4. PERSONAL DATA  Page
Does your research involve personal data collection and/or processing?   Yes No 62
 Does it involve the collection and/or processing of sensitive personal data 
 (e.g: health, sexual lifestyle, ethnicity, political opinion, religious or philosophical 
  conviction)?   
Yes No 62
  Does it involve processing of genetic information? Yes No
  Does it involve tracking or observation of participants? Yes No
 Does your research involve further processing of previously collected personal
__data (secondary use)?
Yes No 62
5. ANIMALS Page
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 135 of 137
Proposal ID 101036838 Acronym Agro2Circular
H2020-CP-IA-2017 ver 1.00 20180307 Last saved 26/01/2021 05:02
Does your research involve animals? Yes No
6. THIRD COUNTRIES Page
In case non-EU countries are involved, do the research related activities undertaken in these 
countries raise potential ethics issues? 
 
Yes No
Do you plan to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Do you plan to import any material - including personal data - from non-EU countries into the 
EU? Yes No
Do you plan to export any material - including personal data - from the EU to non-EU 
countries?  Yes No
In case your research involves low and/or lower middle income countries, are any benefits-
sharing actions planned? 
Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the research at risk? Yes No
7. ENVIRONMENT & HEALTH and SAFETY Page
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to 
animals or plants? Yes No
Does your research deal with endangered fauna and/or flora and/or protected areas? Yes No
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including 
research staff? Yes No
8. DUAL USE   Page
Does your research involve dual-use items in the sense of Regulation 428/2009,  
or other items for which an authorisation is required?
Yes No
9. EXCLUSIVE FOCUS ON CIVIL APPLICATIONS Page
Could your research raise concerns regarding the exclusive focus on civil applications? Yes No
10. MISUSE Page
 Does your research have the potential for misuse of research results? Yes No
11. OTHER ETHICS ISSUES Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Please specify Yes No
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 136 of 137
Proposal ID 101036838 Acronym Agro2Circular
H2020-CP-IA-2017 ver 1.00 20180307 Last saved 26/01/2021 05:02
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues described above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I 
will complete the ethics self-assessment and attach the required documents. ✖
How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 137 of 137
Proposal ID 101036838 Acronym Agro2Circular
H2020-CP-IA-2017 ver 1.00 20180307 Last saved 26/01/2021 05:02
5 - Call-specific questions
Extended Open Research Data Pilot in Horizon 2020
If selected, applicants will by default participate in the Pilot on Open Research Data in Horizon 2020
1
 , which aims to improve and 
maximise access to and re-use of research data generated by actions. 
  
However, participation in the Pilot is flexible in the sense that it does not mean that all research data needs to be open. After the 
action has started, participants will formulate a Data Management Plan (DMP), which should address the relevant aspects of making 
data FAIR – findable, accessible, interoperable and re-usable, including what data the project will generate, whether and how it will be 
made accessible for verification and re-use, and how it will be curated and preserved.  Through this DMP projects can define certain 
datasets to remain closed  according  to the principle "as open as possible, as closed as necessary". A Data Management Plan does not 
have to be submitted at the proposal stage.  
  
Furthermore, applicants also have the possibility to opt out of this Pilot completely at any stage (before or after the grant signature). In 
this case, applicants must indicate a reason for this choice (see options below). 
  
Please note that participation in this Pilot does not constitute part of the evaluation process. Proposals will not be penalised for opting 
out.
We wish to opt out of the Pilot on Open Research Data in Horizon 2020. Yes No
Further guidance on open access and research data management  is available on the participant portal: 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/docs/h2020-funding-guide/cross-cutting-issues/open-access-dissemination_en.htm  and in 
general annex L of the Work Programme.
1
According to article 43.2 of Regulation (EU) No 1290/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council, of 11 December 2013, laying down the rules for participation and dissemination in "Horizon 
2020 - the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2014-2020)" and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1906/2006.
1 
 
LC-GD-3-2-2020: Demonstration of systemic solutions for the territotial deployment of the circular economy 
 
26 European CLUSTERS ENGAGED IN A2C through support letters (click here to Table 44 )
Nº Participant organisation name/Main role Short n. Type Country 
1 
Centro Tecnológico del Calzado y del Plástico -Coordinator. Plastic wastes characterisation & pre -treatments for enhancing enzymatic 
attack, plastics mechanical recycling, PHBV bioplastic compounding & transformation at small scale, bioplastics characterisat ion, 
recyclability & biodegradability studies. 
CETEC RTO ES 
2 Green World Compounding, SL- Plastics waste decontamination & mechanical recycling, development of high barrier recyclable plastics 
compounds, leader of integration of pilot technologies. GWC SME ES 
3 Saperatec-Physical delamination of multilayers containing aluminium SAPE SME DE 
4 Iris Technology, SL- Optical sorting of multilayers IRIS SME ES 
5 Universität für Bodenkultur- Modification of recycled aluminium from multilayers BOKU UNI AT 
6 Mellizyme Biotechnology Ltd – Enzymatic degradation process of PET/PE multilayers MELLI SME UK 
7 Cetec Biotechnology, SL- PHBV bioplastic production & pilot scale up CETBIO UNI IT 
8 University of Milano-Bicocca- Biotransformation of PET/PE enzymatic degradation products into building blocks for cosmetic UNIMIB RTO IT 
9 Universidad de Alicante – Carotenoids for cosmetics & PHBV bioplastics production UA UNI ES 
10 Wetsus- European centre of excellence for sustainable water technology – Water sustainability approach in A2C processes, plastics 
decontamination process, PHBV bioplastic green extraction WETS RTO NL 
11 Regenera Levante, SL - Energy sustainability approach in A2C processes REG SME ES 
12 Centre of Expertise Water Treatment - Water sustainability approach in A2C processes, plastics decontamination process CEW RTO NL 
13 Centro Tecnológico Nacional de la Conserva - Agrifood wastes characterisation & pre -treatments, Research on optimal green hybrid 
extraction & purification routes for bioactives. CTNC RTO ES 
14 
Agrotransformados, SA (MOCITOS) – Food processor - Agrifood wastes (grapes, artichoke, apples) ) & multilayer packaging provider. 
End user (validation of food formulations in real environment). End user (development of food formulations for juices, jams &  compotes 
using the A2C bioactives in real environment) 
MCT SME ES 
15 Laboratorios Almond, SL – Food processor- Agrifood wastes (grapes, apples) & multilayer packaging provider, End user (development of 
food formulations for vegetable desserts using the A2C bioactives in real environment) ALM SME ES 
16 
Proexport-Association of Producers and exporters from Region of Murcia. Agricultural primary sector representative ; Agrifood wastes 
(cauliflower, broccoli, artichoke) & multilayer packaging provider; socioeconomic assessment, A2C Circular Action Plan; A2C model, public 
engagement. 
PROEX NPO ES 
17 DMC Research Center, SL - Development & pilot scale up of green extraction+enzymatic hydrolysis+micrawave -assisted extraction. 
Evaluation of the bioactive extracts. End user (development of nutraceuticals formulations using the A2C bioactives in real environment) DMC SME ES 
18 Citromil, SL -Food processor - Agrifood wastes (citrus) & multilayer packaging provider, development & pilot scale up of green 
extraction+ultrasound-assisted extraction. End user (development of food formulations for juices with A2C bioactives,real environment) VILLANI SME ES 
19 MKS Instruments Italy, SRL. - Development of microwave extraction technology. MKSI LI IT 
20 Experimental Station for the Food Preservation Industry- Research on purification & stabilisation of the bioactive extracts. SSICA RTO IT 
21 Senior Europa, SL (Kveloce I+D+i) - Systemic approach manager -public engagement leader, A2C model (socioeconomic, policy, 
governance & impact assessment), capacity building  KVC SME ES 
22 Polibienestar. Universitat de Valencia- Public engagement, A2C model (socioeconomic, policy, governance), capacity building  UVEG UNI ES 
23 Fundación Cajamar - Financing entity linked to agrifood sector; A2C CEBMs financing needs, A2C model (private funds); public 
engagement, capacity building. CJM NPO ES 
24 Comunidad Autónoma de la Región de Murcia: Public engagement, A2C model (Public financing, policy & governance), A2C Circular 
Action Plan, capacity building CARM Public ES 
25 Asociación Española de Normalización- A2C Standardisation activities, public engagement, A2C model (regulations), capacity building. UNE NPO ES 
26 Fundación Cluster Agroalimentario de la Región de Murcia -Agrifood cluster representative from Region of Murcia: A2C Circular Action 
Plan, public engagement, A2C model (socioeconomic), capacity building  AGRO NPO ES 
27 European Association of Development Agencies-EURADA- Leading clustering actions, public engagement, A2C model (public financing, 
policy & governance), capacity building  EURA NPO BE 
28 Bocconi University - Circular economy expert , Circular business models developer, A2C model (socioeconomic, financing), capacity 
building UB UNI IT 
29 VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd- Environmental externalities, LCA, circularity, benchmarking, A2C model  VTT RTO FI 
30 Fondazione ICONS-Outreach manager, Public engagement, capacity building.  ICONS NPO IT 
31 Fundación Primafrio- Citizens representative linked with agrifood sector; Local outreach desk, public engagement, A2C Circular Action 
Plan; A2C model (socioeconomic).  PRIMA NPO ES 
32 Instituto de Fomento de la Región de Murcia: Regional development agency, CEBMs public financing, public engagement, A2C model 
(financing & governance) A2C Circular Action Plan; capacity building INFO Public ES 
33 Ecotrace Plastic, SL- Leader of development of digital Data Integration System (DIS). ECO SME ES 
34 Equmetrics, SL- Watermark impression development for DIS tool. EQU SME ES 
35 Exus Software, SMLLC- Big Data for DIS tool. ECUS LI EL 
36 EVRYTHNG, Sárl- Blockchain for DIS tool. EVRY LI CH 
37 Solplast, SA- End user (development of new recyclable barrier films as alternative to multilayers & biodegradable films for agriculture in a 
real environment). SOLP LI ES 
38 Eversia, SA- End user (development of barrier packaging as alternative to multilayers and biodegradable packaging in a real environment). EVER LI ES 
39 Lolo Bio Cosmetics, SL- End user (development of new cosmetic formulations using the A2C bioactives in a real environment). LOL SME ES 
40 Tecnoalimenti s.c.p.A- A2C model co-creation; territorial replication of A2C model; public engagement and capacity building TCA NPO IT 
41 Lietuvos Pramonininku Konfedracija- A2C model co-creation; territorial replication of A2C model;  public engagement and capacity building LPK NPO LI 
SECTION 1. EXCELLENCE……...3 SECTION 2. IMPACT ……..26                             SECTION 3. IMPLEMENTATION  .….46 

2 
 
   
 
  
A2C is committed to environmental sustainability. In order to avoid waste paper, the proposal includes hyperlinks to make easier its digital reading. Press                  to come back from the hyperlink across the proposal.  
Back   
3 
 
1. EXCELLENCE 
A2C EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Agro2Circular (A2C) will face important industrial, economic & social challenges in the agrifood sector:  
1. About one third of the food produced is currently wasted1. The fruits & vegetables (F&V) are the group of major 
contribution to food waste along the food supply chain rising up to > 40% of waste.  However, currently, these 
F&V wastes are not exploited, in the best scenario they are transferred for animal feed, compost or biomass energy 
fuel. Research on these agrifood matrices reveals them as an excellent source of a wide range of natural bioactive 
compounds (such as  dietary fibre, phenolic compounds & carotenoids)  as natural alternatives to synthetic 
additives for the production of nutraceuticals, functional foods, and cosmetics. However, synthetic additives are 
still applied due to their high stability and low cost compared to natural alternatives. Methods for obtaining bioactives 
from F&V, based on non -organic solvents extraction t echniques, are not efficient (low yields & purity) and 
environmentally unsustainable. Green hybrid extraction methods  are emerging as great potentially alternatives; 
however, they still require improvements to be economic, time & energy viable for their industrial implementation.  
2. Multilayer plastic films are widely used as industrial packaging for the protection of food (2.3Mt/year)2 and 
agriculture for crops (0.15Mt/year) 3 due to their unique barrier properties enabling significant extension of food 
preservation and chemical disinfection of crops in intensive agriculture4. They are traditionally composed of multiple 
high-performance layers: PE, PET, PA or EVOH, but also aluminium. Currently, there is a  lack of sorting and 
recycling technologies for an e conomic and environmentally sustainable valorisation of these multilayer 
structures due to the different materials they are made: (i) sorting of complex multilayers is not efficient at waste 
treatment facilities (aluminium and opaque foils are not identified, multilayers contaminates monomaterial sorted 
fractions), (ii) recycling of multi materials is complex, not economically viable, (iii) food films requires 
decontamination. Being mostly landfilled (34%) or incinerated (66%). As consequence, annually €650M-950M 
economic value is not recovered for the EU economy5, thus circular approaches are needed.  
3. Digital technologies has been demonstrated as a powerful tool supporting the transition to circular business 
models. However, the agrifood sector6 has a low level of digitalization compared to other industrial sectors (13%7).  
4. While there is an increasing number of European initiatives aimed at implementing the circular economy concept, 
there is still a lack of demonstrated and replicable systemic solutions for the territorial deployment of the 
circular economy. 
 
A2C will solve these challenges  through the implementation of a territorial 
systemic solution for the upcycling of most relevant residues in the agrifood 
sector (fruits& vegetables and multilayers)  into high added value products, 
powered by a digital tool and constructed  upon a systemic approach with high 
replicable/scalable potential.  
Our Circular territorial cluster include all relevant actors (see 
Figure 1) united under the common objective of achieving a 
transition from linear economy to circular economy  in the 
Región de Murcia (Southeast of Spain). This Region is one of 
the keys players of the European agrifood sector. Our Plan is to join the European best available technologies 
to solve the identified challenges and demonstrate its effective value as engine of a change in the production model. 
So technologies and experts from all over Europe ( Germany, Spain, Austria, United Kingdon, Italy, T he 
Netherland, Finland, Belgium and Switzerland) join SMEs, Large  Industries, RTOs, associations, 
organizations and institutions in the Region of Murcia  to develop a systemic solution based on circular 
economy criteria that has a positive social, environmental and economical impact.  
Further, to ensure that our systemic solution and our business model achieve high replicability our consortium 
involves organizations from the Lombary Region (Italy)  and the NUTS-2 Region of Lithuania, two relevant 
representative regions of the European agrifood sector. Furthermore, A2C counts with the commitment to be 
involved in the project activities of 26 clusters from 8 European countries (see Support letters in Section 4).  
 
 
 
A2C will directly contribute to achieve the expected impacts of the topic  by increasing the agrifood sector 
sustainability, generating local/territorial socio-economic & environmental benefits while it increases the security of 
European key products & materials, contributes to decouple economic growth from resource use and pushes towards 
climate neutral industries and communities. EU potential benefits will be significant: Reduction of CO2 27,600.5 
ktonnes CO2 emissions, 13,098.56 ktonne of primary materials fed-back into the economy, 2976 quality jobs 
generated, increasing social behaviour shift towdars circularity (10 -30%), widely disseminated tools and 
recommendations fostering cicular economy at all replication levels and among all relevant to A2C stakeholders, 
including citizens. A2C will achieve TRL 6 at the end of the project (36-months). 
                                                      
1 Herein we will use de terminus “waste”, to avoid confusion among “food waste” and “food losses” which usually are  misunderst and due to lack of a harmonized definition. 
2 Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung (GVM). Flexible Plastic Packaging Market in Germany and in Europe; GVM—Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung.  
3 Flexible Films Market in Europe. State of play, PRE, 2020.  
4 It consists in the use of chemical substances as disinfectants together with high barrier plastic films to seal the land and avoid disinfection gases escape  
5 Kaiser K. et al. Recycling of polymer based multilayer packaging. A review, Recycling, 3,1, 2018.  
6https://www.clustercollaboration.eu/sites/default/files/profile -article/d4.3_best_practices_synthesis_about_how_to_approach_agrifood_market_vf.pdf  
7 The European Economic & Social Committee and the Committee  of the Regions: Digitising European Industry Reaping the full benefits of a Digital Single Market, 2016.  
Figure 1. A2C Cluster actors 
4 
 
1.1. A2C PROJECT OBJECTIVES 
 
 
Objective 1: Demonstrating the first value chain for the upcycling of most representative agrifood wastes. 
 
Aims to demonstrate the technical viability of specific routes for the valorisation of agrifood wastes (fruits and 
vegetables and multilayer plastics) . i) demonstrate the potential of green hybrid extraction, purification & 
stabilisation routes for the obtaining of high valuable bioactives (dietary fibres, phenolic compounds & carotenoids). 
The aim is to achieve high extraction yields and high purity bioactives with high stability for new food s, 
nutraceuticals & cosmetic s. ii) demonstrate the potential of the synergistic combination of sorting, physical 
delamination, enzymatic depolymerisation, decontamination & mechanical recycling for the multilayers 
recycling and biotransformation processes & extensional flow mixing for the upcycling  of the recycled 
multilayers. The aim is to obtain a range of high barrier recyclable compounds as alternative to current multilayers 
in food packaging & agricultur e, PHBV bioplastics compounds for biodegradable food packaging & agriculture 
and carotenoids for cosmetics. iii) demonstrate the potential of the ICT technologies as key tool for the 
implementation of circular solutions. The aim is to implement the traceability of process and products  and to 
develop a predictive tool for recovery processes through an online technological platform named Data Integration 
System-DIS.  Expected impact: 1. A2C high contribution to the decoupling of economic & human activities from 
the consumption of finite resources & GHG emissions, 2. A2C contribution to improve sustainability and circularity 
of clusters’ economic sectors, natural ecosystems, management and valorisation of local resources.  
Objective 2:  Providing to the A2C technological solution the circular systemic approach by building a 
multidimensional model enabling the solution territorial deployment and its replication and scalability. 
Entails to: i) develop and demonstrate the A2C circular business models  and analysing financing opportunities. 
ii) involve relevant stakeholders ( public engagement) to build together  (co-creation) a common view around the 
A2C systemic solution model  at local/territorial and EU level. iii) identify, analyse and quantify the  territorial 
economic, social & environmental barriers/benefits and the relevant indicators related to the respective cluster. 
iv) construct the A2C multidimensional model (includes also relevant factors: governance, regulation, policy, 
financing, etc.) providing the demonstration of the cluster  towards circularity, while designing specific tools to 
foster the replicability&scalability of the A2C model. v) co-create/validate the model in two EU agri-food 
clusters of Italian and Lithuanian regions, enabling the territorial deployment of th e circular economy in both . vi) 
Validate the applicability of the model and the tools delivered, through cross-fertilization with other agrifood 
clusters and relevant stakeholders (see support letters ). Expected impact : 3. Emergence of circular business 
opportunities and a structured pipeline of investment projects; 4. Creation of jobs in the short to medium term.  
Objective 3: Maximizing project impacts and facilitating A2C systemic solution replication& scalability 
Entails to: i) design the communication & dissemination strategy and content packaging to support the public 
engagement, the project sustainability and the widespread of results. ii) engage in cooperation and mobilization of 
all relevant stakeholders at local and EU levels, including those for further commercialisation iii) support the Public 
Engagement strategy through specific and tailored actions.  iv) deliver a framework for autonomous learning & 
capacity building. v) develop a comprehensive exploitation strategy for the A2C cluster. vi) widespread general 
knowledge about food and plastic waste and the circular economy at all levels.  Expected impact: 5. Increased 
circular and climate-neutral practices among citizens and participation in systemic solutions (together with Objetive 
2); 6. More effective development of circular solutions through knowledge transfer; 7. More effective widespread 
uptake and easier replication, scalability and visibility of circular systemic solutions. 
The following Figure 2 summarises A2C project approach to achieve these objectives:        
Figure 2 a) A2C technical approach                                                                        
Figure 2 .b) A2C systemic solution 
 
5 
 
1.1.1. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES  
 
A2C SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES 
A2C OBJECTIVES RELATED TO INNOVATIVE VALORISATION ROUTES FOR THE RECYCLING OF ORGANIC AGRI-FOOD WASTES 
•To enable the introduction of extracted bioactives from agrifood wastes into industrial processes and demonstrate their usability for food , 
nutraceuticals, cosmetics through and EFSA pre -dossier. Implement a methodology for presence of contaminants determination; Demonstrate EU 
regulation compliance new food& nutraceuticals (EC1881/2006, EC -1333/2008 & EU -2016/662, EC -1924/2006) and cosmetics (EC -1223/2009 & EU -
2018/978). 
• To implement an optimal agrifood waste classification & conditioning to improve performance of subsecuent extraction processes. 
•To develop optimised extraction processes by hybrid green technologies  & purification: Green solvents + ultrasounds assisted extraction (yield 
≥60%, purity of fibres, phenolics, carotenoids extracted ≥70%) and Green solvents + enzymatic hydrolisis assisted extraction+  microwaves assisted 
extraction (yield ≥70%, purity of fibres, phenolics, carotenoids extracted ≥80%). 
•To develop ad hoc  stabilisation routes to maintain intact the extracts properties (99%)  & achieve a high stability in new formulations : (i) 
atomisation, lyophilisation, dehydration, vacuum for fibers (ii) delivery systems for phenolic substances & carotenoids  according their potential 
degradation pathways. 
A2C OBJECTIVES RELATED TO SORTING AND RECYCLING OF MULTILAYER PLASTICS RESIDUES 
•To enable the introduction of recycled materials into industrial processes and demonstrate their reusability for agricultural film s and food 
packaging through an EFSA pre-dossier: Implement plastics food contact assessment (EU10/2011), including migration tests ( concentration <10 ppb) 
and NIAs asessment of the recycled materials to prepare EFSA approval; Demonstrate the compliance of agricultural films with EU requirements standards 
according film type (EN13206; EN13655; EN17033; EN17908). 
•To develop an efficient plastic waste pre -treatment and preliminary decontamination route : Develop an efficient washing system including  
recirculation of the wastewater in new washing cycles achieving water reuse rates of 90%; Develop a system for the recovery of the organic fraction from 
the wastewater (≥95%); Develop a system for the microplastics recovery from the wastewater (≥95%). 
•To develop a fast (25kg/h), accurate and efficient (>80% from the infeed) system for the sorting of multilayers: Classify dark materials, including 
aluminium with different positions of the metal layer (Residual unidentified aluminium<1%); Sort thick multilayers (>1mm); Differentiate EVOH compared to 
PE and to differentiate HDPE and LDPE. 
•To develop an efficient system for the physical separation of the aluminium from the mult ilayers: Separate the external and internal layer of 
aluminium from multilayers maintaining plastics properties (purity≥99%). 
•To develop enzymatic technologies for the depolymerisation of PE/PET multilayers: Develop customised enzymes to degrade PE/PET mix; Develop 
efficient pre-treatments for target PE/PET wastes in order to facilitate the enzymatic attack, achieving: i) PE/PET wastes crystallinity decreasing ≥20%. ii) 
Polarity increasing of PE ≥25%. iii) Molecular weight decreasing (≤500 g/mol); Develop optimal enzymatic route for PE and PET depolymerisation to obtain 
alkanes (conversion rate ≥30%), terephthalic acid-TPA (conversion rate ≥40%), and ethylene glycol-EG (conversion rate ≥10%). 
•To develop an optimal mechanical recycling of simple multilayers  (PE-EVOH, PE-PA) allowing their application in blown extrusion and cast 
extrusion: Demonstrate the p lastics decontamination (≥99%) ; Develop aluminium particles h ighly compatible with PE matrix ; Achieve the optimal 
processability by cast & blown extrusion (IFM 1-4 g/10 min) of the recycled plastic flows ( PE-EVOH, PE-PA, PE, PET) to be used in the manufacturing of 
food packaging and agricultural films. 
A2C OBJECTIVES RELATED TO UPCYCLING OF THE RECYCLED PLASTICS AND AGRIFOOD MATERIALS 
•To develop biotechnological routes for the production of high added value building blocks for cosmetic using the resulting pr oducts of the 
PE/PET enzymatic degradation: Develop cell factories to transform terephthalic acid-TPA into protocatechuic acid-PCA (conversion rate ≥20%); Develop 
cell factory to transform ethylene glycol-EG into glycolic acid-GA (conversion rate ≥20%); Develop cell factories to transform alkanes into omega hydroxy-
acids (conversion rate ≥40%). 
•To develop a biotechnological route for  the production of PHBV biodegradable biopolymer and carotenoids by using the by -products of the 
bioconversion resulting products of the PE/PET enzymatic degradation (TPA not bioconverted, glycols, fatty acids with low cosmetic value) and 
organic waste fra ctions coming from the agri -food processing industry: Demonstrate the production of PHBV biodegradable biopoly ester (>0.6 g 
PHBV/g substrate); Demonstrate the PHBV green extraction achieving ≥98% PHBV recovery ; Route development for carotenoids maximum production 
without compromising PHBV production with high extraction rates ≥95%. 
•To develop a range of barrier (OTR 1-10 cm3/atm day), recycled and recyclable compounds as alternative to current multilayer materials for food 
packaging (PE-EVOH, PE-PA) and agricultural films (Al-PE-EVOH, Al-PE-PA): Demonstrate the technology of extensional flow mixing in the extrusion 
process to achieve efficient mixing of EVOH and  PA in a recycled PE, and high dispersion of Al in the PE -EVOH and PE-PA matrix; Develop specific 
compatibilisation routes for the food packaging recyclates: PE-EVOH and recycled PE (OTR 1-5 cm3/atm day); PE-PA and recycled PE compatibilised (OTR 
6-10 cm3/atm day); For agriculture films recyclates: Al modified dispersed in the PE/EVOH & PE/PA (OTR<1cm3/atm day). 
•To develop optimised PHBV biodegradable compounds (IFM 1-4 g/10 min (190;2.16), density <1.3 g/cm3, tensile strenght ≥20 MPa, Elongation≥100%)  
to be transformed into food packaging and agricultural films.  
•To develop food packaging and agricultural films prototypes at small scale from the recycled compounds: high barrier packaging films, agricultural 
disinfection films, and the PHBV compounds: biodegradable packaging films and agricultural mulch films.  
•To develop food & nutraceuticals formulations: food products enriched with the fibres, carotenoids and phenolic extracts (jams, compotes, juices, 
vegetable drinks, and vegetable creams) and nutraceutical formulations using the phenolic substances and carotenoids. 
•To develop cosmetic formulations using the phenolic substances and carotenoids. 
A2C OBJECTIVES RELATED TO DATA INTEGRATION SYSTEM FOR THE AGRI-FOOD SECTOR 
•To develop a digital solution for traceability of the A2C products and processes which allows to process all data of the entire circulat supply chain 
•To develop a decision support tool for predicting the most appropriate route for upscaling the A2C wastes from the traceability data.   
•To integrate the Traceability tool and the Decission support tool in a digital online platform named DIS-Data Integration System for storing, saving, 
processing and communicating the information acroos the value chain (private section) and to citizens & general public (public section).  
A2C OBJECTIVES RELATED TO UPSCALING OF THE A2C TECHNOLOGIES AND IMPLEMENTATION OF A FINAL DEMONSTRATOR 
•To demonstrate the Data Integration System in an operational environment (TRL7) by the Región de Murcia agrifood value chain. 
•To demonstrate the plastic waste pre-treatment and preliminary decontamination system prototype at TRL7: upgrading plastic treatment until 500 
kg, wastewater treatment and recirculation and organic fraction recuperation until 1000 L. 
•To upgrade the multilayers sorting system from lab scale to pilot (TRL7) achieving a capacity of 25kg/h; •To demonstrate the physical 
delamination of the multilayers for the aluminium separation at TRL7 achieving a batch capacity of 20 kg; •To demonstrate the mechanical 
recycling, including the decontamination by vacuum reactor before extrusion in operational environment (500 kg, TRL7); •To upgrade the barrier 
and recycled compounds development and their transformation at pilot scale (1000 kg)-TRL7. 
•To upgrade the fermentation of the customised enzymes from lab scale (100mL) to pilot scale ( 30L); •To upgrade the enzymatic degradation of 
plastic wastes from lab scale (TRL4) to a pilot environment (TRL6) by using bioreactors until 50L and to upgrade the plastics PE/PET wastes pre-
treatments obtained at lab trials at pilot scale (50 -80 kg, TRL6); •To upgrade the biotransformation of products of the PE/PET enzymatic 
degradation into h igh added value substances for cosmetic  in bioreactors of 30L.; •To upgrade at pilot scale the PHBV production (TRL6, 
fermentation to 100L reactors) and extraction (TRL7, extraction modules of 1-3L), obtaining 60 -75 kg of PHBV extracted; •To upgrade the 
carotenoids extraction route obtained at lab trial at pilot scale ( TRL6), obtaining 1 kg of carotenoids/batch of PHBV produced. •To upgrade the 
PHBV compounding and transformation at pilot scale (500kg)- TRL6. 
•To integrate all scale up technologies in  a demonstrator in Murcia (Spain); •To manufacture demonstrators of the products derived from the 
different technologies to be validated by the end users at industrial environment (TRL7): Range of high barrier plastic compounds; Antiwrinkle, anti-
6 
 
skin aging and antioxidants cosmetic formulat ions; Biodegradable and reciclable food packaging ; Food formulations ; Biodegradable and recyclable 
agricultural films; Data Integration System for the agri-food sector. 
A2C OBJECTIVES RELATED TO CIRCULARITY, ADOPTION, REPLICATION AND SCALABILITY OF A2C SYSTEMIC SOLUTION  
 To develop the A2C circular business models, including analysis of financing opportunities and to integrate the business strategy with natural 
capital accounting  
 To build the A2C multidimensional mod el for adoption, replication &  scalability. Entails: To build a strong public engagement strategy and 
effective actions, to contribute to the co-design and acceptance of the A2C multidimensional model and demonstrating the adoption in the Murcia cluster 
and its replication & scale-up potential.; To implement a pilot community based innovation scheme and to study other successful models showcasing 
citizen engagement and business models for circularity ; To develop the evaluation framework (including indicators, methods and timeline for d ata 
collection); To identify environmental, socio -economics and other relevant factors (governance, regulation, policy, standards) for the ad option 
and replication of the circular systemic solution at cluster level and at EU level,  
 To continuously assess A2C environmental and socio-economic impacts for monitoring the cluster transition towards circularity.  
 To validate the A2C replicability and scalability through the Lombardy (Italy) and the NUT-2 (Lithuania) case study. 
 To expand the validation of the model replication and scalability potenti al at EU level by involving a relevant stakeholders and EU  clusters, 
building a community around along the p roject timeline (Support Letters already collected); To generate practical and effective adoption, replicab ility and 
scalability tools for AC2,  including policy recommendation, A2C self ase ssment tool to define the implementation of the model pathways/roadmaps, 
training packages, case studies, good practices, among others. 
OBJECTIVES RELATED TO A2C OUTREACH 
 To ensure wider dissemination & communication among stakeholders: Deliver A2C D&C strategy and to continuously monitor its performance and 
impacts; Deliver the necessary tools to implement tailored outreach activities ; Support public engagement strategy ; Deliver a training plan for capacity 
building tailored to each stakeholder group. 
 To improve consumers and citizens understanding and acceptance of circular and climate neutral practices and to promote their involvement: 
To provide specific training for lo cal actors and education services ; To foster public engagement through specific guidelines based on the lessons learnt  ; 
To deliver tailored communication campaigns; To involve them in the A2C co-creation process. 
 To increase circular solutions deployment and to ensure effective widespread uptake and high visibility of circular systemic solutions; To 
engage in cooperation with CCRI and share the data collected and knowledge gained; To engage in cooperation with other territ orial 
clusters/projects/initiatives;To deliver specific guidelines/tools about relevant topics addressing identified circular economy barriers and facilitators  for 
clusters/industries; To disseminate/ transfer relevant information and recommendations to decision -makers and stakeholders; To involve all relevant 
stakeholders in the A2C co-creation process. 
 Maximizing project further exploitation; Making it ready the exploitation strategy (exploitable results, IPRs frameworks and partners agreement, market 
and business analysis); Establishing commercial networks through networking and dissemination actions; To contribute to new standards developments 
related to circularity of plastics and agrifood residues as a powerful marketing tool by increasing trust among commercial stakeholders 
 
INDUSTRIAL/ECONOMIC/SOCIAL CHALLENGES  
 
A2C addresses agrifood industry main challenges as well as the depolyment of the territorial circular economy. 
 
The agrifood industry is a key strategic sector in Europe from economical (6 % of Europe GDP, 15 million bussiness), 
labour (46 million jobs) and cultural perspectives while it is critical to meet the societal challenges.  
The agrifood sector  is an important part of the food value -chain and encompasses the primary agricultural 
production and the food process ing&manufacturing sector. Spain, a nd particularly Region of Murcia, herein 
Murcia (where is embed the 46% of the project partners) are among the European key players of its sector. The fruit 
and vegetable (F&V) food group is particularly relevant for Europe (2017 EU-28 fruit and vegetables value8= EUR 
57.5 billion, representing the  13.9 % of the value of all agricultural goods & services produced, from which 
Spain=24.4 %) as well as for Murcia, in terms of production and a ctors related to this sector. Spain accounts with 
more than 25% of the European F&V production, from which 1.9 % correspond to the cluster. 
1. FOOD WASTE IN AGRIFOOD SECTOR: Food waste is an important priority for the European Commission 
and for the Member States and Regions, being part of the EU’s plan for a circular economy. It is an issue of paramount 
importance to global food security and good environmental governance, dir ectly linked with environmental , 
economic and social impacts.  
It is estimated that along the food supply c hain, FSC (primary production, processing & manufacturing, retail & 
distribution and Consumption) around an average 20% of food is wasted. This average rise up to 41% for fruits and 
46% for vegetables, resulting the group which most contribute to food waste within the FSC.  
EU Landfill Directive aims to reduce significantly the amount of bio -waste sent to landfills and recommends its 
upcycling by recovering nutritional value. By this way, agrifood residual streams have an important added-value 
if used as feedstock . However, most organic waste streams present a high complexity and variable mixture of 
molecules, which makes specific compound production and separation difficult. 
A2C addresses the huge challenge of reducing food waste from the agrifood industry  by demonstrating 
innovative green hybrid routes for the extraction of high added value bioactives from fruits & vegetables wastes 
from the agri food supply chain for their formulation into new food, nutraceuticals and cosmetic products, and 
biotransformation of organic by-products into bioplastics through a cascading upcycling and zero waste approach. 
2. AGRIFOOD POST -INDUSTRIAL MULTILAYER PLASTICS : Agrifood industry also deals with post -
industrial multilayer plastics for which still do not exist a suitable recycling technology as a true circular solution.  
Currently, flexible multilayer films (a film which each layer is composed of different polymers) are widely used as 
barrier material in the agrifood sector.  The combination of several polymer layers increases shelf‐life by 
controlling the gases transmission and provides other important properties as mechanical, sealing and adhesion.  
 Regarding the food processing industry, these multilayer post-industrial plastic wastes, mainly comes from 
the industrial aseptic plastic packaging. Multilayer packaging is industrially used for a wide range of food products 
                                                      
8https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=The_fruit_and_vegetable_sector_in_the_EU_ -_a_statistical_overview#cite_note-5  
7 
 
such as food concentrates, paste and pulp, fruit & vegetable juices, concentrates and diced fruits, as well as sauces, 
dairy, liquid eggs and wine. Overall, these multilayers allow products to be  efficiently transported, processed and 
kept at room temperature (energy savings) without preservatives, while maintaining organoleptic properties.  
Multilayer films (flexible) amount to nearly the 14% of total food industrial films (2.3 Mt). The rest are mainly 
monolayers films that currently have good recycling routes.   
These multilayer flexible films include (A2C target):   
- Simple multilayers, usually LDPE/PA; Simple multilayer with organic barriers (EVOH), usually LDPE/EVOH; 
Complex multilayers containing aluminium (Al), usually LLDPE/PET-Al, LDPE/PET-Al, LDPE/Al/LDPE. 
 
 Regarding the  primary agricultural production industry , high barrier multilayer plastic films  
(LDPE/EVOH/LDPE, LDPE/PA/LDPE)9 are often used in chemical soil disinfection (0.15 Mt/year).   
Currently, there is a lack of sorting and recycling technologies for an economic and environmentally sustainable 
recycling of these  multilayer structures  due to the different materials they are made, being mostly 
landfilled/incinerated. Their economic value is not recovered for the EU, thus circular approaches are needed.  
The EU has taken action with target ambitious plasti c recycling objective (recycling 75% of packaging waste by 
2030). Moreover, EU is going to tax non -recycled plastic packaging waste for member states (entering into force 
during 2021)10. The plastic value chain must adapt to implement a viable sorting, recycling, decontamination 
and upgrading technologies in the context of a systemic vision for the circular economy of plastics. 
A2C will develop the first recycling value chain for post -industrial multilayer films  based on a synergistic 
approach combining innovative sorting, physical delamination, enzymatic depolymerisation, decontamination & 
mechanical recycling.  A2C also encompasses the upcycling of these recycled residues to develop recyclable high 
barrier plastics for food packaging and agricultural films  as alternative to current multilayers, bioplastics for 
food packaging and agricultural films, building blocks & carotenoids for c osmetic sector. A2C will demonstrate 
that multilayers films can turn circular in two large segments: food & agriculture, and upcycled to the cosmetic sector. 
3. LACK OF DIGITALISATI ON PROMOTING THE CIR CULAR ECONOMY : Digital technologies are 
widely recognized as a powerful tool supporting the transition to circular business models. In fact, the new circular 
Economy action fosters innovative models powered by digital technologies. However, the agrifood sector11 is one of 
the less digitalized sector in EU (13%)12. Integrating the digital technologies into the agrifood se ctor is an 
important challenge that will be addressed in A2C by our Data Integration System “DIS”. 
 “DIS” will be an online technological platform that solves the industry  challenges by a Traceability Tool  
identifying materials, origin, their processes, & quality and a Decision Support Tool  that will predict the 
characteristics of the agrifood residual streams and will explore all the available alternatives for its valorisation and 
selects the most appropriate routes taking into account social, economic, environmental and regulatory criteria. 
DIS will allow to process all data and information required for circular business models and the complex 
demands of the circular supply chains, being an enabler for upscaling the circular economy in the agrifood sector. 
4. EFFECTIVE DEPLOYMENT OF THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY: While there is a relevant and increasing 
number of initiatives across Europe aimed at implement the circular economy concept, there is still a lack of 
demonstrated and replicable systemic solutions for the territorial deployment of the circular economy.  Transitioning 
to a circular economy requires a full systemic change, implying changes throughout value chains, from design to 
new  business & market models,  from  new  ways  of  treating  waste to new modes of consumer behaviour, and 
innovation not only in technologies, but also in organisation, society, finance methods and policies.   
A2C addresses this challenge going beyond traditional waste management, through a multidimensional approach, 
with a strong focus on public engagement and co-creation, including citizens an all relevant stakeholders in the 
process towards circularity. A2C addresses systematically all the factors hampering the implementation of 
circular solutions (socio-economics, environmental, politics, regulatory, financing). It brings a circular economy 
multidimensional model enabling the adoption, replication/scalability of a territorial systemic solution which 
is sustainable, regenerative, inclusive & fair, boosting urban&regional economies while it deliver tools for all actors 
(citizens, industries, decision makers, scientific and education community) fostering circular practices.  
 
SOLUTION AS A WHOLE 
 
 
A2C will allow for the first time the upcycling of fruits & vegetable agrifood wastes (F&VW) and non-renewable 
multilayer plastics into new high added value products with application in the food, nutraceutics and cosmetic 
sectors, and to demonstrate its implementation at pilot scale and the validation of the final products i n a real 
environment. This solution will be powered by an intensive use of digital technologies enabling the traceability of 
all processes, providing a valuable decision tool and fostering citizen’s acceptability through data availability and 
transparency. Moreover, A2C solution will be constructed upon a systemic approach  delivering, through public 
engagement and co -creation processes , a multidimensional model for A2C territorial adoption and highly 
replicable/scalable whose adoption/replication will be boosted through delivering at local/EU levels adequate tools.  
                                                      
9 intensive/monoculture farming favours pathogens. Chemical soil disinfection consists in the use of chemical compounds together with high barrier plastic films to seal the land and avoid gases escape.  
10 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/E-9-2020-004514_EN.html  
11https://www.clustercollaboration.eu/sites/default/files/profile -article/d4.3_best_practices_synthesis_about_how_to_approach_agrifood_market_vf.pdf  
12 Communication from the Commission to the European Parl iament: Digitising European Industry Reaping the full benefits of a Digital Single Market, 2016.  
8 
 
Following is described the A2C whole systemic solution and Figure 3 represents the technological solution. 
 
 
 
 
1.Extraction and purification of bioactive substances from Fruit and Vegetables (F&V)  wastes by a hybrid 
strategy of green solvents and sustainable advance extraction technologies. 
1.1. A2C has selected these F&V wastes since two perspectives: i) great potential to be valorised having wide 
variety of bioactive compounds of interest for the food, cosmetic and nutraceutics industries ii) represent 32.7% of 
the EU total harvested production of F&V and a high volume o f wastes that currently are not exploited.  Result: 
Optimal bioactive compounds from F&V wastes for food, cosmetic & nutraceutics market needs. 
Table 1.  A2C Target bioactives from selected agrifood wastes 
Product Waste (% of generation) Target substances  
Citrus Peel, pulp, skins, seeds (50-60%) Dietary fiber. Phenolics: flavonoids (hesperidin, eryocytrin, quercetin), caffeic acid. Carotenoids: 
β-carotene, lutein, lycopene 
Apples Peel, seeds and cores, exhausted pulp (10-15%) Dietary fiber. Phenolics: flavonoids (quercetin, catechin, epicatechin), chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid 
Grapes Pomace (peel, seeds, stems and pulp residues) and grape 
remains (25%) Dietary fiber. Phenolics: flavonoids (quercetin, catechin, epicatechin), resveratrol 
Artichoke Leaves and bracts (60-65%) Dietary fiber. Phenolics:  Cynarin, chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid. Carotenoids: β-carotene, 
neoxanthin, lutein 
Cauliflower Stems, florets not suitable for marketing, and leaves (40%) Dietary fiber. Phenolics: flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol), caffeic acid 
Broccoli Stems and florets not suitable for marketing, leaves (25-30%) Dietary fibers. Phenolics: flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol), chlorogenic acid.  Carotenoids: α-
carotene, β-carotene, lutein 
 
1.2. Innovative extraction strategies for bioactive substances. From the F&V wastes of 1.1. we will implement 
specific extraction routes according to the target extracts and the required purity their final applications, as 
shows table 2. Result: Technically efficient and economically viable extraction & purification routes.  
Table 2. A2C Green hybrid extraction & purification routes 
2. Production of a range of new formulations using the bioactive substances extracted from wastes for their 
application in cosmetic, nutraceutics and food. 2.1. Design a specific strategy in each case to achieve high stability 
of the extracts for further ind ustrialisation. Result: Extracted substances (dietary fiber, phenolic compounds & 
carotenoids) with high stability ready for application. 2.2. The high stable extracted bioactive compounds will be 
validated in a real environment by end users preparing formulations to demonstrate our solution in 
operational environment (TRL7). Result: Prototypes for food & nutraceuticals (3000L vegetable desserts, 2000L 
enriched juices, 20.000 Kg-juices&jams, 1000L nutraceuticals), and cosmetic (1 kg antioxidants formulations).  
3. Recycling of the multilayer plastics coming from agriculture and post -industrial packaging. 3.1. Optical 
sorting of the multilayers  by a synergistic combination of technologies . Result: Sorting the different multilayers  
into families : 1 (LDPE/EVOH-packaging, LDPE/EVOH/LDPE-agriculture), 2 (LDPE/PA-packaging, 
LDPE/PA/LDPE-agriculture), 3 (LLDPE/PET-Al, LDPE/PET-Al both packaging), 4 (LDPE/Al/LDPE-packaging). 
3.2. Physical s eparation of the Aluminium from the multilayers  based on  SAPE patented delamination 
technology. Result: The separated flows LDPE/PET, LLDPE/PET, LDPE, PET and Al . 3.3. Enzymatic 
depolymerisation of the PE/PET multilayers by a synergic strategy of customisation of enzymes and plastic 
wastes pre-treatments. Our partner MELLI has tested the first known enzyme (MELLI plasticase applied for patent 
protection on) in the world capable of degrading polyethylene (PE) and polyethyleneterephtalate (PET) at high 
Partner Extraction route Purification tech. Expected results Use 
CITRO 
CTNC 
SSICA 
 Green solvents + ultrasounds 
assisted extraction 
Membrane Filtration Dietary fibre (Yield≥60%, Purity ≥70%) Food 
Membrane filtration+ Adsorption  Phenolic compounds & Carotenoids (Yield≥60%, Purity ≥70%) Food 
DMC 
CTNC 
SSICA 
MKSI 
Green solvents + enzymatic 
hydrolysis + MW assisted 
extraction 
Membrane filtration  Dietary fibre (Yield≥70%, Purity ≥80%)  Food; Nutraceuticals 
Membrane filtration+ Adsorption  Phenolic compounds, Carotenoids (Yield≥70%, Purity ≥80%) Food; 
Cosmetics;Nutraceuticals 
Figure 3. A2C technologycal solution 
Back SOTA  
9 
 
rates (24 hours). Moreover, a pre-treatment step  to enhance enzym atic attack will be implemented . Result: 
Alkanes, TPA & EG products. 3.4. Plastics decontamination for the reintroduction of the recycled plastics into the 
agrifood value chain (packaging and agricultural films) by 3 step process of washing, micro/nanoplastics separation 
and vacuum  extrusion. Result: Plastics materials decontaminated (>99%) before mechanical recycling.  3.5. 
Aluminium purification and treatment for reuse. Aluminium from the physical separation will be chemically 
modified. Result: Al achieves optimal compatibility and dispersion in a polyethylene matrix.  3.6. Development of 
processable recycled plastic com pounds. The simple multilayers (families 1 : LDPE/EVOH, 
LDPE/EVOH/LDPE & 2: LDPE/PA, LDPE/PA/LDPE)  and the plastics monomaterials obtained from the 
physical recycling (LDPE, PET) will be formulated for their application in food packaging and agricultural films. 
Result: LDPE/EVOH, PE/PA, LDPE/EVOH/LDPE, LDPE/PA/LDPE, LDPE, PET processable. 
4. Upcycling of the recycled plastics coming from agriculture and post -industrial packaging to obtain high 
added value materials.  4.1. Upcycling of enzymatic degradation products (alkanes, TPA, EG)  by 
biotransformation to obtain high adde value building blocks for cosmetic :  (1) Alkanes. Result: ω-hydroxy-
acids (2) Terephthalic acid-TPA. Result: protocatechuic acid. (3) Ethylene glycol-EG. Result: glycolic acid. 4.2. 
PHBV bioplastics and carotenoids production by cell factory: The by-products of the previous cell factories in 
combination with organic waste from the a gri-food industry  will be used as nutrients . Result: PHBV for its 
application in flexible packaging and agricultural films, carotenoids for cosmetics applications.  
4.3. Development of plastic compounds for food packaging and agriculture. 4.3.1. Development of recyclable 
high barrier PE plastic compounds as alternative to current non -recyclable multilayers. A2C will develop an 
innovative route based on a synergistic strategy of compatibilisation and extensional flow mixing generation during 
the extrusion process to develop blends with high barrier properties. 
- The recyclates from post industrial packaging LDPE-EVOH and LDPE will be compatibilised to develop high 
barrier compounds for food packaging . The aluminium modified will be dispersed in the LDPE/EVOH/LDPE and 
LDPE/PA/LDPE recyclates coming from the agriculture films for agriculture applications (light diffusion, UV -
stability, reflection).  Result: High barrier packaging and agriculture disinfection films at small scale.  4.3.2. 
Development of PHBV bioplastics compounds . The neat PHBV range obtained will be formulated and 
compounded for their application in the flexible food packaging and agricultural films development.  Result: 
Biodegradable packaging and biodegradable agricultural films at small scale. 
5. A2C Data Integration System online platform for the traceability of materials and a predictive tool that will 
allow the selection of the best up cycling option for each material from the existing alternatives. Different ICT 
technologies will be integrated including cloud thechnology, watermark for hiding information, Quick Real-QR for 
identifying the information, Big D ata and Artificial Intelligence for data processing and statistics, and Blockchain 
for data security and immutability.  Result: DIS platform for traceability, prediction and communication. 
6. Integration of the A2C technologies at pilot scale up. Demonstrators.  6.1. All the technologies at pilot scale 
will be integrated in a demonstrator in Murcia (Spain) at GWC, CETBIO, CETEC, DMC and CTNC facilities in 
order to evaluate their performance in an industrial environment. Result: prototypes from the different technologies 
validated in industrial environment by the end users achieving TRL6-7 (see Table 4) 6.2. Recovery of by-products 
generated during the different processes in order to achieve a completely sustainability of the whole A2C upcycling 
strategy. Result: study of the hotspots to determine a recovery & valorisation strategy in the future industrial scale-
up. 6.3 Development of A2C CEBMs and their associated financing mechanisms and integrating them with natural 
capital accounting. Result: A2C Sustainable and feasible circular economy business models. 
7. Providing A2C the systemic approach and tools needed for the circularity and territorial deployment, 
replication and scalability: This approach entails addressing following dimensions/actions through and integrated 
& coordinated use of Social, sciences and Humanities perspective, as following:
7.1 Design a Public engagement 
strategy and implement a community based innovation scheme . 7.2 Multidimensional assessment of the 
territorial/EU context, LCA and circularity eva luation: Identification, analysis and quantification of the socio -
economic and environmental benefits (including regulatory, financing, etc), and monitoring the cluster transition 
towards circular economy . 7.3 Build a multidimensional model for A2C adoption and highly repl icable and 
scalable, co-creation process and validated by other agrifood EU clusters.7.3 Demonstration of the A2C replication 
and scalability potential through 2 European territories Lombardy (Italy) and NUT-2 (Lithuania) regions cases. 
Results: Multidimensional model for A2C adoption highly replicable&scalable and the related self-assessment tool; 
A2C Cluster circular CE action plan; recommendations for decision makers and valuable knowledge to be transferred.  
8. Maximizing pr oject outreach and foster circular economy by stakeholders and general public through 
several activities: Networking, clustering, dissemination and communication ac tivities, development of a training 
plan for local actors and education services for local communities as well as training modules/guidelines for EU 
stakeholders, training and knowledge transfer actions, development of A2C cluster exploitation strategy, contribution 
to standardization . Results: Stakeholders for A2C adoption, replication and exploitation engaged,  
Citizens/consumers raised acceptance, awareness and knowledge about the circular economy and climate neutral 
practice/products, A2C transferable knowledge efficiently transferred. 
10 
 
1.2. RELATION TO THE WORK PROGRAMME 
Table 3. A2C contribution to topic scopes  
SCOPES 
1 Each cluster should include a geographically cohesive territory linked by a systemic solution. Cluster Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP)  
The A2C cluster is composed by all the actors type (shown in Figure 1) needed to effectively implement, demonstrate and replicate the systemic solution 
designed. These actors covers all relevant sectors of the project value chain for the territorial deployment of the systemic solution: Agri-food sector, including 
civil society (PROEX, PRIMA, AGRO, LPK, TCA, MCT, CITRO, ALM, DMC); Extraction technologies & Plastics recycling & formulation (CTNC, CETEC, 
SSICA, BOKU, MKSI, GWC, SAPE, IRIS); Biotechnology (CETBIO, MELLI, UNIMIB, UA); Water, energy & environment efficiency  (WETS, CEW, VTT, 
REGE); Digital technology providers  (ECO, EQU, EVRY, EXUS); Plastics, agriculture and cosmetic end -users (SOLP, EVER, LOL); Social, Science  & 
Humanities (SSH) experts (KVC, CJM, ICONS, UVEG, UB); Policy makers, regulators and standardization (CARM, INFO, EURA, UNE).  
All of them bring together technologies, resources and knowledge enabling both to address the agrifood sector main challenges  (reducing food & plastics 
waste and increasing the level of digitalization) as well as to effectively deploy and replicate the circular economy, through a circular systemic solution. 
A2C project has been constructed through a systemic approach and entails a multidimensional view aimed at address and overcoming at cluster and 
European level: the technological (CITRO, ALM, DMC, CTNC, CETEC, SSICA, BOKU, UNI, MKSI, GWC, SAPE, IRIS, CETBIO, MELLI ,UNIMIB, UA, 
WETS, CEW, REGE, ECO, EQU, EVRY, EXUS), environmental (VTT), socioeconomics (UVEG, KVC, UB, PROEX, PRIMA, AGRO), financing (CJM, 
CARM, EURA, UB , INFO), regulatory&policy and standarization  needs (CARM, INFO, EURA,UNE,UVEG, KVC), as well as involving civil society  
organisations (PROEX, AGRO,LPK), philanthropy (PRIMA), and replicators in Italy and Lithuania, (TCN, LPK respectively).  All of them, hampering 
the recycling of these residues and demosntrating the potential of A2C for adoption and replication&scalability.  
The cluster core is composed by  partners coming from Murcia geographically cohesive region in the southeast of Spain: 18 (44% of A2C consortium). All  
residues providers are from Murcia: (1) PROEX, agricultural primary production sector, is one of the major association of producers and exporters of F&V, 
producing 2.4Mt (1.9% of the total EU production) of those, from which 0.83Mt are the A2C target streams, and generating 8.3 kt of agricultural disinfection 
films waste. (2) MCT, ALM & CITRO industries from the food processing sector, gen erating 0.21 Mt of F&V waste (together with PROEX) and 0.36 kt of 
multilayer plastics residues.  
Besides, the A2C cluster Circular Economy Action Plan  (CEAP) will be progressively constructed at task 7.5, led by AGRO (as cluster representative) 
together with CARM & INFO (Murcia Regional government & regional development agency), PROEX & PRIMA (philanthropy organisation from the agrifood 
sector) and based on the multidimensional data resulting from WP7 which includes a co-creation process. The CEAP will be in line with the regional initiative 
Next Carm by which the strategic priorities of Murcia for 2021-2027, will be defined for its transformation and recovery, to address regional challenges.  
2 “Demonstrate the role of the territorial circular economy to…”; “Increase resilience and provide concrete options for socio -economic..” “Sustainability, 
regeneration of ecosystems..” ; “To avoid social, gender and intergenerational inequalities”; “To produce just and fair outcomes, to boost urban ..” 
A2C circular systemic solution is constructed around local residues generated by regional actors and taking the most of the t erritorial capital, leveraging the 
potential of the territory from the economic, social, cultural and environmental point of view, including natural resources, social capital and institutions.  
The project assesses and addresses at WP7 the territorial capital relevant factors, such as the policy and regulations, their  institutions and the financial 
context. Overall, the local context will be systematically analysed  and barriers and enablers identified as well as measures and recommendations 
hampering them and fostering the circular economy not only at local but also at EU levels will be delivered, helping to const ruct the A2C multidimensional 
model enabling the territorial development of A2C solution as well as its replication & scalability.  
Thus, A2C will systematically address social dimension (T7.4) as a core of the multidimensional model (See 8 dimensions addressed in Figure 7) , which will 
be constructed around the multidimensional approach while will help addressing social justice and inclusiveness, overcoming i nequalities among society, 
and, together with the economic assessment and the circularity of business models, A2C will ensure distributional effects, an d will contribute to a regional 
and fair economy, boosting impacts and fair jobs. Moreover sustainability and environmental externalities will be addressed and monitored (T7.3). 
A2C then, will directly leverages : social impact (mainly measured in terms of quality of life and behavioural changes, Table 36), economic & sustainable 
and inclusive growth (measured in terms of revenues, quality and inclusive jobs, Table 37), environmental impacts (CO2 savings: Table 29) contributing 
mitigating the socio-economy and environmental impacts of COVID-19 crisis.  
3 Address economic, social and environmental dimensions and include science, technology and governance components; demonstrate circular governance 
models and support the active participation of all relevant actors in each cluster; prove the effectiveness and sustainability of circular business models. 
A2C has been conceived to bring socio-economic and environmental dimensions at the core of the systemic circular solution , by involving key 
representatives from the Quadruple Helix in the design and validation of the proposed innovation model and its governance. This Quadruple Helix 
model will involve stakeholders considering the following four categories: (1) public adminis tration and institutions (regional, local, national, European, etc.); 
(2) private organisations and business/enterprises, including financing bodies; (3) academia and research entities, including universities and research centres, 
public and private; (4) c itizens and civil society organisations.  Specific partners in the consortium, namely KVC, UVEG, UB, VTT, ICONS, EURA, CAJM, 
CARM, PROEX, PRIMA, INFOP, AGRO bring together a strong multidisciplinary background mixing environmental and social sciences resear ch and 
methodology, economic and business knowledge, but also citizen engagement, welfare and policy development expertise. Specific  data will be collected 
mainly within WP6 and WP7 in order to identify key factors to ensure the success in the adoption, replication and scale up of the proposed circular solutions, 
while co-creating business models which respond the needs of all stakeholders involved, but also the society as a whole.   
Specific attention will be paid to demonstrate the circular governance model, lead by CARM (regional public authority) and in collaboration with UVEG 
& EURA (policy context), UNE (regulatory framework) and CJM, CARM, INFO & EURA (financial framework), that will ensure the territorial implementation 
of the systemic solution th rough the analysis of current legislative and financial context analysis (enablers and barriers hampering the deployment of t he 
systemic solution) and proposal of new or adapted related regulations, while addressing the socio economic and environmental context, deeply analysed 
by KVC, UB, PRIMA, AGRO, PROEX  and VTT, respectively, in which the solution must be deployed (see task 7.3 & 7.4) 
In addition, UB will lead T6.2 and T6.3, addressing the design of new circular business models  arising from the project, whose sustainability will be 
demonstrated through specific business cases. Section 2. Impact include a preliminary exploitation strategy and associated business models demonstrating 
the commercial potential of the developed technologies. 
4 Sustainable and effective symbiosis within/between economic sectors, foster cooperation and integration between production, services and consumption.  
A2C takes a systemic approach and involve cooperation among all actors in the supply chain, from producers (AGRO, CITRO, ALM) to final consumers 
(EVER, SOLP, LOL), enabling a wide new value chain around the key agrifood sector. This sector has been wisely linked with others (recycling, biotechnology, 
chemistry, plastics, c osmetics, water&energy  sectors) through industrial symbiosis aiming at greatly improve the circularity of the agrifood sector by 
establishing territorial synergies to manage the residues from this sector, recycling/valorising and upcycling it.  
In particular, A2C symbiosis appr oach looks at interactions between the environment, the economy and industry, and promotes the sharing of waste 
materials to reduce waste in the agrifood sector, and with an approach where everything is reused. The generated symbiosis among these sectors strengthens 
regional growth and competitiveness, fostering: (1) Material savings, reusing waste and  by -products of industrial processes;(2) New business models with 
secondary raw resources trading; (3) Mitigation of external volatility risks, reducing dependencies on imported materials and fossil fuel (See Section 2.Impact). 
5 “Effective application of the circular economy beyond resource management…”. Systemic solution & selected economic sectors ba sed on analysis of the 
cluster’s socio-economic needs, circular potential, challenges and smart specialisation priorities. Relation with new CE Action Plan key product value chains. 
A2C clearly goes  beyond conventional waste management  schemes as the holistic approach of the solution involves a circular systemic solution 
technically enabling the sustainability and resource efficiency of the agrifood sector towards a zero waste sector but also providing the necessary 
environment to their effective territorial deployment. The project provides solutions for all targeted food and plastic waste generated within the agrifood 
value chain through a cascade upcycling, enabling these residues to be introduced either into the same value chain or as added value products, while it 
analyse the territorial affairs and provide all the tools to address socio -economic, regulatory, and policy n eeds hampering the deployment of the solution.  
The core of the cluster (18 partners), is located in Murcia where the agrifood sector is one of the leader economic sectors, as acknowledged through 
11 
 
their smart specialization strategy, RIS3Mur. Murcia agrifood value chain  has a key position in terms of R&D leadership, mainly due to its scientific ‐
technological production, high percentage of employment (more than 18% of the Region) and special ization coefficient (above one). Murcia, known as the 
European Orchad, is the third Spanish exporter region to Europe, representing the 19,8% (2.5Mt, 2,564 M€) of the total Spanish exportations. The agrifood 
sector represents 4,3% of Murcia GVA (50% indirectly) and about 0,15% of Spanish GDP. 
Moreover, Murcia RIS3 priorities are structured around key enablers for addressing socio economic needs.  These are those linked to the agrifood value 
chain which mostly have been included in A2C scope, agriculture activities, as well as water cycle (treatment, management) and environment as a whole.  
A2C will contribute by these regional key activities being systemically prioritized, coordinated, targeted and processed through intensive use of cutting-edge 
technologies, enabling moving from a linear business models to a circular approach, which will result in competitive advantages for the region. 
Besides, RIS3Mur is focused on key enabling technologies  fostering the areas of specialization. Among others, special attention is given to some of the 
project involved technologies such as those related to ICTs, biotechnology, new materials and manufacturing technologies.  
The selection of the agrifood sector as the core of A2C is justified by being a key strategic sector for the cluster region and many EU regional 
economies and due to its high potential to move from a linear to a circular economy still is not fully explored and deployed.  The huge size of this 
sector generates a large amount of food and plastics residues with a great potential to be reintroduced into the manufacturing value chains, as A2C proposes. 
Thus, A2C will enable to exploit the circular potential of agrifood sector while perfectly fits with Murcia strategy for the socio-economic growth. 
Also, A2C provides a circular solution for many of the key products addressed in the new Circular Economy Action Plan. Particularly in line with: 
-Food, water & nutrients : (1) Facilitate water reuse and efficiency. (2) Ensuring more sustainable application of nutrients and stimulating the markets for 
recovered nutrients.  Plastics: (1) Increase uptake of recycled plastics and contribute to more sustainable use of plast ics. (2) Address the presence of 
microplastics at all relevan t stages of products’ lifecycle.  (3) use of bio -based feedstock results in environmental benefits, use of biodegradable plastics, 
based on an assessment of the applications where such use can be beneficial to the environment.  Packaging: (1) Driving design for re-use and recyclability 
of packaging including the number of materials and polymers used. (2) Safe recycling into food contact materials of plastic materials other than PET. 
6 Help to create critical mass for public and private investments and public procurement pull for new solutions, contribute to overcoming market failures.  
A2C will help creating critical mass for investments in circular solutions through not only exploring several types of financing schemes beyond project 
own community  but also by delivering recommendations for the improvement of current available schemes while promoting the mo st adequate tools to 
financing circular innovations . At T7.5 specialised partners as CJM (private funds), CARM  & INFO (regi onal public funds) EURA ( EU public&private , 
demonstrated experience in public procurement), supported by UB, will explore several types of financing schemes for the adoption of territorial circular 
solutions at regional/EU levels. This could include national banks, philanthropic funders, impact investors, local credit unions or crowdfunding mechanisms, 
convened together with mainstream finance players from the public and private conventional funding schemes. This research includes studying mechanisms 
such as public procurement, investigating how public procurement could create new markets and provide financial support for A2C related innovations and 
which public sector organisations can swing their purchasing power behind circularity innovations.  
Finally, D7.9 will deliver recommendations for financing schemes (includes recommendations to foster public procurement in the areas related to A2C)  
promoting the adoption of circular solutions as well as practical guidelines for clusters/business on how to address  the financing of their circular innovations 
(D8.4). A2C Standardisation actions (T8.5) will also help contributing to address market failures.  
7 They should improve consumers’ understanding and acceptance of circular and climate-neutral services and products 
Clear, transparent and inclusive communications will facilitate the engagement of consumers and raise acceptance, awareness and knowledge, which 
will impact in a paradigm shift towards acceptance and adoption of circular and climate-neutral services and products. The public host of the DIS tool will 
serve as a valuable tool in reaching this goal, by offering transparency data about A2C processes. Moreover, different and innovative communication formats 
and easy-to-access storytelling (short educat ional videos, facts & myths, etc.) and social media awareness -raising campaigns will increase understanding 
and acceptance (WP8). Moreover, a strong strategy to engage and raise awareness at local/regional level will be carried at T8.3 lead by PRIMA. To reinforce 
engagement and acceptance, co-design/co-creation processes as well as a participatory community based scheme involving citizens/consumers and other 
stakeholder are planned (Task 7.1). These participatory activities will be fundamental to foster acceptance. An ambitious dissemination strategy both adapting 
the project’s results and key messages to the specific stakeholders’ needs and benefits and broadly communicating them to the general public will maximise 
outreach and engagement at European level and beyond. KVC&ICONS lead these activities and have solid experience on the topics above. Details in S.2. 
8 Explore synergies with other funds, including Cohesion Policy funds, the Just Transition Fund and InvestEU, hereby showing pathways to market uptake. 
As already explained in scope 6, CARM & INFO and EURA will analyse and explore public funds especially synergies between the different european funds, 
such as European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the Cohesion Fund, European Structural and INvestment Funds (ESIF) or Structural Reform Support 
Programme (SRSP) . Especially EURA, specialist in European cooperation, will be in charge of this task at European level. From this task, fina ncial 
recommendations fostering circular economy will be delivered (deliverable 7.8) and publicly disseminated among European decision makers.  
9 Include eco-design, industrial symbiosis and industrial ecology. “Promote the role of ecosystems services…… and the use of natural capital accounting” 
A2C includes eco-design elements (T5.2), aiming at deliver recycled and recyclable high barrier PE plastic compounds as alternative to current non -
recyclable multilayers. Otherwise, industrial symbiosis/ecology approach of the project is already been explained in scope 4. 
Businesses depend on natural capital and at the same time they impact on it in a relevant way. This is particularly true for economic activities in the agrifood 
sector as those included in A2C. Agrifood production is strongly affected by natural and climate conditions (e.g. soil, water), and can impact on natural capital 
according to the practices in use. A2C enhances and preserves natural capital, aims to increase resource efficiency and to adopt processes that do 
not deplete new resources, but rather rely on waste as inputs. 
Natural capital accounting is the main tool to measure changes in the stock of natur al capital due to business, and to integrate the value of ecosystem into 
accounting. UB will conduct a Natural Capital assessment (T6.4.3) on the solutions demonstrated, in order to identify their links with natural capital, their 
impacts and the extent of dependencies  by identifying and valuate the ecosystem servic es generated and impacted by A2C solutions, and integrate the 
consideration of natural capital into the circular business models. ICONS will lead the exploitation strategy which will be fully aligned with this approach.  
10 The systemic solutions implemented should facilitate technology deployment, including digital technologies.  
Our solution integrates digital technologies as a core part of the solution,  boosting the circularity of the solution and enabling a closer relation among 
all the value-chain, including end users, by means of providing an accurate composition of all waste inputs and by track the journeys of products, components 
and materials and make the resulting data securely accessible (traceability). Our DIS predictive tool allow to process data and information required to improve 
the circular business models and the complex demands of circular supply chains. DIS will be an enabler for upscaling the circular economy. 
Moreover, it will serve as a powerful tool (through the public DIS, Task 6.2) to arise citizens awareness about the positive impacts of our project and hence 
of the circular economy processes, and it will contribute to A2C acceptance, by providing publicly accurate information. 
11 Facilitate the industrial exploitation of the already demonstrated research results and contribute towards connecting SMEs to larger companies. 
Innovation brought by A2C is based on already demonstrated research results from the project partners  (See Table 5 and TRLs) while it will create 
new value chains linking 13 SMEs (8 from Murcia) with 6 large companies (MCT, ALM, MKSI, EXUS, SOLP, EVER) creating a big leverage effect for the 
regional economy. Moreover, A2C will close the research & innovation divide  by connecting actors from agriculture and food processing sector with 
research & academia as well as with associations and clusters, industry, policy makers; business support organisations, innovation agencies and technology 
transfer intermediaries in multi-actor innovation partnership networks in order to valorise and exploit sidestream biomass and plastics waste resources from 
the agrifood sector, generating 31 circular business models and 15 key exploitable shared results. 
12 Sustainable circular use & valorisation of local resources. “More efficient and sustainable businesses processes and value chains promoting zero-waste..” 
All of the valorization/recycling process involved in A2C have been designed through a zero waste approach by cascade upcycling model processes. A2C 
recycling processes entails a set of pre -treatments, recycling/extraction technologies and further postreatments assuring not only the high quality of all 
outputs but also they are environmen tal cost -efficient and addressing  health and safety issues  such as the elimination of concern substances 
(microplastics, decontamination) and compliance with food contact materials directive (EU 10/2011), food (EC-1924/2006, EC-1333/2008 & EU-2016/662 ), 
and cosmetic (EC-1223/2009 & EU-2018/978) EU legislation. 
12 
 
Local residues from agrifood sector will be valorised , plastics (fossil feedstock) and fruits and vegetables (bio -based feedstock). Its circular use 
sustainability will be assured by several means, water and energy management, recovery of by products, LCA development and benchmarking with similar 
linear solutions as well as the evaluation, quantification through indicators, and monitoring of the cluster transition towards circularity (task 7.3). Within this 
scope, circular business models will be elaborated assuring the business sustainably, some of them enta ils the reuse of the recycled materials, including 
secondary raw materials (aluminium-metal ores feedstock).    
13 Involve community-based innovation schemes. Include specific training for local actors and education services for local communities.  
Tasks 7.1 aimed at analyse a new innovation scheme for the community participative recovery of agrifood waste  from local markets . It entails the 
awareness raising among these markets vendors on the need and benefits of take the most of those vegetables that cannot be sold (e.g. maturity or aesthetic 
defects) but could be integrated within A2C residues streams. This action will be carried out by PRIMA who promotes social wo rks, increasing visibility and 
labour options of people in risk of exclusion social, while increase the agrifood sector sustainability and push towards zero waste sector. In addition, specific 
analysis and recommendations will be done by KVC to foster the adoption & replication of innovative good practices concerning  community based circular 
economy. Finally, since co-design is at the basis of the circular solution development and A2C innovative business models and governance will be driven by 
citizen engagement, social inclusion and community and local based initiatives will be highly foste red in the resulting model.  Moreover at T8.6 a 
comprehensive training plan  for local actors and education services for local communities based on the project outcomes and guidelines for fostering 
public engagement in circular economy projects will be deli vered (Del 8.4) resulting in capacity building  (one of the dimensions of the A2C model) for 
citizens but also for all relevant stakeholders.   
14 Identify, analyse, quantify the economic, social and environmental benefits & challenges. Monitoring and evaluation of the cl uster’s transition towards 
circularity. Analyse regulatory and provide policy recommendations. Analyse available financial schemes for territorial circular solutions and propose concrete 
options for their improvement. Environmental externalities and life cycle assessment (LCA) are included and benchmarking cost and environmental footprint  
WP7 measures the economic, social an enviro nmental impact  of the proposed solution trough LCA (VTT) and by respective social sciences 
methodologies (quantitative and qualitative data collection, focus groups and/or delphi methodology) mainly implemented by th e dedicated partners (KVC, 
UVEG, ICONS),  in parallel to the development of the technological solution, enabling the monitoring and improvement of these areas. Environ mental 
externalities will be assessed (T7.3) and addressed and the LCA will be applied, being a valuable tool in order to benchmar k the environmental benefits of 
the new circular approach and compare it with current linear approach. Moreover, the transition of the A2C cluster towards circularity will be continuously 
assessed, monitoring and validated, lead by VTT. This WP7 also includes a multidimensional analysis, covering relevant dimensions for the success of the 
A2C systemic circular model also in other EU contexts, including the analysis of the policy and regulatory framework (including standardisation issues, UNE) 
at regional-cluster level (CARM,INFO), at national level and at European level (UVEG,EURA). Available financing schemes will be also a ddressed in task 
7.5.3 by EURA, CARM & INFO (Public) and CAJM (private) and linked with proposed circular business models as identified by UB.  
15 The information and data collected and the knowledge gathered by the projects under this topic must be shared with the CCRI. 
The involvement with the CCRI will be part of the networking and clustering activities (T8.3, leader: EURA). Dedicated formats (policy briefs) will be developed 
and participation secured in dedicated events. ICONs – as leader of outreach activities - will contribute and support EURA . In addition, the procedures to 
collect and share the data will be established as part of WP9: Project management and coordination activities. 
16 It is crucial that the systemic solutions implemented and their business models have a high replicability and scalability potential 
WP7 is widely designed to address the replicability and scalability of our solution as a whole, and to ensure the A2C model m aximises the potential for its 
adoption.  From the insights from task T7.2 to T7.4 (contextual studies), a multidimensional model w ill be co-created (lead by UVEG) with those engaged 
stakeholders through the public engagement strategy (T7.1), and in close collaboration with TCA and LPK (providing views of t heir territorial respective 
context) which will also demonstrate the A2C model through specific replication cases within specific regions (T7.6). From this model, a self-assessment tool 
for defining a roadmap for the replicability & scalability will be elaborated, enabling stakeholders/clusters to evaluate how their initial conditions can affect the 
process. Finally, in order t o practically check the usability and flexibility of the model and the self -assessment tool, a cross -validation action will be carried 
out with other EU clusters (16 agrifood clusters, see already engaged ones in Table 44 ) through specific workshops and/or focus groups. This will results 
in the A2C systemic solution validated as highly r eplicable and scalable across European territories. This action will also contribute to the elaboration of 
recommendations on policy/regulatory (D7.8) and financing needs and improvement options (D7.9) as well as to deliver practica l guidelines for other E U 
cluster/business (D8.4). 
17 Cooperation with other circular territorial clusters, transfer relevant information and good practices to policy-makers. Contribute to the open access.  
Close cooperation and coordination with the CCRI. complementarity and cooperation with European projects and initiatives on the circular economy. 
A2C dedicates a specific task (T8.3) aimed at establishing synergies with other circular territorial clusters funded under this topic and other clusters. 
A2C will also engage with projects/initiatives related to the project contents and related to (bio) circular economy. This task will enable sharing experiences, 
avoid overlapping and ensure complementarity while creating synergies to approach common challenges, as well as raising awareness about how the A2C 
impacts. It will be carried out in coordination and cooperation with the CCRI and is led by EURA supported by ICONS and KVC and with the collaboration of 
all partners, each one in their specific sector. KVC has experience on relevant clustering activities, being part of the coordination team of the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Task Group, dedicated to set up an active collaboration activity among projects through meetings, workshops and joint research activiti es for a 
common understanding on the scope and meaning of evaluation and monitoring in all Smartcities and Communities projects (SCC-1). Moreover, it will enable 
to engage actors to participate within the transfer of knowledge actions planned in T8.7. EURA.   
Besides A2C will implement actions in order to share relevant information and good practices to policy-makers and stakeholders not involved in this proposal. 
A2C proposal includes (Table 18) an analysis of the state of the art of projects addressing the management of waste of the agrifood sector and we can state 
that nor duplication neither overlapping with past and on -going research exists. We already have identified other projects/initiati ves with complementary 
approaches that will be involved in clustering actions with the aim of establishing synergies and strategic collaborations, & explore new business opportunities 
for our developments. Moreover, a dedicated budget for open access scien tific publications has been reserved for using “green” or “gold” publications. In 
addition alternatives for free repositories such as OpenAIRE, ROAR, OpenDOAR or ZENODO will be also exploited. 
18 The technology readiness level (TRL) of each circular solution should be within the 6-7 range at the end of the project.  
A2C will reach a TRL 7 at the of the project implementation. Please see justification on Table 4 
 
1.3. CONCEPT AND METHODOLOGY 
 
1.3.1 OVERALL CONCEPT  
 
1.3.1.1 A2C PROJECT CONCEPT   
 
Figure 4 on next page shows the A2C concept to address the project approach and achieve the project objectives. 
 
Public engagement and co -creation at the core of A2C  systemic solution : The multidimensional model co -
creation process is founded on a strong public engagement strategy (designed in Task 7.1 as well as establishing the 
most adequate tools to implement it). This strategy will rely on the Quadruple Helix of Stakeholders approach, 
covering all stakeholders affected, directly and indirectly by the A2C project, divided into four categories: (1) public 
administration and institutions (regional, local, national, European); (2) private organisations and 
business/enterprises, including financing bodies; (3) academia and research entities, including universities and 
research centres, public and private; (4) citizens and civil society organisations.  
13 
 
 
 
Interdisciplinary approach and stakeholders knowledge  use: A2C is a 
transdisciplinary project in which boundaries between and beyond disciplines are 
transcended and knowledge & perspectives from d ifferent scientific disciplines 
(STEM; Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) as well as knowledge 
from societal stakeholders (Social and Science humanities (SSH) disciplines) are 
integrated. Such through a multi-actor & multisectorial approach (explained in scope 
1). Main STEM and SSH experts involved A2C project are shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
1.3.1.2 TRL POSITIONING:  
Table 4. Justification of current TRL and the TRL reached at the end of the project of the most relevant technologies 
Green hybrid technologies for extraction of bioactive substances from agrifood wastes. Starting TRL5 →Final TRL7 
TRL5: Green extraction techniques as green solvent, microwaves, ultrasound and enzymatic hydrolysis have so far proved promising in comparison 
with conventional techniques for natural substances extraction. The advantages, already inherent in the reuse of food waste, can be evaluated in 
terms of time reduction, solvents used and energy required. The potential of hybri d green extraction processes ( combination of two or more ) has 
been demonstrated to overcome the disadvantages of simple extraction methods both in terms of extraction yield and time reduction as well as 
energy consumption. Hybrid processes still require adaptations (according to the wastes, target substances, kinet ics) and fine -tuning for their 
industrial implementation. → TRL7: A2C project will demonstrate 2 routes of extraction based in green hybrid t echnologies: (1) Route 1. Green 
solvents + ultrasounds assisted extraction as extraction technology & Membrane filtration and adsorption as purification technology for fibers, 
phenolics compounds & carotenoids with yield of 60%. (CITRO, CTNC, SSICA). Pilot scale up of extraction (100kg/h) and purification (15kg) (CTNC, 
CITRO) (2) Route 2. Green solvents + enzymatic hydrolysis assisted extraction+ microwaves assisted extraction (MAE) as extraction technology  & 
Membrane filtration and adsorption as purification technology for fibers, phenolics compounds & carotenoids with yield  of 70% (DMC, CTNC, SSICA 
, MKSI). Pilot scale up of extraction (50kg/h) and purification (15kg) (DMC, MKSI, SSICA). 
New food, nutraceuticals & cosmetic formulations using extracts from agrifood wastes. Starting TRL5 →Final TRL7 
TRL5: The potential of different extracts from agri food wastes (dietary fiber, carotenoids, phenolic substances) for the enrichment of food, 
nutraceuticals & cosmetic formulations, as natural alternatives to synthetic additives have been demonstrated. S ome substances (essential oils, 
lycopene, fatty acids) are already employed in formulations. Many other extracts from agrifood wastes could be applied, improvements  on stability 
and low costs for enhancing their industrial applications are required. →  TRL7: SSICA, CTNC DMC & CITRO will implement a specific strategy for 
each extracted substance to achieve a high stability of these extracts. Fibers will be stabilised & conserved by atomisation, lyophilisation, dehydration, 
vacuum concentration. Specific delivery systems based on oil -in-water emulsions, multilaye r emulsions and solid -lipid particles will ensure 
polyphenols & carotenoids stability over the shelf-life of the food formulations. Delivery systems based on encapsulation by ionic gelation will maintain 
intact the properties of the phenolics & carotenoids  as functional cosmetics & nutraceutics ingredients.  Upgrading the delivery systems in order to 
demonstrate the new technology on a relevant scale (1kg) (SSICA, CTNC) and validation of the stabilised extracts in real formulations to demonstrate 
the system in operational environment (LOL). 
Identification and sorting of multilayer materials. Starting TRL4 →Final TRL6 
TRL4: Identifications and sorting of different layers in multilayers films has been established in the EU project MULTICYCLE by IRIS; which showed 
the ability to use HSI -NIR for identifying the different layers in laminated plastic films as well as laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) fo r 
identifying black plastics. →TRL6: During A2C project HSI/LIBS in combination with Artificial Intelligent and Machine Learning will be implemented 
to address the current detection limitations and improve the sorting efficiency, increasing the feasibility of the identifica tion process in multi -layer 
materials, not only including different polymer  types but also including also metallic layers (aluminium). These solutions will be validated  (IRIS) at a 
waste sorting facility (GWC), a in a belt with a yield of at least 25kg per hour at industrial site, aiming for TRL 6. 
Separation of aluminium (Al) from complex multilayer structures. Starting TRL5 →Final TRL7 
TRL5: SAPE has validated innovative recycling process for the postconsumer multilayers fro m packaging containing Al  (PET-Al-PE), by using 
separation fluids. →TRL7: At A2C, this technology will be adapted to the project multilayers containing Al (LDPE/PET-Al, LLDPE/PET-Al, LDPE/Al/ 
PET) preparing specific fluid solutions and optimising their effectiveness in the separation of the Al layer. A pilot plant (20 kg batches) for the specific 
project materials will be implemented, demonstrating it in an operational environment. 
PET/PE enzymatic depolymerisation. Starting TRL4 →Final TRL6 
TRL4: CETEC has validated specific pre -treatment routes for PET and LDPE at lab scale. MELLI has successfully isolated, sequenced, cloned, 
produced recombinantly and tested in-vitro the first known enzyme (MELLI plasticase) in the world capable of degrading polyethylene (PE) and other 
plastics with alkyl chain backbones, including those lack ing ester linkages, as well as PET. →TRL6: During this project, we will implement specific 
pre-treatments for target PET/PE wastes to ease the action of the enzymes (digestion). They will be  based on extrusion followed by a quick cooling 
and micronisation (to decrease crystallinity), modification of the polymer with by -functional chain extensors (to decrease  PE hydrophobicity) and 
thermo and UV aging ( to decrease molecular weight). Upgrading from lab to pilot scale achieving 50 -80 kg of PET/PE pretreated  (CETEC, GWC). 
MELLI will engineer a variant of their existing patented wild plasticase enzyme, improving the enzymes’ kinetics, thermal stability, reducing the capital 
and fixed costs of scaling to industrial biodegradation. Enzyme engineering and mechanistic for the depolymerisation reaction will be well established 
and optimisation of depolymerisation products (alkanes 10 -30 carbons with conversion yields ≥30% and terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol with 
Back Scope18  Back Solution  
Back SSH Impact  
Figure 4 A2C Project concept, enabling the terrotorial deployment of A2C solution as well as its replication and scalability  
 
 
Figure 5 Interdiscisciplinary project membership 
 
 
14 
 
conversion yields (≥40% &≥10%) (MELLI). Upgrading the fermentation of the customised enzymes from lab scale to pilot scale ( 30 L), in order to 
define a detailed fermentation protocol on a relevant scale for the production of each enzyme. Upgrading the new technology o f the enzymatic 
biodegradation of PET/PE from lab scale to a pilot scale environment using a 50L bioreactor (MELLI). 
Plastics decontamination. Starting TRL5 →Final TRL7 
TRL5: Removal of VOCs has been demonstrated for PET and HDPE by the patented Vacurema & Refresh Erema technologies achieving recycling 
post-consumer packaging for EFSA approval →TRL7: We will implement a synergistic approach that close the recycling loop fulfilling EFSA criteria 
based on: cleaning of plastics by water to eliminate solvents traces, ground, chemicals and organic contaminants(GWC, CEW, WETS) + Fluorescent 
detection of nanosized nanoparticles to identify nano and microplastics and selectively separate them by ultra and nanofiltra tion (WETS, CEW) + 
Vacuum extrusion to eliminate VOCs and odours before extrusion that will include devolatilization ports to contribute to the decontamination  (GWC) 
+ Traceability by blockchain to ensure the control of the origin and final destination of all recyclates for food contact approval (ECO) eliminating up to 
99% of contaminants. Upgrading the new technology for plastics decontamination to pilot scale (500 kg). 
Aluminium recycling and chemical modification. Starting TRL4 →Final TRL6 
TRL4: Modification of materials with polymer -shells such as polyisobutylene-PIB have been demonstrated in operational environment, such as 
Borealis technology for impact modification of PP. In particular, methodology for aluminium chemical modification including polymer-shells has been 
validated at lab scale by BOKU. →TRL6: During this project, the most appropriate route for aluminium modification will be implemented based on a 
two-step approach: first by binding of an organic -ligand (e.g. long chain carboxylic acids) or modification with aluminiumoxide/siliciumoxide and 
second modification with a polyethylene compatible shell (eg. polyisobutylene -PIB) achieving an aluminium with high purity and compatible with PE 
(for its application in the PE compound development for agriculture films). Upgrading the new process from lab to pilot scale (1 kg).(BOKU) 
Upcycling of enzymatic degradation products (alkanes, TPA, EG) by cell factories. Starting TRL4 →Final TRL6 
TRL4: Bioproduction of fatty acids from alkanes, protocatechuic acid (PCA) from TPA and glycolic acid (GA) from EG via metabolic engineering has 
been demonstrated at lab scale in yeast and other organisms →TRL6: UNIMIB will develop  3 cell factories i)  Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 
Zygosaccharomyces bailii cell factory  optimizing the heterologous expression and the efficiency of the bioconversion of TPA into PCA, ii) 
Acetobacterium woodii cell factory for the bioconversion of GA into EG by funnelling the substrate through the detoxification pathways that comprises 
the activity of an alcohol dehydrogenase followed by an aldehyde dehydrogenase iii) Lipomyces starkey and Rhodosporidium toruloides cell factory 
studying their molecular mechanisms for fatty acids accumulation from alkanes. In all cases, adaptive laboratory evolution and strain engineering will 
be applied for selecting and tailoring ameliorated strains, in terms of robustness to the substrates as well to the conditions selected for the production 
processes at pilot scale (30 L) validating them in a relevant environment, providing precise measurement of conversion rates and characterisation of 
by-products.  
PHBV and C-50 carotenoids development by Hfx mediterranei haloarchea cell factory. Starting TRL4 →Final TRL6 
TRL4: Hfx mediterranei haloarchea has been shown as a promising candidate for the industrial production of PHBV. CETBIO has demonstrated 
PHBV production (in intracellular granules , >95% PHBV accumulation ) in EU H2020 upPE -T project using PE and PET enzymatic degradation 
products and sugar wastes as nutrients for Hfx, developing economic and environmentally sustainable PHBV productions routes. UA & CETBIO has 
demonstrated the production of C -50 carotenoids (accumulated in the  cytoplastic membranes) , validating that stress caused by H 2O2 (at 
concentrations >25mM) promotes the synthesis of higher concentrations of C50 carotenoids in this haloarchaea . WETS has validated (EU H2020 
project SCALIBUR) PHBV extraction and purification based on green solvents as alcohols. →TRL6: During this project, by-products of the previous 
cell factories (TPA not bioconverted, glycols and hydroxy acids with low value in the cosmetic industry) will be used as nutrients for Hfx mediterranei 
cell factory, in combination with organic waste fractions coming from the agri -food processing industry, determining the optimal concentrations and 
process parameters ( CETBIO). PHBV will be separated by green solvents extraction  and filtration reaching high purity PHBV (≥99%) with high 
yield (≥98%) in the extraction (WETS). Carotenoids will be extract by acetone with high yield (≥98%) (UA). Moreover, a strategy for recovery of 
by-products (salty supernatant) in order to be recycled, increasing process competitiveness. (WETS, CEW, CETBIO). Upgrading the fermentation of 
the haloarchea from lab scale to pilot scale (100 L), for future industrial scale up. (CETBIO). Upgrading the extraction process at pilot scale (1-3 L) 
(WETS). 
High barrier compounds by extensional flow mixing and compatibilisation. Starting TRL5 →Final TRL7 
TRL5: specific screw designs promoting extensional flow mixing compared to conventional configuration of single or twin extrusion, where shear flow 
is promoted, have demonstrated the obtaining of controlled morphology of inmiscible polymers improves the barrier properties of the blend by a factor 
of 30. Moreover, there are commercial compatibilisers that allow the mixing on non -polar polyolefins (PE) and  polar polymers (EVOH, PA, PET). 
CETEC has carry out and validated the direct re -use of the Al -flakes from multilayer packaging into blends with polyethylene forming random 
composites (tensile strenght 16 MPa; strain at break 180%, OTR 50 cm 3/ atm day). →TRL7: A2C proposal will develop  morphology-controlled 
blends (L/W ratio >100) to produce a new range of recyclable gas barrier films -- 3 compounds PE-PE/EVOH (High barrier, OTR 1-5 cm3/atm 
day), PE-PE/PA (Medium-high, OTR 6-10 cm3/atm day) and PET (Medium, OTR 11-20 cm3/atm day) for barrier food packaging and 2 compounds 
PE-EVOH-Aluminium, PE -PA-Aluminium with very high barrier properties (OTR<1 cm 3/atm day) for very high barrier disinfection films for 
agriculture. i) PE and PET obtained from the physical de lamination of the complex multilayers, and the PE/EVOH and PE/PA from the simple 
multilayers will be formulated (additives EFSA authorised) to achieve the required properties to be processed by extrusion ii ) Packaging simple 
multilayers will be compatibilised with the recycled PE (physically recycled), PE-PE/PA with SEBS-g-MA1 and SEBS-g-MA2 and  PE-PE/EVOH with 
RETAIN™ and ReVive compatibilisers under extensional flow mixing iii) PE -EVOH and PE -PA from agriculture will be blend with the modified 
aluminium (CETEC, BOKU) under extensional flow mixing for agriculture application (light diffusion, UV-stability, reflection, very high barrier<1). A2C 
will design a convergent-divergent plate to be incorporated to the commercial twin screw extruder (Leistritz, modelo ZSE 18HP) at CETEC to create 
the extensional flow during the extrusion processes. Upgrading the extensional flow mixing extrusion process at 1000 kg (GWC). 
A2C Data Integration System (DIS). Starting TRL5 →Final TRL7 
TRL 5: The necessary ICT technologies for the “DIS” development (cloud technologies, web technology, watermark, Quick Real -QR, big data, 
Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain) has been proved in commercial solutions by the ICT partners. ECO has a basic platform for traceability of 
recycled agricultural plastics ( www.ecotrace.es). This basic platform includes Cloud, QR, Artificial Vision, Statistics and private blockchain 
technologies. EQU has demonstrated both the incorporation of the QR as a security element and integration of hidden code in the corporate image 
of the Municipality of Mazarrón in Murcia (Spain) to avoid “Fake news”. EVYT has validated the use of the digital identity linked to traceability solutions. 
EXUS has demonstrated that using Big Data to select the best raw materials from agriculture, forestry and aquaculture for the bioe conomy industry 
in the EU H2020 DataBio project (ID 732064). →TRL7: At project, our “DIS” platform will connect the different technologies aforementioned achieving 
a homogeneous technical technological and knowledge integration. The disruption of our “DIS” will be the incorporation of data from anywhere in the 
world without errors, creating traceability  in real time associated with quality standards without errors. In addition, we will use the obtained data for 
deploy a predictive tool based on Big data and Artificial intelligence for selecting the best recovery route of each waste in future cycles. 
 
1.3.1.2 PARTNERS RESEARCH ACTIVITIES LINKED TO THE PROJECT   
The technologies and research applied in A2C rely on results obtained from project partner’s previous projects: 
Table 5. Partner research activities linked to the project 
Partner Project name/Duration/Call Activities Experience Relevant for proposal 
CETEC  
(Coord.), UNE, 
BOKU, TECN, 
CETBIO, UA 
upPE-T (2020-2024) / H2020-NMBP-TR-
IND-2018-2020/ Upcycling of PE & PET 
wastes to generate biodegradable 
bioplastics for food & drink packaging. 
PE & PET pre -treatments for enzymatic depolymerisation , PHBV production, extraction & 
purification, bioplastics formulation, transformation of biodegradable compounds into new 
packaging solutions & validation in industrial environment detecting hotspots. Contribution 
to standardization (biodegradable packaging) and in the adoption of new policies. 
CTNC, SSICA, 
IRIS 
AGRIMAX (2016-2020) / H2020 BBI-VC3-D5-2015 / Valorisation 
of agrifood wastes by biorefinery processing technologies. 
Ultrasounds & enzymatic assisted extractions and in purification 
by membranes. Sorting of plastics by HSI technology. 
CTNC, 
AGRO 
LIFECITRUS (2015-2020) / H2020-LIFE14 ENV/ES/000326 / Recycling 
of citrus industry scrap into natural additives for food industries 
Extraction of high added value substances from citrus wastes , 
assessment the circularity of an agrifood valorisation system. 
Back Scope 11 
15 
 
SAPE FlexPack2Circle (2018-2021) / H2020-SMEInst-2018-2020-2/ 
Transfer of multimaterial flexible packaging to Circular Economy 
Delamination of PE/Al/PET postconsumer packaging by solvent -
based fluids microemulsions. 
IRIS MULTICYCLE (2018-2021) / H2020-CE-SPIRE-10-2018/ Advanced and 
sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based multi-materials 
HSI based solutions development for detection of 
composition of multilayers materials 
IRIS CIRCULAR Food Pack (2021-2024) / H2020- SEP-210687597 / 
Circular Packaging for Direct Food Contact Applications. 
Photonics improved by chemometrics and ML algorithms for the 
characterization of polymer materials in the waste streams. 
UNIMIB YEASTDOC (2017-2021)/H2020MSCAITN2017/Biotechnological 
substances production by yeasts and microorganism. Biotechnological routes for sustainable substances production. 
UA WaysTUP (2018-2020) / H2020-SFS-2018-818308/Value chains for 
disruptive transformation of urban biowaste into biobased products  
Biotransformation of biowaste  into high added value 
substances. 
WETS SCALIBUR (2018-2022) / H2020-SFS-2018-1 / Production of 
biomaterials from biowaste. 
PHA bioplastics extraction & purification by green solvents & 
membranes. 
REG VPP4Islands (2020-2024) / H2020-LC-SC3-ES-4 / Development of 
virtual power plants (VPP) for interoperable and smart islands in Europe. 
Integration of renewable systems  and transition to green 
technologies. 
REG Magnitude (2017-2021) / H2020-LCE-05-2017 / Technologies 
for coordination and integration of the European energy system 
Energy optimisation, synergies between electricity, gas and heat 
and simulation of multi-energy-systems 
DMC BIOVEXO (2020-2025) / H2020-BBI-JTI-2020 / Biocontrol of Xylella 
fastidiosa plant pathogen by organic solutions such as plant extracts 
Extraction of organosulfur compounds  from by -products of 
onions. 
KVC, UB, 
ICONS 
MAtchUP (2017-2020) / H2020- SCC-1-2016-2017 / Demonstration 
of innovative solutions in 3   lighthouse cities and 4 follower cities 
Replication & upscaling business models, social & policy 
assessment and communication, citizen engagement. 
KVC Wellbased( 2019-2022) / H2020-SC1-BHC-29-2020 / Implementation of 
urban policies in 7 pilot cities improving health, wellbeing and equality    
Social and Po licy analysis, scalability & 
transferability, public engagement 
UVEG VALUECARE (2019-2023) / H2020-SC1-DTH-11-2019 / Improvement of the 
quality of life of the making European health systems more sustainable by ICT 
Social and policy assessment, public engagement 
and communication 
UVEG Dinamising Circular Economy in the Innovation System in 
Valencia region / (funded by the regional government).  
Fostering circular economy initiatives among the 
universities and research institutes in the Valencia region. 
UNE CIRC-PACK(2017-2020) / H2020-CIRC-01-2016-2017 / Towards 
circular economy in the plastic packaging value chain 
New standardization in terms of recycling, circular value and 
supply chains 
UB, ICONS URBAN GreenUp (2016-2022) / H2020-EU-3.5-730426 / Demonstration of 
innovative urban solutions in 3  lighthouse cities and 5 follower cities 
Replication & upscaling models, innovative business 
models and communication & dissemination. 
UB CINDERELA (2018-2022) / H2020-CIRC-2017TwoStage / New Circular 
Economy Business Model for More Sustainable Urban Construction 
Circular economy and Circular Economy Business 
models 
VTT EU ORIENTING (2020-2023) / H2020-CE-NMBP-42-2020 / Life cycle 
sustainability assessment methodology towards a circular Economy 
New tools for life cycle sustainability  assessment 
including social, environmental and economic. 
EURA 
XPRESS (2019-2020) / H2020-LC-SC3-2019-RES-IA-CSA / Support for 
Public Procurements to facilitate the collaboration between SMEs and 
public sector 
Fostering and improving Green Public Procurement, 
policy and financing recommendations, clustering, 
Public engagement 
ICONS POCITYF (2019-2023) / H2020-LC-SC3-2019-ES-SCC / Helping cities 
deliver positive energy districts while respecting their mixed urban settings 
Social innovation strategies, clustering , 
communication, dissemination & exploitation. 
EXUS INGENIOUS (2019-2022) / H2020-DRS-02-2018-202 / New integrated 
toolkit for collaborative response in risks and crisis. 
Translate raw sensor data into boosted intelligence  for 
optimized decision support tool. 
EXUS E2DATA (2018-2020) / H2020-ICT-2017-1 / New Big Data paradigm 
increasing of up to 10x using state of-the- art in infrastructure 
Big Data  deployments while utilizing up to 50% less cloud 
resources