3.2 METHODOLOGY  
We have split the project in 9 WPs with 
a total duration of 36 months  (Figure 
6: A2C methodology) . The work is 
organised in three parallel, interrelated, 
blocks:  Block 1  is focused on  R&D 
activities, includes  methodologies for 
EFSA authorisations, DIS development (WP1), organic agri-food wastes recycling by green extraction routes (WP2), 
multilayer plastic wastes sorting and recyling including pilot upscaling (WP3), upcycling of the recycled agrifood 
materials into new food, nutraceutic & cosmetic formulations & upscaling of the optimal extraction routes  (WP4), 
upcycling of the recycled plastic materials into high added value susbtances for cosmetic, PHBV bioplastics and 
compounds for food packaging & agriculture, including pilot scale up (WP5). Block 2 is dedicated to demonstrate 
the A2C systemic solution adoption, replication and scalability. Entails the integration of the technologies at pilot 
scale, including a validation of the products in a industrial environment and the DIS available for the public as well 
as the development of CEBMs of the demonst rated tecnologies and its financing mechanisms  (WP6). WP7  
constructs, validates and demonstrates through 2 replica tion cases, by means of public e ngagment and cocreation 
processes, a model for A2C adoption & replication based on the multidimensional contextual study and addressing 
ideintified barriers while tools and recommendations to decision makers and stakeholders will be delivered. Block 3 
is dedicated to horizontal activities : Dissemination, communication, exploitation, IPR, standarisation, training, 
policy recommendations (WP8) and project management (WP9).  
Block 1. Research and developme nt activities (WP1-WP5): Methodology based on control loops to adjust the 
processing conditions in order to achieve the optimal results WP1. A2C Specifications, Residues Management and 
Data Integration System  will be l ed by  CETEC, as project coordinator,  and will be focus on new products 
specifications, guarantee of safety of the A2C products and processes under EU standards, energy & water efficiency 
assurance and implementation  of the Data Integration System.  WP2. A2C technologies for the recycling of th e 
organic agri-food wastes is dedicated to the  implementation of optimal routes for the extraction & purification of 
phenolic compounds , carotenoids  and fib res from the agri -food wastes and will be led by CTNC . WP3. A2C 
    Figure 6.A2C project methodology 
16 
 
technologies for the sorting and recycling of multilayer plastics residues will include the optimal technologies for 
the recyling of the multilayers, and will be led by GWC ( plastics recycler expert). All WP3 echnologies will be pilot 
scale up based on lab trials, and by-products recovery strategies will be implemented. WP4. Upcycling of the recycled 
agrifood materials and upscaling of optimal extraction & purification routes  is focused on demonstra te the 
applicability of the fibres, phenolic sybstances & carotenoids extracted in the development of new formulations for 
food, nutraceutics and cosmetics achieving the properties of the formulations based on conventional extracts. It will 
be led by DMC (expert in development of innovative food & nutraceutics solutions). WP5. A2C technologies for the 
upcycling of the recycled plastics materials is dedicated to obtain high added value products from the recycled plastic 
materials and will be led by UNIMIB (expert in niotransformation processes). 
Block 2. Activities for demonstration of A2C systemic solution adoption, replication and scalability (WP6-7) 
WP6. Demonstration of the A2C technological solution integrates all the developed technologies at pilot scale up 
technologies (GWC, SAPE, IRIS, BOKU. MELLI, CETBIO, UNIMIB, UA, WTS, CTNC, DMC, CITRO, ALM, MCT, 
MKSI, SSICA) in a demonstrator in the Murcia (Spain) at GWC, CETBIO, CETEC, DMC and CTNC facilities (all 
of them in close industrial areas) evaluating their performance in an industrial environment, and will be led by GWC 
(with a vast experience in process upscaling and whose facilities will include most of the pilots). Moreover, by -
products valorisation strategies will be implemented ( CTNC, WTS, CEW, CTNC. CETBIO, UA, SAPE ) and energy 
performance will be studied (REG) . Prototypes of the valorised products (both organic and plastic ones) will be 
produced at relevant and industrial relevant environment to demonstrate our solution at TRL6-7, setting the basis for 
the future industrial implementation. Circular Economy Business Models (CEBMs) and their associated financing 
mechanisms, for the systemic solutions and technologies demonstrated in the A2C project  will be performed (UB, 
CJM). WP7. A2C systemic solut ion adoption, replication and scalability  defines a public engagement specific 
strategy and implements the required actions to contribute to the acceptance and engagement in the cluster’s transition 
towards a circular economy, acting as well as a bridge to engage stakeholders at EU level. Community-based 
innovation schemes will be part of the engagement an d bottom-up approach of A2C bringing . Once the relevant 
stakeholders are engaged, a specific framework will be established through co-creation to identify, analyse and 
obtain key information along the different dimensions to merge within the A2C systemic solution. With the data and 
feedback provided (from research & business models) an A2C systemic solution model will be built, providing the 
demonstration of the cluster  transition as a whol e towards 
circularity. The model will define key factors of the relevant 
dimensions for the adoption of A2C systemic solution, with a delivered 
self-assessment tool  (See Figure 7) for defining a roadmap for the 
replicability and scalability. The replication potential of A2C systemic 
solution will be demonstrated by studying the replication of the model 
within specific Italian and Lithuanian regions. P olicy 
recommendations to improve circular economy related EU and 
national/local regulation (including standardisation & certification) and 
recommendations for improving current available financing 
schemes will be delivered, therefore contributing to the scalability and 
replicability of the A2C systemic model. Finally, other agrifood clusters 
and relevant stakeholders already engaged (see Table 44 and support 
letters) will validate the applicability of A2C systemic solution model 
and the recommendations derived through cross-fertilization activities.  
Block 3. Horizontal activities (WP8 & WP9) : WP8. Communication, dissemination, exploitation, training & 
policy recommendations  (Leader:ICONS). Widespreads the project resul ts, engages as many stakeholders as 
possible, while raising awareness and knowledge transfer about circular economy and innovations produced by A2C. 
It delivers the A2C D&C strategy and provides the project identity and online channes (ICONS) as well as the 
content packaging to facilitate the A2C dissemination actions and those contents for addressing the general public 
outreach (ICONS, all partners). Dedicated actions at local/regional levels will disseminate/communicate and raise 
awareness while hel p engaging local/regional actors (PRIMA, AGRO,PROEX,CARM,INFO,KVC,ICONS). 
Intensive networking and clustering action s (A2C partners lead by EURA),  at all levels, ensures the widest 
engagement and visibility of project results while promotes cooperation and engagement with other 
projetcs/initiatives. Based on WP7 lessons , WP8 delivers a framework for autonomous learning and capacity 
building in the fields related to A2C at local and EU levels (Leader: UVEG). The long-term sustainability of A2C 
outcomes will be assured  through a comprehensive exploitation strategy and  continuous action s on innovation 
monitoring & market analysis (Leader: ICONS, all partners). Finally, A2C encompasses actions to contribute to the 
development of new standards. A2C benefits of standardization for increasing the exploitation possibilities (Leader: 
UNE). WP9. Project management &  coordination activities: managed by CETEC, assisting all partners in the ir 
activites development.  
Figure 7: A2C model self-assessment tool 
Back Scope 2  
17 
 
Gender dimension: A2C will follow EU gender policy; we regards equal opportunities not just as a legislative 
requirement but as an ingredient, ensuring there are no inequalities, either mal iciously or unintentionally . A2C 
strategy lies on three principles: 1) Fostering gender balance in A2C research teams, in order to close the gaps in 
women participation. 47.9% of personnel involved are women while from all particpants holding a PhD in a science-
related discipline, 51.7% are women. 2) Ensuring gender balance in decision-making, in order to reach the target 
of 40% of the women in panels/groups. The project management board is led by a woman, representing women the 
80% of this board main roles. 3) Integrating the gender dimension in research and innovation content: Gender 
dimension is inherently integrated in our solution and their study and approach will be deeply addressed through the 
multidimensional contextual analysis from WP7, and project activities/results will be tailored to the detected needs. 
 
 
1.4. AMBITION 
 
 
1.4.1. ADVANCE BEYOND THE STATE OF THE ART (SOTA) 
 
1.4.1.1 KEY INNOVATION 1:  UPCYCLING OF AGRI-FOOD WASTES 
 
1.4.1.1.1 SOTA: EXTRACTION OF HIGH ADDED VALUE SUBSTANCES FROM AGRIFOOD WASTES 
Agrifood waste are a valuable source of  bioactive compounds 13. Organic s olvent extraction is the conventional 
method to recover bioactives from vegetal matrix including agrifood wastes, however it has important problems: low 
selective yield  (many other molecules co -extracted with the target ones), environmental unsustainability. To 
overcome the problems alternative green extraction processes are emerging. 
Table 6. State of the art of green extraction processes compared to conventional organic solvents extraction 
Recent research has shown that the combination of properly green extraction methods (hybrid processes) is the 
best solution to maximize yields while minimizing costs . Promising examples of these hybrid processes are Green 
Solvents + Ultrasound assisted extraction, Green Solvents + Enzyme assisted extraction and Green Solvents + 
Microwave assisted extraction and have been tested in a pilot scale by CTNC and SSICA. UAE-EAE14, GS+MAE15 
are promising. Limitations: industrial implementation of hybrid green extraction still requires adaptations and fine-
tuning operations such as those included in A2C project.   
► A2C beyond SOTA. A2C will develop specific green extraction routes  searching an optimal use of green 
solvents, process conditions, energy consumption, process time & enhancement of the extraction yields. These routes 
will combine the advantages of the hybrid processes:-Route 1. Green solvents + ultrasounds assisted extraction -
UAE (target yield 60%) will be applied to obtain dietary fiber, phenolic extracts & carotenoids with a target purity 
of 70%. -Route 2. Green solvents + enzymatic hydrolisis assisted extraction-EAE+ microwaves assisted extraction-
MAE (target yield 70%) will be applied to obtain dietary fiber , and phenolic extracts & carotenoids with a  target 
purity of 80%. 
 
The first advance of all our extraction processes will be based on an extraction using non-organic solvents. We 
will work with aqueous solutions used with the incorporation of enzymes, acidic and basic solutions (such as 
NaOH/urea aqueous solution), ionic liquids (ILs) composed of  organic cations, such as imidazolium,  ammonium, 
and phosphonium and deep eutectic solvents (DEPs) based on quaternary ammonium salts (choline chloride, amines, 
sugars, alcohols & carboxylic acids) , which have shown good results in the extraction of phenolic compounds, 
carotenoids and fibres16.  The second advance will be the utilisation of hybrid processes for all defined ro utes. 
This strategy will make it possible to demonstrate the technical and economic industrial viability of the processes by 
enabling significant energy and timesaving’s and higher extraction yields.  The following Table 7 shows the 
advantages of A2C routes compared to conventional routes.  
                                                      
13 Santana-Méridas O. et al. Agricultural residues as a source of bioactive natural products, Phytochemistry Reviews, 11, 447–466, 2012. 
14 Konwarh, R., Pramanik, S., Kalita, D., Mahanta, C.L., Karak, N., 2012. Ultrasonication – A complementary “green chemistry” tool to biocatalysis: a laboratory-scale study of lycopene extraction. Ultrason. Sonochem. 19, 292–299. 
15 Sonia P. M., et al., 2017. Ionic-Liquid-Mediated Extraction and Separation Processes for Bioactive Compounds: Past, Present, and Future Trends, Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 6984−7052. 
16 Andreu, V., & Picó, Y. Pressurized liquid extraction of organic contaminants in environmental and food samples. Trends in analytical chemistry, 118:  709-721, 2019; Panić, M. et al. Enabling technologies for the extraction of grape -
pomace anthocyanins using natural deep eutectic solvents in up-to-half-litre batches Extraction of grape-pomace anthocyanins using NADES. Food Chemistry, 125185, 2019; De Aguiar, A. et al. Economic evaluation of supercritical fluid 
and pressurized liquid extraction to obtain phytonutrients from biquinho pepper: analysis of single and sequential-stage processes. The Journal of Supercritical Fluids, 104935, 2019; Tamkutė, L. et al. Recovery of valuable lipophilic and 
polyphenolic fractions from cranberry pomace by consecutive supercritical CO2 and pressurized liquid extraction. The Journal of Supercritical Fluids, 104755, 2020. 
Ionic liquids-ILs are liquid molten salts at temperatures below 100 °C  and are typically composed of large and unsymmetrical organic cations and organic or inorganic anions.   
. 
18 
 
 
Table 7. A2C routes compared to conventional extractions 
In addition, we will use advanced purification technologies to eliminate any potential impurities in  the extracts: 
membrane filtration for the fibres purification and membranes filtration and adsorption for carotenoids and phenolic. 
 
1.4.1.1.2 SOTA: NEW FOOD, NUTRACEUTICALS & COSMETICS FROM AGRIFOOD WASTES 
 
A wide array of studies 17 have demonstrated the potential of different extracts from agri -food wastes for the 
enrichment of food formulations as natural alternatives to synthetic additives (Table 8). 
 
Table 8. Bioactive extracts from agrifood wastes as alternative to conventional additives 
 
 
Furthermore, natural compounds may also be regarded as nutraceutical ingredients18 for products with enhanced 
nutritional value, health benefits, and longer shelf-life, highlighting phenolics  compounds and carotenoids ( high 
antioxidant potential), and dietary fibers (digestive properties). Moreover, some agrifood wastes extracts have been 
demonstrated for their cosmetic activity (carotenoids from pineapple) or already employed in cosmetic formulations 
(such as commercially available lycopene from tomato extraction  or essential oils from citrus) 19. But many others 
could be proposed for further applications, where less effective & more expensive products are currently being used. 
Limitations: synthetic additives are still usually applied due to their high stability and low cost compared to natural 
alternative substances. 
 
► A2C beyond SOTA. Some of the higher agrifood wastes generated in Murcia (Spain)  (citrus, apples, grapes, 
artichoke, cauliflower & broccoli) have a great potential to be valorised since they contain a wide variety of bioactive 
compounds (Table 1) of interest for the food, cosmetic and nutraceutics industries. A2C will devel op innovative 
food, cosmetic & nutraceutics formulations based on the bioactive compounds extracted from these wastes.  
Fibres extracted from wastes can find potential applications in food & nutraceutics application as a low -calorie 
bulking agent useful as a flour or fat replacer or to improve water and oil absorption. Phenolic compounds & 
carotenoids will be used as powerful antioxidants in food, cosmetic and nutraceutics formulations. A2C will design 
a specific strategy to achieve a high stability of the phenolic compounds and carotenoids in the new food, 
nutraceutics & cosmetic formulations  since both of them are very sensitive to the de gradation induced by heat, 
light, oxygen, acid, transition metal, or interactions with radical species.  
 
The first step of our strategy will be focused on the identification of the predominant carotenoid/phenolic 
degradation pathway, and secondly based on it we will design specific delivery systems, taking into account: i ) 
presence of iron and radicals . We will add a chelator to bind the iron, partitioning it away from the 
carotenoids/phenolics and making the iron less reactive. Radi cals presence is associated to lipid oxidation, then to 
limit the radicals presence, our delivery system will include free radical scavengers; ii) contact light prevention to 
avoid photodegradation; iii) the carotenoid/phenolic ingredient can be easily dis persed into multiple types of food 
products. iv)  the delivery system will not alter the appearance, flavour, or texture of the final product; v) the 
bioactivity and bioavailability of the carotenoid/phenolic, and any desire to control the release in the final product. 
 
-For phenolics & carotenoids to be used as functional food ingredients we will design emulsions specific delivery 
systems. Based on SSICA experience, A2C will focused on the design of systems with the potential to offer multiple 
forms of carotenoid/phenolics protection, while still allowing for easy incorporation into foods:  oil-in-water 
emulsions since carotenoids & phenolic  substances are lipid -soluble, multilayer emulsions produced by forming 
layers around an oil droplet, and solid-lipid particles.  
 
-For phenolics & carotenoids  as functional nutraceutics & cosmetics , SSICA will encapsulate them  by ionic 
gelation, by extruding an aqueous solution of polymer through a syringe needle or a nozzle. 
 
 
                                                      
17 Ben-Othman et al. Bioactives from Agri-Food Wastes: Present Insights and Future Challenges. Molecules 25, 510, 2020. 
18  Functional food products those with physiological effects which may be beneficial for the health 
19 Barbulova A. et al. New Trends in Cosmetics: By-Products of Plant Origin and Their Potential Use as Cosmetic Active Ingredients. Cosmetics, 2, 82-92, 2015 

19 
 
1.4.1.2 KEY INNOVATION 2:  UPCYCLING OF MULTILAYER PLASTICS WASTES 
 
1.4.1.2.1 SOTA: SORTING OF MULTILAYER MATERIALS 
 
At the recovery facilities, flexible films are separated from rigid heavy items by two well -known technologies 
(ballistic and air separation). In order to identify the different lightweight materials specific systems could be used 
afterwards as is shown in Table 9. However, these identification processes and technologies are highly inefficient or 
prohibitively expensive, especially in case of plastic -metal mixtures. Therefore, many recyclers are still sorting 
plastics by hand, which is unreliable and expensive.  
 
Technology Characteristics Limitations 
Conventional 
NIR20 
Optical detection (wavelengths reflected by the material after NIR light illumines its 
surface). Allows sorting of monomaterials (PE, PP, PET) non -black packaging with 
thickness up to 1mm. Mainly use for separation of rigid plastic packaging and in some 
cases sorting of flexible PE. Industrially implemented. 
No efficiency in multilayers. No identification of opaque layers such as 
aluminium, thin coating layers (e.g. PVdC), thick layers. The equipment 
cannot distinguish between surface and reverse printing. 
PELLENC 
technology21 
NIR advance sorting of PE/PA films and PET/PA/PET bottles.  Industrially 
implemented. 
No identification of opaque layers. No identification of common 
materials in multilayers (EVOH, Al). 
REFLEX22 NIR advance sorting of PET/PE and PP/PE films. Demonstrated, at research 
stage.  
Low separation efficiencies achieved for flexible packaging. No identification 
of opaque layers. No identification of common materials in multilayers 
(EVOH, PA, Al). No identification of complex multilayers (>3 layers). 
Watermarks23/ 
Tracers 
Add digitally marks (recognizable by optical) on the surface of the films during their 
productions by mechanical actions or printing (HolyGrail 24  has achieve the sorting of 
monomaterials by this technology)/ Other technology is based on the use of fluorescent 
tracer materials identifiable by NIR25. Demonstrated, at research stage. 
No validated in embossed plastics. 
Most films to sort are, deformed, or fold difficult for the recognition of 
the watermarks. 
AI based 
vision26 
Well-developed technology that has been studying in the application of plastics sorting: sorting designs 
based on AI exhibit promising separation capabilities. Demonstrated for packaging (efficiency 90%). First 
pilot experiences in USA: spider -like robotic  arms guided by cameras and artificial intelligence (AI) 
implemented to make municipal recycling facilities (MRFs) run more efficiently27. 
High database needed. No demonstrated for films. 
HSI 
Combines the advantages of spectroscopy (rapidity, non -destructive nature), with the 
possibility of analysing the spatial distribution of quality parameters of multi -materials, 
by using imaging technology282930. High accuracy demonstrated for films. 
Not able to detect black and aluminium.  
Limitations: No technology allows the detection of most used multilayers such as PE/EVOH or complex multilayers 
containing aluminium. 
► A2C beyond SOTA. A2C will go beyond the state of the art by adopting HSI/LIBS in combination with 
Artificial Intelligent and Machine Learning  to address the current detection limitations and improve the sorting 
efficiency, increasing the feasibility of the identification pr ocess in multi -layer materials inc luding also metallic 
layers (aluminium). Our partner IRIS has demonstrated the ability to use HSI-NIR for identifying the different layers 
in laminated plastic films as well as laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS31) for identifying black plastics in 
the H2020 Multicycle project32. While existing point sensor can be applied to large packaging, an imaging technique 
such as HSI is preferable for multi-material identification of small films or shredded material fed on a belt. Lastly, 
HSI technology is not able to detect metal (aluminium) layers or black plastics, and will be complemented by the 
additional spectroscopic technique laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) that will be able to classify dark 
materials until  99% of accuracy.  To reach sufficient accuracy and speed  in th e material detection, the 
spectroscopic measurements will be complemented with an AI / Machine learning statistical evaluation , 
implemented using a custom -built state -of-the-art platform. These solutions will be validated at a waste sorting 
facility (GWC), in a belt (yield of at least 25kg/hour) and a sorting efficiency of 80% from the indeed. 
1.4.1.2.2 SOTA OF DECONTAMINATION OF PLASTICS WASTES 
Contamination hinders the reuse of recycled plastics in several applications, such as the food industry .  
Common decontamination processes applied in the recycling plants consist of a process known as 'triple rinsing 
and drying' (plastic waste passed through 3 consecutive washes & drying cycles using huge amounts of wastewater 
and high energy consume). In the case of recycled plastics in contact with food33 the possible migration of chemicals 
(detergents, solvents or  incidental contaminations) is an important issue. Agricultural plastic films  contain high 
contamination by pesticides . Some studies have ide ntified 134 substances including volatile and semi -volatile 
compounds in recycled LDPE and HDPE 34, being the main groups additives, and NIAs35 (polymer and additives 
breakdown products  & contamination from external sources). Moreover, microplastics , can be  unintentionally 
formed36 (microplastics are not currently eliminated at the recycling plants  going across the value chain).  A 
particular problem of plastics waste is the presence of odorous constituents, that are typically not only found on the 
outer surface, but are also adsorbed deep into the polymer, which make them hard to remove37. In the following table 
are shown the most advance technologies existing for plastics decontamination. 
                                                      
20 Near Infrared (NIR) sorting is used commonly in the waste industry to recover materials of value from mixed streams. The technology uses differences in the wavelengths of infrared light that is reflected by polymers with different chemical structures. The wavelengths of light that 
are reflected depend upon the covalent bonds in the polymer structure. 
21 https://www.pellencst.com/products/ (Accessed: 23/11/2020). 
22 McKinlay, R., Morrish, L., A summary report on the results and findings from the REFLEX project. Axion Consulting, 2016. 
23 Invisible codes’ being integrated into both printed materials (labels, sleeves, in-mould labels, films/pouches), as well as directly into a mould (PET bottles, HDPE bottles, thermoformed trays, injection moulded crates. 
24 https://vimeo.com/332020546/39583c93e0 . Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2016-2019. 
25 B.S. Richards. Applications of up-conversion: from PV to plastic recycling, Seminar at Univ. Aarhus, Denmark, 2020.; A. Turshatov, et al., Opt. of up-conversion photonic markers based on a La2O3 host for plastics recycling and anti-counterfeiting applications 2018.  
26 Tadej P. et al. Vision-Based Sorting Systems for Transparent Plastic Granulate. Appl. Sci. 10, 4269, 2020. 
27 Denver recycling center testing robotic sorter. https://www.ge.com/news/reports/dumpster-diving-robots-using-ai-smart-recycling  
28 M. Vidal, A. Gowen and J. M. Amigo, “NIR Hyperspectral Imaging for Plastics Classification,” NIR news, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 13-15, 2012.   
29 G. Bonifazi, G. Capobianco and S. S erranti, “A hierarchical classification approach for recognition of low -density (LDPE) and high-density polyethylene (HDPE) in mixed plastic waste based on short -wave infrared (SWIR) hyperspectral imaging,” Spectrochimica Acta - Part A: 
Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, vol. 198, pp. 115-122, 2018.  
30 A. Ulrici, S. Serranti, C. Ferrari, D. Cesare, G. Foca and G. Bonifazi, “Efficient chemometric strategies for PET-PLA discrimination in recycling plants using hyperspectral imaging,” Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, vol. 122, pp. 31-39, 2013.   
31 Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy has become a very attractive and popular technique in the field of chemical analysis due its high accuracy and simplicity. DOI: 10.1366/11-06574.  
32 Automated monitoring of waste composition and PAT platform for process optimization, article from MultiCycle 1st yearly newsletter, November 2019, available at http://multicycle-project.eu/2019/11/15/strong-foundations-for-smooth-process-scale-up/   
33 Recyclates in contact with food should accomplish EC282/2008 Regulation: i) contamination levels of the recyclates ii) cleaning efficiency of the recycled processes iii) exposure of potential hazardous substances to the consumer. 
34 O. Horodytska et al., Non-intentionally added substances (NIAS) in recycled plastics, Chemosphere, 251, 126373, 2020. 
35 Non-intentionally added substances (NIAS) are chemicals that are present in a food contact material (FCM) or food contact article (FCA) but have not been added for a technical reason during the production process. The term NIAS was introduced for plastic FCMs in Europe in the 
legal context (Commission Regulation (EU) No 10/2011). NIAS have various sources and can be grouped into side products, breakdown products, and contaminants. Typical NIas in plastics are flavor compounds, oligomers, and additives. 
36 https://echa.europa.eu/es/hot-topics/microplastics  
37 A. Cabanes, et al., A review on VOCs from recycled plastics, Sustain. Mater. Technol. (2020).   
Table 9. State of the art of sorting technologies for multilayer films. 
20 
 
Technology/Company Characteristics Limitations 
Degassing decontamination/Gneuss38 VOCs elimination (>91%, vacuum 20 mbar) in PP and odour in PE. Implemented at 
industrial scale in Germany. Only suitable for PE and PP. 
Extruclean/ACTECO39 Use of supercritical carbon dioxide during the extrusion phase to remove contaminants 
(mainly pesticides and solvents) up 70% and odour. Validated at pilot scale. 
Only suitable for PE. 
Difficult industrial scale up (high pressures) 
Vacurema, Refresh/Erema40 Recycling post-consumer PET packaging for EFSA approval. Removal of VOCs in a 
vacuum reactor before extrusion. Implemented at industrial scale. 
Only suitable for post -consumer PET, 
HDPE 
recoSTAR PET /Starlinger41 PET decontamination process for EFSA approval. Only suitable for post-consumer PET 
Deodorized resin/Envision Plastics42 Recycling postconsumer packaging for food contact (only approved by FDA, no EFSA). 
Implemented at industrial scale in USA. 
Only suitable for recycling HDPE bottles 
No EFSA authorisation 
Deodorisation/ Kreyenborg43 Odour removal heating the material by Infrared Dryer ensuring the diffusion of VOCs to 
the atmosphere. Implemented at industrial scale in Germany. No EFSA authorisation 
Capturation of polar/no polar volatiles by 
iorganic scavengers: zeolites/Zeocross 44, 
Tegosorb/Evonik45 
Zeolite (aluminum silicate with high porosity) and zinc salt of ricinoleic acid added to the 
polymers as scavengers to reduce organic compounds migration and eliminate odours. 
Commercialised. 
Both high dispersion in the polymer matrix 
and high compabilization are necessary to 
be effective. 
Table 10. State of the art of plastics decontamination technologies 
Limitations: No technology allows micro/nanoplastics elimination. Most of them no valid for all common plastics 
and no all have EFSA authorisation.    
► A2C beyond SOTA: The feedstock will be processed through 
a cleaning (decontamination) technology to remove any 
contaminants (pigments, additives, solvents, microplastics 
and VOCs), and eliminating the 2nd and third washing and drying 
cycle (see Figure 8). Our decontamination will be design to 
close the recycling loop fulfilling EFSA criteria for their 
application in industrial food packaging . A2C aims to 
implement a clean decontaminating technology based in 3 steps: 
(1) Cleaning by water (to eliminate solvents traces and organic 
contaminants) + (2) Fluorescent detectio n of nanosized nanoparticles to identify nano and microplastics and 
selectively separate them by ultra and nanofiltration + (3) Vacuum extrusion (to eliminate VOCs and odours) + (4) 
Traceability by DIS to ensure the control of the origin and final destination of all recyclates for food contact approval. 
Moreover, the waste water from the first cycle will be efficiently treated to be recirculated from other 
decontamination cycles. At this cycle organic waste will be separated and used during the project for bioplastic PHBV 
production. The A2C decontamination will be developed by considering the evaluation procedure (challenge test) of 
the overall recycling process to be submitted to the EFSA and the EU standard for the agricultural films46. 
 
1.4.1.2.3 SOTA OF RECYCLING OF MULTILAYER MATERIALS 
Three developing technologies for the recycling of multilayer plastic films recovery exist: mechanical recycling by 
compatibilization, physical recycling (delamination and selective dissolution-precipitation) and chemical recycling. 
However, the mechanical recycling downgrades the plastic value, the physical recycling is in the early stage of 
development (only one plant for PE & PP recycling from multilayers containing  polyamide and other  plant for 
aluminium separation are working in Europe47) and the chemical recycling for plastic depolymerisation requires high 
energy & long reaction times to be effective, consequently only 2% of plastic wastes are chemically recycled. Thus, 
the majority of multilayer film waste is currently being sent for energy recovery or landfilling.  
Limitations: There is an important challenge to develop technologies to deal with the recycling of multilayer plastics. 
► A2C beyond SOTA: A2C will achieve for the first time the upcycling of all types of multilayers: simple and 
complex even including aluminium . Concretely, we have designed a specific recycling route according to the 
specific composition of the multilayer structure. 
Table 11. A2C strategy for complex multilayers containing aluminium 
Recycling route Expected results 
Complex multilayers with external layer of aluminium (PE/PET-Aluminised) 
1. Physical delamination Separation of PE/PET and aluminium  
2. Enzymatic depolymerisation of PE/PET Depolymerisation of PE and PET to alkanes, EG & TPA that will be bioconverted into 
building blocks for cosmetic & bioplastics 
3. Surface treatment of Al Al flakes highly compatible with PE 
Complex multilayers with inner layer of aluminium (PE/Al/PET) 
1. Physical delamination Separation of PE, PET and aluminium 
3. Surface treatment of Al Al flakes highly compatible with PE 
3. Mechanical recycling of PE and PET PE and PET processable by extrusion (melt flow stabilisation) 
4. Extensional flow mixing and compatibilization (Aluminium-PE). High barrier (OTR <1 cm 3/atm day)) PE compounds alternative to multilayers for 
agriculture  
Table 12. A2C strategy for simple multilayers (PE/EVOH, PE/PA) 
Recycling route Expected results 
1. Mechanical recycling by extensional flow mixing and compatibilization 
(LDPE-EVOH, LDPE-PA, LDPE/EVOH, LDPE, LDPE/PA/LDPE). 
High-medium barrier (OTR: 1 -20 cm3/atm day) PE compounds alternative to multilayers 
for packaging. 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
38 https://www.gneuss.com/en/turnkey/degassing/  
39https://ec.europa.eu/environment/life/project/Projects/index.cfm?fuseaction=search.dspPage&n_proj_id=4927  
40 https://www.erema.com/en/vacurema_bottle_to_bottle/  
41 https://www.starlinger.com/en/recycling/recostar-product-line/recostar-pet-food/  
42 https://envisionplastics.com/deodorized/  
43 https://www.kreyenborg.com/produkte/plastik-und-chemie-ird-infrarot-trockner/  
44 https://www.pqcorp.com/products/zeolites/zeocros  
45 https://household-care.evonik.com/product/household-care/en/products/pages/tego-sorb.aspx  
46 EN 13206 & amendment prA1 (Thermoplastic covering films for use in agriculture and  horticulture), prEN 14932 (Stretch thermoplastic films for wrapping silage Bales), EN 13655 (Thermoplastic mulch films recoverable after useEN 17033 and FprCEN/TR 17219 (Biodegradable 
mulch films), EN 17098 (Barrier films).  
47 APK AG recycling plant and Saperatec plant. 
Figure 8. A2C decontamination process. 
21 
 
1.4.1.2.3.1. SOTA OF PHYSICAL RECYCLING OF MULTILAYERS. Selective dissolution-precipitation is 
based on a selective polymer dissolution and subsequent precipitation by flashing off the solvent or temperature 
decrease. Delamination techniques separates laminate structures by weakening the adhesive power and are based 
on physical dissolution or chemical delamination. Table 13 and Table 14 show the main processes. 
Table 13. State of the art of dissolution-precipitation technologies 
Technology/Company Characteristics Limitations 
Newcycling/ APK AG48 Dissolution of PE & PP from multilayers with PA and mixing plastics by using 
methylcyclohexane solvent. Implemented at industrial scale in Germany. 
Only recovery of PE and PP 
Low solvent recovery efficiency (high boiling points of solvents). 
CreaSolv/Fraunhofer, 
CreaCycle49 
Solvent and antisolvent to dissolve and precipitate 
the polymer to separate.  Implemented at semi-
industrial scale in Indonesia. 
Complex solvent recovery and limited energy efficiency (needs separate solvent a nd 
antisolvent by distillation).The recycled polymer needs stabilisation (against UV, oxidation) 
& melt flow properties compensation. No quality level for food grade packaging application. 
PureCycle/Procter & 
Gamble50 
Dissolution of PP plastic by supercritical liquids (s -butane). Easy solvent 
removal. Pilot scale proven. Industrial plant in construction in USA. 
Only recovery of PP. Low energy efficiency: process require very 
high T (>2200C) and pressures (20-200 bar). 
LDPE recycling from 
multilayer packaging51 
Dissolution of LDPE by switchable hydrophilicity solvent (SHS, e.g. N, N-
dimethylcyclohexylamine). After cooling with CO2 & water the solvent becomes 
polar achieving the LDPE precipitation. Lab scale demonstrated. 
High temperature for dissolution of LDPE. 
At research stage. 
Table 14.  State of the art of delamination technologies 
Technology/Company Characteristics Limitations 
Al1delamination/SAPE52 
(A2C partner) 
Separation of aluminium from PE and PET by decreasing interfacial forces enabling 
delamination. Solvent based fluids microemulsion for swelling and ca rboxylic acid for 
delamination. High purified materials (≥99%) of comparable value as at the s tart of the 
lamination process. Implemented at industrial scale in Germany by our partner SAPE. 
Only separation of aluminium. No delamination of 
polyolefins-PET. 
PVC Separation/PVCS53 
Delamination of multilayers by swelling in acetone, exposure to hot water, boiling 
impregnated solvent and releasing the desired polymers, followed by density separation. 
Process demonstrated at small scale in Australia. 
Complex solvent recovery and limited energy 
efficiency (high process temperatures).  
At research stage. 
Alicante University54 Injection of water vapour as green solvent for removal of inks and adhesives, plastics 
(PE/PET, PP/ink/PP, PP/Al/PE) separated by centrifugation. Lab scale demonstrated.  
Requires microperforat ion of the multilayer 
material.At research stage.  
►A2C beyond SOTA : Our process will be based on the patented technology55 of our partner SAPE, as new 
innovative recycling process for the multilayers containing aluminium, by using separation fluids. The working 
principle of our technology is as follows: 1. Separation fluids diffuse to the material interface reducing the tension 
between single layers, e.g. between the polymer and aluminium layer. 2. Interfacial bonding is broken; one layer, e.g. 
the polymer layer, is completely lifted from another layer, e.g. the aluminium surface. 3. Separation fluid is designed 
to minimize interaction towards the material layer in order to keep their respective material properties unchanged.  
 
1.4.1.2.3.2. SOTA OF ENZYMATIC RECYCLING OF MULTILAYERS : The PET degradation  is most 
advanced compared to other plastics and a prime example for an enzymatic solution to hydrolyse PET to the monomer 
level. The enzyme system (PETase and MHETase) in Ideonella sakaiensis is able to degrade PET 56. However, the 
turnover numbers of PET degradation are low, being, just 1.2/s to 0.11/s. PE depolymerisation is more difficult due 
to the very stable C-C bonds structure. Recent reports about microbes able to degrade PE57 such as Pseudomonas sp. 
E758 (enzyme alkane hydroxylase-AlkB), Microbulbifer hydrolyticus - IRE-3159 and Aspergillus flavus60.  Moreover, 
laccases are demonstrated oxidising enzymes for PE degradation61.  
At commercial level only CARBIOS technology (for PET degradation) is on-going at industrial level. 
Table 15. State of the art of plastics enzymatic degradation processes 
Technology/Company Characteristics Limitations 
Biorecycling/Carbios62 
Enzymatic depolymerisation of polyesters (PET and PLA) and polyamides. 
PET biorecycling demonstrated at semi-industrial scale in Europe by using esterases enzymes aimed to use 
the ethylene glycol &TPA to re-polymerize them into PET. Industrial operations are expected to begin in 2021.  
Only depolymerisation of PET 
demonstrated. 
Low turnover (0.11-1.2/s) 
Flexyzyme/Uflex63 Enzymes incorporated to polyolefins and polyesters for their depolymerisation at composting conditions. Lab scale 
demonstrated in India. At research stage. 
 
-Our partner MELLI (applied for  patent protection on  64) has isolated, sequenced, cloned, produced recombinantly 
and tested in-vitro the first known enzyme (MELLI plasticase) in the world capable of degrading polyethylene (PE) 
and also capable of degrading other plastics with ester linkages, as PET at high 
rates. The class of enzymes that MELLI’s plasticase is within has a turnover 
that is 1000 -fold higher than PETase and MHETase used for PET 
degradation. MELLI’s enzyme DNA sequence is known, has been produced 
recombinantly, and used to degrade PE orders of magnitude faster than the 
state of the art65,66. Whilst MELLI’s enzyme visibly degrades PE in less than 
24 hours ( Figure 9), Pseudomonas sp. E7 producing alkB took 80 days to 
degrade some 40% of a pre -degraded low molecular weight PE whilst 
Microbulbifer hydrolyticus caused surface degradation of linear low -density 
                                                      
48 https://www.apk-ag.de/en/newcycling/process/ ; WO2018114047A1 
49 https://www.ivv.fraunhofer.de/en/recycling-environment/recycling-plastics.html ; WO2018068973A1. The CreaSolv® Technology is a development of the Fraunhofer Institute in co-operation with the CreaCycle GmbH 
50 https://purecycletech.com/ ; WO2017003802A1 
51 Mumladze, T., et al. Sustainable approach to recycling of multilayer flexible packaging using switchable hydrophilicity solvents. Green Chemistry, 20, 3604–3618, 2018; C. Samorì, et al., Application of switchable hydrophilicity solvents for recycling mult ilayer packaging material, 
Green Chem. 19, 1714-1720, 2017. 
52 https://www.saperatec.de/en/technology.html  ; WO2015169801A1; US20170080603A1. 
53 https://www.pvcseparation.com/  ; WO2018035565A1 
54 Engineering for Circular Economy (E4CE) Group  of the  University of Alicante . https://www.innoget.com/technology -offers/7866/multilayer -film -delamination -process -for -plastics -recycling   
55 https://www.saperatec.de/en/technology.html  ; WO2015169801A1; US20170080603A1.  
56 Yoshida S et al. A bacterium that degrades and assimilates poly(ethyleneterephthalate). Science 351: :1196–1199, 2016. 
57 Huerta Lwanga E et al. Decay of low-density polyethylene by bacteria extracted from earthworm’s guts. Sci. Total Environ. 624:753–757, 2018. 
58 Jeon HJ et al. : Functional analysis of alkane hydroxylase system derived from Pseudomonas aeruginosa E7 for low molecular weight PE biodegradation. Int Biodeter Biodegr., 103:141-146, 2015. 
59 Li Z et al.: Biodegradation of LDPE by Microbulbifer hydrolyticus IRE-31. J Environ Manage, 263:110402, 2020. 
60 Zhang J. et al. : Biodegradation of PE microplastic particles by the fungus Aspergillus flavus from the guts of wax moth Galleria mellonella. Sci Total Environ., 704:135931, 2020. 
61 Mate, D. M., & Alcalde, M.. Laccase: a multi‐purpose biocatalyst at the forefront of biotechnology. Microbial Biotechnology, 10(6), 1457-1467,2017. 
62 https://carbios.fr/technologies/le-biorecyclage/  
63 https://packagingsouthasia.com/she-safety-health-and-environment/sustainability-health/an-enzyme-based-technology-for-100-biodegradable-polymers-mlp/  
64 MELLI have a patent pending on processes using the enzyme and its relatives. 
65 Jeon HJ et al. : Functional analysis of alkane hydroxylase system derived from Pseudomonas aeruginosa E7 for low molecular weight PE biodegradation. Int Biodeter Biodegr., 103:141-146, 2015. 
66 Li Z et al.: Biodegradation of LDPE by Microbulbifer hydrolyticus IRE-31. J Environ Manage, 263:110402, 2020. 
Figure 9. PE degradation over 24 hours. PE spheres of 
~50𝜇m before (left panel) and after 24h (right)) 
degradation by Mellizyme’s plasticase 
22 
 
polyethylene (LLDPE) after 20 days only detected by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Limitations: This MELLI 
wild-type enzyme has been proven in semi-pilot conditions, at temperatures typical of the recombinant host ( 30-37 
C), however this process need to be optimised for the industrial scale up. 
•Recent research works state that chemical or physical pre -treatment of plastic waste may be required in 
enzymatic recycling67 to promote the efficiency68: (i) enzymes attack the amorphous regions initially and then the 
crystalline regions69. (ii) Abiotic factors (temperature, UV, oxygen), or chemical oxidants to oxide the backbone is 
mandatory prior to any biodegradation for plastic with C-C backbones to decrease molecular weight and make easier 
the enzymatic attack70. (iii) Hydrophobic character of some polymers hampers the effective adsorption of enzymes 
to the polymer surface.  Limitations: main factors affecting polymers degradation are crystallinity, hydrophobicity 
and molecular size71. However, no specific route for the modification of these 3 important factors before enzymatic 
degradation is found in the literature. 
►A2C beyond SOTA: Our technology will allow for 
the first time the enzymatic recycling of PET/PE 
multilayers by depolymerisation to EG, TPA and 
alkanes. Firstly, the enzymatic attack will be enhanced by 
a specific strategy for plastics wastes pre -treatment to 
make easier the enzymatic attack on PE and PET wastes 
(CETEC, GWC) by decreasing molecular weight, crystallinity and hydrophobicity (Table 16).  
During A2C project, MELLI (using their proven protein engineering platform72) will engineer a variant of their wild 
plasticase enzyme to be able to degrade PE/PET mixes, improving thermal stability and faster kinetics than the wild 
type. These modifications will make the use of the engineered protein more profitable as by improving the enzymes’ 
kinetics (they turn over substrate to product faster), smaller amounts of enzyme can degrade a greater mass of plastic, 
reducing the capital and fixed costs of scaling to industrial biodegradation . Furthermore, improving 
thermostability, will enable engineered enzymes to operate at high temperatures (~65-75 °C). A thermophilic enzyme 
further reduces process costs as operating enzymatic degradation at high temperat ure removes the need to sterilise 
feed stream. MELLI’s protein engineering platform uses directed evolution to engineer proteins customised with 
functions they define.  MELLI will design and build the DNA sequences encoding their library using proprietary 
software and lab techniques (improved versions of GeneGENIE and SpeedyGENES, software and lab techniques 
pioneered by MELLI founder and CSO Kell and Senior Computational researcher Swainsto)73. 
1.4.1.2.3.3. SOTA OF MECHANICAL RECYCLING OF MULTILAYERS : The blending and 
additivation of polymers by twin screw extrusion is the common approach for recycling polymer -
based multilayers without separating the components.  
Recycling of multilayers films of polyolefin matrix (PE and PP)  containing polar polymers like EVOH, 
polyamide (PA) and PET has been achieved in the last years through commercial compatibilisers  
(coated/encapsulated polar components such as RE TAIN™ by Dow 74 and ReVive by Ampacet 75) allowing to  
fabricate new “recycled” films maintaining physical or optical properties and, in some cases, possibly improve 
upon them. These polar components (EVOH, PA and PET) have itself barrier properties, and then c an provide this 
property to the blend. The barrier properties of the blend  depend on: the permeability ratio of the two materials 
and the morphology of the blend. Some studies76 reveal the unusual barrier effects obtained at small concentrations 
of the barrier material are obtained by the controlled morphology of the dispersed phase and an adequate 
compatibilization.  Then, relation weight W to width L77 of the material has a strong influence in the barrier properties 
of the blend. For example, in two blends of PE/EVOH containing the same EVOH concentration (5%), a EVOH L/W 
ratio of 100 improves the barrier of the blend by a factor of 4 and a L/W ratio of 1000 improves the barrier properties 
of the blend by a factor of 30 78.  Some works show that it is poss ible to obtain mixtures with a controlled 
morphology of inmiscible polymers through continuous extensional flow mixing (EFM), based on specific screw 
designs promoting EFM where shear flow is promoted79.  
►A2C beyond SOTA. The overall novelty of A2C is to develop morphology-controlled blends to produce a new 
range of recyclable gas barrier films (OTR 1 -20 cm 3/atm day). Gas barrier properties will be created through 
structures maximizing the tortuosity of the gas diffusion and creating confinement effects, by extensional flow mixing 
with lamellar structures and an adequate compatibilization strategy. 
                                                      
67Wei. R et al. Biocatalysis as a green route for recycling the recalcitrant plastic polyethylene terephthalate. Microb Biotechnol 10:1302–1307, 2017. 
68 Quartinello F et al. Synergistic chemoenzymatic hydrolysis of poly(ethylene terephthalate) from textile waste. Microb Biotechnol 10:1376–1383, 2017. 
69 J. Zhang et al. ‘Mechanical properties, structure analysis and enzymatic degradation of uniaxially cold-drawn films of poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate]’, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 96, 2130–2138, 2011; H. Abe, et al. ‘Solid-state structures and enzymatic degradabilities 
for melt-crystallized films of copolymers of (R)-3- hydroxybutyric acid with different hydroxyalkanoic acids’, Macromolecules, 31, 1791–1797, 1998. 
70 Jeyakumar, D. et al. Synergistic effects of pretreatment and blending on fungi mediated biodegradation of polypropylenes. Biores Technol 148: 78–85, 2013. 
71 Webb HK at el. Plastic degradation and its environmental implications with special reference to poly (ethylene terephthalate). Polymers 5:1–1, 2013. 
72 Khemchandani, Y., et al. DeepGraphMolGen, a multiobjective, computational strategy for generating molecules with desirable properties: a graph convolution and reinforcement learning approach. J Cheminform 12, 53, 2020; Samanta, S. et al. VAE-Sim: a novel molecular similarity 
measure based on a variational autoencoder. Molecules 25, 3446, 2020; Rowe, W. et al. Analysis of a complete DNA-protein affinity landscape. J R Soc Interface 7, 397-408, 2010. 
73 Swainston, N., et al. GeneGenie: optimised oligomer design for directed evolution. Nucleic Acids Res 12, W395 -W400, 2014; Currin, A., et al. 2015. Synthetic biology for the directed evolution of protein biocatalysts: navigating sequenc e space intelligently. Chem Soc Rev 2015; 
44:1172-1239, 2015; Currin, A. SpeedyGenes: a novel a. et al. Approach for the efficient production of error-corrected, synthetic gene libraries. Protein Eng Design Sel 27, 273-280, 2014. 
74 https://www.dow.com/en-us/brand/retain.html  
75 https://www.ampacet.com/masterbatch-products/ampacet-additives/revive-compatibilizer/  
76 S.W. Kim et al. Barrier property by controlled laminar morphologyof LLDPE/EVOH blends. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 16,4, 511-517, 2000; C.H. Wuang Journal of Polymer Research Morphological, Thermal, Barrier and Mechanical Properties of LDPE/EVOH Blends in Extruded Blown 
Films, 11: 75–83, 2004; C.R. López-Barrón et al. Study on Properties of Polyamide-6/LDPE Blends. Journal of Plastic films and sheeting, DOI: 10.1177/8756087907083481, 2007. 
77 Ratio of its longest dimension to its lowest dimension 
78 Morphology of PE/EVOH blends, 2017; M. Rahanma et al., Effect of different blend compositions on properties of low-density polyethylene/ethylene vinyl alcohol/clay toward high oxygen barrier nanocomposite films, Polymer Science, Series A volume 59,  533–542, 2017.  
79 M. Tokihisa et al. Extensional flow mixer for polymer nanocomposites, Polymer Engineering and Science 46(8):1040-1050. 
Table 16. A2C pre-treatments to enhance enzymatic attack 
23 
 
-We will develop: 3 compounds PE-PE/EVOH (High barrier, OTR 1-5 cm3/atm day), PE-PE/PA (Medium-high, 
OTR 6-10 cm3/atm day) and PET (Medium, OTR 11-20 cm3/atm day) for application in the production of barrier 
food packaging  that will be recyclable, as alternative to multilayer materials , and 2 co mpounds PE -EVOH-
Aluminium, PE-PA-Aluminium with very high barrier properties (OTR<1 cm 3/atm day) for application in 
the development of very high barrier disinfection films for agriculture  that will be recyclable, as alternative to 
multilayer materials.                    Table 17. A2C Formulation & compatibilisation strategies by extrusion 
 
A2C Extensional flow mixing strategy will be based on the design a convergent -divergent plate to be incorporated 
to the commercial twin screw extruder ( Leistritz, modelo ZSE 18HP)  at CETEC. The distributive and dispersive 
mixing capabilities of the twin -screw extruder will be contro lled by the proper choice of the type and geometry of 
specific screw elements by subjecting the flow to a series of convergences and divergences to create extensional 
stresses for improved dispersive mixing capabilities. We will focus in create extensional stress to a flowing mixture 
through a series of concentric converging-diverging (C-D) by an add-on unit to the end of a melt pump channels. 
 
1.4.1.2.4 SOTA: BIOCONVERSION OF PLASTICS DEGRADATION  PRODUCTS ( TPA, EG AND 
ALKANES) INTO HIGH ADDED VALUE PRODUCTS FOR COSMETIC  
 SOTA OF TEREPHTHALIC ACID (TPA) BIOCONVERSION TO PROTOCATECHUIC ACID (PCA). 
TPA from PET depolymerisation is generally re -used to produce PET. However, high purification costs and 
impurities lead to harsh price -based competition with virgin material. Comamonas testosteroni, Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae and Zygosaccharomyces bailii are able to degrade TPA to protocatechuic acid (PCA) that has a high 
value in the cosmetic industry as  anti‐wrinkle and anti‐skin aging agent . Limitations: PCA production from S . 
cerevisiae and Z. bailii is sound, and demonstrated at lab scale (TRL 4) but need to be optimised to increase until 
significant accumulation rates (>15%). 
► A2C beyond SOTA. UNIMIB have broadly studied the yeasts S. cerevisiae and Z. bailii, implementing molecular 
techniques allowing to overcome the current limitations of its genetic manipulation. These strains are notorious for 
their robustness, especially in respect to organic acids and low pH, which will be considered as a key parameter to 
facilitate the diffusion of TPA. We will optimize the heterologous expression and the efficiency of the bioconversion, 
which is remarkably redox balanced. Known bacterial genes encoding for TPA will be codon -optimised and 
expressed in these yeasts, achieving conversion yields to PCA of 20%. 
 SOTA OF ETHYLENE GLYCOL (EG) BIOCONVERSION TO GLYCOLIC ACID (GA) . Several 
strategies for glycolic acid production from renewable carbon sources have been investigated. However, product  
titers remain too low for economical purposes.  It has already been shown that some organisms82, such as  
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Acetobacterium woodii, are capable of oxidising ethylene glycol to glycolic acid. 
The potential of these strains to perform the desired oxidation is of great interest  due to the high tolerance towards 
the end-product. Indeed, no detrimental effects of glycolic acid on growth have been observed up to concentrations 
of 50 g/L. Furthermore, the resistance towards a low pH enables the production of the acidic form, lowering the cost 
of downstream purification steps. Limitations: Maximum efficiency of conversion achieved 10% (it is low compared 
to others bacterial counterpart like Gluconobacter oxydans, however G. oxydans requires a neutral pH for growth, 
the salt of glycolic acid is produced, requiring a more intense downstream processing). 
                                                      
80 http://www.intergro.com/en/online-ordering-coming-soon/  
81 The aluminium layer covers a black or white film according to the year season. 
82 Koivistoinen O M, Glycolic acid production in the engineered yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Microbial Cell Factories, 12, 2013; Schink B, Diversity, Ecology and Isolation of Bacteria, 7, 197-235, Chapman & Hall Microb, 2014. 
A2C Strategy Expected Result 
1. Formulation for the development of processable compounds.  LDPE, PET  (from physical delamination ) and simple multilayers 
(LDPE/EVOH/LDPE, LDPE/EVOH and LDPE/PA/LDPE, LDPE/PA ) formulated with EFSA authorised additives to achieve the properties to be 
processed by extrusion.  
Melt flow index  
(IFM) 1-4g/10min. 
2. High barrier recyclable compounds for food packaging. Compatibilisation strategy for simple multilayers with the LDPE recycled  
LDPE-LDPE/PA (from packaging) :  triblock copolymer of styrene and ethylene/butylene (SEBS) and maleic 
anhydride (MA) functionalized SEBS with 1 wt% (SEBS-g-MA1) and 2 wt% (SEBS-g-MA2) MA compatibilisers. 
Alternative to food packaging multilayers. OTR 6 -10 
cm3/atm day,  IFM: 1-4 g/10 min  
LDPE-LDPE/EVOH (from packaging):   RETAIN™ and ReVive commercial compatibilisers OTR 1-5 cm3/atm day,  IFM: 1-4 g/10 min 
3. Very high barrier recyclable compounds for agriculture.  In the market, 
agricultural plastics including an aluminium layer are yet 
commercialised80 because they provide important benefits to the crops81, 
additional light, reflect a light range that can dissuade c ommon illness 
generated by insects, stable temperatures (narrower temperature range from 
day to night) and very high barrier properties increasing the disinfection efficacy 
since avoid fumigation gases leakage. The main limitation of these films is that 
they are not recyclable and currently are sent to landfill after use. A2C will 
develop a film including these advantages and also being recyclable. 
-Aluminium (from physical delamination) will be modified by  BOKU: i) direct 
binding of an organic -ligand (long chain carboxylic acids) that shows strong 
affinity to aluminium and further modification with a polyethylene compatible shell (polyisobutylene -PIB) ii) a 2 -step procedure were the particles are 
modified with aluminiumoxide/siliciumoxide in a first step, followed by the polymer-shell synthesis protocol.  
-Aluminium modified blend with the processable LDPE/EVOH/LDPE and LDPE/PA/LDPE (from agricultural films).  CETEC background provides 
data about the direct re-use of the Al-flakes from multilayer packaging into blends with polyethylene forming random composites. The results have shown 
some improvements in the polyethylene characteristics that are idoneous for the application on barrier films for agriculture. We have achieved (for 
45 µm films) adequate mechanical properties (tensile strenght 16 MPa; strain at break 180%), thermal stability and reflexion and medium barrier properties 
(OTR 50 cm3/ atm day).  A2C aims to achieve very high barrier films (OTR< 1 cm3/atm day) as alternative to multilayers.  
Alternative to 
agricultural 
multilayers. 
OTR<1 
cm3/atm day, 
IFM: 1-4 g/10 
min 
Light diffusion, 
UV-stability, 
Reflection 

24 
 
► A2C beyond SOTA UNIMIB has develop the bioconversion of ethylene glycol to glycolic acid at lab (TRL4) in 
Acetobacterium woodii. A2C will optimise this process and scale it up (TRL6). Carbon efficiency will be improved 
in the engineered strains: funnel the substrate through the detoxification pathways that comprises the activity of an 
alcohol dehydrogenase followed by an aldehyde dehydrogenase. Synthetic biology will be exploited for the creation 
of a modular system for testing diverse activities minimizing cloning steps and time. It will be also evaluated if GA 
is further catabolised (e.g, to glyoxylic acid), as in this case it will be necessary to disrupt the competitive pathway. 
As contingency plan, the glyoxylic acid could also be used from cells as carbon source, as they woul d need that as 
well for conducting the biotransformation. Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) and strain engineering will be 
applied for selecting and tailoring ameliorated strains, in terms of robustness to the substrates & to the conditions 
selected for the production process at pilot scale. 
 SOTA OF ALKANES BIOCONVERSION TO FATTY ACIDS. There are special group of microorganisms 
that can biotransform alkanes into high value products. Lipomyces starkey and Rhodosporidium toruloides are 
promising industrial bugs able to transform them into a wide spectrum of products83. The desired pathway84 implies 
that alkanes undergo a terminal hydroxylation by a P450 -dependent alkane monooxygenas e, leading to the 
corresponding fatty -alcohol. The re ducing equivalents are regenerated by a NADPH -dependent P450 reductase. 
NAD(P)+ dependent fatty -alcohol dehydrogenases lead to aldehyde and finally an oxidation step generates fatty 
acids85. Limitations: L. starkey and R. toruloides are the most promising strains bacteria for fatty acids production 
(TRL4)86. However, further studies are needed to elucidate this process in greater detail to achieve high fatty acids 
conversion rates and yields for their industrial level scalability. 
► A2C beyond SOTA UNIMIB background indicates that alkanes to diffuse passively across the plasma membrane, 
substrate affinity to be a secondary feature.  A2C will deeply study systems biology to elucidate the genomic 
organization and metabolic pathways and their regulation in L. starkey and R. toruloides. Moreover, the application 
of fast and reliable screening techniques will enable a fast selection of beneficial mutants. Several complete genome 
sequences of L. starkey and R. toruloides strains will be determined to understand the genomic responses of this 
organism to different factors, and the molecular mechanism for fatty acids accumulation. 
 
1.4.1.2.5 SOTA OF PRODUCTION OF PHBV BIOPLASTIC AND CAROTENOIDS  
The main A2C innovation is to  develop a process for th e PHBV production from wastes being completely 
economic & environmentally sustainable and obtaining carotenoids as by-products. 
 
 SOTA OF PHA BIOPLASTIC P RODUCTION FROM WASTE S:  -At commercial level most industries 
commercialised PHA produced from synthetic carbon sources (KANEKA, Metabolix, Danimer Scientific, Tepha, 
Tianan Biologic), and only a few companies in Europe produce PHAs from residues  as BioOn (from agri-food 
and food wastes), Phario (from wastewater), Paques (from wastewater and organic wastes).  Only one commercial 
process (Bioplastech www.bioplastech.eu) for the PHA production from terephthalic acid has been developed in 
Europe by using Pseudomonas putida. They produce medium length chain PHA copolymers mainly for elastomer 
applications. - Few studies identify non -renewable polymers as carbon source for PHA production . Bacterial 
strains that belong to the genus of Sphingobacterium, Bacillus, Comamonas, Pseudomonas, Rhodococcus have been 
demonstrated their PHA production potential (accumulated among 22-34%). CETBIO & UA has demonstrated Hfx. 
mediterranei archaea potential for commercial PHBV production since perspectives that have an important incidence 
in the production costs (currently high production costs are the main obstacle in PHA production methods).  
► A2C beyond SOTA. A2C aims to produce cost competitive PHBV (target price of €2/kg) by using wastes as 
carbon source. A2C advances beyond the state of the art will be: 
• Hfx mediterranei is characterised to bio assimilate non -common substances87. Fatty acids (from alkanes from PE 
degradation) and terephthalic acid (from PET degradation) will be used as feed sources, in combination with organic 
residues (provided by the partners MCT, ALM and CITRO from rejections and CTNC from extraction residues). We 
will grow the archaea at concentrations of 15-25% of salts. It will allow no sterile conditions during the processing. 
•PHBV innovative sustainable and cost competitive extraction & purification route with high recovery efficacy 
(≥98%): 1) using fresh water for disrupting the cells, high intracellular osmotic pressure of Hfx. mediterranei leads 
to a suspension of unscratched PHA granules and cell debris in a salty solution (important advantage beyond most 
cells that required a cell breakage step by high thermal conditions or mechanical rupture by high shearing stress or 
high pressures). 2) Extraction with green solvents as deep eutectic point solvents. 
• Recovery of by-products to be reintroduced in the PHBV production process will highly con tribute to achieve a 
sustainable process. Salty supernatant of the fermentation (SSF) broth will be used to partly replace mineral salts in 
subsequent fermentation processes. Based on previous studies88 we target to achieve a SSF recovery up to 20%.  
 SOTA OF CAROTEINS AS PHBV PRODUCTION BY-PRODUCT. Recent research works89 together with 
the ba ckground of the partners UA&CETBIO confirms the production of carotenoids by Hfx mediterranei. C50 
                                                      
83 Lu W. et al. 2010. Biosynthesis of Monomers for Plastics from Renewable Oils, J Am Chem Soc, 132, 15451–15455; Park Y-K et al. 2018. The engineering potential of Rhodosporidium toruloides as a workhorse for biotechnological applications, Trends biotechnol 36.3:304-317. 
84 Li, L., et al. Crystal structure of long-chain alkane monooxygenase (LadA) in complex with coenzyme FMN: unveiling the long-chain alkane hydroxylase. J. Mol. Biol. 376, 453–465, 2008. 
85 Coon, M. J. (2005). Omega oxygenases: nonheme-iron enzymes and P450 cytochromes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 338, 378–385. 
86Ji et al.  Alkane hydroxylase diversity and biodegradation. Microbiol. Chem. 4,58, 2013. 
87 Q. Lu, et al. “Genetic and biochemical characterization of the PHBV synthase in Hfx mediterranei,” Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 190, no. 12, pp. 4173–4180, 2008. 
88 Koller M. Recycling of Waste Streams of the Biotechnological PHA Production by Hfx mediterranei on Whey. International Journal of Polymer Science, 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/370164.  
89 Giani M et al, Carotenoids as a Protection Mechanism against Oxidative Stress in Haloferax mediterranei, Antioxidants, 9,11,1060, 2020. 
25 
 
carotenoids are  synthesized in response to different types of stress. C50 carotenoids possess 300 times higher 
antioxidant capacity than C40 carotenoids produced by most photosynthetic organisms, and shows interesting 
antioxidant properties with potential applications in cosmetic. The relative proportion of carotenoids content in cells 
depends on the culture conditions used, particularly temperature, pH, and salinity90.  
►A2C beyond SOTA. Our partner UA91 has demonstrated that stress caused by H2O2 (at concentrations >25mM) 
promotes the synthesis of higher concentrations of C50 carotenoids. Production of PHBV and carotenoids are given 
simultaneously as a natural process under specific conditions in this strain Hfx. mediterranei. Isolation of both PHBV 
(in intracellular granules) and carotenoids (in their cytoplastic membranes) are compatible processes. Carotenoids 
will be recovered from cell debris after cell lysis for PHBV extraction. 
 
1.4.1.3 KEY INNOVATION 3:  DIGITALISING THE CIRCULAR PROCESS 
 
1.4.1.3.1 SOTA: DIGITALISING THE CIRCULAR PROCESSES 
•ISO defines traceability as “ability to follow the movement of a feed or food through specified stage(s) of  
production, processing and distribution” 92. Currently, the implementation of effective traceability systems is a 
requirement as it improves the ability to implement verifiable quality and safety compliance programs. Information 
at any point in the value chain has become crucial. Several investigations93 have shown that blockchain can be 
used in supply chains for traceability and can be used to create transparency. However, the main problems for the 
blockchain implementation in complexes value chains traceability as the agrifood  are related to regulatory 
requirements, the internal supply chain and production processes and require significant organizational 
changes.  
There are several commercial traceability solutions on the market such as Carrefour IBM Food trust (Alimentary. 
Based on IBM Blockchain platform 94), FairFo od TRACE 95 (farmer), TE -FOOD96 (food), Everledger platform 97 
(battery manufacturers), BASF- reciChain98 (Canadian plastic recyclers). Limitations: Most commercial traceability 
solutions have architectures designed for multinational companies with processes managed by complex ERPs, many 
others have low or no interoperability and in general, most are marketed at an unaffordable price for most 
companies, especially SMEs. 
•Decision Support Systems (DSS)  are a class of computerised information system that support  decision-making 
activities being widely used for waste management 99. The DSS involves a rule -based decision approach based on 
referenced mathematical models, logic rules, cost functions and restrictions to select the most suitable alternatives 
for waste management, taking into account economic and environmental criteria.  
Currently there are commercial programs for the simulation of industrial processes such as Aspen Plus®, Chemcad®, 
Pro/II®, Prosim®, SuperPro® or COCO® among many others. These programs, based on mass and energy balances, 
allow predicting the response of th e system to scenarios or disturbances in a wide range of sectors (chemical, 
petroleum, pharmaceutical, etc.). However, model library for circular value chains has not followed the same 
development, and there are still missing models of numerous main proces ses.  Limitations: None of the available 
DSS can model the residual streams composition and simulate the value chains for its valorisation, considering 
environmental, economic, social and regulatory aspects.  
► A2C beyond SOTA. Our solution for digitalising the circular processes includes the use of ICT tools to develop 
an online technological platform, the Data Integration System “DIS” that will be an easy-to-use tool for people, 
companies and organizations. DIS will include a Traceability Tool that will solve the problem that the industry used 
to have in identifying materials, origin, their processes, quality and traceability.  For this, “DIS” will integrate the 
value chain of multilayer plastic materials and organic products in their transformation by companies in a continuous 
flow, drawing and creating traceability in real time. Industries and materials (plastics and organic materials) will be 
linked in their transformation processes while interacting with each other, visualizing the path of r ecycling plastic 
materials and new high-value food, nutraceuticals and cosmetic formulas. Through vision and artificial intelligence, 
the data will be quantified, providing results and information with the capacity for analysis and calculation for 
simulations, forecasts and strategic decision -making in the improvement of companies and the processes in the 
recycling and transformation of waste, its pollution and socio -economic benefits, being always available, ensuring 
and guaranteeing all the information wi th Blockchain technology. Moreover, DIS will include the A2C Decission 
Tool that will predict the characteristics of the agri-food residual streams and will explore all the available alternatives 
for its valorisation as feedstock in the industry and select s the most appropriate options taking into account social, 
economic, environmental and regulatory criteria. To provide the tool with a holistic perspective, first, the tool will 
perform a technical scan to analyse for which industries the residual stream i s of interest and what is its recovery 
potential. Second, economic analysis will then be carried out at two levels: at the operational level (operational costs 
and estimate of recovered materials) and at the logistic level (costs in transport and connection between the residual 
                                                      
90 Montero-Lobato Z, et al. 2018. Optimization of Growth and Carotenoid Production by Haloferax mediterranei Using Response Surface Methodology. Mar Drugs, 16(10): 372, 2018.. 
91 Martínez Espinosa R.M. et al. Antioxidants 2020, 9, 1060. doi:10.3390/antiox9111060  
92 ISO 22005:2007, 3.6, Traceability in the feed and food chain – General principles and basic requirements for system design and implementation. 
93 J. Yli-Huumo, D. Ko, S. Choi, S. Park, K. Smolander “Where is current research on Blockchain technology? - A systematic review”. PloS one, 2016 - journals.plos.org 
94 https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/solutions/food-trust/market-segments  
95 https://fairfood.nl/en/solutions/trace/  
96 https://te-food.com/solution/  
97 https://www.everledger.io/industry-solutions/e-recycling/  
98 https://www.basf.com/ca/en/who-we-are/sustainability/Sustainability-in-Canada/reciChain.html  
99 Lin C. S. K., et al. Energy Environ. Sci. 2013;6:426–464.   
26 
 
stream producing companies and the industries responsible for its valorisation). These priorities will be analysed later 
from an environmental, socially and general economic perspective through LCA tools to give the solution a holistic 
character. Hence, it will be a very useful tool for the analysis of the feasibility of different waste management options.  
 
1.4.2. INNOVATION POTENTIAL 
A2C will contribute to: i) expand the business opportunities of the agr ifood sector and on the other , of the waste 
manager companies, recyclers, plastics  & bioplastics and cosmetic sector and ii) the know -how and business 
opportunities of all the partners involved. The main innovations are listed below: 
Green extraction/purification and formulation related innovations 
 2 innovative hybrid green routes for the extraction & purification of bioactive substances from agrifood wastes in an economically viable and sustainable way. 
 High stable bioactive extracts for the potential application in industrial food, cosmetic & nutraceuticals formulations by specific stabilisation routes. 
 Food, cosmetic and nutraceutics formulations from bioactives extracted from agrifood wastes as alternatives to synthetic additives. 
Plastics related innovations 
 Fast and efficient sorting to identify and classify different types of multilayers into families according to their composition, including aluminium. 
 Efficient system for plastics decontamination (≥99%) including additives, micro/nanoplastics, organic fractions, VOCs and odours. 
 Efficient recycling processes. Physical delamination process to separate the aluminium from complex multilayers . Enzymatic depolymerisation of PE & PET 
mixtures.  
 High barrier compounds for high barrier packaging and high barrier agricultural films as alternative to current multilayers. 
Biotechnology related innovations 
 Efficient bioconversion of enzymatic degradation products into high value sunstances for the cosmetic industry. 
 Production PHBV bioplastic and carotenoids using products degradation from PET and PE and organic waste fractions as nutrients.  
Circular economy related innovations 
 First Digital Integrated Solution (DIS), including traceability module and predictive decision tool in a public and private web platform. 
 
1.4.2.1 A2C NOVELTY REGARDING EUROPEAN PROJECTS 
Our analysis of the state of the art ensure no overlaps with past and ongoing European projects, including projects 
funded by the Circular Economy calls under H2020. Following table shows the most relevant projects to A2C scope. 
Table 18. Comparison of A2C project with the most relevant ongoinf projects related to A2C contents.  
 
 
 
2. IMPACT 
 
2.1. EXPECTED IMPACTS 
Agrofood is a core sector in many local and regional worldwide economies, embracing a wide amount and type of 
linked industries, with a strong potential to decouple economic growth from resource use and lead the transition to 
climate neutral and circular solutions. Decoupling economic growth represents a complex and challenging task whose 
successful implementation can only be achieved if managed at regional level with a systemic approach.  
A2C territorial decoupling model is able to create increasing economic returns, reducing the social gap and 
regenerating the natural capital for regions . By tackling this potential, A2C will enable addressing socio -
economic and environmental global concerns, contributing to the recovery of European impacts  of COVID-
19 crisis while increasing the security of some of the key product value chain for Europe, such as packaging, 
plastics and food as following sections will demonstrate it.  
 
A2C SCOPE FRAMEWORK FOR IMPACTS: Dimensioning the residues availability at cluster and EU levels 
In order to quantify the project impacts, following is shown an analysis and quantification of the targeted residues 
that will be valorised within the project cluster as well as their potential for national and European replication.  
The data related to the A2C cluster has been calculated based on the amounts of targeted F&V that could be available 
within our territorial cluster, being those provided by PROEX, CITRO, MCT, ALM (including processing rejections 
and wastes), and hence those that could be potentially valorised within A2C cluster, as well as on the estimated 
amount of multilayer plastics generated within t hese project partners processes (post -industrial multilayer and 
agricultural disinfections films waste).   
 
Dimensioning A2C food residues: Associated data related to food waste within the food supply chain has a wide 
margin due to the lack of standardized quantification methods and the differences among data source. We have 
estimated following impacts based on Eurostat data for European fruits and vegetable production and the percentages 
Back Scopes 
Back COVER page  
27 
 
of waste from the review:  Quantification of food waste per product group along the food supply chain in the 
European Union: a mass flow analysis100, which follows the FUSIONS (EU-funded project) deﬁnitional framework. 
 A2C available targeted agrifood streams : Table 19 shows 
the 2019 EU28 fruits & vegetables (F&V) harvested production 
and the one for Spain and the A2C cluster, as well as the estimated 
Fruits and Vegetables (F&V) waste along all supply chain (based 
on data from Figure 10, 41% for Fruits & 46% for Vegetables). 
 
 Focusing on the specific F&V targeted in A2C,  Table 20 shows harvested production of project F&V  targeted 
(cauliflower&broccoli, artichokes, apples, citrus and grapes), which amounts to 50,069.9 ktonnes (EU), representing 
40.0% of the EU total harvested production of F&V.  Spain produces the 26.6% of A2C target F&V, from which 2% 
is produced/available within A2C cluster. 
 A2C target F&V waste: Table 21 shows the potential 
amount of agrifood waste that could be valorised by A2C 
solution. The EU harvested production of project targeted 
F&V generates a total waste along all the supply chain of 
20,857.6 ktonnes, 2.07% generated by A2C Cluster.  
Potential valorised agrifood waste: Our project is focused in the valorisation 
of the targeted wastes from two stages of the food supply chain (FSC): the 
Primary Production stage and the Processing & Manufacturing stage . 
Figure 11 shows the distribution of F&V waste along the different FSC stages.  
 
From these percentages of waste along the FSC, and based in the 17,068.9 kt that 
our targeted F&V generate along all the FSC, we have calculated the amount of 
waste that could potentially be valorised (waste generated at the Primary 
Production (PP) stage plus the one generated at the Processing & Manufacturing 
(P&M) stage) thanks to the A2C solution.  
 
Potential amount of agrifood waste to be valorised by A2C  (Table 22):  12,620,900 tonnes of F&V valorised 
within EU which correspond to the 23,1% of the total EU generated waste from F&V food group (Calculated 
based on the 54,631.9 kt of waste derived from the total amount of EU F&V harvested, table 19), from which 0,5% 
(252.1 ktonnes) will be valorised within A2C cluster.  
 
 
 
Dimensioning A2C multilayer plastic residues from the agrifood sector : In Europe (2019) the plastics demand 
accounted to 50.7 Mt 101 with the 39,6% (21,1 Mt) going to packaging segment and the 3.4% (1,72 Mt) for the 
agriculture segment. 
The amount of A2C targeted multilayer plastics wastes from agrifood sector available at European level is about  
461,825.0 tonnes (split into 151,360 tonnes form agricultural disinfection films and 310,465.0 tonnes from post -
industrial multilayers films fom food indusres) as following is described: 
                                                      
100 Caldeira, Carla & De Laurentiis, Valeria & Corrado, Sara & Holsteijn, Freija & Sala, Serenella. (2019). Quantification of food waste per product group along the food supply chain in the European Union: 
a mass flow analysis. Resources Conservation and Recycling. 149. 479 -488. 10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.06.011 
101 https://www.plasticseurope.org/application/files/5716/0752/4286/AF_Plastics_the_facts -WEB-2020-ING_FINAL.pdf  
Figure 10. %waste along FSC per Food Group. 
Table 19. F&V harvested production and estimated F&VW in total supply chain . 
Table 20. F&V harvested production of targeted F&V 
 Table 21. Avaliable amount of F&V target waste 
 Figure 11. % of waste along supply chain per food group 
Table 22. Amount of F&V that A2C could be potentially valorised at European, national and A2C levels   

28 
 
 Targeted multilayer plastic wastes from primary agriculture 
production sector: Disinfection films: From the 1,72 Mt of plastics destined 
to the agricultural segment, around 8,8% (151,360 tonne, 275,200 ha) where 
used as disinfection film around Europe102.  
In Europe, 86% of the farmers use chemical disinfection solutions. Europe is 
the second market leader of the chemical disinfection sector following to the 
USA, the growing importance of crop and livestock protection is expected to 
enhance the agricultural disinfectant market. 
Table 23 shows the most relevant countries using these films and their 
respective amounts, and Table 24 shows the amounts of these films split into 
the different levels of replication. A2C solution will potentially enable 
recycling 151,360 tonne of disinfection films , until today sen t either 
to landfill or to energy recuperation. Spain accounts to 31,5% of these 
films, and the A2C cluster could directly covers up to 5,5% of the 
EU disinfection films which are available through PROEX associates.  
 
 Targeted multilayer plastics wastes from the food processing and manufacturing sector : Currently around 
17% of world film production is multilayer films103. Based on the EU plastics demand, around 6,5 Mt where destined 
to industrial packaging, from which 3.5 Mt where destined to flexible industrial packaging 104. On the basis of the 
application, this packaging is usually segmented105 into non-food applications (35%) and food applications (65%, 
2.275 Mt), which includes A2C targeted multilayer packaging industrial wastes. Based on the estimations of the 
GVM106, Table 25 shows the amounts of multilayer flexible industrial packaging available at all replication levels. 
A2C could potentially recycle, at 
replication EU level, 13,65% of total 
industrial food flexible packaging,  
from wich 0,02 % correspond to the 
A2C cluster. 
 
 
2.1.1 Agro2Circular CONTRIBUTION TO THE EXPECTED IMPACTS UNDER LC-GD-3-2-2020 
 1. Decoupling of economic and human activities from the consumption of finite resources and GHG 
emissions: Circular economy is restorative and regenerative by design and aims to keep products, components, and 
materials at their highest utility and value at all times, distinguishing between technical and biological cycles107. This 
economic model seeks to decouple global economic development from finite resource consumption. In this context, 
A2C systemic solution consists of a strategy that reduces the negative impact of the agrifood sector on the 
environment, offering an alternative to traditional linear business model, turning the agrifood sector food and 
multilayer plastics targeted residues into the source of value creation, in line with the principles of circular 
economy, as following:  
 Preserve and improve natural capital: Worryingly, business is increasingly reliant on the very natural capital 
that is being degraded in order to meet the needs of a growing global population and changing consumption patterns. 
Our systemic solution will preserve natural capital by avoiding food loses from agricultural primary sector and food 
production sector (biomass), by lessening both the need of fossil extraction for plastics (and land use for bioplastics) 
production and  the need of  metal ores extraction (bauxite to produce al uminium) while energy and water 
consumption will be efficiently optimized.  
A2C will integrate the business strategy with natural capital accounting through task 6.4.3 enabling understanding 
natural capital impacts and dependencies on the cluster businesse s and enabling to integrate the technical 
environmental analysis into strategic business decision making.   
 Optimise resource yields by circulating products, components, and materials at the highest utility at all times 
in both technical and biological cycles: The technical cycle involves the management of stocks of finite materials 
and entails the technical materials to be recovered and mostly restored in the technical cycle. A2C will enable keeping 
technical components (plastics and aluminium) circulating in and contributing to the economy. 
The biological cycle encompasses the flows of renewable materials, as the fruits and vegetables wastes, which will 
be the source of value creation by extracting additional value from them to b e entered again into food system 
(enriched foods & nutraceuticals) and into other value applications (Cosmetics and bioplastics)  
 Foster system effectiveness by revealing and designing out negative externalities : Negative externalities will 
be continuously assessed & minimized, mainly through LCA analysis, while already identified negative impacts that 
could be derived from the technological solution, such as microplastics presence, plastics decontamination and by 
                                                      
102 https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/europe-crop-protection-pesticides-market-industry  
103 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0921344910002053   
104 https://ceflex.eu/flexible-packaging-in-europe/ 
105 https://www.fooddrinkeurope.eu  
106 Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung (GVM). Flexible Plastic Packaging Market in Germany and in Europe; GVM —Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung 
107 Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF)Towards a Circular Economy: Business Rationale for an Accelerated Transition(2015) 
Table 25. Amount of multilayer packaging films that A2C could potentially recyling at all levels 
Table 23. Amount of EU multilayer disinfection films 
by main countries 
Table 24. Amount of  multilayer disinfection films to 
be potentially recycled at all levels of replication 
29 
 
products, will be addressed at implementation stage. Moreover, our multidimensional analysis and A2C systemic & 
cooperative approach is designed to minimize, if needed socio-economics negative externalites. 
 
Particularly, the implementation of A2C solution will contribute to following ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS: 
 Reduction of Carbon dioxide emissions : Following is shown an estimation on how A2C potentially could 
contribute to the reduction of CO2 emissions by treating agrifood residues at different replication levels. 
Note that we have stimated the amounts of CO2 to be potentially reduced as a major representative of GHG emissions, 
being CO2 the major contributor to climate change. A t project stage, within task T 7.3, a complete and accurate 
inventory on GHG emissions derived from A2C processes will be carried out by VTT specialised partner.  
 
1. CO2 emissions reduction from agrifood waste 
valorisation: Approximately 89 Million tonnes (Mt) of 
food is wasted in the European Union each year, generating 
about 260,770 ktons of CO2.  
Table 26 shows the potential of A2C to reduce 
CO2 emissions by valorising F&V wastes from 
the production and processing stages and 
introducing them into into food, nutraceuticals, 
cosmetics and bioplastics applications. A2C could reduce 10.31% (at EU level) of all emisions produced by total 
food waste, from which 0.21% could be avoided a cluster level.  
 
2. CO2 emissions reduction from multilayers  recycling: A2C will enable 
reducing CO2 emissions by recycling targeted multilayers and upcycling them 
into the plastics value chain, hence avoiding producing virgin materials. Table 
27 shows the potential recyling amount of each kind of material involved in  
A2C solution and Table 28 shows A2C potential of CO2 emissions reduction.  
 
 
 
 3. Total potential of A2C for emissions reduction: Table 29 shows 
the potential of A2C solution to contribute to EU CO2 emissions 
reduction. Particularly, the implementation of the solution within A2C 
cluster will account to 2% of this potential. EU potential reduction 
of CO2 emissions=27,600,500 tonne CO2 eq. by A2C solution being 
applied to targeted agrifood residues (plastics and F&V) around EU.  
 
 Reduction on primary material consumption: A2C will reduce (at EU level) the consumption of primary 
materials contained into three out of the four material flow categories listed by Eursostat108 by 0.19% ,namely Fossil, 
Biomass and Metal ores, as shown in Table 30. See how this reduction contribute to circularity rates in Table 35 in 
page 2. 
 
2. Improved sustainability and circularity of clusters’ economic sectors, natural ecosystems, management 
and valorisation of local resou rces: A2C solution will contribute to the local and regional circular economy by 
being constructed at a suitable scale for closing resource loops and creating sustainable circular ecosystems through 
the valorisation of agrifood´sector local targeted residues.  Our solution for these residues entails an holistic approach, 
and goes beyond traditional resource recovery, where all the treated residues are efficiently managed, valorised and 
introduced again into industrial value chains as valuable resources while all externalities are systematically addressed 
                                                      
108 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-datasets/-/env_ac_mfa 
Data from the FUSIONS EU project (1 ton food waste= 2.93 t CO2 -eq, from which 65.4% comes from 
production, 10.7% from processing, 5.9% from retail and distribution, 10.7% from consumption and 7.3% 
from disposal). Note that at this stage we are not able to discount the emission s from A2C valorisation 
processes, which will be measured through project implementation. 
Data for CO2 emissions in KgCO 2 eq/kg of PA (6.7) , PE (1.9)  & PET (2,19) from Eco -profiles from Plastics Europe, and 
EVOH (8.6) and Al (8.7) from IPCC. For A2C recycling emissions we are using the data from SAPER ATEC process=1.19 
KgCO2 eq/kg (pre-treatment, delamination,and post-treatments) as data for emissions from A2C recycling processes are still 
not available and will be calculated accurately within project implementation. 
DMC: Domestic Material consumption (Kt). A2C contribution calculated by the 
amount of materials potentially recycled equivalent to the primary materials for their 
manufacturing. BIOMASS= Amount of A2C targeted fruits and vegetables ; Metal 
ores: Bauxite non consumed for manufacturing the targeted aluminium amounts (1 
t Al=5 t bauxite) ; Fossil materials: Crude oil not consumed equivalent to the amount 
of potential plastics recycled (excuding the Al),and calculated based on the CO 2 
emissions for virgin materials manufacture (1tCo2eq=0.288 t of crude oil) 
Table 26. Reduction of CO2 emissions from valorizing targeted F&V waste  
Table 27. Potential reduction of CO2 emissions from recycling post-industrial multilayers per 
material type   
Table 29. Total potential reduction of CO2 emissions 
by A2C solution  
Table 28. Total materials to be recycled by A2C 
per material type    
Table 30. Contribution of A2C to reduction on primary material consumption per material type 
Back Scopes 

30 
 
through a co-creation process and public engagement contributing thus to a sustainable, regenerative, inclusive and 
just circular economy for Europe.   
 A2C Contribution to sustainability and circularity of the agrifood sector and to European circularity:  
Due to the cross-cutting nature of the circular economy, measuring progress towards its achievement requires a multi-
faceted approach. In order to quantify109 the expected improvement on the cluster´s economic sector circularity and 
sustainability we are applying the same indicators listed by the EU Commission  while it will enable measure the 
project contribution to Eur ope circularity. The framework is structured into four broad areas: Production and 
consumption (1-4), waste management (5-6), secondary raw materials (7-8), Competitiveness and innovation (9-10) 
Following are shown the most relevant indicators to A2C scope: 
 1. EU self -sufficiency for raw materials . The indicator, Import Reliance (IR), measures how much the EU is 
independent from the rest of the world for several (24) raw materials, which includes aluminium  EU Self-sufficiency 
on Aluminium = 36,4% (2016).  
Currently, the recuperation of aluminium contained in multilayer packaging depend on the country management 
policies. In those countries where energetic valorisation is allowed, this aluminium can be recovered and remelted. 
However, other countries such as Spain, does not allow this valorisation, hence the aluminium is disposed together 
with the untreated multilayers.  A2C contribution: (not available data for quantitative assessment) A2C will recover 
Aluminium from multilayer packaging in high quality conditions and high yield to be efficiently reinjected into 
the economy as raw material, and hence reducing the IR and increasing the self-sufficiency for Aluminium. 
Contribution within project cluster: 25.6 tonnes; Potential contribution within Europe= 21,908 tonnes. 
 
 4. Food waste: The indicator measures the waste generated in the 
production, distribution and consumption of food and it is still under 
development. Current value (2018): 69,000.0 kton of generated waste 
along all food groups. 
 
Table 31 shows A2C potential contribution to this indicator. We have calculated the project contribution in terms of 
% of waste which will be diverted from food waste stream by valorising it in a cascade upcycling approach and being 
introduced again either into the food supply chain or into bioplastics and cosmetics production, hence, no longer 
considered as food waste.  
A2C Contribution: A2C solution has the potential of reducing about 18,3 % the EU waste generated along all the 
food supply chain and hence will highly help cutting food waste by 50 % by weight by 2030, contributing  to the 
Eurepan transition to a circular economy. 
 5b. Recycling rate of all waste, excluding major mineral 
waste: All waste generated within an EU country and finally 
treated excluding major mineral wastes. This rate directly monitors 
the amount of material fed back into the economy, thereby 
capturing the value of materials as far as possible and reducing 
losses. The indicator is calculated  as recycled waste (RCV_R) 
divided by total waste treated excluding major mineral wastes 
(TRT), multiplied by 100.  
A2C Contribution: Table 32 shows current value for EU and Spain 
and the project potential contribution.  A2C could contribute to 
increase the recycling rate of all waste in EU by +1.6 % while, for 
Spain, by +3.71%. 
 
 6a. Recycling rate of overall packaging waste:  Share of 
recycled packaging waste in all generated packaging waste. It is used 
to monitor progress towards the packaging recycling targets 
65%(2025) and 70%(20 30). The indicator is calculated  as material 
recycling (RCY)/ generation (GEN). A2C Contribution: A2C could 
contribute to increase the packaging recycling rate in EU by 
+0.35% while for Spain by +0.32%. (Table 33) 
  
 6b. Recycling rate of plastic packaging waste: The indicator is 
defined as the share of recycl ed plastic packaging waste in all 
generated plastic packaging waste. In the EU Action Plan for the 
Circular Economy, the Commission has proposed an EU-wide target 
of 55% on recycling plastic packaging (by 2025).   
                                                      
109 These indicators can only be calculated at national and EU level (no regional data). For some of them, it is not possible to be quantified with the available data.  
Our treated fruits & vegetables does not account as a waste to be 
treated, hence decreasing TRT in 12,620,900 tonne ; The targeted 
plastics residues (disinfection films and multilayer industrial food 
packaging are recycled instead send to energy recovery or  landfilled, 
hence increasing RCV-R in: 461,825.0 tonnes (from previous Table 31 
and Table 28)  
The targeted multilayer industrial food packaging are recycled instead send 
to energy recovery or landfilled, hence increasing RCV-R in: 310,465 tonnes 
(from previous Table 25) 
  
Table 31. Contribution of A2C to reduce EU food waste  
Table 32. Contribution of A2C to recycling rate of all waste  
Table 33. Contribution of A2C to packaging recycling rate  
Table 34.  Contribution of A2C to plastic  packaging  recycling rate  

31 
 
A2C Contribution: A2C could contribute to increase the packaging 
recycling rate in EU by +1.81% while for Spain by +1.46%. (Table 
34). 
 7a. End -of-life recycling input rates  (EOL-RIR): This indicator measures recycling's contribution to some 
materials demand per type of material, in contrast to the indicators of the monitoring framework on waste 
management, which focus on collection or recycling rates of certain waste streams (5b,6a,6b). Current EOL-RIR for 
Aluminium (EU)=12% .A2C Contribution: A2C solution will enable recovering the aluminium contained in plastic 
packaging, and reinject it again into the economy, hence increasing the End-of life recycling rate of Aluminium. 
 
 7b. Circular material use rate (CMU) Circularity 
rate measures, share of material recovered and fed back 
into the economy - thus saving extraction of primary 
raw materials - in overall material use. The CMU is 
defined as the ratio of the circular use of materials (U) 
to the overall material use (M). A higher circularity rate 
value means that more secondary materials substitute 
for primary raw materials thus reducing the environmental 
impacts of extract ing primary material. A2C Contribution: 
A2C could contribute to increase the Total EU CMU by +0.16%. (Table 35). 
 
 9a Gross investment in tangible goods : Measures gross investment in tangible goods in the recycling sector; 
repair and reuse sector. Also measured in % and the denominator is expressed as Gross Domestic Product at market 
prices of the current year. 2017 EU 28 value:  €18,447.7 Million; A2C Contribution : A2C Gross investment in 
tangible goods= €44.6 millions - %Contribution=0.24176%  
 9b Number of persons employed  in these sectors: 2017, EU28=3,985,720 ; A2C Contribution: New jobs 295 
(205 direct and 90 induced) -%Contribution= + 0.00740% (further explained) 
 9c Value added at factor cost is the gross income: 2017 EU28= €154,790.1 Million euros ; A2C Contribution: 
Turnover €166.8 Millions - %Contribution= + 0.10776%  (further explained) 
 10 Number of patents related to recycling and secondary raw materials: (2017) =290.47 A2C Contribution: 
12 patents or utility models from key exploitable results (Table 45) (%Contribution= +4.13124%) 
 
 
  3. Emergence of circular business opportunities and a structured pipeline of investment projects: In relation 
to circular economy, the business -idea generation  is usually founded on product -life extension activities (reuse, 
repair, recycling) and material efficiency (reduction, re -use and recycling of plastic waste, new technologies for 
generating alternative materials) 110 also, on sustainable production -consumption interactions, waste management, 
closed-loop supply chains, “cradle to cradle” and business founded on a new model of socio-technical organisation.  
The drivers of emerging circular business opportunities are the availability of technologies, with the A2C project 
being a great showcase of new technologies applicable on the market  while fostering a favourable citizens’ 
climate. In addition, the environmental policies and standards, directives and law constitute a relevant drive for 
innovation in this field111. 
In A2C project 31 new circular business cases will be technically demonstrated and economically analysed by the 
market for upscaling; 14 products for direct exploitation by partners and 17 technologies for licensing process or 
technology (more information in Table 43). Further, our circular solution will create a new value-chain where the 
agricultural, food, cosmetic, biotechnology, recycling, plastic f ormulation & transformation, bioplastic 
production, design and manufacturing of equipment, and ICT industrial solutions will be related. Furthermore 
other technical business and training activities for companies and R&D institutions will be implemented.  
 
Besides, at project implementation, not only the technical feasibility of these business models will be 
demonstrated but also its sustainability as a whole . Task 6.4 will also manage with A2C technologies financing 
needs and will explore financing opportunities (public, private and other financing schemes) enabling the adoption 
of these CEBMs by the A2C cluster. Moreover, at task 7.5.3, as part of the multidimensional study aiming at identify 
barriers for the A2C model replication, it will be carried out a deep research on financial framework at local and 
European levels while produce recommendations for improvements, facilitating systemic solutions and their circular 
business models further adoption, replication and scalability.  
 Increased circular and climate-neutral practices among citizens and their participation in systemic solutions  
There is increasing recognition across the EU, nationally and at regional level that citizens have a crucial role to 
play in decision-making for public policies and in their implementation processes. Moreover, public awareness is 
an essential part of achieving sustainable development and in involving citizens in circular practices.  
                                                      
110 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/sustainable_products_circular_economy.pdf  
111 Smol, M., Kulczycka, J., & Avdiushchenko, A. (2017). Circular economy indicators in relation to eco -innovation in European regions. Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy , 19(3), 669-678. 
The targeted multilayer industrial food packaging are recycled instead 
send to energy recovery or landfilled, hence increasing  RCV-R in: 
310,465 tonnes 
  
See the RCV_R A2C contribution amounts to each flow in previous Table 30 
  
Table 35. Contribution of A2C EU circular material use  
Back Scope 7 

32 
 
Our project entails public engagement (and awareness) as a core dimension, where all actors, including citizens, are 
encouraged to participate through the co-creation process. Thus, in Task 7.1 a public engagement strategy (which 
includes citizens) at local, and European level to involve them in the demonstrative process (combined and supported 
by T8.3) will be planned and executed.  In this context, we already have defined follow ing actions fostering 
public engagement and raising citizen’s awareness (among others listed in WP8): 
 Participative community -based schemes  (T7.1.2) as an effective tool to public engagement and to promote 
circular practices among citizens. A2C involves one participative community based scheme at local level, which aims 
to involve citizens, fostering public engagement and raising awareness about the project impacts and importantly 
about food waste as well as to increase the citizens contribution to circular economy and climate neutral practices. 
 Preparation of a training plan  (T8.6) for local actors and education services aimed at foster communities 
environmental awareness and sustainable habits, business and co-creation. 
 Preparation and dissemination of guidelines (T8.6) to foster public engagement in circular economy projects. 
 Creation of a public blockchain linked to “DIS” (T1.5.3) that will provide citizens with reliable information about 
all the processes involved in A2C and their social, economic and environmental impacts.  
 Specific actions at local/regional level targeting also youngsters (T8.3) (Contest, videogames, talks…) 
Indicators: The major impact relies on the raised acceptance, awareness and knowledge  about the circular 
economy, the importance of reducing food and plastic waste and the relevance of climate -neutral actions. Rely on 
the primary impact, the behaviour change is expected to generate the most sustainable choices at individual and 
community l evels in regards to the aforementioned areas, therefore increasing the adoption of circular and 
climate-neutral practices among citizens, as following: 
 Acceptance: acceptance of more sustainable behaviours, and circular economy models may be a major barrier to 
overcome. Research demonstrated 112 that participatory strategies such as community -based participatory research, 
co-creation or co-production, among others, increase the acceptance of the innovation.  
 Awareness and knowledge: The awareness and knowledge held by the citizenships and non-expert decision-makers 
may be suboptimal: knowledge can foster awareness and awareness is a prior condition for acquiring knowledge with 
an open-minded and receptive attitude 113. However, awareness, willingness and kno wledge are not sufficient for 
fostering behavioural change114. 
 Behavioural change: it can occur through peer-pressure and modelling, raised awareness or reminders, among other 
techniques; techniques for changing behaviours for pervasive social  problems has demonstrated its efficacy 115 ; 
alternatives based on social practices have also shown effectivity by directly addressing the social environment at 
interpersonal and meso-level as a whole116. Social practices aimed at behavioural change interact will all individuals’ 
values, attitudes and current behaviours, revealing the barriers, difficulties and challenges and offering insight on 
how to overcome these baseline contextual conditions .  The community-grounded nature of A2C implementation 
will facilitate the behavioural change due to peers’ modelling, reminders and an interpersonal environment favourable 
to environment-responsive choices. Following a community-based participatory research schema, the social impact 
will be evaluated through mixed methods (qualitative and quantitative methodology/tools), through entire lifecycle: 
Table 36. Indicators to evaluate social impacts from A2C project implementation 
Dimension Impact A2C Estimates Means for evaluating the impact 
Quality of life 
Relational aspect Quality of life perceived >30% over baseline (oBL) LSCAPE-25 or WHOQOL-BREF 
Fostered social inclusion >30% oBL Social Inclusion and Perceived Support 
Questionnaire, adapted and translated117  
Strengthened community bonds >50% oBL Social Inclusion and Perceived Support 
Questionnaire, adapted and translated  
Outcomes of A2C 
Related to 
paradigm change 
Acquisition of slow-life and similar approaches >20% Focus groups 
Generation of informal initiatives for transferring the circular economy 
to everyday lives (e.g., mini -markets, groups for exchanging food, 
plastic-made materials, etc.) 
2-4 per replication site  Ad hoc Citizens Survey 
Improvements perceived in the environmental issues concerning each 
communities 
>60% oBL Focus groups 
Paradigm change, considering baseline reluctance 
Acceptance Potential reluctance: Greater acceptance of circular economy models >60% (oBL) Ad hoc Citizens Survey 
High reluctance:  Greater acceptance of circular economy models 
among entrepreneurs and business 
>35%(oBL) Ad hoc Entrepreneurs and the Circular 
Economy survey 
High reluctance:  Enhanced acceptance of “uncomfortable” 
(perceived; self-reported) environment-responsive behaviours  
>30%(oBL) Short survey on environmental behaviours 
(self-reported) 
                                                      
112 Voorberg, W. H. et all. (2015). A systematic review of co -creation and co-production: Embarking on the social innovation journey.  Public Management Review, 17(9), 1333-1357; Wolsink, M. (2013).  
The next phase in social acceptance of renewable innovation.  EDI quarterly, 5(1), 10-13. 
113 Abrahamse, W., & Matthies, E. (2012). Informational strategies to promote pro -environmental behaviour: changing knowledge, awareness and attitudes.  Environmental psychology: An introduction, 
223-232; Desa, A., et all (2011). A study on the knowledge, attitudes, awareness status and behaviour concerning solid waste mana gement. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 18, 643-648. 
114 Abdukadirov, S. (Ed.). (2016). Nudge Theory in Action: behavioral design in policy and markets. Springer.  
115 Borg, K., Curtis, J., & Lindsay, J. (2020). Social norms and plastic avoidance: Testing the theory of normative social behavi our on an environmental behaviour. Journal of Consumer Beha viour, 19(6), 
594-607; Hargreaves, T. (2011). Practice-ing behaviour change: Applying social practice theory to pro -environmental behaviour change. Journal of consumer culture, 11(1), 79 -99 
116 Hargreaves, T. (2011). Practice-ing behaviour change: Applying social practice theory to pro-environmental behaviour change. Journal of consumer culture, 11(1), 79-99 
117 GRACIA FUSTER, Enrique; HERRERO OLAIZOLA, Juan y MUSITU OCHOA, Gonzalo. Evaluación de recursos y estresores psicosociales en la comunidad. Madrid: Edit orial Síntesis, 2002. P. 97. 
ISBN: 84-9756-021-3   (Scale 1 >> 1. I feel identified with my community or neighbourhood  ) 
Back Scopes 
 Back Milestones 
33 
 
Awareness and 
knowledge 
Low reluctance: Enhanced environmental awareness >40%(oBL) Environmental attitudes inventory (EAI) 
Focus groups 
Low reluctance: Increased knowledge about circular economy N/A (+++) Focus groups 
Low reluctance: Increased knowledge about means for reducing food 
and plastic waste 
>70%(oBL) Short survey on environmental behaviours 
(self-reported) 
Awareness and 
knowledge & 
Behaviour change 
Potential reluctance: Fostered participation in initiatives and activities 
during project and outside (e.g., involvement in civil society initiatives) 
N/A  
(+++) 
Focus groups 
In-depth interviews 
Low reluctance: Raised knowledge exchange with peers about topics 
related to sustainability, environment and the A2C project 
>20% (oBL) Environmental attitudes inventory (EAI) 
Ad hoc Citizens Survey 
Behaviour change 
(adoption of 
circular and 
climate-neutral 
practices) 
Potential reluctance: Increased frequency of recycling >15%(oBL) Ad hoc Citizens Survey 
High reluctance: Reduced plastic waste (self-reported) >10%(oBL) Ad hoc Citizens Survey 
Potential reluctance: Reduced food waste >15%(oBL) Ad hoc Citizens Survey 
Low reluctance:  Increased reutilisation of materials and non -
perishable food 
>30%(oBL) Ad hoc Citizens Survey 
Note: specific actions for overcoming higher and medium reluctance areas will be tackled along the project implementation; the planning and strategic insight 
will be individually tailored to each adoption (Murcia) and replication site (Italian and Lithuania cases) and adapted to the circumstances and public’s response.  
 
 4. Creation of jobs in the short to medium  term: At EU level, more than 1,000,000 firms are operating in 
circular economy activities (4% of the total amount of business at EU level) generating >€350 billion in production 
value (1.9% total) and €500billion turnover (€51.5bilion in gross operating surplus). 4 million workers were involved: 
surprisingly, over 4million workers (2.8%) did not received any payment for their work: it means that nearly 4.4% 
of the total number of unpaid workers are linked to circular economy activities118.  
Currently, there is evidenced a structural heterogeneity of circular activities: it implies the need for a targeted and 
unified policy, civil society activity and viable projects with potential for generating ‘decent jobs’ around the CE: 
nowadays, repair, recycling and reuse are low -wage even unpaid activities in most EU countries. The  differences 
between north and south EU States since the 2008 global crisis and the inequalities continue to deepen, increasing 
the gap between countries, reflected in the unemployment and low income or precarious jobs 119. While job creation 
is often presented as a positive externality of a transition to the CE more research and real-world implementation of 
pilots and multinational projects are required for demonstrating the real potential of the eco -innovation in societies, 
for fostering decen t-work, inclusion, and equality . A2C relies on a vast network of key players able to raise and 
enhance the social and employment circumstances related to the current labour-intensive but precarious CE jobs and 
works performed by persons involved: the innovative and disru ptive nature of technologies developed during the 
A2C and its demonstration and community-participatory approach directly tackles these major issues and concerns. 
Table 37 shows the expected direct impact on jobs by A2C solution in our cluster. Further Table 38 shows those 
derived from replication which include those generated thanks to Italian and Lithuanian replication cases.  
Table 37. Indicators to evaluate the direct impact on employment from A2C project implementation and further industrialisation 
Impacts on employment, quality of jobs generated and feasible derived business  
Jobs generated during the project (short term) 26 generated at project implementation within project partners 
Jobs generate d around the adoption of A2C solution within 
cluster, 5 years after the project duration (mid-term) 
295 = 205 (160 from partner direct exploitation and 45 from technology sales); 
90 (client´s new jobs for replication processes)  
 Jobs occupied by persons from deprived areas120 It could reach up to 50-60% Considering that agrifood workers come usually from 
impoverished areas; see Llorente-González, L. J., & Vence. 
 
 5. More effective development of circular solutions through knowledge transfer  between the territorial 
clusters: A2C project has been designed to boost the territorial development of circular solutions through both an 
intensive action on cooperation with other clusters/organizations and by providing valuable tools and knowledge 
about how to implement these solutions.  
On one hand, several actions involving cooperation with clusters have been planed. At Task 8.3, in collaboration 
with the CCRI, it will be carried out a continuous action to both engage in cooperation with other circular territorial 
clusters funded under this topic and other EU -funded projects/initiatives working on complementary fields and to 
involve them in dissemination actions (WP8)  
It is also planned to carry out cross-fertilization activities and exchange of knowledge among clusters and to involve 
them in the co-creation process for the multidimensional model construction and validation (WP7) through specific 
workshops and/or focus groups, while it helps to co -design further training and dissemination activities boosting 
knowledge transfer and hence widely promoting circular practices.  
We already have started the clusters engagement strategy, by informing European clusters (mainly from relevant 
countries to the A2C solution) from the agrifood sector (16) and others ( 10)  (See details in Table 44) about A2C 
activities related to them, who are shown their commitment to be involved. (through a support letter, See section 4) 
Moreover, 2 of the A2C partners, TCA and LPK are big agrifood industry umbrellas and form part of agrifood 
territorial clusters of their respective regions, collaborating on the construction of the multidimensional model for 
A2C systemic solution adoption and the self-assessment tool and its demonstration through replication of the model 
into their respective region. 
                                                      
118 Llorente-González, L. J., & Vence, X. (2020). How labour -intensive is the circular economy? A policy -orientated structural analysis of the repair, reuse and recycling activities in the European 
Union. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 162, 105033. 
119 European Commission (2020) – Employment quality and decent work, at https://ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/topics/employment-and-decent-work_en    
120From current data (https://circulareconomy.europa.eu/platform/sites/default/files/ec_2018_ -_impacts_of_circular_economy_policies_on_the_labour_market.pdf ) is a feasible impact, moderate scenario. 
Back Scopes 

34 
 
On the other hand, A2C will offer valuable transferable knowledge based on the project results. Project activities 
will be focused on systematically identifying, analysing and addressing, through a multidimensional approach and 
involving all relevant actors, the needs and barriers hampering the development of circular solutions and adoption of 
circular business models shifting from linear ones, delivering a multidimensional model (T7.5.5). Based on this 
multidimensional model, a self-assessment tool for defining a roadmap for the replicability & sc alability enabling 
stakeholders/clusters to evaluate how their initial conditions can affect the process (T7.5.6). 
Moreover, based on the results, guidelines/recommendations and specific training modules will we delivered that 
together with the A2C self-assessment tool, aims to achieve at European level an effective development of territorial 
circular solutions among clusters/business, engaged through above mentioned actions, of both agrifood and other 
sectors. These guidelines/recomendations will address among others, those needs and barriers noted by clusters 
and regions as stated in the European clusters conference on 2019, thus helping organisations through a practical 
approach, as following is explained: 
  Knowledge and awareness: Lack of information, knowledge and awareness are identified among the biggest 
barriers towards a circular economy. Th ey are still not co nscious of the circular economy, how to effectively 
implement it and how it may affect their business. Hence, there is a need for more awareness -raising about the 
opportunities and role models to demonstrate how circular business models can work in practice . Addressed at: 
WP6, and transferred at WP8; A2C TK1 (transferable knowledge): A2C Circular economy business models (D8.4); 
A2C TK2: A2C self-assessment tool (D7.6). Addressed at: WP7, and transferred at WP8; Main transfer/training 
activities: Specific training modules, Stakeholders platform, workshops; Main partners: UB, CJM, AGRO, KVC, 
UVEG, INFO, CARM, LPK, TCA 
Besides, practical knowledge is also a need for many companies  as the topic is still new to many, at the level of 
both managers and employees. They need information on the technological possibilities, which needs to be up to 
date. Addressed at: WP1 to 6; A2C TK3: Innovative and synergist technologies enabling circular processes. Main 
transfer/training activities: Workshops, webinars, A2C demonstrative events, Main partners: INFO, technology 
developers and end-users. 
 Policy: Policy and regulation are important barriers. Legislation is still based on linear business models and 
should be replaced by legislation that is suitable for circular models. Addressed at WP7 and WP8, A2C TK4: 
Policy and regulatory schemes to promote circular economy. Main transfer/training activities: Recommendations 
to decision-makers (D7.8) Specific training module/guidelines to clusters/industry environment (D8.4), Stakeholders 
platform, workshops. Main partners: UNE, CARM, KVC, UVEG, EURADA. 
 Financing: Access to finance for circular business models appears it is still an obstacle. Circular business models 
often require higher investment costs. SMEs especially face this problem. They cannot make large investments 
themselves and banks are often reluctant to finance circular initiatives with a lo ng payback period. Addressed at: 
WP7 and WP8;  A2C TK5:  (Public and private) financing schemes to promote circular economy; Main 
transfer/training activities: Recommendations to decision -makers (D7.9) Specific training module/guidelines to 
clusters/industry environment (D8.4), Stakeholders platform, workshops;  Main partners: CJM, UB, CARM, 
EURADA, INFO. 
Other TKs transferred (WP8, D8.4): Those related to foster public engagement in circular economy environments 
and to foster the communities’ environmental awareness and sustainable habits, business and co-creation. 
Table 38 shows the indicators towards the contribution to this impact:  
Table 38. Indicators to measure the impact of knowledge transfer activities within A2C project implementation  
 
 6. More effective widespread uptake and easier replication, scalability and visibility of circular systemic 
solutions, and contribute to achieve policy targets: EUGD, CEAP, EUBS, EIS 
A2C demonstration entails a strong focus on facilitating the circular technical s olution early adoption and further 
replication & scalability, through a systemic approach based on the identification and analysis of challenges, enablers 
and barriers (socio-economics, regulatory, political, standardisation and financing) hampering the deployment of the 
solution not only at A2C cluster level but also at national and European level. This action implies a co -creation 
process and a strong public engagement together with the construction of the multidimensional model suitable for 
the adoption and replication of A2C territorial systemic solution. 
                                                      
121From current data (https://circulareconomy.europa.eu/platform/sites/default/files /ec_2018_-_impacts_of_circular_economy_policies_on_the_labour_market.pdf ) is a feasible impact, moderate scenario. 
Impact Indicators Estimates Means for evaluating the impact 
Quality 
employment 
Employments generated by A2C systemic solution replication  [390-2655] Project reporting; all partners 
Persons employed from impoverished communities 50-60% avg. 
Persons with disabilities employed121 20-30% 
Women employed (idem reference as for person with disabilities) 20% 
New business Business ideas in synergy to A2C >30 
Local alliances Establishment of local alliances with key communities’ business and SMEs >100 
Estimations for calculating employment generated through replication : Minimum- At least the Italian&Lithuanian cases will deploy A2C systemic solution with similar 
impacts on employment than those around A2C cluster. Maximum: more than 50% (7) of already engaged agrifood clusters deploy A2C solution with similar impacts (it is 
difficult to estimate the impact on employment of circular systemic solutions on other sectors, although it is highly expected from intensive action on transfer and tools delivered)  
  
Back Milestones 
35 
 
The project involves two specific replication case (7.6), in the Italian region of Lombardy, one of the major players 
on the agrifood sector and in the NUTS-2 region from Lithunia. This will enable a deep analysis of A2C systemic 
solution externalities and will help better co -creating and demonstrating the multidimensional model for a wide 
European replication and scalability while it will make it ready an implementat ion plan for the deployment of a 
systemic circular solution for the agrifood residues generated in the specific region.   
Then, a multidimensional framework and a the self-assessment tool for the adoption/replication of A2C solution 
in other territories will be built and specific tools/recommendations for fostering replication and scalability will 
be elaborated and properly disseminated to policy makers and relevant stakeholders, as previously explained.  
Moreover, a great visibility at local and European level of the project is envisaged by several means (mainly in WP8): 
-Cooperation and data sharing with CCRI initiative and other relevant european initiatives/platforms as The European 
Institute of Innovation and Technology, The European Circular Economy St akeholder Platform, The European 
clusters collaboration platform, European Urban Initiative, Intelligent Cities Challenge Initiative, Green City Accord. 
-Outreach actions (WP8), Recommendations/Training and transference of knowledge actions at 
local/regional/national an European levels, Project stakeholders platform, etc  
All of these actions will greatly help to a widespread and fast adoption of A2C and other territorial systemic solutions, 
increasing then social, economic and environmental benefits from c ircular economy models adoption while it will 
multiply the local contribution to achieving the policy targets of the European Green Deal, the Circular Economy 
Action Plan, the Bioeconomy Strategy and the European Industrial Strategy. 
Specifically, the adoption of Agro2Circular solution will contribute to achieve following policy targets: 
 Contribution to related contents 
EU Green Deal (EUGD)  
 
1, Increasing the EU’s climate ambition for 2030 and 2050-Target: To increase the EU’s greenhouse gas emission reductions target for 2030 
to at least 50% and towards 55% compared with 1990 levels in a responsible way. A2C: Reduction of 27,600,500 tonne  CO2 eq/year 
2. Supplying clean, affordable and secure energy: The production and use of energy across economic sectors account for more than 75% of 
the EU’s greenhouse gas emissions. Energy efficiency must be prioritised.  A2C: Energy needs of all the processes involved in A2C will be 
analysed, optimised and continuously monitored in order to ensure maximum energy efficiency. 
3. Mobilising industry for a clean and circular economy:  
● The EU’s remains too ‘linear’, and dependent on a throughput of new materials extracted, traded and processed into goods, and finally disposed 
of as waste or emissions. Only 12,31 % of the materials it uses come from recycling (Circularity rate, CMU). A2C will contribute by a potential 
increase of the circularity rate of +0,16% (Table 35). 
● Circular economy offers great potential for new activities & jobs. A2C will generate 31 CEBMs creating 295 jobs (205 direct and 90 induced) 
● Leverage the potential of the digital transformation and 4.Reliable, comparable and verifiable information plays an important part in enabling 
buyers to make more sustainable decisions and reduces the risk of ‘green washing’. A2C integrates digital technologies supporting without 
precedents the tracking and reliability of the implementation of our solution and their impacts in the agrifood sector, which is one with the less 
level of digitalization. Public and reliable information will be accessible, empowering consumers. 
● Waste economic value must be recovered  and its environmental impact and on climate change avoided/minimised. A2C will enable avoiding 
12,620.9 tonnes of food waste by recovering its value and will enable recycling 461,825.0 tonnes of plastics recovering their value to introduced 
into production proceses. 
● Ensuring the supply of sustainable raw materials , by diversifying supply from both primary and secondary sources. A2C enables the 
recuperation of 21.9 kt aluminium in quality conditions to be introduced again into production lines. 
● Ensure a safe, circular and sustainable battery value chain for all batteries , including to supply the growing market of electric vehicles. A2C: 
From recent research, our recovered aluminium could be potentially used in substituti on of lithium and Pb batteries , diminishing the need of 
using primary raw materials in substitution of a secondary raw material as explained further.  
4. From ‘Farm to Fork’ : The Commission will explore new ways to give consumers better information, including by digital means, on details 
such as where the food comes from, its nutritional value, and its environmental footprint.  Our digital solution will enable tracking all the journey 
of the treated food residues from the point of generation to the final consumer and will make possible offering reliable information. Environmental 
footprint of the end products manufactured from the treated residues public available through the public Blockchain of the DIS 
5. Preserving and restoring Europe’s natural capital : A2C will preserve natural capital by avoiding food waste from agrifood sector and by 
lessening the need of fossil extraction for plastics (and land use for bioplastics) production while energy and water consumption will be efficiently 
optimized. Moreover natural capital accounting will be integrated in A2C CEBMs.  
New Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP) 
1. Sustainable Product Policy Framework 
● Designing sustainable products: A2C will contribute to the following sustainability principles considered by the commission:  (1) Improving 
product upgradability, addressing the presence of hazardous chemicals in products, and increasing their energy and resource e fficiency; (2) 
increasing recycled content in products, while ensuring their performance and safety; (3) enabling high -quality recycling;  (4) reducing carbon 
and environmental footprints; (4) mobilising the potential of digitalisation of product information, including solutions such a watermarks. 
●  Empowering consumers and public buyers: A2C contribution explained further in explained in Page 37 
● Circularity in production processes: A2C contribution to circulairity indicators previously explained in Table 35. 
2. Key product value chains  A2C provides a holistic and integrated systemic solution for some of the key products value chain addressed in 
the new Circular Economy Action Plan as previously explained in Excellence 
3. Less waste, more value 
● Waste prevention and circularity: A2C will contribute to the objective to significantly reduce total waste generation  
● Enhancing circularity in a toxic-free environment: A2C will develops solutions for high-quality sorting and removing contaminants from plastics. 
● Creating a well-functioning EU market for secondary raw materials: A2C recovers cost-efficient and good quality Aluminium.  
4. Enhance the role of standardisation: The participation of UNE intends to use the benefits of standardization for increasing the exploitation 
possibilities of the other partners and to become an added-value contributor to the exploitation of the results. Doing so will reinforce the relevance 
of the European standardization system towards the European RDI community and its recognition as an effective exploitation channel  
5. Making circularity work for people, regions and cities : Circularity can be expected to have a positive net effect on job creati on provided 
that workers acquire the skills required by the green transition. A2C will encompass training and knowledge transfer activities aimed at increase 
circularity practices and how to effectively implement them among a wide audience at local& region al, national and European levels, many of 
them directly targeting regional European clusters.  
E
U
B
S European Bioeconomy Strategy’s aim to pave "the way to a more innovative, resource efficient and competitive society that reconciles food 
security with the sustainable use of renewable resources for industrial purposes, while ensuring environmental protection". A2C will contribute 
36 
 
 
 
 
CROSS-CUTTING PRIORITIES 
 
 Agro2Circular integrates Responsible Research and Innovation processes : A2C project entails a 
comprehensive Responsible Research and Innovation process, through a multi -actor approach covering the who le 
value chain for A2C  and relevant societal actors. All are working 
together in order to bet ter align both the A2C  processes and their 
outcomes, with the values, needs and expectations of European society.  
A2C engages relevant actors, from researchers and innovat ors to 
institutions and governments, through inclusive, participatory 
methodologies in all stages and levels of R&I processes (from agenda 
setting, to design, implementation, and evaluation) according to RRI 
principles. Figure 12 shows overall approach of RRI processes involved 
in Agro2Circular. All actors participating in A2C have been allocated 
within one or more fields according to their nature and role in the project.  
 
Table 39 shows the 
objectives of our 
RRI approach and 
expected outcomes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific key issues addressed: Ethics: See task 9.3; Gender equality:  As explained in Section 1.; Open Access: 
Please see Section 2 ; Public Engagement : It is about co -creating the future with citizens and civil society 
organisations, and also bringing on board the widest possible diversity of actor . A2C fosters innovative processes 
that are collaborative and multi-actor: all societal actors work together during the whole process in order to align its 
outcomes to the values, needs and expectations of society. Science Education: Our main focus is on to better equip 
citizens with the necessary knowledge and skills so they can participate in R&I debates mainly related to 
environment, circular economy and climate neutral practices and more specifically related to the need of addressing 
plastics and food waste. 
 
 Agro2Circular integrates SSH disciplines: A2C embraces an interdisciplinary 
approach that will integrate into the research and innovation chain contributions from 
Social Science and Humanities (SSH) disciplines which will favours understanding 
of the project related complex cultural, socioeconomics, political and other  issues, 
including gender aspects. This integration will lead to a systemic solution enabling 
the territorial deployment of the A2C circular economy business models and its 
replication, while it will help to understand and address through tailored and effective 
tools the citizens’ needs towards an acceptance and increase of climate neutral 
practices among them and fostering clusters/business circular practices adoption. It will enable our solution being 
socially acceptable, directly applicable and marketable and cost-effective.  
 
A2C integrates the strengths of following SSH disciplines 122: Social & behavioural sciences,  Humanities, 
Journalism and Education Science and Business, Administration & Law (See previous Figure 5 in section 1).  
                                                      
122 https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/docs/h2020-funding-guide/cross-cutting-issues/ssh_en.htm 
to ensure food and nutrition security by turning organic waste and food residues into valuable resources while it will enable a sustainable 
management of natural resources (increasing the amount of usable fraction from crops), diminishing environmental pressures and biodiversity 
loss (bioplastics manufacture from food residues). A2C will also reduce the dependence on non-renewable resources (diminishing petroleum 
needs by recycling multilayers plastics into new recyclable plastics) and contributing to deliver the EU’s energy and climate targets and will 
help to achieve a greenhouse gas neutral Europe.  
EIS 
European Industry Strategy:  The twin ecological and digital  transitions will affect every part of our economy, society and industry. Europe 
needs an industry that becomes greener and more digital while remaining competitive on the global stage.  A2C is fully in line with this policy and 
will contribute to achieve t hese challenges as previously explained.  31 circular business models w ill be created, enabling a growth of €166.8 million , 
among project partners, while it allow industry to be more productive.  Our cross industrial symbiosis approach will contribute to the greening of 
industries and development of circular economies and products, strengthening European competitiveness and creating jobs through the creation 
of new value chains, which is a core policy. 
O
D 
S 
 
 
Table 39. Main objectives 
and outputs of A2C RRI 
approach 
Figure 12. Integration of RRI within A2C project 
Figure 13. Balance of SSH and STEM 
disciplines applied in A2C project 
37 
 
The integration of SSH disciplines is highly relevant in A2C (see in Figure 13 the project contribution of SSH 
experts) mainly in WP7: A2C systemic solution adoption, replication and scalability and WP8: A2C Outreach and it 
is materialised in the behavioural change techniques, the business scenarios or the communication and dissemination 
actions, including the social m arketing and local/territorial communication plans. However, the most important 
application of SSH is the evaluation of the impact as well as the collection of data and information from the 
communities through co-production and Community-Based Participatory Research (or CBPR) for fostering the 
public engagement and empowerment ; the CBRP and public engagement relies on several disciplines from an 
integrative approach, thus , sociology, social psychology, even philosophy and ethics, economics and social 
communication.  
 H2020-LC-BAT-2019-2020123: In order to meet the future needs for energy storage, novel material systems with 
high energy densities, readily available raw materials, and safety are required. Currently, lithium and lead mainly 
dominate the battery market,  lithium may show substantial supply challenges prospectively. Thus, there is an 
increasing research about new chemistries to diversify battery technologies as those studying the concept of an 
aluminium-based (high -valent ion) rechargeable all -solid-state battery as highly promising for meeting future 
demands124 since aluminium offers the advantage of a  volumetric capacity four times higher compared to lithium 
analog. Consequently, although out of scope of this project, recovered aluminium (without loss of qu ality) from 
multilayers plastics wastes could have a potential use on batteries, with the great advantage of being a secondary 
raw material, displacing other materials with risk supply, contributing then to raw materials security in Europe.  
 
2.1.2 CONTRIBUTION TO ANY SUBSTANCIAL IMPACT  
OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS: A2C allows a responsible use of resources (renewable sources used as 
raw materials), avoiding the extraction of fossil non -renewable resources  and minimizing the environmental 
impacts along the supply chain. The use of local raw materials also reduces the impacts associated with 
transportation and consequently reduces noise and emissions associated with heavy goods traffic.  
On the other hand, the use of hybrid extraction processes based on green technologies allows the reduction of the 
use of organic solvents , which is associated with a reduction in the generation of hazardous waste and the 
emission of volatile organic compounds. Furthermore, these innovative extraction processes have shown significant 
energy savings. 
Finally, the biotransformation of organic wastes into bioplastics and the enzymatic recycling are green technologies 
that facilitate the progressive elimination of non-renewable plastics and their associate. 
OTHER SOCIO-ECONOMICS IMPACTS 
 
 Monetized economic impacts from the CO2 Emissions avoided:   
 
 
 Economics impacts for producers and processors derived from avoiding food waste: Based on the cost per 
tonne of edible food waste by sector of avoiding respective food waste.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Other social impacts : As previously demonstrated,  the A2C project and innovations have some relevant 
objectives in the background considering its social perspective: the reduction of plastic and food waste enhanced 
citizens’ and communities’ quality of life (QoL), redistribution of prosperity, the generation of n ew business and 
employment. A2C project will also empower communities and persons in the decision -making through co-creation 
of adaptations and solutions tailored to their local contexts as following: Empowering consumers and public buyers 
through A2C public engagement strategy and co-creation process: Empowerment and participation are intrinsically 
linked: The research demonstrated that local -based initiatives and projects, or the self -reflection and community 
engagement in specific themes and topics parti cularly relevant considering their challenges and concerns led to 
collective empowerment. The relational concept of empowerment relies on the ability of community members to 
influence other actors to behave in ways in which they would not have conventionally behaved, being able to modify 
their values, assumptions, statutory drivers and barriers and fostering their representation and role in the decision -
making processes125.   
                                                      
123 The Commission will continue to implement the Strategic Action Plan on Batteries and support the European Battery Alliance. It will propose legislation in 2020 to ensure a safe, circular and sustainable 
battery value chain for all batteries, including to supply the growing market of electric vehicles. 
124 https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fchem.2019.00268/full   
125 Adamson, D. (2010). Community empowerment. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy.  
Carbon emissions are monetized using social costs of carbon (SCC) = €44.4 / t 
CO2 eq.  Estimations from https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/cost-
benefit-analysis-and-the-environment/the-social-cost-of-
carbon_9789264085169-17-en 
Cost per tonne of edible food waste:  
-Agricultural primary sector= €300   
-Processing sector= €1,490 
Table 40. Monetized economic impacts from the CO2 Emissions avoided 
Table 41. Economics impacts for producers and processors from avoiding food waste 
Back Impact 6 

38 
 
As for the relation between behavioural change and its links to community engagement and empowerment, targeted 
local campaigns and peer modelling (e.g., in schools, in communities' key places) are effective however a strong 
foundation of individuals’participation, public engagement and community bonds are required126, as A2C proposes.   
 
2.1.3. BARRIERS TO OVERCOME 
Following are shown the main barriers identified and addressed at A2C that could potentially hamper the adoption 
and replication of A2C systemic solution and while individually explained all of them are strongly related.  
 Related to our multidimensional model approach for A2C territorial deployment: As those noted by the 
(EESCR) European Economic and Social Committee in its Report about EU Circular economy strategies . The 
strategies/models for circular economy deployment often lacks on: It do not effectively include all actors involved 
in implementing a circular economy model:  Mainly addressed through A2C own consortium partners involving 
all actors, not only technological but also those addressing the multidimensional framework, including civil society 
organisation as well as through a strong focus on public engagement. ; Lack of tailoring to the specific territorial 
context: A2C entails a comprehensive understanding of the current state of affairs in their territory though a deep 
contextual analysis; Sustainable practices are often not economically viable:  Preliminary business cases (Table 
43) show promising benefits. Circular business models will be constructed upon data collection from the 
technological developments along with the exploitation strategy that will make su re a successful business for 
industrial partners . ; Lack of provisions for scalability and transferability: A2C multidimensional model is 
constructed upon a co-creation process, not only involving all relevant actors at cluster level, but also involving al l 
relevant actors at EU level. Specially, TCA and LPK will participate in offering valuable inputs to calibrate this 
model while other EU clusters (agrifood and non agrifood sectors) from several countries already involved in A2C 
(Support Letters) will also participate in the validation process. 
 Paradigm shift towards circularity : Systematic reviews of circular economy barriers coincides that a lack of 
awareness of circular economy practices it is a significant barrier to developing a circular economy  Results from 
the OECD Survey on the Circular Economy in Cities 127 and Regions and those from the EESCR. 
Bringing about a paradigm shift is a complex task that needs to cover value chains and different players 
comprehensively. Only including all the elements in value chains and all stakeholders, including citizens will result 
in a paradigm shift . A2C solution: Raising circular economy practices awareness and foster the paradigm shift 
through strong focus on public engagement. A2C will conduct an intensive public engagement ( inclusive and 
participatory approach) and community-based participative implementation, therefore providing a key relevance to 
the behavioural change which is expected to generate the most sustainable choices at individual and community 
levels therefore increasing the adoption of circular and climate -neutral practices among citizens, but also at 
community levels (See section xx)  
 Knowledge and Governance barriers : By addressing common governance barriers such as the need for better 
knowledge, funding and regulation, strategies for the deployment of Circular Economy highly increase their adoption 
potential. Moreover, as noted in previous sections, knowledge is a major barrier for business/clusters in order to 
implement circular solutions/p ractices but also for decision makers. A2C solution : An intensive action on 
dissemination and knowledge transfer but also co creation, among decision makers, business/clusters and all relevant 
stakeholders is envisaged. These actions are supported by several guidelines, recommendations and practical guides 
form the project learns that definitively will foster circular solutions such as A2C being deployed and replicated 
around EU. Please see more details on xxx.  
 Barriers to entrepreneurship or the new businesses creation. A great deal of literature has been written about 
existing barriers to entrepreneurship or new business growth. Overall, the entrepreneurship Skills for Growth -
Orientated Businesses can be classified as external (labour market conditions, market structure, government policy, 
economic climate, legislation and access to market) and internal (motivational factors, management capability, 
funding, marketing capacity, poor product or service) 128. A2C project involves all relevant actors and utilitie s to 
implement, scale-up and replicate our systemic solution. The collaboration of all these actors for the fulfilment of the 
objectives of the project will make it possible to minimize the barriers, as an example: the collaboration between 
supplier compan ies and clients will speed up the understanding of the market, the presence of the public 
administration allows the alignment of the legislation and public policies, the presence of the financial sector 
facilitates access to capital, the presence of RTOs enables the transfer of technology, among others. 
 
2.2. MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT 
 
2.2.A DISSEMINATION & EXPLOITATION OF RESULTS  
 
2.2.A.1. DISSEMINATION AND EXPLOITATION OF THE PROJECT RESULTS DRAFT  
A2C will encompass exploitation and dissemination through both the Exploitation Plan (EP) Task 8.7, and the 
Communication & Dissemination strategy (CDS), respectively. Within these two plans it will be summarized the 
                                                      
126 Voorberg, W. H., Bekkers, V. J., & Tummers, L. G. (2015). A systematic review of co-creation and co-production: Embarking on the social innovation journey.  Public Management Review, 17(9),  
127https://www.keepeek.com//Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/urban-rural-and-regional-development/the-circular-economy-in-cities-and-regions_10ac6ae4-en#page15  
128 TM Cooney. 2012, “Entrepreneurship Skills for Growth-Orientated Businesses”.  
39 
 
beneficiaries’ strategy and concrete respective actions related to the protection & explo itation and dissemination of 
the project results. These plans will be designed in order to fully achieve the expected impact of the proposed solution 
and it will specifically describe the activities to be undertaken (how and by whom) in order to ensure the exploitation 
beyond the project itself. The CDS will be aligned with the exploitation goals (Task 8.7) and other outreach activities 
including training, policy recommendations (Task 8.6) and standardization (Task 8.8), ensuring key outputs of the 
project are adequately shared with and reached by the targeted audiences 
The exploitation strategy will reflect and will be built-up as a result of sound analysis of the market trends, potential 
users, and financial sustainability. The EP and CDS will be updated d uring the implementation of the project with 
the concrete dissemination and exploitation activities carried out.  
A2C schedules one dedicated Work Package 8: A2C outreach : communication, dissemination, exploitation, 
training and recommendations which includes activities for: Results dissemination and exploitation at local, region 
and European levels, engaging stakeholders and clustering, training and knowledge transfer, innovation and IPRs 
management and business plan development. Particularly, A2C outreach tasks will be coordinated by the Outreach 
Manager (ICONS) while coordinating a Local Outreach Desk (PRIMA), and the related strategic decisions will 
be addressed by the Exploitation Committee (ExC).  
The activities to be implemented as part of the CDS are split into a) general and professional dissemination, spreading 
the project objectives and outputs, as well as fostering networking with public administrations, governments, 
business, clusters, civil society and innovators; b) scientific dissemination, aimed at academia, research entities and 
other R&I projects; c) communication, enhancing awareness and participation of the general public and stakeholders 
at large providing a better understanding about circular economy, food waste and plastic challenges maximising the 
project outreach; d) contributing to the citizenship engagement as pivotal element of project implementation (T7.1) 
and expected impacts achievement.  
We already have established the preliminary bases for IPRs, dissemination and exploitation activities, as following: 
►Agro2Circular results dissemination: Following Table 42a) shows preliminary A2C Dissemination strategy  
 
Table 42b) Already defined actions/tools (and their indicators), shown below and have been scheduled within WP8:  
Content packaging 
eNewsletter>6 ; Scientific publications, posters, oral presentations and articles in industrial magazines  (main topics: biotechnology, chemical, 
materials, engineering, food sciences, public engagement and co -creation, territorial circular economy, A2C content relate d to SSH disciplines) >30; 
tailored infopacks (1 in English + 1 per country, translated)  ; abstracts of A2C public deliverables>8; 1 A2C Best Practices Book; Practical tools and 
guidelines tailored to clusters/industries (CEBMs, financing, policy & regulations)>3 ; Guidelines fostering public engagement, circular economy 
and environmental education (projects, public administration, civil society organisations and associations, academic entities and innovative business)>3; 
Policy & regulation and financing recommendations for decision makers >4 (2 + 2 updated along project); 1 A2C model self-assessment tool. 
Dissemination and public engagement actions  
Networking and 
clustering actions 
Participation in external events  (technical/scientific/transversal fairs, congresses, conferences, joint webinars, roundtables, 
workshops) >60; Mobilization of key European and international stakeholders & associations  (+100); B2B meetings (>200), 
clustering with other circular territorial clusters and EU projects/initiatives (>50). Alliances with civil society organizations  (>30 
TARGET AUDIENCE SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE MAIN CHANNELS & TOOLS  
Private organisations and 
business/enterprises related to A2C: 
Agrifood industry, Industrial key sectorial 
companies (end -users: food, cosmetic and 
nutraceutical and plastics producers), plastic 
recyclers, Agrifood clusters, financing 
intermediaries 
i) To stimulate the public engagement;  
ii) Identification of decision makers and 
sales cycle; iii) Capture attenti on for 
future commercialization; iv) Promoting 
A2C solutions adoption and replication; 
v) Training/Knowledge transfer. 
Tailored info -packs, Networking; clus tering activities; B2B 
meetings; attending sectorial events; A2C industry oriented 
organized events; co -creation workshops/joint webinar/focus 
groups; specific  training/knowledge transfer actions; industrial 
magazines; presentations in events; Stakeholder s platform; 
specific guidelines (CEBMs, financing and regulations);  A2C 
Best Practices Book 
Sectorial groups/initiatives related to 
agrifood, plastics, circular economy, 
recycling, regional development -e.g. CCRI, 
European cluster platform, European circular 
economy stakeholders  Vanguard Initiative, 
SPIRE, European Technology Platforms  
i)  To support the public engagement ii) 
Dissemination multiplier as an umbrella 
organization and high visibility;  iii) 
Foster collaborations;  iv) Networking 
and clustering activities with other EU 
projects/initiatives;  
v)  Training/Knowledge transfer. 
Tailored in fo-packs, Clustering activities, joint webinars; 
attending sectorial and transversal events; A2C organized 
events;  co -creation  workshops/joint webinar/focus groups;  
Stakeholders platform; specific guidelines,  specific guidelines 
(CEBMs, financing and regulations) A2C Best Practices Book 
Scientific community related to A2C : Public 
and private research & academic 
organizations, scientific communities, 
researchers, trainees, and other working 
groups  
i)   To increase their participation within 
the public engagement actions ; ii) 
Promote suggested innovation 
approach; iii) Identify synergies and 
foster collaborations; iv) Scientific 
knowledge transfer 
Tailored info-packs; Scientific papers, posters & presen tations 
in congresses/ conferences/seminars; scientific oriented 
organized events;   co-creation workshops/joint webinar/focus 
groups; direct contact with RTOs & universities and at 
conferences & congresses;  specific  training/transference of 
knowledge actions; Stakeholders platform ; A2C Best Practices 
Book 
Decision makers  (public administration & 
institutions), financing bodies 
standardization organisms, organisms  
related to circular economy, regional 
development, innovation  (EU, National, 
regional, local) 
i) To raise the outcomes of the public 
engagement ii) Incentivise further 
discussions within the EU on the 
direction of A2C solutions; iii) Inclusion 
of the outcomes of the project in new or 
future regulations; iv) Facilitating 
widespread market uptake 
Tailored info -packs; Policy & regulation and financing 
recommendations; specific organized meetings;  co-creation 
workshops/joint webinar/focus groups , networks and clustering 
activities to reach them;  Stakeholders platform ; A2C Best 
Practices Book;  
Citizens and civil society organizations 
i) To support the public engagement, ii) 
Achieve community acceptance of A2C 
delivered solutions; iii) Involve citizens 
in the project participatory community 
based scheme. 
Tailored info -packs, project abstracts; tailored training,  co-
creation workshops/joint webinar/focus groups ; Stakeholders 
platform, organized events, surveys, specific organized events, 
pilot community based -scheme;  abstracts of key Public 
Deliverables; Alliances with civil society organisations (CSOs) 
Table 42 a). A2C dissemination strategy.  
 Back Milestones 
40 
 
(local, regional, EU & 
international level) 
Task 8.5 
CSOs); A2C Organized events >20: A2C final event, tailored workshops for targeted stakeholders, joint webinars, A2C 
technology demonstrative events.  
Knowledge 
transfer/training 
Task 8.6 
1 mentoring programme for regional industries ; Individual assessments to regional industries ;  Organized actions aimed to 
knowledge transfer (practical guidelines for clusters/industries, guidelines fostering public engagement, CE and decision makers 
recommendations and environmental education)>20 
Actions specially 
fostering Public 
engagement (Task 
7.1) at all levels 
Engagement campaigns, Cro ss-fertilization activities, co -creation workshops/focus groups (WP7), 1 community based 
innovation scheme (WP7), 1 local/regional engagement plan agrifoos sector, 1 circular economy support desk for regional 
industries. Tailored lectures/workshops  (>20), youngster’s regional contests  (>8), short documentary  (>1, translated) , 
videogames (>1, translated). 
 
Additionally, a stakeholders platform  will we created and hosted into the project web page, providing vertical 
communication among project partners and stakeholders , and horizontal among engaged stakeholders fostering 
cooperation among them and also facilitating and wideing the impacts of Task  7.7 (A2C model cross-validation 
activities with clusters) and 8.6 (knwoledege transfer, training activites). It will also host different resources and will 
enable perform Outreach actions. 
►Agro2Circular key Exploitable results and preliminary business cases 
The Exploitation Strategy, and its implementation will ensure the high visibility and promotion of the project 
and its results during its execution and an efficient exploitation once finished . Industrial partners will directly 
exploit the products and processes that will be developed in the Agro2Circular project. This exploitation will be 
produced a clearly quantifiable economic, environmental and social impact from the short term. In addition, the 
development of our circular systemic solution will allow indirect exploitation through: 
1. Dragging effect on a local or regional scale in other companies because of the progressive acceptance of the circular 
model.2. Replicability of the circular systemic solution in other European regions or zones. 
Taking this into account, the initial proposal of exploitation strategy has been established in order to consolidate the 
present consortium from the beginning. Exploitation activities include ensuring that all IP-owning partners as well 
as potential and confirmed e xploitation partners will work towards a successful technology and knowledge 
transfer for future speedy market uptake. Each partner in the consortium will have different benefits according to 
the nature of the entity and their results. Agro2Circular potent ial exploitable results (key results) that have be en 
already defined are shown below, in Table 43 Agro2Circular Business cases & Exploitation plan summary.   
During the project, a preliminary business plan will be drafted, including the different business cases of each of the 
identified Agro2Circular potential businesses. At the end of the project, the Final Business Plan ( D8.3) will be 
delivered. Following Table 43 summarizes the preliminary expected business cases outputs of the project linked to 
the potential customers identified and the exploitation strategies planned by the partners for each of the target groups. 
 
 
BUSINESS CASES. Exploitation of: EXPLOITATION ROUTE ESTIMATED BUSINESS REVENUE 
1. RECYCLING PLANT OF MULTILAYER PLASTIC 
1.1-(Product)- Pellets of recycled 
plastics for packaging and agriculture 
applications (PE/EVOH, PE/PA, LDPE 
and PET) (GWC). 
1.1- Direct Exploitation GWC. 
Target clients  for recycled plastics : Plastics 
transformers such as SOLP, EVER or plastic 
formulators. 
Target selling price for recycled plastics: 1,200 €/ton PEr and 
1,300 €/ton PETr (average price). Expected volume: 50,000 
ton/y. Turnover: 60.5 M€/y. Investment: 0.85 M€. New job: 
20. 
1.2-(Technology)- Plastic 
decontamination including water reuse, 
micro-plastics removal and resource 
recovery (WETS & CEW). 
1.2- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients  for 1.2 technology : Plastic 
recyclers such as GWC, Eco Plastics Beograd 
(Support letter). 
Technology selling price: Reference selling price of a plastic 
decontamination installation of 5 0,000 ton/y: 55,000€/unit. 
Expected volume of sales: 10 plants. Turnover: 0.5 M€. New 
job: 5. 
 
1.3- (Technology)- Optical sorting 
technology for multilayer plastic 
materials (IRIS). 
1.3- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 1.3 technology: Multilayer 
plastic recyclers such as GWC or plastic 
recyclers such as Eco Plastics Beograd. 
Technology selling price : Reference selling price for an 
optical sorting line of 3 -5 ton/hour: 60,000 €. Expected 
volume of sales: 10 plants. Turnover: 0.6 M€. New job: 4. 
 
 
1.4- (Technology)- Separation of 
Aluminium from complex multilayer 
plastics (SAPE).