1.4 A) Direct Exploitation SAPE. 
Target clients  for recycled material : Plastics 
recyclers (GWC, Eco plastics Beograd) or 
plastic compounders, such as GWC.
1.4 B) Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 1.4 technology : plastic 
recyclers such as GWC, Eco Plastics Beograd 
(Support letter). 
Target selling price for recycled material: 900 €/ton PEr and 
1,000 €/ton PETr, 1,700 €/ton Al -briquettes, Expected 
volume: 17,000 ton/y (10,000ton/y PEr; 3,400 ton/y Al -
briquettes; 2,600 ton/y PETr). 
Turnover: 17.38 M€. Investment (additional): 0.15M€ 
(industrial plant under construction in SAPE headquarter. 
New job: 40 (2021-2022). 
Technology selling price: 2M€ for Plant of 17,000 ton/y. 
Expected volume of sales : 5 plants.  Turnover: 10M€. New 
job: 15. 
1.5- (Product)- Enzyme cocktail for PET 
/ PE degradation (MELLI). 
1.5+1.6+1.7 A) Direct Exploitation MELLI 
Target clients  for enzyme cocktail:  Cosmetic 
industries such as LOL, chemical industries, 
biotechnology industries such as CETBIO, 
lubricant industries or other industrial 
applications. 
1.6+1.7 B) Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 1.6 +1.7 technology : 
Recycling industries interesting on enzymatic 
process such as CETBIO. 
Target selling price for enzyme cocktail:   at full commercial 
scale 200€/kg. Expected volume of sales: 3,500 kg. 
Turnover: 0.7M€. Investment: 0.2M€. New job: 3. 
Target price for technology licensing. 100,000-150,000€ for 
installation 3,500kg/y. Expected volume of sales: 2 plants. 
Turnover: 0.2-0.3M€. New job: 2.  
Client Investment: 0.4 M€. Clients’ new job: 6. 
1.6- (Technology)- Enzymatic recycling 
process of multilayer PE/PET structures 
(MELLI). 
1.7- (Technology)- Pre-treatments to 
enhance enzymatic attack ( CETEC 
&GWC). 
2. Recycled and recyclable plastics formulations  
Table 43: A2C Business cases & Exploitation Plan summary 
 Back Impact 3 
Table 42b). A2C dissemination actions/tools and respective indicators  
41 
 
2.1- (Product)- Recycled and recyclable 
high barrier compounds for food 
packaging applications (GWC). 
2.1- Direct exploitation GWC 
Target clients for compounds : plastic 
transformers for flexible packaging applications, 
such as EVER. 
Target selling price for high barrier compounds:  2,000 €/ton 
(average price). Expected volume : 5,000 ton/y. Turnover: 
10.0 M€/y. Investment: 0.3 M€. New job: 4. 
2.2- (Product)- Recycled and recyclable 
very high barrier compounds for 
agricultural films (GWC). 
2.2- Direct exploitation GWC 
Target clients for compounds : plastic 
transformers for flexible agriculture 
applications, such as SOLP. 
Target selling price for high barrier compounds:  2,300 €/ton 
(average price). Expected volume: 4,000 ton/y. Turnover: 9.2 
M€/y. Investment: 0.3 M€. New job: 4. 
3. Aluminium from plastic multilayer films  
3.1- (Product)- Blends of Aluminium 
compatibilized from complex multilayers 
(BOKU & CETEC). 
3.1- Direct Exploitation CETEC/GWC. 
Target clients  for Aluminium blends : plastic 
transformers such as SOLP, EVER. 
Target selling price for blends Aluminium compatibilized ; 
3.500 €/ton. Expected volume of sales : 1,000 ton/y. 
Turnover: 3.5 M€. Investment: 0.95 M€. New job: 5. 
3.2- (Technology)- Technology for 
chemical modification of Aluminium 
flakes from complex multilayer (BOKU) 
3.2- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients  for 3.2 technology : plastic 
recyclers such as GWC, Eco Plastics Beograd. 
Target price for technology licensing . 120,000-140,000€ for 
installation 1,000ton/y. Expected volume of sales: 2 plants. 
Turnover: 0.24-0.28M€. New job: 2.  
Client Investment: 1.9M€. Clients new job: 10 
4. Substances from Circular process for FOOD & NUTRACETICS formulations 
4.1- (Product)- Fibre and phenolic 
compounds and carotenoids for food 
applications (CITRO & CTNC). 
4.1- Direct exploitation CITRO 
Target clients for fibre and phenolic compounds: 
Food companies such as MCT, and ALM. 
Target selling price for food substances; 3 €/kg Fibre, 45 €/kg 
phenolic 85 €/kg carotenoid. Expected volume of sales : 
2,100 ton/y (2,000 ton/y fibre; 50 ton/y phenolic; 50 ton/y 
carotenoids). Turnover: 12.5 M€. Investment: 4.5 M€. New 
job: 15. 
4.2- (Technology)- Route 1. Hybrid 
process for obtaining dietary fibre, 
phenolic compound and carotenoids 
(CITRO, CTNC & SSICA). 
4.2- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 4.2 technology: Companies of 
manufacturing natural additives and ingredients 
for food applications. 
Target price for technology licensing . 100,000-150,000€ for 
installation 2,000ton/y. Expected volume of sales: 2 plants. 
Turnover: 0.20-0.3M€. New job: 1.  
Client Investment: 9.0 M€. Clients’ new job: 30. 
4.3- (Product)- Fibre, phenolic 
compounds and carotenoids for food  
and nutraceutical applications (DMC). 
4.3- Direct exploitation DMC 
Target clients for high purity substances : Food 
companies such as MCT, ALM, cosmetic 
companies such as LOL and nutraceutical 
companies. 
Target selling price for food substances ; 3.5 €/kg Fibre, 60 
€/kg phenolic 125 €/kg carotenoid. Expected volume of 
sales: 1,500 ton/y (1,400 ton/y fibre; 50 ton/y phenolic; 50 
ton/y carotenoids). Turnover:   
14.15 M€. Investment: 6.1 M€. New job: 20. 
4.4- (Technology)- Route 2 .Hybrid 
process for obtaining dietary fibre, 
phenolic compound and carotenoids 
(DMC, MKSI, SSICA & CTNC). 
4.4- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 4.4 technology: Companies of 
manufacturing natural additives and ingredients 
for food, cosmetic, and nutraceutical 
applications.  
Target price for technology licensing . 150,000-200,000€ for 
installation 1,500ton/y. Expected volume of sales: 2 plants. 
Turnover: 0.3-0.4M€. New job: 1.  
Client Investment: 12.2 M€. Clients’ new job: 40. 
4.5- (Technology)- Methodology for 
encapsulation of high quality substances 
(DMC & SSICA).  
4.5- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 4.5 technology: Companies of 
manufacturing natural additives and ingredients 
for food, cosmetic, and nutraceutical 
applications. 
Target price for technology licensing . 35,000 -40,000€ for 
installation 1,500ton/y. Expected volume of sales: 2 plants. 
Turnover: 0.07-0.08M€. New job: 1. 
Client Investment: 0.2 M€. Clients’ new job: 4. 
4.6- (Technology)- New Microwave 
system with high efficiency of the energy 
transfer for extraction of substances  
(MKSI & SSICA).  
4.6- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 4.6 technology : Extraction 
companies such as DMC and CITRO.  
Technology selling price : Reference selling price of a new 
MW of 200kg/h for food 70,000 unit. Expected volume of 
sales: 10 units. Turnover: 0.7 M€. New job: 3. 
4.7- (Technology)- Delivery systems for 
phenolic compounds and carotenoids as 
functional food ingredients (SSICA & 
CITRO).  
4.7- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 4.7 technology : Extraction 
companies such as DMC and CITRO.  
Technology selling price: Reference selling price of delivery 
systems of 25 kg/h for food phenolic compounds and 
carotenoids 15,000 unit. Expected volume of sales: 10 units. 
Turnover: 0.15 M€. New job: 1. 
4.8- (Technology)- Delivery systems for 
phenolic compounds and carotenoids as 
functional cosmetic and nutraceutics 
ingredients (SSICA & DMC).  
4.8- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 4.8 technology : Extraction 
companies such as DMC and CITRO.  
Technology selling price: Reference selling price of delivery 
systems of 25 kg/h for cosmetic & nutraceutic phenolic 
compounds and carotenoids 15,000 unit. Expected volume 
of sales: 10 units. Turnover: 0.15 M€. New job: 1. 
5. Substances from Circular process for COSMETIC sector 
5.1- (Technology)- Biotransformation of 
PE and PET enzymatic degradation 
products into building blocks  (UNIMIB & 
CETEC). 
5.1- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 5.1 technology : Cosmetic 
industries such as LOL or biotechnology 
industries such as CETBIO. 
Technology selling price : Reference selling price of 
biotransformation equipment 150 kg, 55,000 -65,000€/unit. 
Expected volume of sales : 10 units.  Turnover: 0.55-65 M€. 
New job: 2. 
5.2- (Product)- Fibre, phenolic 
compounds and carotenoids for 
cosmetics applications (DMC). 
5.2- Direct Exploitation DMC. 
Target clients  for compounds : Cosmetic 
industries such as LOL. 
Target selling price for cosmetic substances; 3.5 €/kg Fibre, 
60 €/kg phenolic 125 €/kg carote noid. Expected volume of 
sales: 1,500 ton/y (1,400 ton/y fibre; 50 ton/y phenolic; 50 
ton/y carotenoids). Turnover:   
14.15 M€. Investment: 6.1 M€. New job: 20. 
5.3- (Product)- Carotenoids from by -
products of PHBV production (UA). 
5.3- Direct Exploitation CETBIO. 
Target clients  for carotenoids : Cosmetic 
industries such as LOL. 
Target selling price for cosmetic carotenoids from PHBV; 100 
€/kg carotenoid. Expected volume of sales : 5,000 kg/y. 
Turnover: 0.5 M€. Investment: 90,000€. New job: 2. 
5.4- (Technology)- Carotenoids from 
by-products of PHBV production (UA). 
5.4- Licensing process to third parties. 
Target clients for 5.4 technology: Biotechnology 
industries such as CETBIO. 
Technology selling price : Reference selling price of 
discontinuous reactor of 100 litres: 90,000€/unit. Expected 
volume of sales: 10 units. Turnover: 0.9 M€. New job: 2. 
6. PHBV production from wastes 
6.1-(Product)- Bioplastic (PHBV) 
production (CETBIO & UA). 
 
6.1- Direct exploitation CETBIO  
Target clients for PHBV : Plastic Compounders 
or plastic formulators, such as GWC, Bio -mi 
(Support letter). 
Target selling price for PHBV polymer: 6,000 €/ton. Expected 
volume of sales: 250 ton. Turnover: 1.5 M€. Investment:  0.75 
M€ (bioreactors and general equipment). New job: 8.  
6.2-(Technology)- Bioplastic PHBV 
production (CETBIO, UA). 
6.2+6.3- Licensing process to third parties  
Target clients 6.2 & 6.3 technology : PHBV 
producers such as CETBIO, Bio -mi (Support 
letter) and other biotechnological industries. 
Technology selling price: Reference selling price of 250 ton/y 
production installation: 0.75 -0.85M€. Expected volume of 
sales: 2 plants. Turnover: 1.5-1.7 M€. New job: 5.  6.3-(Technology)- PHBV extraction and 
purification process (CEW).  
42 
 
7. PHBV COMPOUNDS for packaging and agriculture films applications 
7.1-(Product)-PHBV-based compounds 
for food packaging applications (GWC & 
CETBIO). 
7.1- Direct exploitation GWC 
Target clients for PHBV-based compounds : 
Plastic transformers for flexible packaging 
applications, such as EVER. 
Target selling price  for PHBV compound: 2,100 €/ton. 
Expected volume of sales : 1,000 ton/y. Turnover: 2.1 M€. 
Investment: 0.25 M€ (equipment for increasing industrial 
capacity). New job: 2. 
7.2-(Product)-PHBV-based compounds 
for agricultural films (GWC & CETBIO). 
7.2- Direct exploitation GWC 
Target clients for PHBV -based compounds : 
Plastic transformers for flexible agriculture 
applications, such as SOLP. 
Target selling price  for PHBV compound: 2,100 €/ton. 
Expected volume of sales : 1,000 ton/y. Turnover: 2.1 M€. 
Investment: 0.25M€ (equipment for increasing industrial 
capacity). New job: 2. 
8. DIGITAL TOOL FOR TRACEABILITY AND PREDICTION in circular economy strategies 
8.1-(Product)- Digital traceability tool for 
circular processes  (ECO, EQU, LOL & 
EXUS). 
8.1- Direct exploitation ECO 
Target clients for traceability tool : industrial 
companies such as GWC, MCT, ALM, DMC, 
CITRO, SOLP, EVER & TAHE. 
 
Target selling price for DIS solution; System implementation 
15,000-25,000€. Annual subscription 1,000€ for traceability 
& 1,500€ for traceability +predictive tool. Expected volume of 
sales: 100 units/y. Turnover: 2 M€. Investment: 0.1 M€. New 
job: 10. 8.2-(Product)- Predictive ICT based tool 
for circular processes  (ECO, EQU, LOL 
& EXUS). 
8.2- Direct exploitation ECO 
Target clients for predictive tool : Recovering 
companies such as GWC, CITRO and DMC. 
8.3- (Technology)- Data Integration 
System as traceability tool and predictive 
tool (ECO, EQU, EVRY & EXUS). 
5.4- Licensing process to third parties ECO. 
Target clients for 8.4 technology : Digital 
companies such as Digitouch (support letter). 
Target price for technology licensing:  depending on the 
processes or products included. 
9. R&D SERVICES, PROTOCOLS & MANUALS (INDUSTRY ORIENTED) 
9.1- R&D services. 
9.2- Technical or engineering studies. 
9.3- Characterization studies. 
9.4- Technical assistance for replication. 
A) Direct exploitation  WET & CEW, REG, 
CETEC, CTNC, SSICA, UA, UNIMIB, VTT, 
UVEG, UB, and ICONS (9.1 to 9.4) 
 
 
 
WET & CEW: water efficiency studies for process. 15.000€. 
REG: energy efficiency studies for process. 15,000€. 
CETEC. Composability and biodegradability studies. 6,000€. 
CTNC: By-products valorisation strategies. 7,500€. SSICA: 
Study on delivery systems of natural substances. 12,000€.  
UA. Study on PHBV -based compounds for other industrial 
applications (cosmetics, hygie nic…). 10,000 €. UNIMIB: 
Study on biotechnological routes of waste conversion. 
25,000€.  VTT. Study on LCA, social-economics impacts for 
other circular processes. 20,000€.  UVEG: Servicies for 
policy planning & strategy for territories towdars circular 
economy (20.000€). KVC& ICONS: Services for citizen 
engagement aimed to design territoral circular models 
(25.000€). UB: specialised services aimed at CEBMs 
development in agrifood sector/industries (€30.000) 
10. TRAINING COURSES 
10.1- Training courses for industry 
10.2- Training courses for end users. 
10.3- Master classes for MSc or PhD 
students. 
 
A) Direct exploitation ALL (10.1 to 10.3) ALL. Training courses of LCA, s -LCA & LCC, SSH, 
Decontamination of waste plastic, Biopolymer 
transformation, Recycled plastic transformation, 
Recyclability of agrifood wastes, Biodegradation test, 
standardization activities, Business cases & awareness 
courses.  
150€/pax for presential, 50€/pax for virtual, 250€/pax master 
class. 
 
Considering the figures of the different  business cases of A2C cluster showed in previous table, a turnover of 
€166.8 million  (€150.4 million from direct exploitation and €16.4 million from transfer technology) has been 
calculated. For it will mobilise an industrial investment of €44.6 million  (€20.9 million from direct exploitation 
and €23.7 million from client´s investment). All of it will allow the creation (in 5 year) of 295 new jobs generated 
within and around our A2C cluster (205 new direct jobs and 90 indirect from client´s new jobs). Further, during the 
project implementation, these direct economic & social impacts will be updated (Task 6.4 in WP6). The project 
implementation itself also will generate 26 jobs within the project consortium. 
 
As shown, beyond the direct exploitation our exploitation 
route includes the transfer of the technology developed in 
the A2C project .  For this , our TIER-1 is focused on those 
territorial clusters from countries, which are the main players in 
the agricultural primary production and t he food processing 
sector, and hence , the main producers of the food and plastics 
residues targeted by A2C, as following (Eurostat data):  
EU Primary agricultural sector : About 1.5 million 'farms' in 
the (EU) managed fruit orchards and about 0.8 million 
farms cultivated fresh vegetables Figure 14 a) shows 
the share of main countries: Romania (23.1%), Spain (15.7 %) and Italy (13.3%). Figure 14 b) shows the dedicated area 
to produce F&V in EU (5.6Mha): Spain accounted for the highest proportion (31.0%), followed by Italy (17.7%), Poland 
(10.1% and France (7.7%). 
EU Food processing and manufacturing sector : Processed F&V were worth EUR 51.5 billion (6.5  % of the overall 
value of the EU food industry’s). Key players are: Italy (22.3 %), Spain (15.1 %), Germany (11.8 %), and France (10.2 %). 
A2C TIER-1: ROMANIA, SPAIN, ITALY, POLAND, FRANCE, LITHUANIA, PORTUGAL, GERMANY  
Figure 14. Main EU players on primary agricultural sector: a) main farms b) production area 
a) 
 b) 
Back circularity indicators 
43 
 
A2C already counts with the commitment (See support letters) to be involved in project activities of relevant 
(agrifood and others sectors) clusters from these Tier-1 countries (and others). Following Table 44 shows these 
clusters, the main sectors representing their associates and the cluster size (scalability) as well as the main Bussines 
Case they would be interesring (BC) for them. Companies associated to these clusters will be potential clients of the 
A2C partners exploiting the developd technologies.  
 
Moreover, A2C also count with the support of several actors from relevant sectors to A2C, around Europe, already 
committed to be informed and participate in Outreach actions (See support letter on Section 4). 
2.2.A.2 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, KNOWLEDGE PROTECTION AND REGULATORY ISSUES 
 
2.2.A.2.1 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY RIGHTS  
Effectively exploiting development results rely on a proper protection of IPR to be enabled by the knowledge and 
innovation management of the project. All rules regarding IP management will be detailed in a Consortium 
Agreement that will be signed by all p arties. Agro2Circular results generated under the project could be any 
tangible or intangible output, more particularly data, knowledge or information on any form or nature , 
whether it can be protected or not. In addition, business information or valuable know-how can be protected via 
contractual mechanisms, like non-disclosure agreements or as trade secret. Therefore, if relevant within the project, 
such mechanisms will be implemented as a possible form of protection. The intellectual property issues and 
questions on the ownership of the results in Agro2Circular project will be addressed in detail  within the 
Consortium Agreement and discussed inside the General Assembly. Agro2Circular partners have envisaged a range 
of protection measures.  In addition, the industrial partners will use the industrial secret option to protect the new 
knowledge obtained in the A2C project.  
Partner Envisaged protection  
WETS & CEW Shared patent/Utility model for plastic decontamination including water organic recovery and micro-plastic removal. 
IRIS Patent/Utility model for optical sorting technology for multilayer plastic materials. 
SAPE Industrial secret of improvements in the aluminium separation process.   
MELLI Industrial secret (Enzymatic PET/PE degradation) until Patent will be completed.  
CETEC Patent/Utility model for pre-treatments for PE and PET plastic wastes to enhance enzymatic degradation. 
BOKU Patent /Utility model for chemical modification of Aluminium flakes from complex multilayer plastic structures. 
DMC, MKSI & CTNC Shared Patent/Utility model for hybrid extraction technology including green solvents, MW & enzymatic assisted extraction.   
DMC & SSICA Shared Utility model for encapsulation & stablisation techniques of polyphenols and/or carotenoids.     
CTNC & CITRO Shared Patent/Utility model for hybrid extraction technology including green solvents and Ultrasound assisted extraction.   
SSICA & MKSI Shared Utility model for the new MW assisted extraction configuration. 
UNIMIB Patent /Utility model for biotransformation of PE & PET enzymatic degradation products into building blocks. 
UA Patent/ Utility model for carotenoid production as by-produc of PHBV production. 
CETBIO & UA Shared patent for PHBV manufacturing by Hfx. Mediterranei. 
WETS  Shared Utility model for green extraction & purification process of PHBV. 
ECO Commercial agreement/ Use license for DIS technologies (EXUS, EQU, EVRY). 
CLUSTER Country Related BCs Sectoral Industries SIZE  
AgroBioAlliance (AgroBioCluster) PL 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services; Food Processing & Manufacturing members: 52 
EUROPEAN CLUSTER ALPE ADRIA 
PANNONIA 
RS 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services: Education & Knowledge Creation members: 85 
AGRO KLASTER HOMOLJE ZAGUBICA RS 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services; Food Processing & Manufacturing members: 54 
PARCO AGROALIMENTARE FVG  IT 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services; Food Processing & Manufacturing members: 20 
Vitagora FR 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services; Food Processing & Manufacturing members: 550 
foodRegio DE 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services members: 81 
CTA Agrifood ES 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services members: 17 
FEMAC ES 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services members: 58 
National Food Cluster Lithuania LI 4, 8, 9, 10 Food Processing & Manufacturing: Education & Knowledge Creation members: 21 
Lithuanian food exporters association LitMEA LI 4, 8, 9, 10 Food Processing & Manufacturing: Food knowledge & Market  members: 20 
Associação para o Desenvolvimento da Agro-
Industria 
PT 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services; Food Processing & Manufacturing members: 128 
(AgroTransilvania Cluster) RO 4, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services; Education and Knowledge Creation members: 83 
Polish Cluster of Composite Technologies PL 1, 2 3, 6, 7, 8,9 
10 
Plastics, Textile Manufacturing members: 80 
Packaging Cluster ES 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 
9, 10 
Paper and Packaging; Plastics members: 102 
CAT.AL, High Technology Agrifood Lombardy 
Cluster  
IT 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 Agricultural Inputs and Services; Biopharmaceuticals 
 
members: 56 
Clubster-NHL FR 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 Biopharmaceuticals; Food Processing and Manufacturing members: 300 
Subcarpathian Flavours Cluster PL 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 Business Services; Food Processing and Manufacturing members: 67 
SPRING  - Italian Cluster of Green Chemistry IT 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 Downstream Chemical Products; Education and Knowledge Creation members: 105 
DREAM Cluster FR 1, 8, 9, 10 Environmental Services; Information Technology and Analytical 
Instruments 
members: 101 
AgriFood Lithuania DIH LI 8, 9, 10 Digital AgriFood  Members: 28 
Finance Innovation FR 8, 9, 10 Financial Services; Insurance Services members: 600 
AFIL - ASSOCIAZIONE FABBRICA 
INTELLIGENTE LOMBARDIA 
IT 8, 9, 10 Crossectorial; 4.0 Industry members: 140 
SMART ENERGY BALTIC DIH LT 8, 9, 10 Energy; Digitalisation members: 105 
Polish Construction Cluster PL 9, 10 Construction Products & Services members: 314 
ICONIC Cluster RO 8, 10 Business Services; Information Technology and Analytical Instruments members: 24 
Cluster Construcción Sostenible ES 9, 10 Construction Products & Services members: 20 
Table 44: A2C European terrotorial cluster already engaged In A2C (See support letters) 
Table 45: Partners envisaged protection actions 
Back Scope 16  
Back circularity indicators 
Back Impact 5  
Back COVER page  
44 
 
2.2.A.2.2 MEASURES T O ENSURE THE COMMERC IAL EXPLOITATIO N: In the preparation of this 
proposal, the complementarity of the members of the consortium was carefully analysed to avoid and prevent 
potential conflict of interests. Besides, during the preparation of the project a careful literature survey was performed, 
and no limitations for the freedom to operate of the project were detected. 
Based on the background of the consortium partners and studying their potential contribution to new IP generation, 
an internal IPR management strategy will be included in the Exploitation strategy WP8 (D8.3). 
According to the preliminary strategy and procedures, whenever a result is identified to be exploitable by one or 
more partners and protecting it is possible, reasonable and justified, the necessary steps to protect the associated 
IP shall be taken . At all times (including in the case of a jointly owned result), IP protection measures (such as, 
but not limited to, patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade-secrets, confidentiality, and other forms of protection) shall 
follow the Grant and Consortium Agreements. Any issue that might arise from the IP protection initiative during 
the project will be dealt with by the General Assembly. Each partner shall appoint a representative for IP related 
issues. For each identified IP, the following steps will be taken:  
1. The concerned partner notifies the Outreach Manager about the technical content of any protectable IP.  
2. Preliminary copyright, trademark, or patent analysis are conducted by the concerned partner as well as the 
Outreach Manager in collaboration with the Technical manager in order to check “freedom-to-operate”. 
3. Filing of the related IP protection application is then followed directly by the relevant partner(s), in accordance 
with the recommendations of the other partners in order to maximize the potential for protection of the result. 
2.2.A.2.3 KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND IP STATUS 
Throughout the project, the consortium will continuously contribute to generate the new knowledge that will be 
instrumental for shaping the expected project outcomes, several of which may  qualify for Intellectual Property (IP) 
protection. On the other hand, it is an obligation and also to the interest of the consortium to widely disseminate the 
proposed new methods and tools through qualified scientific publications. In order to comply with the obligation to 
disseminate results as well as open access rules and obligations, whilst safeguarding at the same time the rights 
of the consortium partners to protect their IP thus enhancing the chances of an effective commercial exploitation 
of the p roject results, a strategy aimed at a proper management of the generated knowledge  is defined in the 
project. This strategy, which has to be perfectly coordinated with the dissemination strategy , will be aimed at 
ensuring that communication and dissemination activities are duly carried out, whilst not endangering the rights 
of the consortium partners to protect their IP. Accordingly, the strategy and procedures for IP management will be 
an integral part of the strategy and procedures for knowledge management. 
General principles, onto which this strategy and procedures is built, is summarized as follows: 
 Ownership of results: in full compliance with the Model Grant Agreement as well as the Consortium Agreement, 
results are owned by the beneficiary that generates them. 
 Joint ownership by several beneficiaries : whenever results have been jointly generated by two or more 
beneficiaries and it is not possible to establish the respective contribution of each beneficiary, or separate them for 
the purpose of applying for, obtaining or maintaining their protection, such results shall be jointly owned by the 
beneficiaries that generated them. In such a situation, the joint owners must agree (in writing) on the allocation 
and terms of exercise of their joint ownership (“joint ownership agreement”). 
 Agreement on background : the beneficiaries must identify and agree on the background for the action 
(“agreement on background”). “Background” means any data, know -how or information – in whatever form or 
nature (tangible o r intangible), including any rights such as Intellectual Property Rights – that are held by the 
beneficiaries before their accession to the Grant Agreement, and is needed to implement the action or exploit the 
results. Background will be clearly identified  within the Consortium Agreement  and the “agreement on 
background” will be an integral part of the Consortium Agreement , which will be concluded between the 
partners before the Grant Agreement is signed. 
 Access rights: the beneficiaries must give each other access – on a royalty-free basis – to any of the background 
needed to implement their own tasks  under the action, unless the beneficiary that holds the background has – 
before acceding to the Grant Agreement, informed the other beneficiaries that acc ess to its background is subject 
to legal restrictions or limits, including those imposed by the rights of third parties, or agreed with the other 
beneficiaries that access would not be on a royalty-free basis. The beneficiaries must moreover give each other 
access – under fair and reasonable conditions – to any background needed for exploiting their own results , 
unless the beneficiary that holds the background has – before acceding to the Grant Agreement – informed the other 
beneficiaries that access to its background is subject to legal restrictions or limits, including those imposed by the 
rights of third parties. “Access rights” means rights to use results or background under the terms & conditions laid 
down in the Grant Agreement. “Fair and reasonable c onditions” means appropriate conditions, including possible 
financial terms or royalty-free conditions, taking into account the specific circumstances of the request for access. 
2.2.A.2.4 MEETING STANDARD REQUIREMENTS 
It will be a key requirement that all recoverable products in the project will have, or be able to acquire, regulatory 
approval. In some cases (for example specific substances) this may be relatively straightforward by analogy, whereas 
45 
 
for others this may require additional focus and effort. T he integration of the “Agro2Circularproducts” in the 
market will be investigated taking into account its relation to the current standards such plastic food contact and 
food safety requirements of EFSA and regulations such as REACH for the classification a nd identification of 
hazardous substances. To ensure the standard and regulations compliance throughout A2C implementation we have 
include a specific Task 1.3 named A2C methodologies in WP1. In addition, the task 8.5 Standardization activities 
an analysis of the applicable standardization landscape will be develop for ensuring that all market practises and 
requirements will be met by the project outcomes.  
Regarding PHBV polymers and their potential uses in the plastic market standards of relevance for the end-user 
sectors will be checked and taken into consideration, e.g. some of the key ones are: “ASTM D5588-18 Standard Test 
Method for Determining Aerobic Biodegradation of Plastic Materials in Soil”, WK42833 “New Test Method for 
Determining Aerobic Biodegr adation of Plastics Buried in Sandy Marine Sediment under Controlled Laboratory 
Conditions”. 
2.2.A.2.5 MANAGEMENT  OF RESEARCH DATA AN D OPEN ACCESS TO PEE R-REVIEWED 
SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATIONS 
Confidential data related to industrial processes and products will be kept restricted to the consortium partners 
and not published until it is protected by partners for exploitation by, for example, patents. Only non -sensitive 
publishable data will be eventually shared and made accessible to the research community for verification. Specific 
procedures for publication clearance will be included in the Consortium Agreement. Contractors will have to inform 
the consortium of their intention to publish their results that may be relevant intellectual property. Dissemination of 
intellectual property is granted only with the approval of the consortium, making sure that the period of the GA will 
also address these aspects, in order to guarantee that no conflicts ari se between the partners on IPR. Publishable 
results proposed by partners must be accepted at operational level by  Outreach manager and Project 
Coordinator. The CA will also address these aspects. Agro2Circular will follow a proactive strategy for internal 
data and knowledge management. 
 
A data repository will be managed by CETEC as Project Coordinator to store common data, results, reports and 
deliverables. All partners will be responsible for publishing project results in local and international press and in 
peer-reviewed scientific journals and conferences. CETEC will intervene in case of existing results which have been 
classified as publishable but do not receive the necessary dissemination. In addition, it will be ensured that all project 
related publications can be read online, downloaded and printed . However, efforts will be made to provide as 
many additional rights as possible as the right to copy, distribute, search, link, crawl, and mine increase the utility of 
the accessible publication. In particular, several open access schemes will be proposed to be used by all consortium 
members. 
A dedicated budget for open access scientific publications has been reserved, which will be used for “green” 
or “gold” publications in reputable journals. Alternative repositories such as the Open Access Infrastructur e for 
Research in Europe (OpenAIRE), the Registry of Open Access Repositories (ROAR) and the Directory of Open 
Access Repositories (OpenDOAR) or other institutional repositories such as ZENODO will be also exploited, as they 
are supported by the EC with no cost related to their use. In all cases, as soon as possible and at the latest within six 
months after publication, ICONS as WP8 leader and Outreach Manager will be responsible to collect a machine-
readable electronic copy of the published manuscript in order to be deposited in the project website either as 
a reproduction, if permitted by the publisher, or as a direct link to the publication. In addition, the research data 
and bibliographic metadata needed to validate the results presented in the deposited  scientific publications will be 
stored in the respective area of the repository.  
The information and data collected and the knowledge gathered by A2C will be shared with the CCRI.  
 
2.2.B COMMUNICATION AND AWARENESS ACTIVITIES  
S 
At WP8 the Communication and Dissemination Strategy (CDS), Month 6 (deliverable xx) will be delivered for 
widespreading the results, objectives and to promote awareness and education within the local communities and the 
EU society while fostering public engageme nt. CDS will be continuously monitored & updated along the project. 
ICONS, the A2C Outreach Manager, will lead communication activities. 
This plan will include following communication and awareness related issues : ▪Overall communication & 
awareness strategy and its expected results, providing general information about plastic and food waste, as well as 
other environmental and circular economy issues, to the whole citizenship; ▪ Project visual identity and document 
templates; ▪ Overarching messages, target g roups and tailored key messages; ▪Identification and segmentation of 
communication & awareness targets; ▪Tools and channels needed to implement successful activities; ▪Description of 
monitoring tools. 
A2C communication strategy is based on: -A clear definition of objectives; - Reaching  audiences, and specifically, 
general society, beyond the action’s own community;  -Implemented by expert professionals and adequate tools.   
Back RRI 
46 
 
The three primary types of interaction with communication target g roups are: Printed material , Personal 
interaction and online and mass media communications & tools . Besides, we will participate in the EC 
dissemination tools (newsletters, social media accounts…) 
A2C main communication goals are: 1. To raise European citizens awareness about cooperative & circular projects 
as an effective way to meet socioeconomic & environmental challenges and to increase circular and climate neutral 
practices among them, by properly communicating the project benefi ts. 2. To facilitate the quick acceptance of 
circular business models and their innovative technologies and products/services within European industry/clusters 
and General public.  3. To raise awareness about the need for new/adapted regulations facilitati ng the adoption and 
replication of circular business models and to promote public engagement as key to achieve an inclusive and climate 
neutral Europa in 2030.  
Following are shown main elements of  Agro2Circular Communicatiom strategy . Table 46 shows preliminary 
overaching messages, target audencies and respective messages. Table 47 shows channels and tools to reach them. 
 
 
We target to reach, at least: 200,000 European citizens; 1,500 Industries and 500 Public & Private decision Makers  
 
3. IMPLEMENTATION 
 
3.1. WORK PLAN 
A2C partners have developed a detailed Work Plan, splitting the project in 9 WPs, with a total duration of 36 months. 
Our strategy will include control loops to adjust the developments to the optimal results.  
Technical activities (WP2-WP6) focused firstly in the A2C Methodologies and DIS development (WP1), organic 
agri-food wastes recycling by green extraction routes ( WP2), multilayer pla stic wastes sorting and recycling 
including pilot upscaling (WP3), upcycling of the recycled agrifood materials into new food, nutraceutic & cosmetic 
formulations & upscaling of the optimal extraction routes ( WP4), upcycling of the recycled plastic materia ls into 
high added value substances for cosmetic, PHBV bioplastics and compounds for food packaging & agriculture, and 
pilot scale up of this tecnologies (WP5). Demonstration of the A2C systemic solution adoption, replication and 
scalability (WP6-WP7) includes the integration of the technologies at pilot scale, including a validation of the 
products in a industrial environment (WP6), and the demonstration, through 2 replication cases, by means of public 
engagment and co-creation processes, of a model for A2C adoption and replication based on the multidimensional 
contextual study ( WP7). Horizontal activities  (WP8-WP9). Dissemination, communication, exploitation, IPR, 
standardisation, training, policy recommendations (WP8) and project management & coordination activities (WP9). 
Following Figure 15: A2C PERT diagram, shows how planned Work Packages inter-relate. 
 
 
TARGET AUDIENCE KEY MESSAGES 
General public: 
 European Citizens 
 Young public 
(tailored messages) 
 Circular and climate neutral practices entails socioeconomics and environmental benefits while enabling decoupling 
economic growth from resource use. 
 Recycling plastics and avoiding food waste from the agrifood sector is a global challenge and must be urgently addressed 
through territorial circular systemic solutions based on innovation & cooperation. 
General European 
Industry and European 
clusters  
 Regional scale economies and cooperation between economic sectors/territorial clusters are key for Europe sustainability 
recovery and growth. 
 Plastic and food waste is a valuable resource that should be upcycled and re-enter into the value chain, creating profitable 
businesses for the entire value chain.  
 Introducing digital technologies into the industrial sector boost the industry circular transformation.  
 Transforming linear bussines model into circular ones generates new value chains and leverage economy  
 Public engagement and co-creation as effective tools to deploy circular economy as a whole. 
EU decision makers 
(private and public)  
 Creating an enabling business & regulatory environment is key to facilitate a widespread territorial depolyment of the circular 
economy systemic solutions enablig address global threaths and boosting sustainable growth and economic recovery.  
 A2C project will drive Europe towards the adoption of new replicable and scalable territorial circular eco nomy models and 
will contribute to achieve socio-economics and environmental policy targets. 
 Public engagement and co-creation as effective tools to deploy circular economy as a whole. 
CHANNELS AND TOOLS  TO REACH TARGET AUDIENCE 
ONE-WAY COMMUNICATION TWO-WAY COMMUNICATION 
 Website & Social media (twitter, LinkedIn) –General public 
 Audiovisual productions: short videos & final video (main results)- General public 
 Press and news releases –General public 
 3 Infographics: 1 Environment issues & circular economy, 1 food looses and valorization,1 
recycling multilayer packaging-General public  
 Posters, brochures- Industry  
 Journalistic articles-Industry  
 Policy and financial Review-Decision makers 
 Internet debates-monthly 
updated:General public 
 A2C open days: Industry 
 Presentations in EU initiatives/Info 
days: Decision makers  
Table 47. A2C communication channels and tools 
Table 46: A2C target audiences and key messages to communicate 
Figure 15: A2C PERT diagram  
Back COVER page  
47 
 
 

48 
 
DETAILED WORK DESCRIPTION TABLE 3.1A: WP DESCRIPTION 
Table 3.1A: List of Work Packages     
Nº Work Package Title Lead Nº Lead Person-Month Start Month End Month 
1 A2C Specifications, Residues Management and Data Integration System 33 ECO 274.5 1 36 
2 A2C technologies for the recycling of the organic agrifood wastes 13 CTNC 135.0 2 16 
3 A2C technologies for the sorting and recycling of multilayer plastics residues 2 GWC 277.5 1 22 
4 Upcycling of recycled agrifood materials and upscaling. 17 DMC 139.5 13 24 
5 A2C technologies for the upcycling of the recycled plastics materials 8 UNIMIB 186.0 13 24 
6 Demonstration of the A2C technological solution 2 GWC 701.5 21 36 
7 A2C systemic solution replication and scalability 21 KVC 265.0 1 36 
8 A2C outreach: Communication, dissemination, exploitation, training & policy recommendations 30 ICONS 241.0 1 36 
9 Project management and coordination activities 1 CETEC 92.0 1 36 
 2,304.00  
Table 3.1b: Work Packages description    
WP n. 1 Lead beneficiary ECO 
WP tittle A2C Specifications, Residues Management and Data Integration System  
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months 15.5 10.5 1.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 7.5 30.5 4.0 13.5 2.0 3.0 4.5 1.0 2.0 0.5 1.0 
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months 0.5        0.5    44.0 40.0 44.0 42.0 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 
Start month  1 End month 36 
 
 
Objectives: (i) to define the specifications of the new products along the value chain (ii) to establish strategies for 
compliance assessment with standards and prepare the recycled materials food contact approval (iii) to define 
recommendations on water and energy for the new technologies and processes (iv) to perform a management plan 
for the different residues (v) to characterise the residues (vi) to develop the A2C Data Integration System-DIS. 
 
1.1. A2C requirements (M1 to M 3). Leader: CETEC. Others:  GWC, IRIS, CETBIO, UNIMIB, UA, CTNC, 
MCT, ALM, PROEX, DMC, CITRO, ECO, EQU, EXUS, EVRY, LOL 
Definition of the technical requirements to achieve for the final products will be define. Inputs for partners will be 
collected by CETEC in a Kick off Meeting (Mo nth 1). It will be defined: New food formulations characteristics 
(MCT, CITRO, ALM, and CTNC), new nutraceutics formulations (DMC), new cosmetic formulations  
characteristics (LOL, UNIMIB), new plastic and bioplastics compounds specifications and natural carotenoids 
(GWC, CETEC, CETBIO, and UA ), new agricultural films and food packaging characteristics  (SOLP, EVE, 
PROEX), new Data Integration System characteristics (ECO, EQU, EXUS, and EVRY). 
1.2. A2C methodologies (M1 to M36). Leader: CETEC. Others: GWC, CNTC, MCT, DMC, CITRO. 
1.2.1. Plastics food contact assessment & compliance to agriculture standards. CETEC, GWC. A methodology 
for the measurements of the contaminants  including origin or non -intentionally added substances -NIAS of the 
recycling processes) will be established taking into account the standards on plastics food contact testing evaluated 
by UNE in WP8 . CETEC will use different testing technologies for the detection of these potential contaminants. 
This methodology will be used in task 3.5  to assess the efficiency of the decontamination process.  Moreover, 
migration tests of the recycled materials development will be developed.  Finally, a pre -dossier following the 
guidelines on submission for safety evaluation by EFSA will be elaborated by GWC. 1.2.2. New food, nutraceutics 
and cosmetic formulations assessment and compliance to food/cosmetic standards.  CTNC, DMC, CITRO, 
MCT. Methodology for new formulations with extracts from agrifood wastes will be established and evaluated by 
UNE in WP8, determining the  potential contaminants (heavy metals, pesticides, chlorates and toxins ) and 
establishing acceptance or rejection criteria according to the EU regulations: EC1881/2006 -maximum levels for 
contaminants in foodstuff , EC-1333/2008 & EU-2016/662 maximum residue levels of pesticides, EC-1223/2009 & 
EU-2018/978- restriction of substances for cosmetic, EC-1924/2006- nutrition and health claims made on foods. A 
pre-dossier following the guidelines on submission for safety evaluation by EFSA will be elaborated by CTNC. 
1.3. A2C water and energy efficiency assurance (M1 to M24). Leader: REG. Others: WETS, CEW. 
In Month 3 a set of recommendations on energy efficiency (REG) and sustainable water & wastewater management 
(WETS & CEW) for the A2C technologies and processes will be defined. These recommendations will include the 
use of renewable energy technologies and energy key parameters optimisation to reach the maximum energy savings. 
In relation with the sustainable water management, preliminary water demand, water quality criteria and wastewater 
characteristics from A2C technologies will be collected by WETS and CEW. A strategy will be developed to create 
a near zero discharge water management with high rates of water reuse and resource recovery. The energy & water 
study will be carried out at three levels: i) technical, ii) economic, and iii) legislative.  Later, month 3 to 24,  an 
analysis of the energy requirements of technologies (time of use, life cycle and load) will be carried out by REG. 
1.4. A2C residues management and preliminary characterisation (M1 to M36). Leader: GWC. Others: CETEC, 
IRIS, CTNC, MCT, ALM, PROEX, CITRO, ECO. 
49 
 
1.4.1. Residues Management Plan.  GWC, CTNC, MCT, ALM, PROEX, CITRO, ECO. GWC and PROEX will 
define an action plan to collect the different residues from MCT, ALM, CITRO (food packaging and organic wastes), 
and PROEX (vegetables wastes and agricultural films), including collection, transportation, storage and logistic. A 
specific protocol for the hygienic conditioning of organic materials be stablished. ECO will collect all data for the 
DIS tool. 1.4.2. Characterisation of plastic multilayers flows . CETEC. The composition of all multilayer films 
will be analysed by composition by CETEC (FTIR, DSC, TGA), determining the materials of the different layers, 
inorganic content and possible contaminants. 1.4.3. Characterisation of organic residues. CTNC. Physicochemical 
properties (pH, moisture, ash, protein, fat, fibber and total sugars), microbiological studies, contaminants presence, 
and bioactive compounds (polyphenols, flavonoids, carotenoids, sugars and fibre) will be analysed. 
1.5. A2C Data Integration System (DIS) (M1 to M20). Leader: ECO. Others: EQU, EXUS, EVRY. 
ECO will configure the cloud servers and services, the Web environment as a communication tool for entering data, 
security policies for public and private users, and the communications between the technologies and the databases. 
From the information collected in tasks 1.1 to 1.4, ECO will design the structure of the database and will prepare an 
initial template for the collection of Web data. After this, sub-tasks 1.5.1 to 1.5.3 will be implemented in parallel.   
1.5.1. Identification of materials and processes by QR and Hidden Code.  EQU, ECO. A template design with 
the characteristics of the material and processes to be identified, linked to the traceability data will be prepared . 
These data will consider qualities of the materials, their work environment, support for digital printing and other 
physical materials (paper, cardboard, fabric or plastic). The validation and authentication processes will be defined 
in the database of the QR an d Hidden C ode with the g eo-positioning informat ion and metadata necessary for 
traceability, standard maps with and without a link to big data. 1.5.2. Big Data statistics, indicators, strategic 
decision aid tool. EXUS, ECO. From the data collected, Big Data will provide information in real time with statistics 
of times, quantities and basic economic and standards -based values. In each part of the traceability, it will give 
associated predictive information useful for improving the process and the related com pany. "DIS" as a predictive 
tool will analyse and calculate the available alternatives for the valuation of raw materials in the industry and will 
select the most appropriate options taking into account social, economic and environmental aspects. 1.5.3. 
Development of blockchain-based security. EVRY, ECO. A public blockchain linked to "DIS" will be designed 
by EVRY and ECO. This public blockchain will generate hashes of traceability events. A highly scalable publicly 
auditable technology will be use (e.g., IOTA) as the primary place to anchor the data but other blockchains will be 
supported to ensure redundancy, EVRY will build a secure bridge from a cloud API to the target blockchains and 
will based on emerging chain standards such as EPCIS 2.0 .  1.5.4. DIS integration and validation. ECO, EQU, 
EXUS, EVR, the integration of the different systems will be implemented and validated by a finally pilot test. 
 
Deliverables: D1.1 A2C  requirements (Report-CO; CETEC, M3).   D1.2 A2C Residues Management Plan  
(Report-CO; GWC, M3, M12, M24, M36). D1.3 EFSA plastics pre-dossier & compliance with agricultural 
standards (Report-CO; GWC,  M36). D1.4 EFSA agri food pre -dossier & compliance with food/cosmetic 
standards (Report-CO; GWC, M36) D1.5 Energy and Water Recommendations (Report-CO; REG, M3). D1.6 
Energy management Plan (Report-CO; REG, M12, M24). D1.7 A2C Data Integration System BETA Version 
(Software-CO; M12, M20). D1.8 A2C Data Integration System (Report-CO; ECO, M12, M20). 
 
WP n. 2 Lead beneficiary CTNC 
WP tittle A2C technologies for the recycling of the organic agrifood wastes  
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months             59.0 9.0 8.0  25.0 13.0 2.0 14.0 
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months                   5   
Start month  2 End month 14 
 
Objectives: WP2 is aimed at implementing and optimising the technologies for the extraction and recycling of 
agrifood wastes, including the following specific objectives: i) Establishing the conditioning of agrifood waste ii) 
Developing the optimal green hybrid extraction routes iii) Purifying and stabilising extracts for their application in 
new formulations iv) Assessing the quality of extracts and their antioxidant and antimicrobial capacity. 
 
2.1. Agrifood waste classification and conditioning (M2 to M16). Leader: CTNC. Others: MCT, ALM, CITRO, 
PROEX, SSICA 
 
CTNC will separate the different waste at source for subsequent treatment depending on the type of waste and the 
compound of interest to be extracted. Specific conditioning treatments (drying, crushing, grinding) will be carried 
out to increase the surface area under attack in the future extractions, shortening treatment times. Moreover, previous 
processes of filtration with membrane to favour the concentration and extraction will be evaluated.  
2.2. Extraction of high value-added substances at laboratory scale (M2 to M16). Leader: CTNC. Others: DMC, 
CITRO, SSICA, MKS 
50 
 
2.2.1. Extraction processes . CTNC, SSICA, DMC, CITRO, MKS.  The organic wastes from task 2.1. , will be 
submitted to green hybrid extraction routes for obtaining the target bioactive extracts: 1. Green solvents + 
ultrasounds assisted extraction (UAE) and 2. Green solvents + enzymatic hydroly sis assisted extraction (EAE)  + 
microwaves assisted extraction (MAE).  
The first phase of routes 1 & 2 will be a green solvents extraction. CTNC and SSICA will compare and evaluate 
the potential and effectiveness of alternative food grade solvents (aqueous, ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents). 
We will select the ideal solvent for each route based on its effectiveness (solvent power, selectivity). 
In route 1, CTNC, CITRO, SSICA will develop the ultrasounds assisted extraction (UAE, 10-20 MHz) by using 
water-ethanol mixtures as solvent. It will be critical to study the kinetics to decrease processing residence time, and 
to reduce energy consumption. 
In route 2 , CTNC, DMC and SSICA will develop the enzyme assisted extraction  using common food -grade 
enzymes (cellulases, pectinases, and hemicellulases) to disrupt the structural integrity of the plant cell wall, obtaining 
fibres with high solubility (that will be separated by ultrafiltration).  MKS, in collaboration with DMC, SSICA and 
CTNC will study the microwave assisted extraction applied after the EAE to obtain the phenolic substances. They 
will apply mixtures of nonpolar solvent and water, including the humidity of biological matrices themselves. 
2.2.2. By products recovery. Leader: CTNC.  Recovery of the green solvents will be studied by diafiltration and/or 
ultrafiltration and nanofiltration. Moreover, the organic fractions remaining from the extraction processes will be 
send to CETBIO to be used as nutrient source in the PBHV production (task 5.1). 
2.3. Purification and stabilisation of extracts (M8 to M16). Leader: SSICA. Others: CTNC, DMC, CITRO 
2.3.1. Purification and conservation.  SSICA, CTNC, DMC, CITRO. -The fibres will be separated by membrane 
filtration to achieve 99% of fibres retention with high purity (70 -80%)-The phenolic compounds & carotenoids 
will be separated and purified by a two-step process i) membranes to retain potential contaminants and ii) adsorption, 
in a carbons/zeolites co lumn. The adsorbed phenolics & carotenoids will be eluted by ethanol -water mixture 
allowing extracts that are concentrated and enriched in antioxidants to be obtained.  2.3.2. Stabilisation and 
conservation. SSICA, CTNC, DMC, CITRO.  The fibres will be stabi lised and conserved by conventional 
technologies of atomisation, lyophilisation, dehydration, vacuum concentration according to their characteristics.      
-Delivery systems for phenolics & carotenoids as functional food ingredients (emulsions, multilayer emulsions, 
solid-lipid) will be specifically designed according to the ingredients food formulations where they are going to be 
incorporated. -Delivery systems for phenolics & carotenoids as functional cosmetics & nutraceutics ingredients  
will be encapsulated using natural polymers (sodium alginate with chitosan). SSICA will use a double-fluid atomizer 
to produce microcapsules of uniform composition by ionic gelation.   
2.4. Evaluation of the extracts (M8 to M16). Leader: CITRO. Others: CTNC, SSICA, DMC, ALM, MCT, LOL 
The following studies will be carried out to the purified extracts: (i) richness and composition (ii) physicochemical 
characteristics (iii) microbiological quality, stability tests (iv) potential organic and inorganic pollutants  (v) 
antioxidant and antimicrobial capacity as functional ingredients, by means of electrical impedance. 
 
Deliverable: D2.1 Agrifood waste conditioning (Report-CO; CTNC, M10, M16); D2.2 Extraction of substances 
from agrifood wastes (Report-CO; CTNC, M10;  M16). Extraction routes, including by -products recovery. D2.3 
Purification & stabilisation of the extracts (Report-CO; SSICA, M16), methodologies for the purification and 
conservation of the extracts including encapsulation methodology for nutraceuticals and cosmetics. D2.4 Evaluation 
of the extracts (Report-CO; DMC, M16), technical characterisation of the extracts. 
 
WP n. 3 Lead beneficiary GWC 
WP tittle A2C technologies for the sorting and recycling of multilayer plastics residues  
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months 35.5 34.0 48.0 34.0 17.0 69.0    22.0  13.0         
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months
5.0     
Start month  2 End month 22 
 
Objectives: WP3 is aimed to implement the technologies for the sorting and recycling of the multilayers, including 
these specific objectives: i) To establish plastic waste pre-treatments, including a preliminary decontamination. ii) 
To develop an optimal sorting. iii) To separate the aluminium from the multilayer materials.  iv)To customise 
enzymes and develop the models for the depolymerisation of PE/PET multilayers to obtain TPA, EG and alkanes. 
v) To develop PE/PET pre -treatments to enhance the enzymatic attack. vi) To implement a decontamination 
technology for the plastics fro m mechanical recycling.  vii) To chemically modify the Aluminium   to achieve an 
optimal dispersion in a polyethylene matrix viii) To achieve the optimal processability of the recycled plastic. 
 
3.1. Plastic waste pre-treatments and preliminary decontamination (M2 to M9). Leader: GWC. Others: WETS, 
CEW. 
51 
 
3.1.1. Pre-treatments and preliminary decontamination. GWC. The multilayers will be washed to eliminate all 
potential contaminants (organic materials from agri-food industry, ground and surface chemicals from agriculture), 
centrifugated and grinded at GWC facilities to the required size (20-30 mm) for the following recycling treatments. 
3.1.2. Water recirculation, microplastics and organic by-products recovery. WETS, GWC, CEW.  Wastewater 
will be treated in the near zero liquid discharge water management facility focussed on water recovery (reverse 
osmose, ultrafiltration), micro-plastics removal and resource recovery. Micro/nano -plastics will be identified by a 
novel fluorescent detection method of nano sized particles at low concentrations and separated by nanofiltration. 
Recovery of the organic fraction of the wastewater will be made by filtration. The organic fraction will be valorised 
by PHBV production in task 5.1.2. Firstly, WETS & CEW will develop a system a lab scale and based on the results 
they will develop the design at pilot level that will be implemented at GWC facilities (capacity of 1000L/day). 
3.2. Optical sorting of the multilayer materials (M2 to M22). Leader: IRIS. Others: GWC. 
3.2.1. Lab scale studies . IRIS. A preliminary characterization to evaluate the best performing technology and 
configuration to discriminate the targeted materials  will be developed using a  set of mono - and multi -material 
layered reference samples characterized in task1.4. Offline testing of HSI solutions will be performed to classify the 
different plastic typologies including black and dark materials. For materials including metallised laye rs 
(aluminium), LIBS will be considered. Offline prototype devices currently available at IRIS facilities will be adapted 
to the specific needs of the materials monitored and the industrial application. Initial testing on waste samples will 
be performed, d eveloping chemometric models to evaluate their accuracy for each of the samples. The models 
obtained by applying chemometric models (PLS) to spectroscopic data will provide quality measurements. 
Additionally, the symbiotic deployment of ML algorithms will refine and support the data analytics. 3.2.2. Design 
of the monitoring equipment for multilayers identification. IRIS. The prototype monitoring systems to properly 
identify multi-layer materials will be developed. The monitoring prototypes will encompass optimized state-of-the-
art HSI/LIBS technology with an innovative modelling strategy based on the combination of chemometrics and 
machine learning algorithms. Finally, Factory Acceptance Tests (FAT) will be performed to guarantee that all the 
components are running properly and the monitoring systems can perform in an industrial environment. 3.1.3. Pilot 
scale-up. IRIS, GWC. The multilayers sorting will be pilot scale to evaluate their performance in an industrial 
environment/coupled with the multilayer mate rials treatments. Pre -selected batches of materials with different 
composition will be monitored by the system, characterising the batch in terms of composition, for flow rates of 
25kg/h. Finally, the pilot will be shipped to GWC (task 6.1). 
3.3. Physical recycling of complex multilayers containing aluminium (M3 to M22). Leader: SAPE. Others: 
CETEC, GWC 
 
3.3.1. Separation of aluminium from complex multilayer 
structures at lab scale.  SAPE, CETEC. The pre-treated and 
sorted multilayers containing Al will be  test at SAPE lab 
facilities to study the efficiency of the delamination fluids into 
the multilayer structures. The capacity of the fluids to diffuse 
to the material interface to reduce the tension between the 
polymer and the aluminium layer will be determ ined by 
studying the interfacial bonding. Moreover, studies of 
interaction of the fluids with the polymer layers will be carried out to ensure the polymer properties are unchanged 
(purity >99%). After delamination, standard technologies for sorting (float sink operation) will be implemented to 
obtain the separated flows: LDPE/PET, LLDPE/PET, LDPE, PET and Al  that will be characterised by CETEC. 
3.3.2. Pilot scale up . SAPE, GWC. SAPE will design and study the required adaptations on its pilot plant (20 kg 
batches) for the specific project materials. The adapted prototype will encompass the core process (delamination) 
and the required post-treatment (conventional operations for sorting eg. sink flotation and drying that will be design 
in collaboration with GWC and implemented at GWC facilities). 3.3.3. Recovery of by-products and valorisation. 
SAPE.  The fluid solutions will be reuse in other delamination cycles. Moreover, a specific study for the recovery 
of other chemicals (e.g. coming from the adhesives) from washing waters will be implemented. 
3.4. Enzymatic recycling of multilayer structures based on PE/PET  (M3 to M22). Leader: MELLI. Others: 
CETEC, GWC  
3.4.1. Pre-treatments to enhance enzymatic attack . CETEC, GWC. CETEC, in collaboration with GWC, will  
study the optimal pre-treatment route for PET/PE wastes to enhance the enzymatic attack. Firstly, a study based on 
extrusion followed by a quick cooling and micronisation will be develop by GWC in order to decrease plastics 
crystallinity. A study to increase PE polarity by modification of the polymer with by-functional chain extensors will 
be implemented. Moreover, CETEC will develop a study to decrease the molecular weight (≤500 g/mol) by 
combining thermo and UV aging in wet environment.  A comparative analysis of the samples before and after the 
pre-treatments will be carried out studying the effects on crystallinity degree (DSC), polarity (FTIR) and molecular 
weight (GPC). Finally, CETEC will upgrade the optimal PE/PET pre-treatments to pilot scale up to demonstrate the 
technologies in relevant environment and to obtain representative quantities (50 -80kg) of the waste pre -treated 

52 
 
materials for the following processes. 3.4.2. PE/PET enzymatic degradation . MELLI.  3.4.2.1. Engineering 
PET/PE degrading enzyme. MELLI will develop novel and improved variants of their plastic degrading enzyme 
They will use their platform technology for synbio -based directed evolution alongside high-throughput screening 
methods to engineer variants with optimized enzyme kinetic s, thermal stability, specificity, pH dependence and 
degradation products.  This will be performed by MELLI’s enhanced Design -Build-Test-Learn cycle using the 
‘Genie’ technologies that MELLI have already developed129. 3.4.2.2. Lab scale characterisation of the engineered 
enzymes. The most promising engineered enzymes will be tested on PET/PE models as well as PE/PET waste 
streams pre-treated in task 3.4.1. by spectrometry and chromatography. Preliminary scale-up will be performed to 
optimize enzymatic degradation in shake flasks and a 500 mL scale-down bioreactor. Product yield will be optimised 
by varying key process conditions. Moreover, the degradation rates and degradation products (likely including TPA, 
EG, alkenes and various by-products) will be determined quantitatively. Data on degradation product composition 
will be used to inform the design of a separation system for the production of valuable products in 3.4.3.3. Scale-up 
of PE/PE T degrading enzyme manufacture and enzymatic degradation of PE/PET . At a loading of 3g 
enzyme/kg polymer, a 30kDa enzyme degrading polymer bonds at a rate of 1 per second will degrade the polymer 
in ca 10h. This allows us to calculate that for 50-500 L reactors we shall need to produce enzyme at the multi-gram 
scale. This will be performed at MELLI and the enzymes tested there. Such testing will include testing formulations 
for partial purification, and drying the enzymes for transportation to Spain where M ELLI will test them in a pilot 
process at CETEC’s facility. Scale up of customised enzyme manufacture will include a fermentation process for 
enzyme production, downstream partial enzyme purification and subsequent freeze drying for storage and shipping 
to Spain, where the pilot demonstration will be run.  MELLI will scale up enzyme manufacture to 30 L to ensure 
sufficient enzyme is manufactured . Scale up of  PET/PE enzymatic biodegradation  in a 50 L reactor with 
associated downstream recovery (distillation) of valuable products based on lab trials (task 3.4.2.2). MELLI will 
optimize production by modulating process parameters. The pilot process will be built on a portable skid that will 
be shipped to Spain for the operation phase of the pilot demonstration at CETEC facilities (WP6). 
3.4.3. By-products recovery and valorisation. WETS, MELLI. Experimental studies for the recycling of the by-
products generated will be implemented:  i) Water from bioprocesses could be recirculated to be used in the same 
processes; Wastewater will be treated in the circular water management facility, with special attention to water 
recovery and removal of microplastics. ii)  Enzymes could be recovered, by for instance ultrafiltration or enzyme 
immobilization, iii) potential industrial applications of degradation by-products. 
3.5. Mechanical recycling of simple multilayer structures and products from physical recycling (M7 to M22). 
Leader: CETEC. Others: GWC, BOKU  
3.5.1. Plastics decontamination . GWC. The plastics will be treated in an Erema 130 vacuum reactor aiming to 
eliminate up to 99% of contaminants. Measurements of the contaminants (by methodology in task 1.1.2 by CETEC) 
before and after the treatment will ensure the achievement of this efficacy. The process will be implemented at pilot 
scale at GWC (500 kg). 3.5.2. Aluminium recycling. BOKU, CETEC. The aluminium coming from the physical 
separation (task 3.3) will be chemically modified by BOKU to achieve an optimal compatibility and dispersion in a 
polyethylene matrix. Two strateg ies will be investigated: i) direct binding of an organic -ligand and further 
modification with a polyethylene compatible shell  ii) a two step procedure were the particles are modified with 
aluminiumoxide/siliciumoxide in a first step, followed by well-established polymer-shell synthesis protocol. 
Finally, BOKU, in collaboration with CETEC,  will develop some blends by extrusion of the modified aluminium 
with LDPE/EVOH /LDPE and LDPE/PA /LDPE matrix. Serial block -face scanning electron microscopy for 
investigation of real 3D distribution, orientation and concentration of filler materials  will be carried out by BOKU 
to determine the compatibility and dispersion.  Based on lab trials, BOKU will scale up the process (1kg) that will 
be implemented at CETEC facilities in Task 6.1. 3.5.3. Additivation and development of processable recycled 
plastic compounds. CETEC. GWC, SOLP. This task is aimed to achieve the optimal processability of the different 
recycled plastic flows obtained: LDPE/EVOH/LDPE, LDPE/EVOH, L DPE/PA/LDPE, LDPE/PA, LDPE, PET.  
Formulation with the optimal additives (included in EFSA list) will be done. 
 
Deliverables: D3.1 Plastic waste pre-treatments (Report-CO; GWC, M9). D3.2 Organic by-products recovery. 
Water treatment and recovery of the org anic fraction (Report-CO; WETS, M9). D3.3 Optical sorting technology 
(Report-CO; IRIS, M 10, M22 ). D3.4 Multilayers physical recycling  (Report-CO; SAPE, M1 2, M22 ). D3.5 
Multilayers enzymatic recycling (Report-CO; MELLI, M18, M22). D3.6 Plastics decontamination (Report-CO; 
GWC, M14 , M22).  D3.7 Aluminium modified (Report-CO; BOKU, M1 8, M22).  D3.8 Plastics processable 
compounds (Report-CO; CETEC, M14).   
 
WP n. 4 Lead beneficiary DMC 
WP tittle Upcycling of recycled agrifood materials and upscaling 
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
                                                      
129 Khemchandani, Y., et al. DeepGraphMolGen, a multiobjective, computational strategy for generating molecules with desirable pr operties: a graph convolution and reinforcement learning approach. J 
Cheminform 12, 53, 2020; Samanta, S. et al. VAE-Sim: a novel molecular similarity measure based on a variational autoencoder. Molecules 25, 3446, 2020; Rowe, W. et al. Analysis of a compl ete DNA-
protein affinity landscape. J R Soc Interface 7, 397-408, 2010. 
130 https://www.erema.com/en/vacurema_bottle_to_bottle/ 
53 
 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months             25.0 17.0 18.0  32.5 22.0 9.0 16.0 
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months                      
Start month  13 End month 24 
 
 
Objectives: To demonstrate the application of the extracts in new formulations at small scale, and to develop at pilot 
scale the extraction routes and related demonstration of the extraction and purification of the target compounds. 
 
4.1. Formulations of the extracts at  small scale (M13 to M18). Leader: ALM. Others: CTNC, SSICA, DMC, 
CITRO, MCT, LOL. 
New formulations will be developed at small scale to demonstrate the applicability of the extracts obtained in WP2, 
taking into account the market requirements defined by the end users in WP1. If is necessary reformulations will be 
made to achieve the expecte d technical results. 4.1.1. Food and nutraceutical formulations and validation at 
small scale. DMC, CTNC, SSICA, CITRO, MCT, ALM. A specific work to obtain different food products enriches 
with the extracts (jams, compotes, juices, vegetable drinks, and ve getable creams) and nutraceutical formulations 
(antioxidants) based on the extracts will be developed. A minimum of six different new products will be developed 
determining the doses of bioactive substances to ensure its functionality without compromising nutritional balance 
and sensory quality. The formulations will be validated and compared to conventional ones to ensure that achieve 
the technical requirements. 4.1.2. Cosmetic formulations and validation at small scale . SSICA, CTNC, LOL 
Different cosmetic  formulations (antioxidants, antimicrobial a nd antiaging) will be developed and tested.  The 
formulations will be validated and compared to conventional ones to ensure that achieve the technical requirements.  
4.2. Pilot scale up of the optimal extraction routes (M16 to M24). Leader: DMC. Others: CTNC, MSK, SSICA, 
CITRO. 
4.2.1. Pilot scale up.  DMC, CTNC, MSK, SSICA, CITRO .  Based task 4.1 results,  lab trials in WP2, and the 
environmental and economic analysis, the conditioning, extraction, purification and c onservation routes will be 
upgraded to pilot scale, optimising the key parameters. -CTNC, and DMC have pilot and industrial conditioning 
processes (drying, crushing, grinding, and filtration) that will be adapted to the project requirements. -CTNC has a 
pilot plant for green extraction and ultrasound -assisted extraction. Later, in collaboration with CITRO they will 
develop the necessary adaptations to extract dietary fibres, phenolic compounds & carotenoids (100kg/h).  CTNC 
have the capacity for purification (membranes, adsorption columns) and conservation (atomisation, lyophilisation, 
dehydration, vacuum concentration), and will adapt them in collaboration with CITRO to the project requirements 
(15 kg of capacity). -DMC have the capacity to work with green extraction and enzymatic  hydrolysis assisted 
extraction. Later, they will adapt them to the extraction protocol design for the high solubility fibres extraction. 
Moreover, a pilot microwave -assisted extraction plant will be set up in DMC, with the assistan ce of MSK and 
SSICA, to obtain phenolic substances & carotenoids. The hybrid pilot developed will achieve a capacity of 50 kg/h. 
DMC have a pilot plant for purification (including membranes and adsorption technologies) and conservation 
(including lyophilis ation, dehydration, vacuum, atomisation), the required adaptions will be implemented to 
accomplish the project requirements (25 kg).  -SSICA will set up a pilot for the delivery systems of phenolic & 
carotenoids substances at CTNC facilities, including emul sions-based system and encapsulation (1kg). 4.2.2. 
Validation of the extracts obtained at pilot scale-up. CTNC. The extracts will be evaluated for its applications in 
the elaboration of new food, cosmetics and nutraceuticals products, according to the study of the parameters defined 
in task 2.4 and after their purification and stabilisation according to activities explained in task 2.3. 
 
Deliverables: D4.1 New formulations based on the extracts (Report-CO; CTNC, M16). Food, nutraceutical and 
cosmetic formulations, based on end users’ requirements, and validation.  D4.2 Pilot scale up of route 1 (Report-
CO; CITRO, M24), including equipment adaptations. D4.3 Pilot scale up of the route 2 (Report-CO; DMC, M24), 
including equipment adaptations. D4.4 Validation of the extraction pilot scale up (Report-CO; CTNC, M24).   
 
 
WP n. 5 Lead beneficiary UNIMIB 
WP tittle A2C technologies for the upcycling of the recycled plastics materials 
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months 32.0 27.0   12.5  25.0 30.0 20 25.0  12.0  0.5 0.5 1.0
0.5   
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months                      
Start month  13 End month 24 
 
Objectives: To obtain high added value products from the recycled plastic materials. Specific objectives are: i) to 
upcycle the enzymatic PE and PET degradation products (TPA, EG and alkanes) into high added value building 
blocks for the cosmetic industry by biotechnological routes ii) to use the by -products of these biotransformations 
together with organic waste fractions from the agrifood processing industry as nutrients in the bioprocess to obtain 
54 
 
PHBV bioplastic and carotenoids iii) to develop an optimal green route for PHBV extraction & purification iv) to 
develop recycled and recyclable high barrier compounds for food packaging and agriculture films as alternative to 
current multilayer films v) to develop PHBV biodegradable compounds achieving the technical properties required 
to develop the target food  packaging and agricultural films vii) To develop target food packaging and agricultural 
films at small scale to prove the viability of the developments; v) To demonstrate its recyclability, biodegradability 
and compostability; vii) to demonstrate the A2C technologies in a relevant environment by their pilot scale up.
5.1 Upcycling of products (TPA, EG, alkanes) obtained from the enzymatic degradation (M13 to M 22). 
Leader: UNIMIB. Others: CETBIO, UA, WETS, CEW 
5.1.1. Upcycling of TPA, EG and alkanes to building blocks by biotechnological routes . UNIMIB.  
•Bioconversion of TPA into protocatechuic acid (PCA).  Bacterial genes encoding TPA 1,2 -dioxygenase 
(TPADO) and 1,2 -dihydroxy-3,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dicarboxylate dehydrogenase (DCDDH) will be codon -
optimised and expressed in yeasts, with an initial preference for the backers’ yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 
the acid tolerant yeast Zygosaccharomyces bailii.  •Bioconversion of EG into glycolic acid (GA) by the activity of 
an alcohol dehydrogenase followe d by an aldehyde dehydrogenase.  It will be also evaluated if GA is further 
catabolised (for example to glyoxylic acid), as in this case it will be necessary to disrupt the competitive pathway. 
As contingency plan, the glyoxylic acid could also be used from cells as carbon source, as they would need that as 
well for conducting the biotransformation.  We will also evaluate a pathway described in Acetobacterium woodii 
where ethylene glycol is transformed in acetaldehyde and then either into ethanol or acetyl-CoA. •Bioconversion of 
alkanes into ω-hidroxy acids. The C16 and C18 omega hydroxy-acids 16-hydroxy palmitic acid and 18-hydroxy 
stearic acid will be our main focus of production due their wide application in cosmetic. Substrates uptake by yeast 
strains of Lipomyces starkeyi and Rhodosporidium toruloides will be implemented applying metabolic engineering.  
The best strains will be moved in bioreactor (2L stirred tank bioreactors)  for calculating the k ey performance 
parameters and for determining cell viability and integrity.  The best results will be scale up at 10L reactors at 
UNIMIB. Downstream techniques will be investigated, such as centrifugation of the microbial cell paste, High 
Pressure Homogenization, Reactive extraction , tangential flow micro - and ult ra-filtration on appropriate scale, 
including a cell lysis step when required. Finally, the bioprocesses will be design to be pilot scale at CETEC facilities 
in 30L bioreactors to integrate them into the A2C technological solution (task 6.1). 5.1.2. PHBV and carotenoids 
production by Haloferax mediterranei cell factory. CETBIO, UA, WETS, CEW. The by-products from task 5.1.1. 
(TPA not bioconverted, glycols and hydroxy acids with low value in cosmetic) and the organic waste fractions 
coming from the agrifood processing industry (Tasks 2.2 and 3.1) will be used as feedstock for the PHBV production 
and carotenoids.  •Organic waste pre-treatment (CETBIO). The organic wastes will be submitted to an anaerobic 
fermentation to break down the wastes into volatile fatt y acids and sugars  that can be assimilated by the 
microorganisms producers of PHBV. •PHBV and carotenoids production (CETBIO, UA). Hfx mediterranei will 
be grown in a salt medium (15-25%) by CETBIO, in collaboration with UA. Firstly, a study to determine the optimal 
process parameters will be developed to set optimal growth rate, salinity, carbon:nitrogen: phosphorous ratio and 
fermentation time. PHBV concentration and composition under different conditions will be determined by gas 
chromatography (GC) by UA. Pilot scale of PHBV production in a 100 L reactor demonstrating our technology in 
TRL6 and providing representative PHBVs quantities for the following processes. •PHBV green extraction, 
purification (WETS, CETBIO). (i) The PHBV rich cells of Hfx mediterranei will be lysed with an osmotic shock 
by adding fresh water. (ii) the cell culture will be dewatered and dried to obtain a dried mixture of PHBV and cell 
debris(iii) green solvents (e.g. deep eutectic) extraction of the PHBV •PHBV by products valorisati on (WETS, 
CEW, UA). Studies for the recycling of the by-products generated will be implemented. i) Salty supernatant (from 
the fermentation broth) by filtration. iii) Solvents recovery iii) Moreover, a high added value contained in the cell 
debris biomass are carotenoids that will be separated by UA. Then, cell debris after cell lysis for PHBV extraction 
will be used for carotenoids recovery by UA.
5.2 High barrier recycled and recyclable compounds (M13 to M22). Leader: GWC Others: CETEC, BOKU 
The LDPE/EVOH, LDPE/EVOH/LDPE, LDPE/PA, LDPE/PA/LDPE and LDPE processable compounds 
developed in task 3.5.3. will be submitted to a synergistic strategy  (compatibilisation and extensional flow mixing 
generation during the extrusion process ) to develop morphology-controlled blends to produce a new range of 
recyclable gas barrier films (OTR 1-10 cm3/atm day) for food packaging and agriculture.   
5.2.1. Compatibilisation routes. CETEC, GWC, BOKU.  LDPE/EVOH recyclates will be compatibilised with the 
recycled LDPE by RETAIN and Revive commercial compatibilisers to obtain high barrier compounds (OTR 1 -5 
cm3/atm day) and LDPE/PA recyclates and LDPE will be compatibilised by using triblock copolymer of styrene and 
ethylene/butylene (SEBS) and maleic anhydride (MA) func tionalized SEBS  to obtain medium -high barrier 
compounds (OTR 6 -10 cm3/atm day). Moreover, the aluminium modified in task 3.5.2. will be dispersed in the 
LDPE/EVOH/LDPE and LDPE/PA/LDPE recyclates coming from the agriculture films by CETEC, in collaboration 
with BOKU, to achieve very high barrier compounds (OTR<1cm 3/atm day) for agriculture applications. 5.2.2. 
Extensional flow mixing. Leader: CETEC. Others: GWC. All the blends will be developed under extensional flow 
to ensure an efficient and homogeneous dispersion of the  EVOH, PA and aluminium in the PE host matrix and to 
55 
 
control the morphology of the modules created. For this purpose, a convergent-divergent plate will be incorporated 
to the commercial twin screw extruder at CETEC. The shear rate, the extensional flow, the ratios of compatibilisers, 
aluminium and polymers will be 
adjusted to develop the best controlled 
morphologies (L/W ratio >100).  The 
final characteristics expected in the 
films will be determined by CETEC 
(Table 48). The process will be scale up 
at GWC achieving a 1000 kg capacity.
5.3 Biodegradable compounds (M15 to M22). Leader: GWC. Others: CETEC  
T5.3 is aimed to achieve the 
processability of the PHBV obtained in 
the T5.1.2. by: i) compounding of 
PHBV with other biodegradable 
polyesters as  PBAT, bio -PBS. ii) 
formulation with EFSA authorised 
additives. The compounds obtained will be characterised by CETEC  (Table 49: PHBV target properties ). The 
process will be upgrade to pilot scale up at GWC facilities achieving 500 kg.
5.4 Compounds transformation (M18 to M24). Leader: CETEC. Others: SOLP, EVER, PROEX 
5.4.1. Transformation into food packaging and agricultural films at small scale.  CETEC, SOLP, EVER. The 
compounds obtained (T5.2, 5.3) will be transformed at small scale (5 -7 kg) into food packaging and agricultural 
films by blown extrusion and cast extrusion.  The films will be characterised to ensure the technical requirements 
achievement (mechanical, thermal, water & oxygen barrier pro perties, and migration). 5.4.2. Validation at small 
scale. CETEC, SOLP; EVER, MCT, ALM, CITRO & PROEX.  The packaging obtained at small scale (subtask 
5.4.1) will be  used for packing food products.  i) MCT will validate juices bags, simulating packaging proc ess, 
including test of weldability and storage ii) ALM will simulate packaging process of vegetable oils (iii) CITRO will 
simulate packaging procedure of concentrates. Moreover, the agricultural films obtained at small scale (T5.4.1) will 
be validated by PROEX compared to conventional films in horticultural soils at small scale in 20 litres trays. 5.4.3 
Plastics end life scenarios. CETEC. i) Recyclability studies of the developed food packages and agricultural films 
will be carried out to determine its potential use as raw materials for the reintroduction in the production cycle . ii) 
Biodegradability studies in soil ( EN ISO 17556:2013), freshwater ( EN ISO 14852:2005) and seawater ( EN ISO 
19679:2018) & compostability studies under industrial (ISO 14855)  and home composting tests ( EN 14995, EN 
13432 at 20-30oC) will be developed to the bioplastics materials.  
 
Deliverables: D5.1. TPA, EG and alkanes bioconversion to building blocks. Conversion of TPA, EG and alkanes 
into PCA, GA and ω-hydroxy acids by biotechnological routes. (Report-CO; UNIMIB, M20). D5.2. PHBV range. 
Fermentation and process parameters. (Report-CO; CETBIO, M22). D5.3. PHBV extraction & purification. Green 
process for PHBV extraction and purification. (Report-CO; WETS, M20). D5.4. Salt and cell debris by products 
recovery and valorisation. (Report-CO; WETS, M2 2). D5.5. Carotenoids by products recovery and 
valorisation. (Report-CO; UA, M2 2). D5.6. High barrier compounds . Compatibilisation strategies, extensional 
flow mixing and form ulations. Biodegradable compounds . New bioplastics fo rmulations. (Report -CO; GWC, 
M22). D5.7. Compounds transformation. Transformation processes at small scale to obtain the target packaging 
and agricultural films. (R-CO; CETEC, M22). D5.8. Plastics end of life scenarios. Recyclability, compostability & 
biodegradability assessment. (R-CO; CETEC, M22). 
 
WP n. 6 Lead beneficiary GWC 
WP tittle Demonstration of the A2C technological solution 
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months 18.0 74.0 36.0 14.0 19.0 34.0 37.5 21.0 26 30.0 45.0 21.0 25.0 30.0 30.0 0.5 34.0 29.0 9.0 6.5 
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months 3.0  10.5     27.0    2.0 26.5 15.0 19.0 15.0 13.0 17.0 10.0 2.0 2.0 
Start month  21 End month 36 
 
Objectives: Specific objectives are:  i) To integrate physically all the developed technologies at pilot scale up in  
demonstrators in the south of Spain. ii) To demonstrate all the technologies in a relevant and industrial environment. 
iii) To manufacture the different A2C prototypes. iv) To set the basis for the future industrial implementation. v) To 
define the A2C business cases, identifying the specific business models and the financial framework.
6.1 Integration of the technologies at pilot scale (M21 to M29). Leader: GWC. Others: GWC, SAPE, IRIS, 
BOKU, MELLI, REG, CETBIO, UNIMIB, UA, WETS, CTNC, DMC, CITRO, ALM, MCT, MKSI, SSICA, ECO, 
EQU, EXUS, EVRY 
Table 48. A2C High barrier recycled and recyclable compounds properties  
Table 49. A2C biodegradable compounds properties  
56 
 
6.1.1. GWC. This task is aimed to integrate all the  technologies at pilot scale in a demonstrator in Spain at GWC , 
CETBIO, CETEC, DMC and CTNC  facilities ( all of them in close industrial area s) in order to evaluate their 
performance in an industrial environment. 6.1.2. By-products valorisation strategies. CTNC, WTS, CEW, CTNC. 
CETBIO, UA, SAPE . This task is aimed to detect the “hotspots” in all A2C processes during their scale up to 
determine alternatives to minimise the negative environmental impact. Particular emphasis will be placed on: i) 
Water rejections →Study on quantity minimization and reuse by WTS&CEW ii) green solvents →Study on recovery 
to be reintroduced in the agrifood and PHBV extractions processes by CTNC and WETS iii) organic fractions → 
study as nutrients for PHBV production by CETB IO (task 5.1) iv) Microplastics → fluorescent studies by 
WETS&CEW v) Recovery of delamination fluids →recovery studies by SAPE vi) Enzymes →Study on recovery 
for enzymatic processes by W ETS; vii) Salty supernatant →Study for the reintroduction in the Hfx. broth by 
CETBIO; viii) Cell debris → Study on re-use as a nutrient in fermentation by CETBIO and UA.  
These minimization studies will include both economics and environmental criteria, as well as technology 
perspective. The conclusions be useful for co mpleting the LCA study (task 7.3 ) and the Exploitation plan of A2C 
solution (task 8.7). Coordination and integration of these studies will be carried out by CTNC.
6.2 A2C demonstrators (M25 to M33). Leader: GWC. Others: REG and ALL TECH PARTNERS (see partners 
on Table 50. A2C demonstartors) 
 
Demonstrators and prototypes (Table 50) of the valorised products will be produced at relevant scale and industrial 
relevant environment to demonstrate our solution at TRL6-7  
 
Energy performance of demonstrators will be studied  by REG studying energy consumption analysis, electrical 
parameters, loads and renewable energies integration. Energy indicators (e.g., kWh/kg) will be compared with other 
industrial technologies to recommend the most efficient solutions.
6.3 Setting the basis for the future industrial implementation (M25 to M36). Leader: GWC. Others: Partners 
from Table 50. A2C demonstartors 
A2C processes protocol paper including the integration of all processes and the validation in real environment 
develop by the end users will be elaborated. Moreover, ECO will include all the data in the Data Integration System 
providing a powerful digital tool for the future industrial implementation, allowing to obtain digitally all the project 
data and providing a simulation tool for potential cases in the industrial scale up.
6.4 A2C business cases and financing (M14 to M36). Leader: UB Others: CJM, INFO, and Partners from Table 
50. A2C demonstartors (TECH PARTNERS) 
6.4.1. Identification of specific business models. UB, CJM, TECH PARTNERS. UB will perform a desk research 
to identify circular business models and their associated financing mechanisms, related to the m ain fields of A2C 
project. Business models will be categorized according to key dimensions. Next, UB will develop a circular business 
modelling framework, based on consolidated approaches like the Business Model. UB will support partners through 
dedicated (online) workshops to: i) describe and analyse their circular business model; ii) develop new models, 
starting from their business cases and from the experiences analysed, taking into account the characteristics of the 
territories involved in the project. Furthermore, financing mechanisms to support business model replication will 
be assessed  by CJM . Different  financing opportunities will be considered stressing the suitability, major 
opportunities and risks of each of them.    
6.4.2. Integrating the business strategy with natural capital accounting.  UB, KVC. UB will conduct a Natural 
Capital Assessment on the solutions demonstrated in the project, in order to identify their links with natural capital, 
the impacts of operations on natural capital and the extent of dependencies. Firstly it will be identified the ecosystem 
services generated and/or impacted by the solutions demonstrated in the project.  This assessment will provide inputs 
to fill in the circular business model canvas within Task 6.4.1. and highlight the value of ecosystem services 
generated or impacted by the solutions. The assessment will therefore be used to improve the circular business 
Table 50. A2C demonstartors  
57 
 
models, identify strategies to manage possible risks and identify new revenue streams. Based on the results of WP7 
(LCA, environmental impact assessment), the ecosystem services will be translated int o monetary values through 
traditional economic valuation methods. 
 
Deliverables: D6.1 A2C integration of technologies (Report-CO; GWC, M29). Integration of all technologies at 
pilot scale in a demonstrator at GWC. CETBIO and CETEC facilities. D6.2 A2C Data Integration System  
(Software-PU; ECO, M25). D6.3 A2C demonstrators (Report-CO; GWC, M33). Demonstrators and prototypes at 
TRL 6-7, including energy performance.  D6.4 Basis for future industrial implementation  (Report-CO; GWC, 
M36). D6.5 A2C business cases (Report-CO; UB, M36). Business models and financing framework. D6.6 Natural 
capital assessment of demonstrated solutions (Report- CO; UB, M36). 
 
WP n. 7 Lead beneficiary KVC 
WP tittle A2C systemic solution adoption, replication and scalability 
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months 2.0 4.0 4.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2 3.0 3.0 2.5 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.5 2.0 2.0 1.0 2.0 
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months 45.0 21.0 8.0 15.0  17.0 6.0 15.5 26.0 1.0 7.0 10.0     2.0 2.0 2.0 21.0 20.5 
Start month  1 End month 36 
 
Aimed to reach a comprehensive definition of the A2C Systemic solution model and its potential for transferability, 
by identifying multidimensional impacts but also costs, drivers, challenges and success factors towards the adoption 
of the A2C . Specific objectives: i) To explore how the implementation of the circular economy solutions may 
impact on the general society and, specifically, in local communities. ii) To identify key multidimensional factors, 
that determine the readiness for integrating territorial circular economy solutions in different territories across EU. 
iii) To generate and validate a multidimensional model fo r the adoption, replication & scalability of the  A2C 
systemic solution iv) To study how the replicability & scalability can be maximised / enhanced, as well as how to 
make sustainable the generated circular economy business models. 
 
7.1. Public Engagement and community-based schemes for sustainable systemic circular economy (M1- M36). 
Leader: KVC. Others: UVEG, ICONS,CARM, INFO, EURA, CJM, AGRO, PRIMA, PROEX,TCA,LPK 
7.1.1 Public engagement strategy. KVC, UVEG, ICONS, CARM, INFO, EURA, CJM, AGRO, PRIMA, PROEX. 
Aims at designing a clear strategy and the required methodology to involve relevant stakeholders in the 
demonstration process (combined & supported by T8.3), fostering the participatory nature of the A2C systemic 
model. The strategy relies on the Quadruple Helix of Stakeholders approach, being crucial for the adequate co-
creation and community participation methodology for public engagement to ensure a meaningful adoption, 
replication & scalability of the A2C systemic solution model. 7.1.2. Community -based innovation schemes . 
PRIMA, KVC, ICONS, UVEG, TCA, LPK. PRIMA will implement a pilot community-based innovation action 
aiming at public engagement while promotes  circular social practices among citizens and raises  awareness 
about A2C project and about food waste. It will consist of installing bins at local food markets in Alhama de Murcia, 
encouraging vendors to deposit the F&V waste. Then, the collected wastes will be incorporated into the project value 
chain for its valorisation. Alhama de Murcia Municipality, SME local companies, students will also be involved and 
it will be surveyed if implementing a bonus system would increase the public collaboration for separate collection. 
Moreover, KVC in collaboration with UVEG, TCA and LPK will analyse other successful community -based 
innovation schemes in order to further deliver within the A2C systemic model, together with the results of our pilot 
action, recommendations for fostering public engagement in circular economy initiatives/projects.
7.2 Evaluation framework (M1 to M9). Leader: KVC; Others: UVEG, VTT, UB  
Entails the d evelopment of the evaluation matrix and the fra mework for the replicability &  scalability of the 
generated A2C CEBMs as well as establishing a comprehensive action plan for WP7 main objectives: evaluation of 
the environmental, socio-cultural and socio-economic feasibility and the potential A2C systemic solution impact. A 
specific framework for evaluation, monitoring and data collection will be established to identify, analyse and obtain 
key information along the different dimensions to merge within the A2C systemic solution.
7.3 Environmental assessment, LCA and A2C circularity monitoring (M5 to M36). Leader: VTT. Others: 
TECH PARTNERS 
Environmental externalities and impacts will be assessed and addressed through a life cycle ass essment (LCA) 
approach which will be applied in two stages: Screening LCA-to identify environmental hot spots of the concept, 
through identifying environmental strengths and weaknesses of the technologies and the systemic solution. An 
iterative assessment will be conducted: primary data of the processes will be used as input; by receiving feedback in 
the early phase of the project the technology developers (WP2-5) can incorporate the findings in their work. Then, 
the new technologies and corresponding appli cations will be assessed by applying  Full LCA -i.e. standardized 
methodology (ISO 14040-44). It will include benchmarking cost (from task 6.4) and environmental footprint with 
similar linear solutions. The LCA will also follow ILCD handbook and PEF Guidance  where applicable. It will be 
58 
 
also evaluated the  potential positive environmental impacts (selected according to PEF Guidance) of the new 
technologies and corres ponding applications. This Handprint assessment will be based on the carbon handprint 
approach built on standardised carbon footprint methodology, this will cover the green-house-gas emissions, use of 
resources and additional indicators found to be critical for the agrifood value chains. Monitoring and evaluation 
of A2C circularity: It will be stablished the most adequate monitoring framework  for the circularity quantitative 
assessment. An initial assessment will be carried out in order to detect strengths & weaknesses and to measure and 
to monitor the cluster advancement and transition towards circularity as well as to finally validate the circularity of 
the business models.
7.4 Social and economic analysis (M5 to M36). Leader: KVC. Others: UVEG, UB, AGRO, PROEX, PRIMA 
According to T7.2, socio-economic factors will be analysed at baseline a nd during the project by different means 
aligned with T7.1.1 & 7.1.2: secondary sources, statistical data, consultation will stakeholders, co-creation sessions 
and community participation thro ugh direct dialogue, surveys/ interviews. Moreover, AGRO will design a  survey 
pool hosted within the stakeholders’ platform targeting stakeholders in Murcia. PROEX & PRIMA will provide the 
socio-economic view from the territorial agrifood sector. Following dimensions at territorial/community-level 
will be evaluated and quantified : a) production and jobs creation; impact on employment; b) economic security 
and impact on the redistribution of prosperity and reduction of poverty; c) involvement and participation of citizens 
traditionally excluded from  the decision-making processes; d) Equity, social justice and inclusiveness; e) social 
design and value attributed co -designed solutions tailored to community -specific contexts and conditions; f) other 
potential impacts of the A2C systemic solution (e.g. q uality of life improvement, material circumstances of 
communities). Then, acceptance will be analysed and presented in-light of the previous results.
7.5 Multidimensional model for adoption, replicability and scalability of A2C systemic solution at regional 
and EU level  (M12 to M36). Leader: UVEG. Others: KVC , EURA, CARM, INFO, AGRO, PROEX, PRIMA, 
UB, VTT, CJM, TCA, LPK 
7.5.1. Multidimensional analysis of the circularity of A2C systemic solution . KVC, UB, VTT. Key outcomes 
from the monitoring and evaluation at the economic, technical & environmental levels (T7.2-7.4) together with 
specific assessment of the acceptance and usability of the solutions will be complied and analysed but also insights 
from the technological developments (WP1 to WP 5) and the business models (WP6) to drive conclusions on the 
replicability and scalability determinants. 7.5.2. Regulatory, standardisation and political relevant factors at 
European level.  UVEG, KVC, EURA, CARM. A comprehensive research into r egulatory and political factors 
enabling or limiting the adoption of the A2C systemic solution will be carried ou t in order to elaborate guidelines, 
able to contribute to replication and scalability accor ding to the factors identified.  It entails the definition of the 
regulatory frameworks, public context (including public funding) and standardisation activities  (addressed at 
T8.5).7.5.3. Financing schemes  linked to the business models generated . EURA, CJM, CARM, INFO, UB. 
Analyses several types of financing schemes bey ond project own community. It will be explored the financing 
ecosystem enabling the adoption of territorial circu lar solutions at regional/ EU levels. EURA will collect and 
manage the data about green public procurement and analysing also good practices of financing tools for A2C as 
well as coordinate co-creation interactions between public procurers and relevant stakeholders involved in the A2C. 
Deliverable 7.9 will deliver recommendations for financing schemes (including recommendations to foster public 
procurement in the areas related to A2C)  .7.5.4. Governance dimension of the A2C systemic solution model.  
UVEG, KVC, EURA, INFO, CARM, TCA, LPK . Analyses the key factors on the governance of A2C model by 
studying other successful circular governance models through desk research , in order to detect potential 
weaknesses, strengths and means to overcome the barriers found. The alternatives will be analysed by involving the 
Quadruple helix of stakeholders, to assess which of the governance elements and/or their combinations better applies 
to the A2C systemic solution. 7.5.5. A2C Model construction . UVEG, KVC, EURA, INFO, CARM, UB, VTT, 
CJM, TCA, LPK. Previous outcomes will be integrated to build the multidimensional model that will the address 
the multidimensional needs studied and other issues and will make possible an effective and sustainable territorial 
deployment of the circular systemic solution while enables the circularity of the CEBMs.  Different SSH 
theories/methodologies will be applied, including the Socioecological Model or the Theory of Change (ToC), to 
explain how activities are understood to produce a series of results that contribute to achieving the expected final 
impacts, therefore contributing to a better understanding of (i) the sustainability factors and (ii) the framework 
conditions. 7.5.6 Self-assessment tool elaboration KVC, UVEG, EURA, INFO, CARM, UB, VTT, CJM, TCA, 
LPK. A self-assessment tool for defining a roadmap for the replicability  & scalability will be elaborated, enabling 
stakeholders/clusters to evaluate how their initial conditions can affect the process. Specific items and indicators 
will be defined. Besides, based on the information collected and supported by the self-assessment tool, the cluster 
circular economy action plan (CEAP) will be progressively constructed by AGRO with CARM, INFO, PROEX 
& PRIMA in co-creation with the inputs of the  stakeholders from Murcia Region. D irect involvement will bring 
their motivation for successful possible implementation in the future. The Action Plan will finally be a deliverable.
7.6 Italian/Lithuanian Region replication case (M12 to M36). Leader: TCA. Others:  LPK, VTT, KVC, UB.  
59 
 
TCA & LPK will demonstrate the A2C replication/scalability potential thorugh preparing a specific replication plan, 
making it ready at project end the future implementation of the circular economy business models specifically 
identified for the Lombardy / Lithuania NUTS-2 Region and based on A2C our solution while provides relevant 
territorial inputs to the other tasks. Specific tasks: i) Contextual study of the amounts and type of residues within the 
regional agrifood industry. Identification of industrial synergies and definition of the new value chain for the 
implementation of the technological solution; ii) Public engagement: a) involvement of relevant entities for the new 
value chain for the implementation of the technologic solutions (agrifood residues providers, technology providers, 
recyclers and end users); b) reaching the stakeholders at regional/operati onal levels needed to implement the 
systemic solution; iii) Multidimensional contextual/territorial analysis, according to the A2C model; iv) specific 
workshops and exchange  of knowledge on A2C solution.; v) Definition and development of specific circular 
business models.
7.7 Validation of the A2C multidimensional model through cross-fertilization with other clusters. (M12-M36).  
Leader: KVC; Others: UVEG, ICONS, UB, CARM, EURA, CJM, VTT, AGRO, PRIMA, PROEX, AGRO, TCA, 
LPK. In order to validate the A2C model and the self-assessment tool and to generate specific strategies and tools 
to foster the adoption of A2C model, other agrifood EU clusters will be involved (Support letters) through specific 
workshops/focus groups and other cross-fertilization activities. Those, will contribute to the elaboration of lessons 
learnt and policy recommendations to enhance circular economy related EU and national/local regulation  (with 
inputs on standardisation & certification), but also to improve current available financing schemes, contributing 
to the scalability and replicability of the A2C systemic model. The results will be also used to co -design specific 
training contents (T8.7), to transfer the knowledge required for fostering the circular economy models.  
 
Deliverables: D7.1 Public Engagement Strategy & Summary of Activities and Results (Report-PU; KVC; M12, 
D24, M36). Design and its implementation . D7.2 Community based innovation schemes (Report-PU; PRIMA; 
M36). Lessons learnt & impacts. D7.3 Evaluation framework and methodology (Report-CO; UVEG, M9). D7.4 
Environmental assessment, LCA and A2C circularity monitoring (Report-CO; VTT, M18, M36 ). D7.5 
Socioeconomic and sociocultural analysis report (Report-PU; KVC, M18, M36). Conclusions from task 7.4. D7.6. 
A2C systemic solution model and self -assessment tool (Report-PU; KVC, M30). Processes of the model 
generation and the definition of the dimensions, indicators, including the self-assessment tool. D.7.7 A2C circular 
Action Plan report (R-CO; AGRO, M36). D7.8 Policy Recommendations (Report-CO; UVEG, M18, M36). D7.9 
Financing recommendations (Report-PU; EURA, M18, M36) . D7.10 Report on potential for adoption and 
scale-up potential of the A2C project (Report-PU; KVC, M36). Medium and long-term potential for replication 
& scalability of solutions and governance model in EU. D7.11 Lombardy Action Plan (Report-CO; TCA, M36). 
D7.12. NUTS-2 Lithuania Action Plan (Report-CO; LPK, M36). 
 
WP n. 8 Lead beneficiary ICONS 
WP tittle A2C outreach: Communication, dissemination, exploitation, training & policy recommendations  
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months 6.0 3.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 4.5 2.5 2.5 3.5 2.5 2.5 2.0 2.5 
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months 9.5 6.0 5.0 8.5 13.0 13.0 12.0 12.5 2.5 43.0 24.0 8.5 2.0 1.5 2.5 2.5 2.0 5.0 2.0 4.5 4.0 
Start month  1 End month 36 
 
Objectives: To widespread the project results and to engage stakeholders, while raising awareness and knowledge 
transfer about circular economy and innovations produced by A2C. Specifically : i) Design the dissemination and 
communication strategy to support the public engagement, the project sustainability and the widespread of results. 
ii) To widespread general knowledge about food and plastic waste and the circular economy concept. iii) To deliver 
a framework for autonomous learning and capacity bu ilding.  iv) To implement actions to reach an optimal D&C 
performance and to periodically assess their implementation and capacity for raising awareness & engagement. vi) 
To support all partners in communicating /disseminating their results and to enhance the transferability potential 
together with the WP7. It includes the support to the Public Engagement strategy and actions from WP7.
8.1 A2C Outreach Strategy. (M1- M4). Leader: ICONS.  
The Communication and Dissemination (C&D) Strategy (CDS) will include the stakeholder characterisation, 
mapping, definition of phases for disseminating the project, communication campaigns and thematic campaigns, 
tools, actions, channels, timing and geographical specifications in order to provide a strategy tail ored to each local 
community but also to the EU -wide context. It will include KPIs, evaluation checkpoints, timing and procedures.  
Continuous monitoring of KPIs and analysis of the effectiveness of the strategy and impacts from C&D activities 
will be conducted. C&D activities will be coordinated by the Outreach Manager (ICONS), while coordinating a 
Local Outreach Desk (PRIMA) in charge of tailor the CDS to the local context exploiting the most effective tools 
& channels, reach local/regional/national stakeholders and communities. The information and data collected and 
the knowledge gathered by A2C will be shared with the CCRI (T8.5).    
60
8.2 Project identity and online channels. (M1- M4). Leader: ICONS. Others: All 
Visual identity and online channels will be generated, and settled a well -defined brand identity and related 
communication material (website, social media channels,  flyer, roll-up, project presentation video, etc.), and the 
main online communication and engagement project’s channels. Other c ommunication materials will be produced 
to support local engagement. The A2C website  (M2: landing page, M4: launch)  will be constantly updated with 
information on the project’s activities . A specific session will be dedicated to the A2C cluster with conten ts 
developed in Spanish and managed by the Local Outreach desk. The website will host a stakeholder platform as a 
two-way communication tool. The management of the website contents will be backed up by a social media 
strategy. In addition, A2C project will launch a Twitter and LinkedIn account.
8.3 Communication and engagement at local and regional level. (M5- M36). Leader: PRIMA Others: PROEX, 
AGRO, KVC, ICONS, CARM, CJM, INFO. 
The Local Outreach desk will implement Social Communication campaigns designed for enhancing and aligning 
with the public and citizenship eng agement strategy (T7.1).  Specific actions  already proposed:  -PROEX: 
engagement plan targeting local/regional primary agricultural stakeholders  through specific actions and raising 
awareness. -AGRO will organize conferences/workshops targeting local/regional industrial sector, facilitating their 
circular economy approach and offering an administrative support desk facilitating their circular transition as well 
as promote issuing regional recognitions to the successful ones. General public will be also engaged through tailored 
organized events.-PRIMA will carry out local/regional awareness actions,  targeting also the young public : (1) 
lectures/workshops at regional schools, Universities and educative events to raise awareness on A2C topics (M9-
M20, twice/weekly). (2)Regional contests for scholars aimed to spread the circular economy approach and fostering 
their involvement in these practices. Students will dare to solve a problem related to the sustainability of a 
product/processing waste. Best solutions will receive a recognition at an organize d event. (3) Short documentary 
production involving several actors (Alhama de Murcia municipality, local companies, students), arising awareness 
about project topics and fostering community  engagement on circular and climate neutral practices. It will be 
submitted to film contests related to the topic. ( 4) A youngster videogame  production, based on the waste 
management of a product manufacturing process.  
Additionally, communication will focus o n local/regional dissemination of results  through content packaging 
and relations with key stakeholders, stimulating social acceptance and replication. Dedicated publications will 
be produced and some Public Deliverables will be edited in an easy reading mode.
8.4 Outreach at European level. (M1- M36). Leader: ICONS. Others: All 
Content packaging, supporting the dissemination of A2C results and the project’s exploitation strategy, include: a) 
biannual eNewsletter; b) dedicated info-packs in an easy-to-read format supported by visual tools (i.e. infographics/ 
factsheets), with specific A2C contents for each  target group c) abstracts of key Public Deliverables, edited to 
facilitate their dissemination d) project final publication: A2C Best Practices Book (electronic & printable format), 
includes guidelines, lessons learnt and recommendations e) scientific & technical publications. Public outreach: 
contents addressing the general public, including citizens and stakeholders at large, aimed at widespread distribution 
(through European and global information multipliers and media) include: a) press & news releases, to raise project 
topics visibility, challenges and results, promoting A2C events; b) independent journalistic articles around A2C 
and related topics; c) audiovisual productions : short video interviews with project experts, stakeholders’ 
representatives,  decision-makers, and a final video on the main outcomes d) dedicated social media campaigns at 
EU and international level on occasion of thematic World Days and other EU initiatives.
8.5 Networking and clustering activities. (M5- M36).  Leader: EURA. Others: All    
An intensive networking activity will be conducted by all partners. Specific activities will include: a) Mobilization 
of key European and international stakeholders and associations (industry, academia, consumer associations, NGOs) 
fostering the connection of A2C with international markets and players and with Circular Economy Action Plans, EU 
Bioeconomy Strategy and the European Industrial Strategy at local, regional, national, European and international 
levels b) B2B meetings, participation in external events, organization of project events at EU level (workshops and 
other dissemination events with EU stakeholders and decision -makers, the final event at EU level) at 
local/regional/country level. c) Clustering with existing relevant European projects and initiatives on the circula r 
economy and the circular bioeconomy d) Cooperation with other circular territorial clusters funded under this topic. 
Close collaboration with the CCRI will be sought to maximise impacts through all the specific activities and 
ensure a wider dissemination among a large number of stakeholders and policy-makers.
8.6 Training, knowledge transfer and guidelines/recommendations to promote A2C  circular model. (M9- 
M36).  Leader: UVEG. Others: PRIMA, AGRO, PROEX, KVC, ICONS, UB, EURA, CARM, INFO, TCA, LPK 
It will be elaborated specific resources and open learning materials to contribute to the promotion of the model, 
taking into account the facilitators and barriers identified in WP7. It will be designed and executed an autonomous 
but comprehensive training plan f or local actors and education services for local communities and training 
modules/guidelines for EU stakeholders to better implement/transfer the knowledge acquired during the project 
and all lessons learnt, contributing to both a more effective development of circular solutions and to foster the 
61 
 
communities’ environmental awareness and sustainable habits, business and co -creation. Among other s: a) 
business models for circular economy innovations; b) financing and regulatory issues related to CE. 
A set of guidelines for fostering public engagement in circular economy projects  will be also generated by 
conducting a joint reflection on the ways for fostering effecti ve communication & public engagement for circular 
economy projects and environmental community-based initiatives, contributing to the know-how and the literature 
at EU about participatory and co -creation frameworks applied to environmental fields. The elaboration of these 
guidelines will require the p articipation of stakeholders from the quadruple helix in workshops, focus groups and 
DELPHI studies.  
At regional level, PRIMA will also develop a n industry mentoring programme aimed at generating innovative 
results-oriented ideas to respond to circular business challenges, through A2C multidimensional approach.  
From the data collected through surveys in T7.4, AGRO will elaborate an initial individual evaluation about the 
circular economy situation of the surveys’ participants , and a good practice directory for Circular Econ omy in the 
agrifood sector, which will be visible through the project's web tool.
8.7 Exploitation strategy and long-term feasibility (M5-M36). Leader: ICONS. Others: All partners 
8.7.1 Mapping of Key Exploitable Results: Identifies all projects’ results through an initial webinar, introducing 
exploitation concepts and helping partners identifying them. From inputs from all other work packages and direct 
interviews with A2C partners, a comprehensive mapping of exploitable results will be produced. The resulting 
library will provide the basis for a comprehensive deployment strategy focusing on different exploitation pathways. 
8.7.2 IPR Assessment: Analyses background and foreground associated to each result, reaching consensus among 
IP owners and assessing the proper IPR measures while timely addressing all the potential issues that may hamper 
A2C exploitation routes. If needed, it will established connections with the European IPR Helpdesk support services. 
8.7.3 Innovation monitoring and market analysis: It will focus on the evolving socio-economic context including 
user needs, overall market trends, stakeholders and competitors, with particular reference to the outputs susceptible 
to be exploited, as well as the general considerations applied to generat e new circular business at EU level. The 
analysis will be based on desk research and questionnaires to stakeholders.  8.7.4 Exploitation Plan (EP): Develops 
and updates an exploitation roadmap that will coordinate and document both the joint and the individual strat egies 
of the consortium after the project’s end. At the project level, the Exploitation plan will focus on: i) Clarifying further 
research areas/needs, ii) Assessing a ctivities and resources needed to reach higher TRLs, iii) Defining an overall 
governance to accelerate the move of research results to market, iv) Assessing partners’ role in driving the replication 
and upscaling of solutions after the end of the project (in coordination with WP7), v) Providing framework business 
plans of commercial solutions, based on the outcomes of WP6. At the partner level, the plan will report individual 
partners’ exploitation strategies to leverage results within their own organisatio ns. Two dedicated workshops 
involving all partners will be organized during the project progress meetings, involving all the partners to collect 
inputs for further exploitation analysis.
8.8 Standardization activities. (M1- M36). Leader: UNE. Others: all tech partners 
T8.8.1: Analysis of the applicable standardization landscape (M1-M5): Based on the activities and the needs of 
the WPs, the applicable existing standards and those under development will be identified. The availability of this 
information at an early stage in the project provides for its consideration and facilitates the compatibility of the 
project outcomes with current market practises. T8.8.2: Contribution to the ongoing and future standardization 
developments (M6-M36): A2C will interact with the relevant technical standardization committees. This will also 
allow capturing their inputs as stakeholders and using the standardization system as a fast and highly focussed 
dissemination tool to the market stakeholders. Building on this, A2C will contribute to new standards developments 
in specific topics related to the A2C objectives by providing information, participating in ongoing works, submitting 
technical proposals for the modification of existing standards or even promoting the elaboration o f new standard 
documents like technical specifications (TS). The development of fast track standards like CEN -Workshop 
Agreements (CWA) will be studied. 
 
Deliverables: D8.1 Dissemination and Communication Strategy (Report-PU; ICONS, M4). Project strategy for 
wide spreading the results, objectives and to promote awareness and education -local & the EU society. D8.2 Report 
on Dissemination and Communication (Report-CO; ICONS, M18, M36). D8.3 Exploitation strategy (Report-
CO; ICONS, M18, M36). D8.4 Toolkit of guidelines and training materials : CEBMs, financing & regulatory 
issues,  public engagement, circular economy and environmental education , Best Practices book, training plan for 
local actors/education services (Report-PU; UVEG, M18, M36). D8.5 Standardization landscape and applicable 
standards (Report-PU; UNE, M5). D8.6 Contribution to standardization (Report-PU; UNE, M9, M18, M36). 
 
WP n. 9 Lead beneficiary CETEC 
WP tittle Project management and coordination activities 
Part. N. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Name CETEC GWC SAPE IRIS BOKU MELLI CETBIO UNIMIB UA WETS REG CEW CTNC MCT ALM PROEX DMC CITRO MKSI SSICA 
P. Months 30.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 5.0 1.0 1.0 0.5 2.0 1.0 0.5 1.0 
Part. N. 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 
62 
 
Name KVC UVEG CJM CARM UNE AGRO EURA UB VTT ICONS PRIMA INFO ECO EQU EXUS EVRY SOLP EVER LOL TCA LPK 
P. Months 6.0 9.0 0.5 0.5 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 3.0 1.0 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 1.0 1.0 
Start month  1 End month 36 
 
Objectives. To structure, foster and daily maintain a high level of commitment from all partners  and to provide 
adequate tools for guaranteeing the timely delivery of all results in the project. Specifically : i) Facilitating and 
following up the fulfilment of the project’s goals, through periodical and detailed control of all tasks and potential 
risks; ii)To set up an effective framework for efficient communication, collaboration, exchange of documents and 
fast decision-making; iii) The correct management of all legal, financial and administrative duties of the project. 
 
9.1. Project Coordination, Quality Assurance and Risk Management (M1-M36). Leader: CETEC. Other: All. 
This task sets the processes for the overall A2C project management, ensuring decision-making, clear an operational 
internal communication, just as metric and timely risk control. -Set up a quality assessment mechanism based on 
project metrics that will be introduced in D9.1, then elaborated as the project evolves, and periodically reported in 
the Periodic Reports. -Monitor the project, aided by all WP leaders, for foreseeable potential risks and promptly 
initiating contingency plans to lessen or eliminate t heir negative effects. -Establish a bottom -up and top -down 
communication flow among all the partners that will include decision -making not only in terms of discussion of 
internal milestones, risks and deliveries, but also in terms of external positioning, key alliances and sustainability of 
the project’s results.-Set up management structures featuring clear responsibilities for all relevant partners.-Establish 
& coordinate all the management processes including, but not limited to, transversal coordination of all partners and 
WPs according to the work plan and the project’s objectives, external reviews, internal meetings, compilation, 
circulation of meeting minutes and action points, reporting procedures & communication channels. 
9.2. Administrative and Financial Coordination (M1 to M36). Leader: CETEC. Others: All partners 
This task includes the daily management of all legal, financial and administrative issues; both within the consortium 
and also with regards to their formal communication to the EC:  -Monitors full compliance with the current 
regulations of all activities, agreements, amendments, expenditures, IPR management and any other relevant issue 
at stake. -Sets up a secure, organized and useful collaborative space for the efficient communication, coll aboration 
and exchange of documents among all partners (M3). Maintain and deliver templates for all the financial, 
administrative and reporting duties of all partners. -Ensures periodic reporting and communication with the EC for 
purposes of coordination, progress monitoring and reporting; including the preparation and submission of Periodic 
and final Reports (M18, M36). -Requests, collects and review inputs from all partners with regards to any report, 
official deliverable, document and/or information as required by the EC or by the own daily routine of the project. 
This will include an additional layer of internal reporting, in the form of internal Activity Reports (periodic technical 
reports plus an overall follow-up of the Use of Resources and expenses) due every six months -Implementing any 
potential change in the Grant Agreement by ensuring the fulfilment of the contractual obligations in the Grant 
Agreement such as, but not limited to, the provision of payments.  
Task 9.3 Ethical issues management and Data Protection issues (M1-36). Lead: UVEG. Others: All partners 
An Ethics Handbook will be developed and will contain ethical measures when conduct ing research with humans 
and monitoring mechanisms as well as ethics benchmarks. Moreover, this task will cover the assessment and follow-
up of relevant ethical issues related to the project in each stage of the project with the final goal of protecting th e 
rights, the security and welfare of the participants in the project. In addition, specific  attention will be paid to data 
management to monitor compliance with data protection issues by developing a data management plan. If required, 
this task will cover the preparat ion of documents - according to EU and national regulatory frameworks - to be 
submitted to et hics authorities prior to start of the participant’s involvement such as: informed co nsent forms, 
information sheets. 
 
Deliverables: D.9.1 Project Management Guideline & Quality Plan (Report-CO; CETEC, M3). D.9.2 Project 
reports. Non official reports of technical, financial and risk analysis (Report -CO; CETEC, M9, M27).  D.9.3 
Ethics Handbook (Report-CO; UVEG, M6). Guidelines to manage with all relevant ethical issues.  D.9.4 Data 
management plan (Report-CO;UVEG,M12). Description of the data management life cycle for the data collected, 
processed and/or generated along the project. The first version of the DMP will include an evaluation of the ethics 
risks related to the data processing activities of the project and an opinion if a DPIA should be performed.  
 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables  
Del. 
(number) Deliverable name WP Short 
name  Type Dissem. 
level 
Del. date 
 
D1.1 A2C requirements 1 CETEC R CO 3 
D1.2 A2C Residues Management Plan 1 GWC R CO 3, 12, 24, 36 
D1.3 EFSA plastics pre-dossier & compliance with agricultural standards 1 GWC R CO 36 
D1.4 EFSA agrifood pre-dossier & compliance with food/cosmetic standards 1 CTNC R CO 36 
D1.5 Energy and Water Recommendations 1 REG R CO 3 
D1.6 Energy management Plan 1 REG R CO 12, 24 
D1.7 A2C Data Integration System 1 ECO R CO 12, 20 
D1.8 Data Integration System (BETA Version) 1 ECO Soft CO 20 
Back to Section 2. RRI 
63 
 
D2.1 Agrifood waste conditioning 2 CTNC R CO 10, 16 
D2.2 Extraction of substances from agrifood wastes 2 CTNC R CO 10, 16 
D2.3 Purification & stabilisation of the extracts 2 SSICA R CO 16 
D2.4 Evaluation of the extracts 2 DMC R CO 16 
D3.1 Plastic waste pre-treatments 3 GWC R CO 9 
D3.2 Organic by-products recovery 3 WETS R CO 9 
D3.3 Optical sorting technology 3 IRIS R CO 10, 22 
D3.4 Multilayers physical recycling 3 SAPE R CO 12, 22 
D3.5 Multilayers enzymatic recycling 3 MELLI R CO 18, 22 
D3.6 Plastics decontamination 3 GWC R CO 14, 22 
D3.7 Aluminium modified 3 BOKU R CO 18, 22 
D3.8 Plastics processable compounds 3 CETEC R CO 14 
D4.1 New formulations based on the extracts 4 CTNC R CO 16 
D4.2 Pilot scale up of the route 1 4 CITRO R CO 24 
D4.3 Pilot scale up of the route 2 5 DMC R CO 24 
D4.4 Validation of the extraction pilot scale up 5 CTNC R CO 24 
D5.1 TPA, EG and alkanes bioconversion to building blocks 5 UNIMIB R CO 20 
D5.2 PHBV range 5 CETBIO R CO 22 
D5.3 PHBV extraction & purification 5 WETS R CO 20 
D5.4 Salt and cell debris by products recovery and valorisation 5 WETS R CO 22 
D5.5 Carotenoids by products recovery and valorisation 5 UA R CO 22 
D5.6 High barrier compounds and biodegradable compounds 5 GWC R CO 22 
D5.7 Compounds transformation 5 CETEC R CO 22 
D5.8 Plastics end of life scenarios 5 CETEC  R  CO 22 
D6.1 A2C integration of technologies 6 GWC R CO 29 
D6.2 A2C Data Integration System 6 ECO Soft PU 25 
D6.3 A2C demonstrators 6 GWC R CO 33 
D6.4 Basis for future industrial implementation 6 GWC R CO 36 
D6.5 A2C business cases 6 UB R CO 36 
D6.6 Natural capital assessment of demonstrated solutions 6 UB R CO 36 
D7.1 Public Engagement Strategy & Summary of Activities and Results 7 KVC R PU 12, 24, 36 
D7.2 Community based innovation schemes 7 PRIMA R PU 36 
D7.3 Evaluation framework and methodology 7 UVEG R CO 9 
D7.4 Environmental assessment, LCA and A2C circularity monitoring 7 VTT R CO 18, 36 
D7.5 Socioeconomic and sociocultural analysis report 7 KVC R PU 18, 36 
D7.6 A2C systemic solution model and self-assessment tool 7 KVC R PU 30 
D7.7 A2C circular Action Plan report 7 AGRO R CO 36 
D7.8 Policy Recommendations 7 UVEG R CO 18, 36 
D7.9 Financing recommendations 7 EURA R PU 18, 36 
D7.10 Report on potential for adoption and scale-up potential  7 KVC R PU 36 
D7.11 Lombardy Action Plan 7 TCA R CO 36 
D7.12 Lithuania NUTS-2 Action Plan 7 LPK R CO 36 
D8.1 Dissemination and Communication Strategy 8 ICONS R PU 4 
D8.2 Report on Dissemination and Communication 8 ICONS R CO 18, 36 
D8.3 Exploitation strategy 8 ICONS R CO 18, 36 
D8.4 Toolkit of guidelines and training materials 8 UVEG R PU 18, 36 
D8.5 Standardization landscape and applicable standards 8 UNE R PU 5 
D8.6 Contribution to standardization 8 UNE R PU 9, 18, 36 
D9.1 Project Management Guideline & Quality Plan 9 CETEC R CO 3 
D9.2 Project reports 9 CETEC R CO 9, 27 
D9.3 Ethics Handbook 9 UVEG R CO 6 
D9.4 Data management plan 9 UVEG R CO 12   
3.2. MANAGEMENT STRUCTURES, MILESTONES AND PROCEDURES 
3.2.1. MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE 
The Agro2Circular management structure is illustrated in 
Figure 16. The consortium and management structure will 
promote an optimal use of the knowledge, experience and 
expertise of the partners in fulfilling the objectives of the 
project, while providing effective project monitoring and 
control.  
The consortium organisati onal structure will comprise the 
bodies shown in following Table 51. 
 
General 
Assembly (GA) Responsible for the strategic decisions and the ultimate decision -making body. The GA will consist of one representative of each consortium 
partner and will be chaired by the Coordinator’s representative. The General Assembly assisted by the Technical Committee and the Exploitation 
Committee will articulate the management of the project at the strategic level. The GA will meet at least twice a year. Any member party of the 
consortium should be represented at any meeting of such consortium body and may appoint a substitute to attend and vote at a ny meeting. Any 
decision may also be enforced if the Project Coordinator circulates it to all members of the consortium in written form and i t is then agreed upon 
by the majority of the consortium. The GA will be free to act on its own initiative to formulate proposals and take decisions in accordance with the 
set procedures. The following decisions will be taken by the GA: changes to the consortium configuration, major changes of the work plan, major 
budget shifts, reallocation of work, IPR issues settlement of problems differences between contractors or partners. 
Table 51. A2C consortium organisational structure  
Figure 16. Agro2Circular 
Management Structure 
64 
 
Technical 
Committee 
(TC) 
Coordinates technological issues. It follows the work done in work packages and ensures the coherence of implementation and t echnical work 
progress plus manages technical matters arising from the work undertaken in each WP. The TC consists of a maximum one delegate from each 
partner up to a maximum of five participants for the Committee. Initially the TC will be made up of CETEC, CTNC, KVC, ECO and GWC. The TC 
members may be renewed annually by voting in the GA. The decisions taking and voting procedures are described in the Consortium Agreement. 
The TC is also responsible for risk management, quality assurance and the technological and scientific progress assessment of all project outputs 
that are delivered to the European Commission, including the accomplishment of milestones. The TC will be chaired by the Technical Manager.  
Exploitation 
Committee 
(ExC) 
Coordinates all exploitation issues by the implementation and update the Exploitation Plan. It follows the marketability of t he work done in the 
implementation and will ensure that circular business criteria (profitability, effectiveness, efficiency and su stainability) will be prioritized. For this 
purpose, the ExC continuously analyses the market and ensures that the project has the capability to develop innovative strat egies, models, 
products, and services, during its lifetime. ExC consists of a one deleg ate of each industrial partner (SME or Large industry) and will be chaired 
by the Coordinator´s representative. The decisions taking and voting procedures are described in the Consortium Agreement. In addition, the ExC 
ensures that dissemination & communication activities complement the exploitation and intellectual property strategy of A2C.   
Project Management Board (PMB) 
Project Coordinator (Ms. Fuensanta Monzó, R&D Project Manager at CETEC, see CV in Section 4 -5). She will organise project management 
meetings and will coordinate payments to partners. She will have an active role in the project, taking part in all key project aspects, following-
up & adaptation the project plan & progress monitoring on all WPs. Setting management procedures. She will ensure the work programme is kept 
to schedule and objectives, deliverables and milestones are met. She will monitor the obligations compliance of all parties. She will be responsible 
for monitoring and implementing contingency actions. She will be the direct link to EC communications. 
Project Manager: Mr. Federico Mesa, (Project Manager at CETEC, CV in Section 4). He has a vast experience and knowledge in financial and 
administrative requirements of H2020 projects. He has the role to manage all day -to-day administrative aspects of the project, providing advice 
regarding financial and procedural issues and keeping track of all important administrative procedures. He will also undertake assistance duties 
such as facilitating meetings, providing logistic, review deliverables, compiling reports, disseminating documentation, etc.  
Technical Manager: Ms. Presentación García, (Technology coordinator of CTNC, CV in Section 4) who has a vast experience in R&D projects 
of multidisciplinary complexity in biotechnology, food & biology fields will be responsible for the project technical decisions. She will coordinate the 
scientific and innovation activities among the technical partners. She will monitor the status and progress of all R&I activities. She will report within 
the project structure about the progress of the technical tasks and for identifying potential risks, discussing act ions and following them up inside 
the technical WPs.  
Systemic Approach Manager : Ms. Maite Ferrando  (Managing Director at KVC, CV in Section 4) as expert on innovation, social policy and 
wellbeing, she will ensure that both holistic and circular approaches will be considered in all project implementation tasks and set replication 
objectives will be meet. 
Outreach Manager: Ms. Giuliana Folco (Research and Exploitation Manager at ICONS, CV in Section 4) who has long experience in managing 
international R&D projects of multidisciplinary complexity, will be responsible for dissemination decisions . She will make sure that the desired 
project outcomes are clearly specified and delivered to the right industry players, scientific communities, relevant authorit ies and civil society. 
Further, she will ensure the exploitation of results by means of effective management of all knowledge and Intellectual Property Right issues. She 
will ensure that the project addresses the requirements of the end -users and has the expected impact, consistent with the perspectives of the 
industrial partners i n the consortium. She also  will coordinate an outreach local desk  (lead by PRIMA) focused on maximize impacts at 
local/regional level with concrete actions. In addition, the Outreach Manager will be in charge of the Exploitation Committee.  
WP Leaders: are responsible for day-to-day operational decisions of the project. Each WP is further subdivided into tasks, which are allocated to 
Task Leathers responsible for task coordination. The Work Package Leader monitors the task progress, approves progress report and deliverables, 
assesses milestones, and deals with technical problems that concern WPs. Any changes to the members of the Work Packages Leaders shall be 
subject to approval by the GA. 
Stakeholder 
Panel (SP) Panel stakeholder is created to bring together partners and representatives of organizations, industrial companies, associations which are relevant 
in the A2C’s results uptake. The Panel will make recommendations on the necessary features of the project’ results, as well a s on the Systemic 
Circular Solution. In add ition, stakeholders will contribute to build new market routes and implementation vehicles in different industrial sectors. 
Related to the demonstration activities, online meetings and workshops for the Stakeholders Panel will be organized at EU lev el, to gain specific 
feedback from this Panel in the A2C targeted sectors. During the project implementation, new stakeholders will be contacted by KVC as Systemic 
Approach Manager to join the stakeholders’ network of A2C and they are invited to join one project meeting per year where possible. Right now 
we have the following members…………………………… 
 
3.2.2. DECISION-MAKING MECHANISMS 
The consortium has agreed o n an organizational structure (Table 51) and decision-making mechanisms that have 
proved to be appropriate and efficient in previous H2020 projects. The responsibilities of the various management 
bodies, the decision-making process, conflict resolution, etc. will be described in detail in the Consortium Agreement 
(model DESCA), which will be signed by all partners before the official project start. Each partner will be responsible 
for effective and economic execution & management of its own activities according to the Grant Agreement and 
Consortium Agreement requirements, conditions and guidelines. To further ensure smooth interaction and 
collaboration, specific attention will be paid to: (i) internal communication flow.  GA meetings: face-to-face 
plenary consortium meetings organized every 6 months  to discuss strategic issues relating to the project and its 
progress, harmonize activities, solve potential conflicts and decide on major issues. ; PMB meetings: physical 
meetings (every 6 months) combined with the GA meetings every 6 months and intermedi ate virtual meetings 
utilizing Google Meet or similar (every 3 months). Even though the PMB is composed of WP leaders, all partners 
may be invited to the meetings and all partners will provide input to the WP leaders on the progress achieved. ; WP 
meetings: whenever deemed necessary by the WP leader, combined with the GA and PMB face -to-face meetings 
where appropriate or through Google Meet. ; Web-based communication: consisting of an external, public website 
and an internal, password-restricted web-based shared working environment as well as a dedicated Meet group. All 
relevant project documents (reports, meeting minutes presentations, etc.) will be uploaded to the internal site and the 
project members will be able to access, download and upload data and documents. The website will be fully 
operational in month 4. ; Day-to-day communication between the partners will mainly take place by online systems 
such as Meet, phone and e -mail. The Project Manager will actively stimulate and facilitate the co mmunication and 
interaction between partners.  (ii) reporting . Reporting and technical reviews: The performance of all work 
processes will be systematically monitored by the Coordinator and measured against the defined deliverables and 
milestones to ensure that the project stays focused and to identify any opportunities for improvement. Progress, 
periodic and final reports: The Project Coordinator assisted by the Project Manager will request the required input 
65 
 
and each partner will be required to report on t he work carried out and results obtained and any related delays, as 
well as on the work planned for the following period. The following reports are scheduled: - As part of its contractual 
obligation towards the EC, the consortium will deliver two Periodic Reports (financial and technical, Month 
18+60days, M36+60days) and one Final Report (M36+60days). 
-Additionally, and for internal monitoring purposes, the partners have agreed to produce intermediate internal 
progress reports (M9, M27). (iii) technical man agement. Deliverables tracking: A table of deliverables will be 
updated by the Project Manager and made available on the document sharing platform as a tracking tool. All 
deliverables will be validated by the respective WP leader, reviewed by the Project Manager, approved by the Project 
Coordinator before being distributed to the rest of the consortium, and submitted via the Portal of the EC. Technical 
review meeting(s): The Project Coordinator will make the necessary arrangements for the mandatory midterm 
review meeting by the EC Officer and external experts. (iv) financial management. The Project Coordinator will be 
responsible for the overall financial management and the timely distribution of the EC contribution. The Project 
Manager will support partners by: ①Providing detailed information on the individual budgets and H2020 financial 
rules at the project kick -off. ②Advising all partners on financial matters according to H2020 financial rules 
whenever requested (without liability). ③Monitoring expenses as part of the 9 -monthly internal progress reports. 
The PC will review and approve all financial statements and compile the overall financial data required for the two 
financial reports as part of the Periodic Reports.  (v) quality assu rance. All partners will perform their work 
according to their internal quality control and assurance procedures. At project level, a project management guide 
will be prepared, summarizing the main information for project management. It will address quality assurance aspects 
including an internal review procedure for deliverable and milestone reports. All deliverables will have to be 
reviewed by the Project manager and approved by the Project Coordinator. The achievement of milestones will be 
assessed by the Technical Committee.  
Table 3.2a: List of milestones  
Nº Milestone name WP Date Means of verification 
1 First batch of sorted multilayer materials at 
small scale 3 M10 
Identification and sorting of multilayers (80% from the infeed) including dark and aluminium (>99%efficacy): 
LDPE/PET-Al, LLDPE/PET-Al, LDPE/Al/ PET, LDPE/EVOH, LDPE/PA at small scale (1 -3 kg) able to start 
the next trials. Deliverable 3.3. 
2 First extracts from agri-food wastes at 
small scale 2 M12 Dietary fibres, phenolic compounds and carotenoids (purity 70-80%) extracted from target agrifood wastes. 
Deliverables 2.1, 2.2., 2.3, 2.4.  
3 Public Engagement Strategy 7 M12 Public engagement strategy is ready to be implemented, Verified D7.1 
4 First batch of recycled multilayers at small 
scale 3 M18 
First batch from physical delamination: LDPE/PET, LLDPE/PET, LDPE, PET and Al separated flows with 
high purity (>99%) at small scale able to start enzymatic depolymerisation and mechanical recycling. 
Deliverable 3.4. First batch from PET/PE enzymatic recycling: TPA, EG & alkanes from PET/PE degradation 
at small scale (100 -200 g) able to start bioconversion trials. Deliverable 3.5 . First batch from aluminium 
modification: chemically modified aluminium at small scale (200 -300 g) highly compatible with PE matr ix. 
Deliverable 3.7. First batch of processable plastic compounds LDPE/EVOH, LDPE/EVOH/LDPE, LDPE/PA, 
LDPE/PA/LDPE, LDPE, PET blown extrusion, cast extrusion compound grades (25-50 kg). Deliverable 3.8. 
5 
Optimal routes for extraction, purification & 
stabilisation of phenolic compounds, 
carotenoids and fibres   
4 M18 
Optimisation of 2 extraction routes. Route 1. To achieve a yield of 60%. Route 2. To achieve a yield of 70%.  
Optimised ad hoc stabilisation routes to maintain intact the extracts properties (99%) & achieve a high stability 
as food ingredients nutraceuticals & cosmetics. Deliverables 2.1, 2.3, 2.4, 4.1.  
6 A2C DIS System Beta Version 1 M20 Beta version of DIS including the private and public structure, communication processes for all involved 
technologies and public blockchain linked. Deliverables 1.7, 1.8. 
7 Decontamination system for plastic 
recyclers and integration  3 M22 Plastics decontamination (≥99%), including volatile and semi -volatile compounds and odours, organic 
materials and microplastics. Lab process upgraded at pilot scale.  Deliverable 3.1, 3.2, 3.6.  
8 First high added value products from 
upcycling of recycled plastics  5 M22 
Obtaining protocatechuic acid-PCA from TPA (conversion rate ≥20%) , glycolic acid-GA from EG (conversion 
rate ≥20%)  and C16 & C18 ω-hydroxy acids from alkanes(conversion rate ≥40%). Deliverable 5.1. Obtaining 
PHBV at small scale (500 g -1 kg). Deliverables 5.2, 5.3. 5.4 Obtaining C-50 carotenoids (≥95% extracted 
from cell debris) . Deliverable 5.5. Range of barrier (OTR 1 -10 cm3/atm day), recycled and recyclable 
compounds as alternative to current multilayer materials by morphology-controlled blends (L/W ratio>100): 
PE/PE-EVOH (OTR 1-5 cm3/atm day), PE/PE-PA (OTR 6-10 cm3/atm day). Deliverables 5.6 and 5.8. Very 
high barrier compounds for agricultural applications:  Al modified dispersed in the PE/EVOH and PE/PA 
compounds (OTR<1cm3/atm day). Deliverables 5.7 and 5.8. PHBV compounds with optimal processability 
and characteristics to be transformed into food packaging and agricultural films: IFM 1-4 g/10 min (190;2.16), 
density <1.3 g/cm3, tensile strenght ≥20 MPa, Elongation≥100%. Deliverables 5.7 and 5.8. 
9 A2C DIS system complete & qualified 6 M22 DIS available for the public with data of the circular approach of the Cluster. Deliverable 6.2. 
10 
Scale-up of the optimal agrifood extraction, 
purification & stabilisation technologies and 
integration. 
4,6 M29 
Route 1 extraction scale up (100 kg/h) and purification & conservation (15 kg) and both integrated at CTNC 
facilities.  Route 2 extraction scale up (50kg/h) and purification & conservation (25 kg) and both integrated at 
DMC facilities. Pilot for the delivery systems of phenolic & carotenoids substances at CTNC facilities (1kg).  
Deliverables 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 & 6.1. 
11 Scale-up of the multilayers sorting system 
and integration  3,6 M29 Identification & sorting system scale up for flow rates of 25 kg/h and shipped at GWC facilities. Deliverables 
3.3, 6.1. 
12 
Scale-up of the physical delamination 
system for aluminium separation and 
integration 
3,6 M29 Delamination process scale up (20 kg batch) including the core physical delamination by fluids and the sorting 
of the separated materials by sink flotation. Deliverables 3.4, 6.1. 
13 
Scale-up of the fermentation of enzymes & 
PET/PE enzymatic biodegradation 
process, integration and a methodology for 
by-products recovery 
3,6 M29 
Enzymes fermentation upscale at 30L fermentator and enzymatic fermentation process upgraded at 50L 
reactor. Production of at least one batch of degraded PET/PE at pilot scale for characterization and evaluation 
of by-products for valorisation routes and industrial applications. Deliverables 3.5, 6.1. 
14 Scale-up of the aluminium recycling and 
integration  3,6 M29 Process for aluminium chemically modified scale up (1kg) and integrated at GWC plastics recycling plant. 
Deliverables 3.7, 6.1. 
Back Impact.Communication 
66 
 
15 
Scale-up of the biotransformation of the 
TPA, EG & alkanes into high added value 
products and integration 
5,6 M29 
Upcycling of TPA, EG and alkanes to building blocks by biotechnological routes scale up by UNIMIB at 
CETEC facilities in 30 L fermenters. Production of at least one batch per product at pilot scale for 
characterization and evaluation of by-products for valorisation routes and industrial applications. Deliverables 
5.1, 6.1. 
16 
Scale-up of the bioproduction of PHBV and 
C-50 carotenoids by Hfx. mediterranei cell 
factory 
5,6 M29 
Production of a PHBV by selected wildtype and engineered strains of Hfx. mediterranei as cell factory (>0.6 
g PHBV/g substrate, production rates >95%) & upgrading at pilot scale up 100L. Green extraction of PHBV 
(yield≥98%) & upgrading  at pilot scale (1 -3L). Extraction of C -50 carotenoids (yields ≥95%). Deliverables 
5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 6.1. 
17 
Scale-up of the extensional flow mixing 
extrusion system to obtain recycled and 
recyclable high barrier compounds 
5,6 M29 
Scale up of the process (10 00 kg) at GWC facilities by incorporation of a convergent -divergent plate to the 
plastic extruder. Production of at least one batch per product at pilot scale for characterization and evaluation. 
Deliverables 5.6, 6.1. 
18 Scale -up of the plastics decontamination 
process and integration 3,6 M29 
Scale up of plastics water washing & recirculation, microplastics identification and separation and organic by-
products recovery (1000L), and vacuum reactor by VOCs elimination (500 kg) implemented at GWC facilities. 
Deliverables 3.1, 3.2, 3.6, 6.1. 
19 Products from A2C technologies validated 
in a real environment 6 M33 
Validation of demonstrators in real industrial conditions.  Demonstrators for recycling sector:1000 kg of high 
barrier compounds alternative to multilayers;  
Demonstrators for cosmetic sector: 1kg of antiwrinkle & antiskin aging formulations using PCA, GA & hydroxy 
acids, 1 kg of antioxidant formulations using phenolic extracts, and carotenoids; Demonstrators for food 
sector:  200 demonstrators of biodegradable food packaging, 200 demonstrators of barrier & recyclable food 
packaging for juices, 3000L of vegetable deserts , 2000L of enriched juices, 20.000 kg of jams and compotes 
and 1000L of 2 nutraceutics formulations ; Demonstrators for agriculture sector: 500 kg of biodegradable 
mulch films, 500 kg of recyclable and high barrier disinfection  films; Demonstrators for Circular Economy 
Digitalisation: “DIS” including traceability and Predictive Decision Support Tool .Deliverable 6.3. 
20 
New recycled products applicable in food, 
nutraceutics, cosmetic, food packaging, 
and agricultural applications. 
1 M36 
Residues, Energy & Water Management Plan (Deliverables 1.2,  1.5, 1.6). EFSA pre-dossier for recycled 
plastics, including food contact assessment (EU10/2011) migration tests (concentration <10 ppb) and NIAs 
assessment. EFSA predossier for new food, cosmetic and nutraceutics formulations including EU regulations 
assessment for maximum contaminants presence (EC -1333/2008 & EU -2016/662, EC-1223/2009 & EU -
2018/978, EC-1924/2006). Deliverables 1.3, 1.4. A2C processes protocol paper (Deliverable 6.4.) 
21 
A2C systemic solution circularity and ready 
for adoption & highly replicable and 
scalable & basis for future industrial 
implementation 
6,7 M36 
A2C CEBMs successfully developed integrating natural capital accounting (D6.5,D6.6) 
A2C Public engagement strategy successfully deployed (D7.1.), A2C Community-based innovation schemes 
and lessons learnt (D7.2) besides the evaluation framework (D7.3) delivered. Delivering the LCA and A2C 
circularity assessed and demonstrated (D7.4), A2C socio-economic, cultural and acceptability factors as well 
as its social impacts addressed (D7.5) Delivering policy & regulations (D7.8) and financing (D7.9) for decision 
makers, also the scale -up potential results (D7.10) the A2C systemic solution model and sel f-assessment 
tool (D7.6), Murcia CE action plans (D7.7) and the replication cases action plans (D7.11 and D7.12) 
22 A2C outreach successfully implemented 8 M36 
Setting the A2C outreach strategy (D8.1) and successfully implemented as following (D8.2): A2C high 
visibility, reaching: 200,000 European citizens; 1,500 Industries, 500 Public & Private decision Makers and. 
Website (≥20.000 hits), social media (≥1000 followers).  
Successful exploitation strategy, establishing commercial networks (D8.3), Delivering: training plan for local 
actors/education communities, recommendation/guidelines to policy makers and relevant stakeholders and 
practical guidelines/training for industries and clusters (D8.4) and to contribute to new standards 
developments (D8.5,D8.6); Increased a wareness about circula r and climate neutral practices (indicator: 
Table 36); Effective knowledge transfer (Table 38). See planned actions indicator measures on table 42b) 
(vi) conflict resolution.: The WP Leaders will assume responsibility for operational decisions within their WP, 
whereas the GA will be responsible for decisions related to strategic developments of the project.  
Procedure for decisions by the GA . Quorum: The GA shall not decide on issues unless two -thirds (2/3) of its 
members are present or represented (including attendees joining by teleconference). ①Each of the Beneficiaries has 
one vote. Absent members are not entitled to vote or transfer votes. ②Decisions will be taken by a simple majority 
of votes with the Project Coordinator holding a casting vote in the event of a tie. All partners retain a veto right.  
The details of the decision-making procedures will be laid down in the Consortium Agreement.  
Conflict resolution through a four-step procedure: Problem solving discussions and negotiations will generally take 
place during the ordinary and ad-hoc meetings between the relevant partners. If no solution can be found then: 1. The 
partners concerned will inform the WP Leader. If no solution is achieved, then; 2. The WP Leader will inform the 
Project Coordinator who will mediate between partner(s). If no solution is achieved, then; 3. The General Assembly 
will be req uired to hold an extraordinary meeting within 15 days. If the conflict can still not be resolved or if it 
significantly affects the viability or scope of the project as a whole, then; 4. Project Coordinator will then additionally 
seek advice from the EC Pr oject Officers, where appropriate. In serious situations the Project Coordinator will 
recommend that any parties in conflict conduct external mediation jointly funded by each party.  
3.2.2. INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 
The management structure and work plan propo sed follow the guidelines of the European Standard for Innovation 
Management (CEN/TS 16555 -1:2013), which provides the elements for a systematic approach to innovation and 
optimal management of aspects related to innovation capabilities.  
Innovation Management will be led by an Outreach Manager, Ms. Giuliana Folco whose main roles will be to act 
as a champion for the project and its exploitation.  
Ms. Giuliana has been nominated for this role by  the consortium as she shows strong leadership and has excellent 
cross function and cross-sectorial knowledge and skills.  
Specifically, the A2C project: ①Provides the organizational structure, communication flow and dissemination and 
exploitation plan and activities for effective innovation management. ②Brings together a consortium of partners 
with the right competences to execute a well -structured innovation program with clearly defined innovation 
objectives, assignment of roles and responsibilities, task distributions and detailed planning. ③All the required  
resources, key performance indicators, milestones and deliverables have been defined. ④Foreseen risks have been 
67 
 
listed and risk mitigation measures proposed (Section 3.2.4). ⑤The Work Plan includes the dedicated WP8, with 
tasks related to exploitation, IP  management, protection of IPR, internal and external communication and 
involvement of stakeholders. ⑥The Project Coordinator will promote a culture of knowledge sharing and innovation. 
Additionally, the E xC will guide the innovation activities by providin g insights in technical, business and market 
issues and opportunities. ⑦Advantage will be taken of the unique combination of industrial, technical & scientific 
competences in the consortium and the Stakeholder Panel to maximize the chances of bringing the project innovations 
to other similar enclaves and to establish the optimal context for the generation of novel creative ideas. 
3.2.3. RISKS RELATED TO PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION   
Risk management is  a key issue integrated in A2C  project. The following 
aspects are included in our risk analysis: Risk identification by a systemic 
approach based on the project objectives; Risk analysis, determining risk 
rating and priorisation.  We consider Risk = Likeli hood to occur x 
Severity- Likelihood to occur: Low-1, Medium-2, High-3. Severity: Low-
2, Medium-4, High-6.  Risk Level are considered: High≥12; Medium: 7-
11; Low≤6. ;Minimisation strategies: actions to minimise the likelihood to occur (Mitigation) and Contingency for 
Severity.; Risk monitoring. Each WP leader will periodically review the status of each task achievement in relation 
to its objectives. As a result of this analysis, a corrective action plan will be constructed to reiterate some of the 
tasks with changes to their content that are likely to produce an improved deliverable closer to the quantified target. 
The improved deliverable will then be re -integrated into the milestone assessmen t. The following critical risks 
(Management (M), Technical (T), External (E)) have already been considered : See their graphic representation in 
Figure 17 and see risks description in following table 3.2b. Critical risks.                           
Description of risk/Risk Level WP Proposed risk mitigation measures 
1. (T) NIAs are not adequately identified during 
the plastic recycling processes then detection 
thresholds impair return to food contact.  Low-6 
(1x6) 
1 
Mitigation: CETEC will implement a methodology for food contact assessment and compliance (task 
1.1.2.) including NIAs analysis with specific equipment able to sense ppm of pollutants.  Contingency: 
if results of identification are not successful then methodologies would be readjusted. 
2. (T) Problems in DIS integration with different 
platforms or Operative Systems (O.S.) and the 
correct visualization of the information.  Low-6 
(1x6) 
1 
Mitigation: ECO, EQU, EXU & EVRY programmers take into account the adaptive design in any O.S. 
and platform. The unification of criteria and results will be through browsers and engines that meet the 
standards and requirements of 3WC (World Wide Web Consortium). The visualization and use of DIS 
in these browsers, allows to eliminate errors from the whole system. Contingency: re-programing the 
identified problems and validating each ones.    
3. (T) The economic feasibility study determines 
a high cost in the extraction of the compounds of 
interest from vegetable wastes.  Low-6 (1x6) 
2 
Mitigation: CTNC, SSICA, DMC, CITRO & MKS will carry out a specific study for each extraction 
route determining the optimal parameters to achieve a balance between the quality of the extract, the 
environmental and economic sustainability of the system (task 2.2).  Contingency: if the routes are 
not economically viable, then studies in the variation of the key parameters will be develop. If is 
necessary alternative routes will be implemented. 
4. (T) The extracts from agrifood wastes do not 
achieve the expected purity (70-80%) and 
consequently are not valid for food, nutraceutics 
and cosmetic applications.  Low-6 (1x6) 
2 
Mitigation: SSICA, CTNC, DMC and CITRO will develop a specific route of purification for each 
extract (task 2.3) based on a synergistic combination of filtration and resins, determining the optimal 
parameters in each case.   Contingency: the parameters will be readjusted and if it is necessary 
alternative purification techniques (e.g. ion exchange chromatography) will be implemented or 
alternative agrifood wastes will be selected. 
5.(T) Feeding condition under laboratory setups 
significantly differs from industrial flows for optical 
detection.  Low-6 (1x6) 
3 
Mitigation: IRIS will establish from the beginning a common operation range flux of materials at lab 
scale and industrial level. Specific physical barriers will be designed and included if the material 
distribution on the conveyor is not considered be suitable for th e proper sorting (task 3.2). 
Contingency: If the problem is caused by either hardware or software, then additional capacity will 
be brought on line to cope with the speed. 
6. (T) PET & PE wastes do not have adequate 
characteristics (low crystallinity, molecular weight 
<500 g/mol, high polarity) to be efficiently attack 
by the customised enzymes. Low-6 (1x6) 
3 
Mitigation: CETEC will work to develop an ad -hoc pre-treatment for PE and PET wastes based on  
physic-chemical modifications (task 3.4.1) to achieve polymers chains assimilable by enzymes. 
Contingency: Others alternative pre-treatment route will be studied and designed by CETEC 
7.(T) Modification of Al-flakes not stable enough.  
Medium-8 (2x4) 3 
Mitigation: BOKU will develop two robust routes (task 3.5.2) for the Al stabilization and highly 
compatibilisation with PE matrix based on direct binding of an organic -ligand (e.g., long chai n 
carboxylic acids) that shows strong affinity to aluminium and further modification with a polyethylene 
compatible shell (e.g., polyisobutylene -PIB) and the second one based on modifications with 
aluminiumoxide/siliciumoxide in a first step, followed by t he polymer-shell synthesis.  Contingency: 
Others alternative pre-treatment routes will be studied and designed by BOKU. 
8.(T) Expected sensory quality of the new food, 
nutraceutics and cosmetic formulations 
containing the extracts are not as expected, 
being not marketable.  Low-6 (1x6) 
4 
Mitigation: DMC, CTNC, SSICA, CITRO, MCT & ALM will carry out a specific research (task 4.1 ) to 
ensure that the different extracts are idoneous for new food formulations (jams, compotes, juices, 
vegetable drinks, and vegetable creams), nutraceutical formulations (antioxidants), and antioxidants 
and antiskin aging cosmetic formulations, ensuring their functionality without compromising nutritional 
balance, physical parameters and sensory quality.  Contingency:  reformulations will be made to 
achieve the expected technical results. If it is necessary other alternative extracts and/or agri -food 
wastes will be studied. 
9.(T) Recycled plastics contains contaminants 
not being suitable for food applications.  Low-6 
(1x6) 
5 
Mitigation: WETS & CEW will implement at GWC facilities a water washing system to eliminate 
organic materials, including detection of microplastics that will be eliminated by microfiltration. 
Moreover, GWC will implement a decontamination technology (vacuum reaction) before extrusion 
process (including devolatilization ports to contribute to the decontamination) to eliminate all potential 
volatile and semi -volatile compounds and odours.  Contingency: If decontamination is not enough 
Figure 17. Risks representation  
68 
 
 
3.3. CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE 
A2C brings a multidisciplinary team with complementary and excellent expertise. The A2C Consortium is a strong 
platform of experts along “the first territorial systemic solution for the upcycling of agrifood wastes, including 
plastics and fruits & vegetable wastes into high added value products for agrifood & cosmetic sectors”.   
Moreover, a fluent network collaboration with strategic stakeholders (e.g., some will be part of the Stakeholders 
Panel, others will participate in A2C co-creation and outreach actions such as the 26 European clusters engaged).  
The Consortium involves 10 European countries and the core is in the Region of Murcia (ES) since it is a key player 
of the European agrifood industry. Moreover, the Consortium involves other 9 European countries (GER, AT, UK, 
IT, NL, BEL, FIN, CH, LI) bringing the most advance technologies to the cluster, circular business & communication 
experts and two areas for replication (IT, LI) and addressing a balance between Southern, Northern and Eastern 
Europe.The Consortium consists of 41 partners with complementary competences as following: 
(<99%) then other alternative decont amination technologies will be studied (supercritical CO 2 during 
the extrusion) 
10.(T) Redox unbalance in the desired 
bioconversion pathways of the enzymatic 
degradation products into building blocks for 
cosmetic.  Low-6 (1x6) 
5 
Mitigation: UNIMIB  will calculate the redox balance and thermodynamics of all the reactions by 
specific tools  http://equilibrator.weizmann.ac.il/) and compensations will be applied where needed, 
such as enzyme engineering for cofactor swapping and compensatory reactions for either adding an 
electron sink or for providing reducing equivalent. Contingency: Other alternative  compensatory 
routes will be studied. 
11.(T) Morphologies obtained by 
compatibilisation by extensional flow mixing are 
lower than expected (L/W<100) not reaching high 
barrier properties.   Low-6 (1x6) 
5 
Mitigation: CETEC and GWC will implement a synergistic strategy based on specific compatibilisation 
routes carried out under extensional flow mixing during the extrusion process in task 5.2, that will be 
achieved by the incorporation of a convergent -divergent plate in the extruder.  Contingency: Other 
compatibilisers will be studied and if it is necessary other routes for the extensional flow achievement 
will be design. 
12.(T) Mismatch at the interplay between 
technologies at the ‘integration of technologies at 
pilot scale phase.  Low-6 (1x6) 
6 
Mitigation: Planned and well-coordinated communication and alignment of all technologies during the 
phases preceding the ‘integration of technologies at pilot scale’ phase. A specific task in the project 
(T6.1) will be focused in the integration of all develop technologies at pilot scale. It will be led by GWC 
in collaboration with all technical partners.  Contingency: If necessary, a pilot will be redesigned to fit 
the integrated production chain. 
13.(E) Difficulties in involving EU -wide decision-
makers and poor outreach at EU level. 
Medium-8 (2x4) 
7 
Mitigation: the participation in EU alliances and clusters  (already engaged through support letters)  
will facilit ate the EU -wide involvement ; however, a potential suboptimal outreach should be 
considered: all partner s will devote significant efforts in maximizing the project impact and, in 
collaboration with WP8 leaders and the Outreach Manager , resources and means will be put at 
disposal of the whole consortium for fostering an optimal communication and involvement o f relevant 
European stakeholders.  Besides, EURA as the representative of European regional development 
agencies, has strong links with decision makers and networks at EU level   Contingency: Increase 
efforts and using the networks of stakeholders that are being engaged.  
14.(E) Low citizenship engagement and 
suboptimal involvement of relevant stakeholders 
in the participatory processes. Low-6 (1x6) 
7 
Mitigation: although socio -economic and socio -cultural conditions of all communities targeted may 
undermine the recruitment and engagement process, an in -depth revision of concurring factors and 
potential solutions will be conducted prior the implementation of the WP7 actions; also, the iterative 
process of assessment and the continuous surveillance of the publ ic engagement strategy will allow 
to adapt the actions and measures in a timely manner ). Besides, PRIMA, the leader of the actions, 
has strong links at community levels and will be supported by the Alhama de Murcia municipality 
(support letter) in carrying  out the participative action and engage citizens. Contingency: e.g., to 
involve more CSOs in touch with the communities, community leaderships and community business 
for aiding the engagement. 
15.(E) Low performance of the communication 
activity and suboptimal audience outreach. .  
Low-6 (1x6) 
8 
Mitigation: WP8 leader ICONS has vast experience in outreach actions and together with involved 
partners will evaluate the strategy and the performance of actions yearly; for communication 
campaigns, there will be a baseline and final evaluation. This iterative approach allows to detect and 
make corrective actions ahead on time in order to maximise the outreach of the activities and the 
A2Cscope.  Contingency: re-edition of the A2C Dissemination & Communication strategy. 
16.(E) It is not sufficiently ensured that the 
developed technologies, processes, etc. align to 
the latest stand ards, which could lead to 
incompatibility with already existing solutions and 
thus threaten a successful entry into the market .    
Medium-8 (2x4) 
8 
Mitigation: Right from the start of the project, it is made sure that all relevant standards are taken into 
account and that no stand-alone solutions are being developed but fit into the market/already existing 
solutions. Contingency: The compliance with most relevant standards will be checked at several 
stages in the project. 
17.(M) Delays in the execution of tasks/WP or 
deliverables cause delays in project expected 
progress. Medium-8 (2x4) 
9 
Mitigation: Work package leaders and tasks leaders have been selected based on a wide experience 
in relation to the project activities. Project Management and decision mechanisms in Consortium 
Agreement (task 1.1). Contingency: If is necessary the Project Coordinator will reallocate some tasks 
to avoid delays. 
18.(M) A partner leaves the project or 
underperforms either technically or financially. 
Low-6 (1x6) 
9 
Mitigation: Exhaustive control of activities,  consortium with agreed and negotiated tasks, meditated 
and measured tasks and efforts. Consortium agreement. Contingency: Substitution by other partner 
with similar profile. In addition, the whole capabilities of each partner have been explored and partial  
tasks could even be done by current partners (same or different departments/areas). 
19.(M) Lack of overall coordination. Low-6 (1x6) 9 
Mitigation: Effective coordination ensured by the management structure and the work plan. The 
project Coordinator has a  vast experience in coordinating EU projects and is supported by the 
executive board. Contingency: Staff in charge of the project will be re -evaluated and will be carried 
out the reallocation of the tasks and personnel efforts. 
20.(M) Delays in the samples reception due 
borders closing for Covid-19. Medium-8 (2x4) 9 Mitigation: Activities will be plan taking into account time allotted to accomplish the calendar.   
Contingency: In case of long periods then we will focus on other specific aspects of the project. 
69 
 
Plastic multilayers upcycling value chain 
CETEC (ES) will lead the related developments in collaboration with IRIS (ES) optical sorting, SAPE (DE) physical delamination, MELLI 
(UK) enzymatic depolymerisation, GWC(ES) decontamination, mechanical recycling & new compound s, UNIMIB (IT) biotransformation of 
enzymatic degradation products into high added value substances for cosmetics, CETBIO (ES) & UA (ES) PHBV bioplastics & carotenoids 
production. GWC will be the leader of the integration of all technologies at pilot scale in a demonstrator. 
Valorisation of the agrifood waste value chain 
CTNC (ES) will lead the related developments in collaboration with DMC (ES) green extraction+enzymatic hydrolysis+microwave-assisted 
extraction, MKSI (IT) microwave extraction technology developer, CITRO (ES) green extraction+ultrasound-assisted extraction, SSICA (IT) 
purification and stabilisation of the bioactive extracts . The wastes providers for the developments in both value chains will be MCT (ES), 
ALM (ES), CITRO (ES), multilayer packaging & agrifood wastes and PROEX (ES) multilayer agricultural films & agrifood wastes.  
Digital tool DIS for the agrifood sector 
ECO (ES) leading related developments, in collaboration with EQU (ES) watermark impression, EXUS (LI) Big Data, EVRY (LI) blockchain. 
End users to validate the A2C developments in a real environment  
SOLP (ES) new recyclable barrier films & biodegradable films for agriculture, EVER (ES) barrier packaging and biodegradable packaging, 
LOL (ES) new cosmetic formulations, MCT (ES), ALM (ES), CITRO (ES) new food formulations and DMC (ES) new cosmetic formulations 
Sustainability approach 
REG (ES) will ensure the energetic sustainability and WETS (NL) & CEW (NL) the water sustainability of all A2C processes, and  VTT (FI) 
will perform the LCA, measuring cluster circularity and benchmarking of solutions.  
A2C Systemic approach and multidimensional model for adoption, replication & scalability and A2C Outreach  
KVC(ES, public engagement, socioeconomics) will lead the related activities in collaboration with experts on SSH disciplines, UVEG (ES) 
public engagement, socioeconomics and p olicy, AGRO(ES) leading Murcia CEAP, regional socioeconomics, PRIMA (ES) leading 
local/regional engagement, regional socioeconomics, PROEX (ES) regional socioeconomics, CJM (ES) private financing, UB (IT) CE 
expert, A2C CEBMs and socioeconomics, VTT (FI) environmental, circularity & benchmarking, CARM (ES) public administration, regional 
policy and public financing, INFO (ES) public administration, public financing, UNE(ES) standardisation organism, EURA (BE) leading 
clustering actions, public European fund s & policy, TCA (IT) & LPK(LT) replication cases, ICONS (IT) leading A2C Outreach, A2C 
exploitation. 
Partner’s contribution is key for the successful project compl etion. The main role of each partner (also shown in 
cover page table) and the W ork Package where they are mainly involved are highlighted in (Table 3.4a). Many of 
A2C partners have already participated in EU/national networking activities so they have good experience in research 
activities cooperation&coordination.
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED 
Table 3.4a: Number of person months required  
Nº Partner Name WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 WP9 Total P/M 
1 CETEC 15.5  35.5  32.0 18.0 2.0 6.0 30.0 139.0 
2 GWC 10.5  34.0  27.0 74.0 4.0 3.5 2.0 155.0 
3 SAPE 1.0  48.0   36.0 4.0 2.5 2.0 93.5 
4 IRIS 1.5  34.0   14.0 2.0 2.5 2.0 56.0 
5 BOKU 1.0  17.0  12.5 19.0 2.0 2.5 2.0 56.0 
6 MELLI 0.5  69.0   34.0 2.0 2.5 2.0 110.0 
7 CETBIO 0.5    25.0 37.5 2.0 3.0 1.0 69.0 
8 UNIMIB 0.5    30.0 21.0 2.0 2.5 1.0 57.0 
9 UA 0.5    20.0 26.0 2.0 2.5 1.0 52.0 
10 WETS 7.5  22.0  25.0 30.0 3.0 2.5 2.0 92.0 
11 REG 30.5     45.0 3.0 2.5 2.0 83.0 
12 CEW 4.0  13.0  12.0 21.0 2.5 2.5 2.0 57.0 
13 CTNC 13.5 59.0  25.0  25.0 2.0 4.5 5.0 134.0 
14 MCT 2.0 9.0  17.0 0.5 30.0 2.0 2.5 1.0 64.0 
15 ALM 3.0 8.0  18.0 0.5 30.0 2.0 2.5 1.0 65.0 
16 PROEX 4.5    1.0 0.5 2.5 3.5 0.5 12.5 
17 DMC 1.0 25.0  32.5  34.0 2.0 2.5 2.0 99.0 
18 CITRO 2.0 13.0  22.0 0.5 29.0 2.0 2.5 1.0 72.0 
19 MKS 0.5 2.0  9.0  9.0 1.0 2.0 0.5 24.0 
20 SSICA 1.0 14.0  16.0  6.5 2.0 2.5 1.0 43.0 
21 KVC 0.5     3.0 45.0 9.5 6.0 64.0 
22 UVEG       21.0 6.0 9.0 36.0 
23 CJM      10.5 8.0 5.0 0.5 24.0 
24 CARM       15.0 8.5 0.5 21.0 
25 UNE        13.0 1.0 14.0 
26 AGRO       17.0 13.0 1.0 31.0 
27 EURA       6.0 12.0 1.0 19.0 
28 UB      27.0 15.5 12.5 1.0 56.0 
29 VTT 0.5      26.0 2.5 1.0 30. 
30 ICONS       1.0 43.0 3.0 47.0 
31 PRIMA       7.0 24.0 1.0 32.0 
32 INFO      2.0 10.0 8.5 0.5 21.0 
33 ECO 44.0     26.5  2.0 0.5 73.0 
34 EQU 40.0     15.0  1.5 0.5 57.0 
35 EXUS 44.0     19.0  2.5 0.5 66.0 
36 EVRY 42.0     15.0  2.5 0.5 60.0 
37 SOLP 0.5  5.0   13.0 2.0 2.0 0.5 23.0 
38 EVER 0.5     17.0 2.0 5.0 0.5 25.0 
39 LOL 0.5 5.0    10.0 2.0 2.0 0.5 20.0 
40 TCA 0.5     2.0 21.0 4.5 1.0 29.0 
41 LPK 0.5     2.0 20.5 4.0 1.0 28.0 
Total P/M 274.5 135.0 277.5 139.5 186.0 701.5 265.0 241.0 92.0 2,312.0 
 
70 
 
Table 3.4b: Other direct cost: only partners that exceed the 15% of personnel cost has been included 
 
   

Section 4,5,6-page 1 
 
 
 
 
Nº Participant organisation name/Main role short n. Type Country 
1 
Centro Tecnológico del Calzado y del Plástico-Coordinador. Plastic wastes characterisation & pre-treatments for enhancing enzymatic 
attack, plastics mechanical recycling, PHBV bioplastic compounding & transformation at small scale, bioplastics characterisation, 
recyclability & biodegradability studies. 
CETEC RTO ES 
2 Green World Compounding, SL- Plastics waste decontamination & mechanical recycling, development of high barrier recyclable plastics 
compounds, leader of integration of pilot technologies. GWC SME ES 
3 Saperatec-Physical delamination of multilayers containing aluminium SAPE SME DE 
4 Iris Technology, SL- Optical sorting of multilayers IRIS SME ES 
5 Universität für Bodenkultur- Modification of recycled aluminium from multilayers BOKU UNI AT 
6 Mellizyme Biotechnology Ltd – Enzymatic degradation process of PET/PE multilayers MELLI SME UK 
7 Cetec Biotechnology, SL- PHBV bioplastic production & pilot scale up CETBIO UNI IT 
8 University of Milano-Bicocca- Biotransformation of PET/PE enzymatic degradation products into building blocks for cosmetic UNIMIB RTO IT 
9 Universidad de Alicante – Carotenoids for cosmetics & PHBV bioplastics production UA UNI ES 
10 Wetsus- European centre of excellence for sustainable water technology – Water sustainability approach in A2C processes, plastics 
decontamination process, PHBV bioplastic green extraction WETS RTO NL 
11 Regenera Levante, SL - Energy sustainability approach in A2C processes REG SME ES 
12 Centre of Expertise Water Treatment - Water sustainability approach in A2C processes, plastics decontamination process CEW RTO NL 
13 Centro Tecnológico Nacional de la Conserva - Agrifood wastes characterisation & pre-treatments, Research on optimal green hybrid 
extraction & purification routes for bioactives. CTNC RTO ES 
14 
Agrotransformados, SA (MOCITOS) – Food processor - Agrifood wastes (grapes, artichoke, apples) ) & multilayer packaging provider. 
End user (validation of food formulations in real environment). End user (development of food formulations for juices, jams & compotes 
using the A2C bioactives in real environment) 
MCT SME ES 
15 Laboratorios Almond, SL – Food processor- Agrifood wastes (grapes, apples) & multilayer packaging provider, End user (development of 
food formulations for vegetable desserts using the A2C bioactives in real environment) ALM SME ES 
16 
Proexport-Association of Producers and exporters from Region of Murcia. Agricultural primary sector representative; Agrifood wastes 
(cauliflower, broccoli, artichoke) & multilayer packaging provider; socioeconomic assessment, A2C Circular Action Plan; A2C model, 
public engagement. 
PROEX NPO ES 
17 DMC Research Center, SL- Development & pilot scale up of green extraction+enzymatic hydrolysis+micrawave-assisted extraction. 
Evaluation of the bioactive extracts. End user (development of nutraceuticals formulations using the A2C bioactives in real environment) DMC SME ES 
18 Citromil, SL-Food processor- Agrifood wastes (citrus) & multilayer packaging provider, development & pilot scale up of green 
extraction+ultrasound-assisted extraction. End user (development of food formulations for juices with A2C bioactives,real environment) VILLANI SME ES 
19 MKS Instruments Italy, SRL. - Development of microwave extraction technology. MKSI LI IT 
20 Experimental Station for the Food Preservation Industry- Research on purification & stabilisation of the bioactive extracts. SSICA RTO IT 
21 Senior Europa, SL (Kveloce I+D+i)- Systemic approach manager-public engagement leader, A2C model (socioeconomic, policy, 
governance & impact assessment), capacity building  KVC SME ES 
22 Polibienestar. Universitat de Valencia- Public engagement, A2C model (socioeconomic, policy, governance), capacity building  UVEG UNI ES 
23 Fundación Cajamar- Financing entity linked to agrifood sector; A2C CEBMs financing needs, A2C model (private funds); public 
engagement, capacity building. CJM NPO ES 
24 Comunidad Autónoma de la Región de Murcia: Public engagement, A2C model (Public financing, policy & governance), A2C Circular 
Action Plan, capacity building CARM Public ES 
25 Asociación Española de Normalización- A2C Standardisation activities, public engagement, A2C model (regulations), capacity building. UNE NPO ES 
26 Fundación Cluster Agroalimentario de la Región de Murcia-Agrifood cluster representative from Region of Murcia: A2C Circular Action 
Plan, public engagement, A2C model (socioeconomic), capacity building  AGRO NPO ES 
27 European Association of Development Agencies-EURADA- Leading clustering actions, public engagement, A2C model (public financing, 
policy & governance), capacity building  EURA NPO BE 
28 Bocconi University- Circular economy expert, Circular business models developer, A2C model (socioeconomic, financing), capacity 
building UB UNI IT 
29 VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd- Environmental externalities, LCA, circularity, benchmarking, A2C model  VTT RTO FI 
30 Fondazione ICONS-Outreach manager, Public engagement, capacity building.  ICONS NPO IT 
31 Fundación Primafrio- Citizens representative linked with agrifood sector; Local outreach desk, public engagement, A2C Circular Action 
Plan; A2C model (socioeconomic).  PRIMA NPO ES 
32 Instituto de Fomento de la Región de Murcia: Regional development agency, CEBMs public financing, public engagement, A2C model 
(financing & governance) A2C Circular Action Plan; capacity building INFO Public ES 
33 Ecotrace Plastic, SL- Leader of development of digital Data Integration System (DIS). ECO SME ES 
34 Equmetrics, SL- Watermark impression development for DIS tool. EQU SME ES 
35 Exus Software, SMLLC- Big Data for DIS tool. ECUS LI EL 
36 EVRYTHNG, Sárl- Blockchain for DIS tool. EVRY LI CH 
37 Solplast, SA- End user (development of new recyclable barrier films as alternative to multilayers & biodegradable films for agriculture in a 
real environment). SOLP LI ES 
38 Eversia, SA- End user (development of barrier packaging as alternative to multilayers and biodegradable packaging in a real 
environment). EVER LI ES 
39 Lolo Bio Cosmetics, SL- End user (development of new cosmetic formulations using the A2C bioactives in a real environment). LOL SME ES 
40 Tecnoalimenti s.c.p.A- A2C model co-creation; territorial replication of A2C model; public engagement and capacity building TCA NPO IT 
41 Lietuvos Pramonininku Konfedracija- A2C model co-creation; territorial replication of A2C model;  public engagement and capacity 
building LPK NPO LI 

Section 4,5,6-page 2 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
4.MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM   3
4.1 PARTICIPANTS   3 
4.1.1  CETEC – CENTRO TECNOLÓGICO DEL CALZADO Y DEL PLÁSTICO    3 
4.1. 2 GWC -GREEN WORLD COMPOUNDING   6 
4.1.3 SAPE -SAPERATEC   9 
4.1.4 IRIS -IRIS TECHNOLOGY, SL   11 
4.1.5 BOKU -UNIVERSITÄT FÜR  BONDENKULTUR   13 
4.1.6 MELLI -MELLIZYME BIOTECHNOLOGY LTD   15 
4.1.7 CETBIO -CETEC BIOTECHNOLOGY, SL   17 
4.1.8 UNIMIB -UNIVERSITY OF MILANO -BICOCCA   19 
4.1.9 UA -UNIVERSIDAD DE ALICANTE   21 
4.1.10 WET -WETSUS - EUROPEAN CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE 
WATER TECHNOLOGY   
 24 
4.1.11 REG -REGENERA LEVANTE, SL   26 
4.1.12 CEW -CENTRE OF EXPERTISE WATER TREATMENT   28 
4.1.1 3 CTNC -CENTRO TECNOLÓGICO NACIONAL DE LA CONSERVA    29 
4.1.14 MCT -MARÍN MONTEJANO  AGROTRANSFORMADOS, SA    32 
4.1.15 ALM -LABORATORIOS ALMOND, SL   33 
4.1.16 PROEX -PROEXPORT   35 
4.1.17  DMC -DMC RESEARCH CENTER, SL  36 
4.1.18 CITRO -CITROMIL, SL   39 
4.1.19 MKSI -MKS INSTRUMENTS ITALY, SRL   40 
4.1.2 0 SSICA - EXPERIMENTAL STATION FOR THE FOOD PRESERVATION 
INDUSTRY  
 41 
4.1.21 KVC-KVELOCE I+D+I  44 
4.1.22 UVEG -POLIBIENESTAR   47 
4.1.23 CJM -FUNDACIÓN CAJAMAR   49 
4.1.24 CARM -GOVERNMENT OF THE REGION OF MURCIA.   52 
4.1.25 UNE -ASOCIACIÓN ESPAÑOLA DE NORMALIZACIÓN   53 
4.1.26 AGRO -FUNDACIÓN CLUSTER AGROALIMENTARIO DE LA REGIÓN DE 
MURCIA  
 55 
4.1.27 EURA -EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES   57 
4.1.28 UB - UNIVERSITA COMMERCIALE LUIGI BOCCONI  59 
4.1.29 VTT -VTT TECHNICAL RESEARCH CENTRE OF FINLAND LTD   61 
4.1.30 ICONS -  FONDAZIONE ICONS   62 
4.1.31 PRIMA -FUNDACIÓN PRIMAFRIO   65 
4.1.32 INFO - INSTITUTO DE FOMENTO DE LA REGIÓN DE MURCIA  67 
4.1. 33 ECO -ECOTRACE, SL   69 
4.1.34 EQU-EQUMETRICS, SL  70 
4.1.35 EXUS-EXUS INNOVATION  72 
4.1.36 EVRY-EVRYTHNG  77 
4.1.37 SOLP-SOLPLAST, SA  78 
4.1.3 8 EVER-EVERSIA, SA  83 
4.1.38 LOL -LOLO BIO COSMETICS   86 
4.1. 40 TCA -TECNOALIMENTI S.C.P.A    87 
4.1.41 LPK - LIETUVOS PRAMONININKU KONFEDRACIJA  89
4.2  THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT  91 
4.2.1  PARTNER 1 CETEC  91 
4.2.2 PARTNER 7 CETBIO  91
4.3 STAKEHOLDERS PANEL   92
4.4 EUROPEAN CLUSTERS SUPPORTING A2C    93
4.5 OTHER STAKEHOLDERS SUPPORTING A2C   99 
5.ETHICS AND SECURITY  99
5.1 ETHICS  99
5.2 SECURITY  100 
6. ATTACHEMENTS  105
6.1 STAKEHOLDERS PANEL AGREEMENTS  106
6.2 SUPPORT LETTERS OF EUROPEAN CLUSTERS FOR A2C CLUSTERING  107
6.3 SUPPORT LETTERS OF OTHER RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS FOR A2C   133 
Section 4,5,6-page 3 
 
 
4.MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 PARTICIPANTS 
4.1.1  CETEC – CENTRO TECNOLÓGICO DEL CALZADO Y DEL PLÁSTICO  
 
PARTNER Nº: 1 (RTO) 
WEBSITE: www.ctcalzado.org 
SHORTNAME: CETEC  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PROJECT COORDINATOR. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
CETEC is a non -profit organization, founded in 1994 and supported by the regional administration and regional 
manufacturers, with the mission of improving the competitiveness of the regional SMEs and companies in the 
footwear and plastic sector. Currently, it is formed by almost 70 SMEs and companies of footwear and plastic areas. 
CETEC is a meeting point to carry R&D project, acquire legal information, regional and national funding for projects, 
among other activities. 
For this purpose, the company is organized in four departments: (1) Administration and Management, (2) R&D, (3) 
Laboratory and Quality and (4) Technical Consultancy, in charge of the following activities: 
▪ Conducting R&D leading to transfer processes. 
▪ Promoting the implementation of innovative technologies in business. 
▪ Generating and disseminating technological knowledge to companies devoted to similar activities. 
▪ Collaborating and promoting standardization processes. 
▪ Disseminating the values of technology in the environment economic and social of the centre. 
▪ Ensuring appropriate advice and technical assistance in those areas that are particularly sensitive to the 
competitive development: i) Quality control, ii) Product development and industrial design, iii) Industrial 
organization and production, iv) Automation and industrial robotics. 
 
The main CETEC research areas are: formulation & compounding of bioplastics and biodegradable materials, 
new bioplastics for packaging applications, development of composites & nanocomposites , development of 
bioplastics formulations with natural additives, acceleration of biodegradation properties of polymers and 
development of formulations for high performance plastics and multilayer structures (barrier, thermal, mechanical & 
optical properti es), new alternatives for plastics/bioplastics recycling  and recycling studies and manufacturing 
processes (injection, thermoforming, cast & blown extrusion).  
 
CETEC is an associate member of the Bio-based Industries Consortium (BIC) and a member of the Network of 
Technological Centres in the Region of Murcia (CECOTEC) which is recognized as Results Transfer Office for 
the Government of Spain. Furthermore, CETEC is a full member of The Bio-Based Industries Joint Undertaking 
(BBI JU), that is a Public-Private Partnership between the EU and the Bio-based Industries Consortium. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
CETEC is the Coordinator of the project, being in charge of assisting other partners in the development of their 
activities. CETEC will lead the WP 9-Project Management & Coordination . CETEC will also be involved in 
WP1, leading A2C requirements (T1.1), and A2C methodologies tasks (T1.2) and developing the plastics multilayers 
flows characterisation (T1.4.). In WP3, characterizing the plastics flows from the physical delamination (T3.3), 
developing pre-treatments to the PET/PE multilayers, in collaboration with GWC, to enhance the enzymatic attack,  
developing blends by extrusion of the modified aluminium with LDPE/EVOH/LDPE and LDPE/PA/LDPE matrix 
and developing processable  LDPE/EVOH/LDPE, LDPE/EVOH, LDPE/PA/LDPE, LDPE/PA, LDPE, PET 
compounds (T3.5). In WP5, compatibilisation and extensional flow mixing strategies for development of high barrier 
compounds (T5.2), collaboration with GWC in the develop of PHBV biodegradable compounds (T5.3), 
transformation of plastics compounds into food packaging & agricultur al films at small scale and validation, 
recyclability, compostability & biodegradability studies (T5.4). In WP6, will be involved in the A2C demonstrators 
(T6.2), in setting the basis for future industrial implementation (T6.3). Moreover, CETEC will be involved in WP8 
in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Project Management experience : CETEC experience as coordinator began in FP7 being promotors & technical 
coordinators of GREENAVOID (8 partners; FP7 -SME-2011-BSG;2012-2015) & DEGRICOL (9 partners, FP7 -

Section 4,5,6-page 4 
 
SME-2012; 2012-2015). In H2020 frame, CETEC has coordinated the project HTPush (H2020-NMP-25-SMEInst-
2-2014; 2014 -2016. Universal and compatible system for plumbing and heating), the project BIOMULCH (5 
partners; H2020-FTIPilot-2016; Integrated solution for innovative biodegradation control of agricultural plastic 
mulches; 2017-2019) and the project AppShoe (Erasmus+ KA3-EACEA40-2016; 2017-2019),  H2020 projects have 
been successful projects obtaining real demonstrators and base for new projects (currently CETEC is involved in the 
submission of BIODIS, that is the evolution of BIOMULCH, as Project Coordinator). 
Currently, CETEC is the Coordinator of project upPE-T, funded by H2020-NMBP-TR-IND-2018-2020, Upcycling 
of PE & PET wastes to generate biodegradable bioplastics for food & drink packaging  and of the project VALUE-
RUBBER, funded by H2020-EIC-FTI-2018-2020, Recycling technology to introduce rubber for End-of-Life Tyres 
into production lines as virgin rubbers substitute and of the project. 
 
Other related experience : CETEC has a vast experience on R&D, quality control and characterization, 
compounding and transformation of plastics that will be key for the project implementation. CETEC has previous 
experience in the formulation, compounding and transformation of bioplastics, such as PLA and PHA, for food 
packaging & agriculture applications, recyclability and biodegradation studies. Moreover, they have experience in 
the plastics pre-treatment for enhance the enzymatic attack and prove of it is their participation in the project upPE-
T (H2020-NMBP-TR-IND-2018-2020) where CETEC decrease crystallinity, polarity and molecular weight of PE & 
PET wastes.  CETEC has a fully -equipped plastic laboratory and a complete pilot plant for plastic formulation, 
compounding and transformation.  
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
CETEC participation in A2C project will broad its experience as Coordinator and expand its European network, 
being involved in advance technologies for plastic wastes upcycling. In particular, CETEC will be pioneer in the 
development of new high barrier plastics compounds for food packaging and agriculture as alternative to current 
multilayers and-hoc pre-treatments to enhance enzymatic attack of PE/PET mix plastic wastes. CETEC will transfer 
knowledge to their associated companies of the plastic and recycling sectors 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
The staff of CETEC is formed by 16 (8 females and 8 males) highly qualified employees from different competences: 
industrial, mechanical & chemical engineering, chemistry and biology. Personnel involved in A2C is:  
 Dra Fuensanta Monzó Sanchez (female), R&D Manager . She holds a Degree in Chemistry and a research 
proficiency certificate by the University of Murcia. She has experience in the coordination of European H2020, 
FP7 projects, National and regional projects, as w ell as in the preparation of regulations. She is a specialist in 
polymers applied to plasticulture. Since 1996, Ms. Monzó is the responsible of the R&D of CETEC. She will be 
the Project Coordinator of Agro2Circular project. She will ensure the work programme is kept to schedule and 
that objectives, deliverables and milestones are met. She will have an active role in the project, taking part in 
all key project aspects , supervising all management tasks. She will be responsible for monitoring and 
implementing contingency actions. In addition, she will be the direct link to EC communications. 
 Mr Federico Mesa (male), Project Technician. He holds a degree in Economics and Enterprise, a Master degree 
in R&D and Technological Management and a Master’s degree in investment and financing. He has experience in 
communication, dissemination and IPR management over 15 years. He also has experience of management in 
projects of European H2020 programme. He is responsible for financial management  and communication of the 
CETEC national and international projects.  He will be the Project Manager of Agro2Circular project , 
managing all day-to-day administrative aspects of the project, providing advice regarding financial and procedural 
issues and keeping track of all important administrative procedures. He will also undertake assistance duties such 
as facilitating meetings, providing logistic, review deliverables, compiling reports, disseminating documentation. 
 Mr José Antonio Plaza Hernández (male), R&D Project Manager . He is the Environmental & Agricultural 
plastic Project Management in CETEC. He has a Bachelor degree in Agronomist Engineering, a Master degree in 
Environmental Technology and a Master degree in R&D and Technological Management. He has over 12 years 
of experience in management and development of R&D projects in the fields of agronomy, energy, water, waste, 
water waste discharges, and plastics for agriculture and packaging, especially in fields such as bioplastics, 
biodegradable plastics, development of new products, improvement of properties by the addition of nanoparticles 
and nanocomposites. 
  Dra Carmen Fer nández Ayuso (female), R&D Technician. She holds a bachelor degree in chemical 
engineering, and a PhD in chemical engineering. She is a specialist in plastics and rubber and has over 12 years of 
experience in management and development of R&D projects in t he plastic area at national and European level. 
She has experience at quality control, pre -treatments of plastics materials to enhance their recyclability, 
identification and characterisation of polymers at laboratory. 
Section 4,5,6-page 5 
 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 Monzó, F., Caparrós, A. V., Pérez -Pérez, D., Arribas, A., & Pamies, R. Synthesis and characterization of new 
layered double hydroxide -polyolefin film nanocomposites with special optical properties.  Materials, 12(21), 
3580, 2019. 
 Fernández C, Arribas A, Plaza J.A., Bódalo A., Gómez E. High Oxygen Barrier Polyethylene Films. Polymers & 
Polymer Composites, Vol. 25, No. 8, 2017. 
 Espejo C, Arribas A, Monzó F, Diez PP. Nanocomposite films with enhanced radiometric propert ies for 
greenhouse covering applications. Journal of Plastic Film & Sheeting (2012), 28(4): 336-350. 
 Arribas A., Carrión F.J. Scratch resistance of a polycarbonate + organoclay nanohybrid. Express Polymer Letters 
(2009), 3: 621-629. 
 Arribas A., Carrión F.J. Physical and tribological properties of a new polycarbonate-organoclay nanocomposite. 
European Polymer Journal (2008), 44: 968-977. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
CETEC team has a vast experience in plastic/bioplastic formulation, compounding, plastic processing, recycling and 
biodegradation studies, plastic aging studies and plastics characterisation. Proof of this are the following projects. 
 
 upPE-T- Upcycling of PE & PET wastes to generate biodegradable bioplastics for food & drink packaging 
(H2020-NMBP-TR-IND-2018-2020). Coordinator: CETEC 
 BIOMULCH-Integrated solution for innovative biodegradation control of agricultural plastic mulches . (H2020-
FTIPilot-2016-1; 2016-2019). Coordinator: CETEC 
 BIOSUS- Sustainable alternatives to non-recyclable multilayer films (2018). CDTI, Spanish Ministry of Science, 
Innovation and Universities. 
 AppShoe: Apprenticeship in the jute footwear sector funded by H2020 Erasmus+, KA3 -2017-2019. 
Coordinator: CETEC 
 ECOPOT-Development of PLA pots with controlled biodegradation properties (2016). CDTI, Spanish Ministry 
of Science, Innovation and Universities. 
 HTPush-Universal and compatible system for plumbing and heating (acronym: HTPush). H2020-NMP-25-
SMEInst-2-2014. Coordinator: CETEC. 
 DEGRICOL- Consumer-safe and thermally -stable bioplastic formulation with controlled biodegradation 
properties for agricultural and horticultural accessories ( FP7-SME-2012; 2012-2015) 
 ISA-PACK-A Flexible Sustainable Active and Intelligent Packaging Technology Platform Enabling Enhance 
Shelf Life (FP7-KBBE-2011-5; 2012-2014).  
 GREENAVOID- Greenhouse solution to avoid film covers U.V. a nd sulphur degradation. FP7-SME-2011-
BSG;2012-2015 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 Fully-equipped laboratory to test and characterize plastic and bioplastics materials, including: mechanical 
strength test, light aging (XENOTEST), rheometer, fluidity index, UV-visible spectroscopy, microscopy, density, 
thermogravimetry analysis, infrared sp ectroscopy 
(FT-IR), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), 
migration tests for food packaging, 
thermogravimetric Analysis  (TGA) coupled to 
Fourier Transform  Infrared Spectroscopy ( FTIR), 
oxygen permeability, defragmentation tests. 
 
 Pilot plant  equipped for plastic and bioplastic 
compounding and transformation at pilot scale: 
-Extrusion compounding of all types of thermoplastics 
materials and additives by twin -screw extrusion 
compounder. We are experts on biomaterials (PLA, PHA), 
nanoadditives ( nanoclays, nanofibers) and biobased 
additives (cellulose, starch and encapsulated eugenol and 
thymol). 
-Monolayer and multilayer films manufacturing : cast 
extrusion, blown extrusion, multilayer lamination 
machine. 

Section 4,5,6-page 6 
 
-Pieces manufacturing: Injection moulding, and thermoforming. 
4.1. 2 GWC -GREEN WORLD COMPOUNDING  
 
PARTNER Nº: 2 (SME) 
WEBSITE: http://www.gwplastics-group.com/ 
SHORTNAME: GWC 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Green World Compounding (GWC)  is a company producer of sustainable compounds and masterbatches 
from agricultural and industrial plastic waste.  GWC is specialized in the manufacturing of recycled products 
based on polypropylene (PP), polyethylene (PE), being one of the leading companies in Europe in the manufacturing 
of reinforced glass recycled polyethylene and polypropylene compounds. Moreover,  GWC is the leading company 
of recycled plastics from agricultural and industrial waste sources 
on a national basis. 
GWC belongs to the group GW formed by : GWE (Green World 
Enterprise), which is dedicated to the recycling and trading of 
plastic waste (poly propylene, polyethylene terephthalate and 
polyethylene) and GWC dedicated to the manufacturing of 
recycled compounds and masterbatches.  
GWC is dedicated to the continuous improvement by means of an 
intensive labour on R+D in order to be able to control th e quality 
variations of plastic waste and obtain on demand formulations to 
produce sustainable compounds and masterbatches to be used in 
specific applications.  
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
GWC is involved in WP1, A2C requirements (T1.1), collaboration in me thodologies for plastics food contact 
assessment & compliance to agriculture standards (T1.2), and leading with PROEX the A2C residues management 
plan. GWC leads WP3, where they deal with the plastics wastes pre -treatments & preliminary decontamination 
(T3.1), monitoring the sorting system coupled with the multilayer materials treatments (T3.2), sorting of physically 
delaminated materials (T3.3), collaboration with CETEC in PET/PE plastics pre-treatments to enhance the enzymatic 
attack, plastics decontamination & collaboration in the development of processable plastics compounds (T3.5), and 
also will lead WP6, managing the integration of A2C technologies at pilot scale (T6.1) and the demonstration of all 
the technologies in a relevant and industrial environment (T6.2), setting the basis for the futur e industrial 
implementation (T6.3). Moreover, GWC will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities 
(T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience : GWC, as a leader plastics recycling facility, has a vast experience in plastics wastes pre -
treatment, cleaning, mechanical recycling of packaging and agricultural films: moreover, they develop formulations 
for the development of recycled compounds with enhanced properties, addressing the plastic waste problem through 
innovation. The GWC team skillset and vision are extremely relevant to the work the A2C consortium will carry out. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
GWC participation in A2C will allow them the implementation of the first plant for the recycling of simple and 
complex multilayers containing aluminium in Europe, promoting a new business line in the circular economy and 
being pioneers and enlarging its portfolio of products and clients. Moreover, they will broad its European networking 
with other relevant stakeholders in the Circular Economy and plastic waste sectors. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
The staff of GWC is formed by 41 employees, integrated by workers with different profiles, from chemists and 
chemical engineers to economists. Personnel involved in A2C is:  
 
 Mr Carlos Egea Caballero. He holds a degree in Economic and Business Sciences by the University of Murcia 
and a Business Degree by the Manchester Metropolitan University (U.K.). He has experience in the realization of 
audit and consulting tasks, gained during the period he worked in Audihispania and, later on, in Arthur Andersen 

Section 4,5,6-page 7 
 
(Nowadays called Deloitte). From 2003 to 2013 Mr. Egea was the Financial and Administrative Director, in charge 
of Management Control of the Group and member of the Management Committee of the Com pany, in direct 
dependency of the Presidency, of J.Garcia Carrión, S.A. Since 2013, Mr. Egea is the General Manager of the GW 
Group. 
 Dr Salvador Navarro Navarro. He holds a Degree in Chemical Engineering by the University of Murcia and a 
PhD in chemical science by the Technical University of Braunschweig (Germany) and has specialized in the 
plastics and rubber. He worked as a researcher at the Department of Macromolecular Materials in the Technical 
University of Braunschweig. Over the years, he h as specialized in polymers and Innovation Management. 
Currently, Mr. Navarro is the Technical, Laboratory, Design and Product Development Director of GWC. 
 Mr Isidoro Javier Román López . He holds a Degree in Chemical Sciences by the University of Murcia and  a 
master´s degree in Quality and Environment Management by the Centro Europeo de Estudios Empresariales. Mr. 
Román has a vast experience in Quality Management in different fields and R & D Management. Early on, he 
worked as Quality and Environment Coordin ator, responsible for international relations and prevention 
representative in Ability Diseño Gráfico. He has been both Research, Development and Innovation director and 
Commercial Director at Befesa Plásticos. Currently, Mr. Román is the Commercial Director of GWC. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
GWC has developed a diverse range of different grades for extrusion, thermoforming and injection moulding. GWC 
offer the following portfolio of compounds under the next brands: 
▪ALFACOM®-Compounds based on PP (recycled or neat PP) and recycled glass fiber 
ALFACOM are compounds with recycled PP or neat PP as matrix and recycled glass fiber at different 
concentrations as reinforcements. The compounds also contain different additives as thermal stabilisers, UV 
stabilisers, and chemical stabilisers. 
In the following table are shown the different ALFACOM products commercialized: 
 
▪ALFATEM®- Recycled low density polyethylene (LDPE) compounds 
ALFATEM are compounds based on recyc led low-density polyethylene from agricultural wastes. ALFATEM 
can be moulded by extrusion, blown -extrusion or injection. In the following table are shown the different 
ALFATEM products commercialized: 
 
 
▪ALFAFIL®-Compounds based on PP (recycled or neat PP) and talc/CaCO3 
ALFACOM are compounds with recycled PP or neat PP as matrix and talc or CaCO 3 at different concentrations 
as reinforcements. In the following table are shown the different ALFAFIL products commercialized: 

Section 4,5,6-page 8 
 
 
Main applications of the compounds: 
✓ Construction 
✓ Fitting 
✓ Furnitures 
✓ Electrical appliances 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 New range of high-performance recycled PP compounds for the automotive section (2017), funded by the 
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness. CETEC, GWC. 
 RECYCLEMAS-Development of a new technology to obtain masterbatches from recycled plastics. (2015), 
funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness. 
 PPFVRECICL-New technology for the manufacture of recycled polypropylene composites reinforced with 
fiberglass from landfill. 2010. Internal funding. 
 Demonstration of thermoplastics compounding reinforced with recycled  glass fibre (2007), funded by the 
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, CDTI PID IDI-20070475. 
 RECYSHIP- Pilot project for the dismantling and decontamination of discarded boats. (2009). LIFE07- ENV—
E-000787. 
 BEFESA- Demonstration of a process to recycle glass fibre wastes to produce polypropylene composites 
(2009). LIFE07-ENV-E-802. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
GWC has a total area of 10,000 m 2 and a polyolefins-compound production capacity of 
22,000 tons/year. GWC has advance equipment and processes in the field of additives and 
compounding process at industrial level. For A2C activities, GWC will contribute any of 
its equipment that might be relevant to the project’s work including: 
- 8 octopus trucks and 3 mobile presses for the collection of plastic waste. 
- Feedstock preparation: removal of contaminants to ensure optimal sorting 
(washing/drying equipment). 
- Classification: Sorting by shape, size and density (sink / float separation tank). 
- Sorting:  manual sorting.  
- Shredding (plastic shredding equipment, plastic extruder). 
- 3 independent extrusion lines developed specifically for the recycling of agricultural 
and industrial waste sources 
- Compounding plastics extruders.  
 
In addition, they have infrastructure available for the performance area of product and 
laboratory areas for R&D. 
Beside the large production capacity, GWC counts with a well -equipped laboratory for a 
complete analysis of their compounds and masterbatches, in addition to machinery for the 
simulation of the production process in order to guarantee the adequacy of the formulation 
to the process and the obtainment of the sought characteristics. 
- Thermobalance. 
- Two Meters of the Index of Fluency (MIF) for thermoplastics polymers. 
- Blown film extruder. 
- Mechanical strength test on universal testing equipment  
- Injection moulding machine  
- Pendulum for impact testing.  
- Machine for notched. 
- Die cutter for test samples. 
- Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). 
- Optical microscopy. 
- 2 muffle furnaces.   

Section 4,5,6-page 9 
 
4.1.3 SAPE -SAPERATEC  
 
• PARTNER Nº: 3 (SME) 
• WEBSITE: www.saperatec.de 
• SHORTNAME: SAPE  
• LOCATION: Germany 
• ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Saperatec is the first company in Europe specialised in separate the Aluminium from post -consumer 
PE/Al/PET packages like stand-up pouches by physical delamination based on separating fluids, allowing obtain 
individual materials (PE, Aluminium y PET) with high quality. 
Saperatec has been founded in 2010 with the intension to exploit the patented Saperatec technology as new 
innovative recycling process for multilayer materials. As one of the first application fields, Saperatec started its 
business with the aim to recycle of thin film photovoltaic modules. The development of a photovoltaic -recycling 
pilot line was partially funded by the Germa n DBU Project no. 29682 (11/2011 -11/2012). After installation of the 
pilot line the company acted as photovoltaic recycling company for a period of appr. 12 months. Due to the strong 
withdrawal of the photovoltaic production in Europe the photovoltaic recycling market has been decreased 
dramatically in short-term forcing Saperatec to change its business field. The comprehensive experience acquired by 
using the separation liquids for the separation of photovoltaic modules could be transferred to other materials to be 
recycled. In 2013, Saperatec build a flexible Pilot Recycling Plant to further exploit the identified application fields. 
A comprehensive market study revealed that the market of flexible packaging is a timely, realistic and promising 
business opportunity. As for PE/Al/PET packages, like stand -up pouches.  In 2014, Saperatec’s technology has 
been awarded with the Green Tec Award, Europe’s most renowned environmental and business prize, in the 
category “Recycling & Resources”. In 2016 Saperatec has been added to the Global Cleantech 100 list – a yearly 
award for companies expected to have the highest market  impact in the next 5 -10 years. Currently, Saperatec is in 
the engineering phase for the operation of the first industrial recycle plant for flexible composite packaging. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
SAPE will be involved in WP3, developing a key A2C task the physical separation of complex multilayers containing 
aluminium (T3.3) to obtain the separated flows: LDPE/PET, LLDPE/PET, LDPE, PET and Aluminium. In WP6 will 
be involved in the integration of th e developed technology at pilot scale in the final A2C demonstrator (T6.1) . 
Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: SAPE is the unique developed technology in Europe for the separation of aluminium from 
complex multilayers. The principle to separate aluminium from multilayer systems by the use of a separation liquids 
has been investigated for more than 10 years by the researcher Dr. Horst Seibt, co -founder and shareholder of 
Saperatec.  We have specific experience that will be key for the development of A2C tasks: fluids design & 
characterisations, fluid production, delamination testing, engineering capabilities (P&ID, mass balance calculations). 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
By participating in A2C project, SAPE will adapt its technology to post -industrial materials containing aluminium 
broading its knowledge and being the first plant in Europe able to delaminate post-industrial complex multilayers, 
establishing new markets for Saperatec technology . Moreover, they will broad its European networking with other 
relevant stakeholders in the Circular Economy and plastic waste sectors.  
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr. Sebastian Kernbaum (male). He is the Managing Director of Saperatec and has a n experience of over 20 
years in plastics recycling. Ing. Mechanical Engineering and Production Technology at TU Berlin; Master and 
Doctoral Thesis in Recycling Planning and Control, expert in Re-Use of Electrical and Electronic Equipment. 
 Dr. Marcus Schulze (male). Head of R&D at Saperatec. He is a plastics expert with a PhD in Organic Chemistry 
by Würzburg University.  He has more than ten years of experience in the international plastics industry. 
 Dr. Dennis Meisel (male).  R & Development technician at Saperatec. He holds a Chemistry degree. He has 
specific experience related to the plastics formulations and characterisation at laboratory.  
 Mr. Jörg Uhding (male). Process engineering at Saperatec. He is an expert in Conceptual Design of Recycling 
plants, and has a vast experience (10 years) working with plastics packaging in project planning and execution. 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 10 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
Patents: 
 US20200238679A1. Facility for separating layers in multilayers systems 
 WO2019229235A1. Separation fluid, method and apparatus for recycling multilayer material 
 WO2015169801A1. Method and apparatus for recycling packaging material  
 US20170080603A1. Method and apparatus for recycling packaging material 
 US106185268B2. Method for separating multilayer systems 
Publications: 
 
 Multilayer Recycling - Verbundmaterialien trennen. TASIMA  -Tagung Siedlungsabfallwirtschaft Magdeburg. 
2020. 
 Recycling beginnt bereits bei der Wahl der Verbundstoffe. Magazin  “Kunststoffe”. Carl Hanser Verlag. 2017. 
 Trennung von Verbundmaterialien zur Gewinnung von Sekundärrohstoffen. Recycling - und Rohstoffkongress, 
Band 9, Verlag Karl Thomé-Kozmiensky, Nietwerder.2016. 
 Boost for windshield laminate recycling. Recycling magazine. 2014. 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 FlexPack2Circle - Transfer of Multimaterial Flexible Packaging to Circular Economy (2018 -2021). 830508. 
H2020-EIC-SMEInst-2018-2020. 
 PVB for RE -USE- Industrial scale purification of PVB from windshield waste and preparation for Re -Use to 
close the material Life-Cycle (2014-2017).  ECO/13/630624.  FP7 Programme ECO innovation. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Saperatec ope rates at it’s headquarters offices, lab infrastructure and a pilot plant for developing recycling 
technologies for multilayer materials based on separation fluids / the delamination technology.  
 
All R&D activities are currently performed in 2 Saperatec labs . One is dedicated to th e liquid development and 
optimization, the other acts as an intermediate between the liquid development and the pilot line. In the latter, 
separation trials are executed in 3 litres environments, added by all relevant pre-test before entering the pilot line (1,5 
m³). Besides that, the lab is equipped especially with means for fluid development and analysis, including HPLC, 
and Photometer.  
 
The pilot plant is designed for batch 
operation of small quantities ranging 
from 30 up to 200 kg feed material 
(depending on material type). The 
storage capacity for the waste 
composite materials (input) is 
maximal 90 Tons. The treatment of the 
composite materials is carried out with 
separation liquid. The liquid consists 
of water and other additives such as 
acids and bases. The pilot line is 
subdivided in six departments: pre -
treatment, Saperatec core process, 
recovery of liquids, mechanical 
separation, media, storage. T he picture 
shows our pilot plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Saperatec pilot plant 
Section 4,5,6-page 11 
 
4.1.4 IRIS -IRIS TECHNOLOGY, SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 4 (SME) 
WEBSITE: http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/ 
SHORTNAME: IRIS  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
IRIS Technology Solutions S.L , was established in Barcelona in 2007, is an advanced engineering company  
specialized in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) -based real -time quality 
monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at 
the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of-the-
art IR analyzers for at-line and in-line process monitoring.  
 
Our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of MEMs, Near Infrared Spectroscopy, 
Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, 
Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as f or decision support 
systems. In addition to photonics -based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and 
machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-
based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
 
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an 
Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strateg ic lines, for 
shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste 
valorisation 
 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as 
carrying our various joint private projects with industry 
partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in 
working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as 
coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and 
BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 and 
currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is 
equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and 
wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 
certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 166002: 
Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a pr ovider of 
technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: EPIC, 
SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of 
companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
IRIS is involved in WP3, by developing the optimal detection and sorting of multi-material waste technology by the 
most appropriate photonic solutions by adopting HSI/LIBS in combination with Artificial Intelligent and Machine 
Learning to address the current detection limitations and improve the sorting efficiency, increasing the feasibility of 
the identification process in multi-layer materials, not only including different polymer types but also including also 
metallic layers (aluminium). (T3.2). In WP6 will be involved in the integration of the developed technology at pilot 
scale in the final A2C demonstrator (T6.1) . Moreover, IRIS will be involved in WP8 in communication & 
dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience : IRIS has a strong experience in  data science, chemometric, spectroscopy, mechatronics, 
mechanical, optical, industrial design engineering. In particular they have previous experience in the ability to use 
HSI-NIR for identifying the different layers in laminated plastic films as well as laser induced breakdown 

Section 4,5,6-page 12 
 
spectroscopy (LIBS 1) for identifying black plastics and prove of it is their participation in the project H2020 
Multicycle project where successfully achieve the identification of black materials and some laminated structures. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
By participating in A2C project, IRIS will broad its knowledge and experience in advanced plastic sorting devices, 
that is one of its current R&D areas. It will be the first company implementing a sorting facility able to identify and 
sort complex multilayers, even containing aluminiu m, introducing a solution of great relevance to their clients. 
Increasing its networking. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dra. Ana Mª López Sabiron (Female). Project and Innovation Manager at IRIS. Chemical Engineer (2006) 
and European PhD in Engineering (2011) by University of Zaragoza. With more than 15 years of experience 
working closely to the industry at research centres for the promotion, launching, development and implementation 
of R&D and innovative projects at national (e.g. private, CDTI, CIEN) and European level (e.g. H2020, FP7) 
even as Project Coordinator (VULKANO-H2020-SPIRE, MULTICYCLE-H2020-SPIRE), her expertise focuses 
on sustainability (life cycle perspective) of industrial systems and processes, circular economy, development and 
application of new technologies, or improvements in process integration, among others, especially in energy -
intensive sectors and agro-industry.  
 Mr. Gergios Chalkias (male). Project and Innovation Manager. BSc in Environmental and Natural Resource 
Management from University of Ioannina (Greece). MSc in Industrial Ecology from Universities of Leiden and 
Delft (the Netherlands). 10+ years of experience working at the nexus of innovation and  sustainability as a 
researcher, consultant and, most recently, project and product manager. Expertise in integrating principles of 
circular economy with digital technologies (e.g. industry 4.0) as applied across a wide range of industrial and 
business applications. International experience. 
 Dr. D avid Nettleton (male). Data Mining Analyst . Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat 
Politécnica de Catalunya, Spain; M.Sc. in Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, UK. 20+ 
years experience of applying data mining algorithms and statistical techniques in a diversity of data analysis and 
modelling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, 
online user web search behaviour and data privacy. He has participated in several competitive multi -partner 
research projects and has a European patent application for a graph matchin g algorithm. His IT Industrial 
experience includes project management, consultancy, programming and analysis, database development and 
business startups, B2B projects, and a number of large-scale European projects. 
 Ms Diana Galilea (female). Senior Programmer. Bachelor’s degree in Industrial Engineering with specialty in 
Industrial electronics from the Universidad of La Rioja. Her professional background comprises technical 
experience in the areas of embedded microcontrollers programming for wireless commun ications working with 
different range of sensors. Software expertise including Matlab, Visual Studio, Autocad, Protel DXP. 
Programming skills including C++, C#, .NET among others. Experience in developing software for chemometric 
analysis, translating chemometric algorithms from researchers’ source code, such as R or Matlab to C++ or C# in 
order to integrate it with a user interface that carries out the analysis, and controls the system. She also has been 
working in monitoring systems where information about sensors and actuators are displayed on the user interface. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 An integrated optical system for the examination of sample materials, EU Patent Application EP18198458, 
03/10/2018, Rosales Alejandro, Kehoe Timothy, Garrick Meabh 
 Draft patent for the combination of ML and chemometrics for materials identification 
 Commercial Data Mining, Processing, Analysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects, David Nettleton, 
Elsiever book, ISBN9780124166028, 304p  
 Conference ICIEMPM 2016: Towards Automatic Calibration of In -Line Machine Processes, 18th International 
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, Nettleton, D.F., Bugnicourt, E., 
Wasiak, C., Rosales, A., London, United Kingdom, July 28-29, 2016.  
 QUANTIFICATION OF MICRO-PULLWINDING PROCESS AS BASIS OF DATA MINING ALGORITHMS 
FOR PREDICTIVE PROCESS MODEL, Christian Wasiak, David Nettleton, Henning Janssen and Christian 
Brecher, Proceedings, 21st International Conference on Composite Materials -25th August 2017. 
 
 
 
1 Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy has become a very attractive and popular technique in the field of chemical analysis due its high accuracy and simplicity. DOI: 10.1366/11-06574.  
Section 4,5,6-page 13 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 CIRCULAR Food Pack (2021 -2024). Circular Packaging for Direct Food Contact Applications. H2020 SEP -
210687597 
 MERLIN (2021-2024). Increasing the quality and rate of multi -layer packaging recycling waste. H2020 SEP -
210687606 
 DECOAT (2019-2023). Recycling of coated and painted textile and plastic materials. 814505. H2020-NMBP-
ST-IND-2018 
 MULTIPLE (2019 -2022). Multimodal spectral sensors and orchestrated deep models for integrated process 
optimization. 871783. H2020-ICT-2019-2. 
 MULTICYCLE (2018-2021). Advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based 
multi-materials. 820695. H2020-NMBP-SPIRE-2018 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
IRIS has engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. 
 
- Fully-equipped Spectroscopic Laboratory with several instruments, FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as 
well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim -Xenics). The associated staff are properly tra ined and skilled in 
chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -
commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
- Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: 
signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for 
programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD 
software [SolidWorks], among others.   
Our optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the 
designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light 
sources and related “opticalware”). 
- Wet Chemistry Lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipments, microscope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and 
opacity measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, 
manual and automatic coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
4.1.5 BOKU -UNIVERSITÄT FÜR  BONDENKULTUR  
 
PARTNER Nº: 5 (UNI) 
WEBSITE: www.boku.ac.at 
SHORTNAME: BOKU 
LOCATION: Austria 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Founded in 1872, the Universität für Bodenkultur Wien / University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, 
known too by its acronym "BOKU", comprises 15 departments and four service centres in Vienna, as well as a 
number of experimental centres around Vienna. The university is attended by approx. 13,000 students, provides study 
courses at the bachelor, masters and doctoral levels, has approx. 1,500 staff, where approx. 1,000 of them are engaged 
in teaching and research.  
The Institute for Biologically Inspired Materials (BIMat), https://boku.ac.at/nano/bimat is part of the Department 
of Nanobiotechnology of BOKU, and employs researchers from physics, chemistry, and microbiology. The BIMat 
was established at the in 2011 by Prof. Erik Reimhult . It is the leading institute for biological applications of 
nanotechnology in Austria .  BIMat specializes in biological systems a nd materials, including polymer 
nanomaterials such as polymer-grafted nanoparticles. The Department of Nanobiotechnology will be involved 
in A2C project. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
BOKU will be involved in WP3 by developing the chemical modification of the aluminium (coming from physical 
delamination) to achieve an optimal compatibility and dispersion in a polyethylene matrix (T3.5). In WP6 they will 

Section 4,5,6-page 14 
 
be involved in the integration of the developed technology at pilot scale in the final A2C demonstrator (T6.1). 
Moreover, BOKU will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: Surface modification of inorganic particles for the purpose of producing novel filler materials 
is one of the main fields of research of DI Dr. Ronald Zirbs.  BOKU Institute for Biologically Inspired Materials 
(BIMat) is an expert in polymers and hybrid materials such as polymer-grafted particles and their application in 
packaging and biotechnology. In particular, they have previous expertise in the development of hybrid materials 
based on polymer-grafted particles and thermoplastics polymers as matrix (PE, PP).  
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Taking part as partner of A2C project BOKU will broad its knowledge in the core areas of the Institute for 
Biologically Inspired Materials , broading its knowledge in surface grafting methods for aluminum flakes for PE 
matrix, and will create new research lines for PhD, master and thesis. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr Ronald Zirbs (male) is Senior scientist at the Institute for Biologically Inspired Materials, working towards 
a habilitation in the area of synthesis of hybrid smart materials.  He is an expert in nanotechnology of polymers, 
nanomaterials and nanoparticles synthesis. He was part in several successful international projects, holds 3 patents 
and (co-)authored 39 scientific publications (h-index=19). 
 Mr Dieter Jäger (male) is a Senior scientist at the Institute for Biologically Inspired Materials, expert in polymers 
nanotechnology and phenomena of materials on the nanoscale. Their implication in the A2C project will be 
focused in the development of ad -hoc core-shell nanoparticles for the PHBV compounds and the physical and 
chemical interactions of them.  
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 Zirbs, R; Lassenberger, A; V onderhaid, I; Kurzhals, S; Reimhult, E., “Melt-grafting for the synthesis of core –
shell nanoparticles with ultra-high dispersant densit” NANOSCALE. 2015; 7: 11216-11225 
 Binder, W. H.; Zirbs, R.; Gahleitner, M.; Machl, D.,  "Grafting Polyisobutylene from Nanoparticle Surfaces: 
Concentration and Surface Effects on Livingness“ Macromolecules 2009,  42 (19), pp 7379–7387 
 Kurzhals, S.; Pretzner, B; Reimhult, E; Zirbs, R., "Thermoresponsive polypeptoid-coated superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles by surface-initiated polymerization" MACROMOL CHEM PHYS. 2017 
 Beaumont, M; Nypelo, T; Konig, J; Zirbs, R; Opietnik, M; Potthast, A; Rosenau, T., “Synthesis of redispersible 
spherical cellulose II nanoparticles decorated with carboxylate groups” GREEN CHEM. 2016; 18(6): 1465-1468. 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 upPE-T- Upcycling of PE & PET wastes to generate biodegradable bioplastics for food & drink packaging  
(H2020-NMBP-TR-IND-2018-2020).  
 Hairy- Properties of molecular transport th rough "hairy" nanochannels (hairy)  (2013-2016; National project - 
funded by Jubiläumsfonds der Stadt Wien für die Universität für Bodenkultur Wien, Austria 
 MagnMemb-Synthesis of membranes with permeability controlled by an external magnetic field (2013 -2014; 
National project funded by  Hochschuljubiläumsstiftung der Stadt Wien, , Austria 
 FWFMicelle- Ionic Liquid-Aqueous Micellar Systems for Sustainable Catalysis (2013 -2016; National project 
funded by  Fonds zur Förderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung (FWF), Austria) 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
The Institute for Biologically Inspired Materials is equipped with all necessary 
infrastructure for their R&D activities in the modification of inorganic 
particles of aluminium , joint with the equipment of other institutes of the 
Department of Nanobiotechnology. Main equipment is: spin - coater, polymer 
purification, pendant drop, chemical work benches for nanoparticles synthesis, 
Langmuir-Blodgett trough, glove box chemistry environment.  
The Institute also has a well-equipped laboratory for the characterisation of 
hybrid materials required in A2C tasks, including:  particle size, morphology 
and dispersion analysis (TEM, SEM), weigh molecular analysis ( GPC ), 
particle size (dynamic light scattering), biointerface and affinity measures  
Chemical work benches for hybrid 
materials synthesis 
Section 4,5,6-page 15 
 
( quartz crystal microbalance-QCM-D, waveguide spectroscopy (DPI) and surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy 
(SPR)), optical spectroscopy and quantitative absorbance and fluorometry measurement, thermal analysis 
(DSC/TGA). 
4.1.6 MELLI -MELLIZYME BIOTECHNOLOGY LTD  
 
PARTNER Nº: 6 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.mellizyme.com  
SHORTNAME: MELLI 
LOCATION: United Kingdom 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER.  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Mellizyme is a privately owned biotech start-up founded by CEO Jacob Nathan and CSO Douglas Kell (scientific 
leader at University of Liverpool) in 2019. They develop cutting edge tools that use synthetic biology to engineer 
and optimise enzymes. Mellizyme discovered the only known enzyme to degrade previously difficult to recycle 
polymers, those that have a  carbon-carbon backbone such as polyethylene (PE). Building on this discovery 
Mellizyme is using its cutting-edge protein engineering platform, that relies on synthetic biology, automation and 
machine learning techniques, to optimise the performance of this enzyme so it can be employed to recycle plastics.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
MELLI will contribute heavily to WP3 by leading subtask 3. 5.2 “Engineering and Characterising a PE/PET 
degrading enzyme”, where they will engineer and characterise an enzyme capable of degrading PE/PET polymers. 
MELLI will also lead on subtask 3.5.3., “Scale -up of PE/PET degrading enzyme manufacture and enzymatic 
degradation of PE/PET”, where they will scale up manufacturing of the engineered enzyme as well as the process for 
degrading PE/PET. In WP6 MELLI will implement their degradation process in a 50 L pilot demonstration process 
in Spain, where they will degra de PE/PET and recover valuable products. Moreover, MELLI will be involved in 
WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: MELLI discovered the only known enzyme to degrade previously difficult to recycle polymers, 
those that have a carbon-carbon backbone such as polyethylene (PE) and polyesters as PET. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Mellizyme are interested in the Agro2Circular project for a number of reasons. First, the funding would enable us 
to demonstrate that we can use our protein engineering platform to optimize our enzyme for a specific application. 
Second, our involvement in Agro2Circular is a chance to exemplify that our plastic degrading enzyme can be used 
to reduce plastic waste, create valuable chemical feedstocks and be plugged into a circular economy. Finally, for 
our plastic degrading enzyme to be deployed at scale it needs to be part of a wider supply  chain (or circle in this 
case). Engaging in this project is an invaluable opportunity for Mellizyme to build relationships with other members 
of the consortium and integrate our technologies to build a wider circular system. In the future we hope to build on 
these relationships further by applying our joint circular solution at an even larger scale and contributing to solving 
the plastics crisis, combatting the climate and ecological emergency (CEE) and bringing about systemic change to 
the way we manage plastic waste and manufacture chemicals.  
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr Douglas Kell (male). Chief strategy officer (CSO) at Mellizyme . Professor at Biochemistry & Systems 
Biology, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology Department of University of Liverpool and 
associated Science Director at Technical University of Denmark (DTU). Kell is a well-known scientific leader in 
systems and synthetic biology and has a vast experience in enzymes development. His expertise is proven in 
scientific papers and patents as well numerous industry projects ( see http://dbkgroup.org/).   He will guide the 
relevant parts of the project.  
 Dr Vittorio Bartoli (male). Synthetic Biologist at Mellizyme.  Bartoli has an MEng in Chemical Engineering 
and a PhD in Synthetic Biology. He has experience in lab automation, mathematical modelling, computer 
programming, systems biology, synthetic biology and molecular biology, which he uses to develop innovative 
biotechnologies (see: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=nWPDNHgAAAAJ&hl=en). He combines 
these skills and knowledge of chemical engineering to build on Mellizymes existing t echnologies and to scale-
up their processes. Outside of academia he’s worked at two SMEs and has a strong understanding of how to 
carry out research in a commercial context.  
 

Section 4,5,6-page 16 
 
 Dr Neil Swainston (male) - Senior Computational Researcher at Mellizyme. Swainston has a background 
and extensive expertise in systems biology, synthetic biology, bioinformatics, lab automation and computer 
science. Swainston has proven himself both in industry as a bioinformatics team manager as well as in Academia 
where he created much of the foundational technology (GeneGenie and SpeedyGenes) that Mellizyme uses to 
engineer proteins  (see: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=bc32feUAAAAJ&hl=en). Swainston is 
responsible for optimizing the technology that Mellizyme uses to engineer proteins.  
 Dra Hannah McCue - Senior Researcher at Mellizyme. McCue is an experienced interdisciplinary 
researcher with expertise in synthetic biology and molecular biology. She has broad ranging skills including 
experimental design and implementation, project management and line management. Prior to joining 
Mellizyme she was a senior research associate at the University of Liverpool’s Gene Mill where she used 
high-throughput robotics to deliver bioengineering solutions to both industrial and academic partners. Of 
particular relevance to this project is her prior work on polymers & biopolymers. (see:  
https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?as_q=&num=10&btnG=Search+Scholar&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&as
_occt=any&as_sauthors=%22Hannah%2 
0V.+McCue%22&as_publication=&as_ylo=&as_yhi=&as_allsubj=all&hl=en). 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
Platform for engineering plastic degrading enzymes. Our experimental platform for engineering proteins is based 
on a set of proven “synthetic biology” methods pioneered by Mellizyme’s CSO Professor Douglas Kell, and Senior 
Computational researcher Dr Neil Swainston, as is demonstrated by the fact they’ve been published in peer-reviewed 
journals. Initially, sequences of DNA holding information that bacteria can use to produce a large set (>10^5), or 
library, of  different variations of an enzyme are designed using software GeneGenie 1. Next, a lab process, 
SpeedyGenes, is used to assemble the  DNA sequences that code for the library designed in GeneGenie 2. 
Subsequently, the protein library is tested to discover the best enzyme variants, which in the case of this project are 
the ones that best degrade multilayer plastics. Subsequently, the DNA sequences encoding  the “best enzymes” are 
sequenced. Knowledge of how the DNA sequence affects enzyme performance is learnt from and used to inform a  
second “round” of directed evolution, where the enzyme optimised in the first round is subject to further rounds of 
evolution, until an enzyme is found that carries out our desired function to standards we define3,4.  
1. Swainston, Neil, Andrew Currin, Philip J. Day, and Douglas B. Kell. ‘GeneGenie: Optimized Oligomer Design for Directed Evolut ion’. Nucleic Acids Research 42, no. W1 (1 July 2014): W395 –400. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku336.  
2. Currin, Andrew, Neil Swain ston, Philip J. Day, and Douglas B. Kell. ‘SpeedyGenes: An Improved Gene Synthesis Method for the Efficient Production of Err or-Corrected, Synthetic 
Protein Libraries for Directed Evolution’. Protein Engineering, Design and Selection 27, no. 9 (September 2 014): 273–80. https://doi.org/10.1093/protein/gzu029.  
3. Currin, Andrew, Neil Swainston, Philip J. Day, and Douglas B. Kell. ‘Synthetic Biology for the Directed Evolution of Protein Biocatalysts: Navigating Sequence Space Intelligently’. Chemical Society 
Reviews 44, no. 5 (2015): 1172–1239. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CS00351A.  
4. Sadler, Joanna C., Lucy Green, Neil Swainston, Douglas B. Kell, and Andrew Currin. ‘Fast and Flexible Synthesis of Combinatorial Libraries for Directed Evolution’. In Methods in Enzymology, 608:59–
79. Elsevier, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.mie.2018.04.006.  
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
 
● Hiden Mass Spec   
● Echo 550  
● OpenTrons liquid handling robot  
● Biolector with RoboLector 
● 958 sq. ft. lab space 
● 970- sq. ft. office space   
 
Hiden Analytical HPR -40 DSA: membrane 
inlet mass spectrometer 

Section 4,5,6-page 17 
 
 
Labcyte Echo 550: miniaturized acoustic 
liquid handler   
 
M2P-Labs Biolector with RoboLector: 
Microbioreactor 
 
Opentrons OT-2: Lab robot 
  
4.1.7 CETBIO -CETEC BIOTECHNOLOGY, SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 7 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.cetbio.com (under development)  
SHORTNAME: CETBIO  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
CETEC Biotechnology (CETBIO), is a new spin-off from the Technological Center of Footwear and Plastic of 
the Region of Murcia (CETEC). CETBIO was born out in 2020 of the essential belief that success of a company is 
linked to a firm commitment towards sustainability and protection of the environment. CETBIO is a company focus 
in the application of biotechnological processes and approaches for enhancing biodegradation of plastics in the 
environment and its valorization as wel l as for the industrial production, formulation and manufacturing of 
biodegradable bioplastics, especially polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) biopolymers.  

Section 4,5,6-page 18 
 
CETBIO has been funded after over 25 years of research at  CETEC Technological Center whose more 
relevant findings, protocols and methods have been transferred to the company 
One of the main objectives of CETBIO is to make biodegradable bioplastics competitive in environmental, economic 
and performance-related terms. The viable solution strategy of CETBIO is the utilization of residues as a feedstock 
for the biotechnological process. Actually, CETEC has signed relevant agreements with regional agri-food companies 
for the supply of industrial solid wastes for the exploitation of these wastes as energy a nd carbon sources for the 
biotechnological production of PHA. 
CETBIO has invested in state -of-the-art facilities and equipment as well as highly qualified human resources with 
the vision to bring its products and services to market and provide a sustainabl e and economic alternative to 
conventional plastics.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
CETBIO will be involved in WP5, carrying out the development of PHBV  by biotechnological routes (T5.1) . In 
WP6 they will be involved in the integration of the developed technology at pilot scale in the final A2C demonstrator 
(T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: They have demonstrated experience in the PHBV production from plastics wastes as shows its 
participation in the H2020 project upPE-T. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
A2C project will allow to CETBIO being the first manufacturer of a range of PHBV from multilayers PET/PE plastic 
wastes and organic agrifood wastes. They will exploit the PHBV produced and the PHBV fermentation technologies. 
The success in the project will suppose the growth of the spin -off, its consolidation and the creation of new job 
opportunities 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dra Verónica Cánovas (female). She holds a bachelor’s degree in Biology and a PhD in Biochemistry, Molecular 
Biology and Biomedicine. She has more than 8 years of experience developing R&D research projects in 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology with a strong expertise in genom ic and transcriptomic, genetic engineering 
(downregulation and overexpression of genes), extraction and analysis of DNA, RNA and proteins, analysis of 
gene expression by New Generation Sequencing and PCR.  She also has experience in microbiology, isolation and 
cultivation of bacteria, bacterial DNA and plasmid extraction and bacterial transformation and cloning. 
 Mr Salvador Garcia, (male). He is Biotechnologist with a M.S. in Biotechnology and Sustainability at University 
of Alicante. He is an expert in microbiology and bioprocesses of microalgae, haloarchaeas and PHA production 
from industrial wastes. He has experience in the determination of bioprocesses performance parameters and 
modelling of the system. 
 Mr Rafael Losana (male), CEO of the Technological Centre of Plastic and Footwear of Murcia since 1992 and 
CEO of CETEC biotechnology.  He is a Technical Industrial engineer with a vast experience in the plastic & 
bioplastic sector. He has more than 25 years of experience in business management, project management, 
innovation, entrepreneurship and technology transfer.  
 Mr Alejandro Viso (male). He holds a bachelor’s degree in Biology, and is expert in environmental sciences. He 
has more than 20 years of experience developing R&D research projects in Bio technology and environment. He 
also has experience of management in projects of European H2020 programme.  
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
Given that CETBIO was founded very recently as a spin -off of CETEC, CETBIO itself have participated in a N 
European project.  
 upPE-T- Upcycling of PE & PET wastes to generate biodegradable bioplastics for food & drink packaging  
(H2020-NMBP-TR-IND-2018-2020). 
Moreover, the staff of CETBIO has a vast experience participating in national and EU projects related to the 
development of bioplastics.  
 
 BIOMULCH-Integrated solution for innovative biodegradation control of agricultural plastic mulches. (H2020-
FTIPilot-2016-1; 2016-2019). Coordinator: CETEC 
 BIOSUS- Sustainable alternatives to non-recyclable multilayer films (2018). CDTI, Spanish Ministry of Science, 
Innovation and Universities. 
Section 4,5,6-page 19 
 
 ECOPOT-Development of PLA pots with controlled biodegradation properties (2016). CDTI, Spanish Ministry 
of Science, Innovation and Universities. 
 DEGRICOL- Consumer-safe and thermally -stable bioplastic formulation with controlled biodegradation 
properties for agricultural and horticultural accessories ( FP7-SME-2012; 2012-2015) 
 ISA-PACK-A Flexible Sustainable Active and Intelligent Packaging Technology Platform Enabling Enhance 
Shelf Life (FP7-KBBE-2011-5; 2012-2014).  
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
CETBIO has the necessary equipment for A2C activities development:  
- Bioreactor (30L capacity) with adjustable agitation speed, air/gas ratios, pH, nutrients. 
- Biodegradation test by respirometry (soil, freshwater, seawater, home & industrial compostability). 
- Centrifuge. 
- UV-visible spectroscopy 
- Microscopy 
- Biological safety cabinet.  
Moreover,  CETBIO has acces to the sothisticate equipment of CETEC for bioplastics characterisation. In addition, 
CETBIO has agreements and cooperates with the University of Alicante and Polytechnic University of Cartagena 
and have access to their technical research service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.8 UNIMIB -UNIVERSITY OF MILANO -BICOCCA  
 
PARTNER Nº: 8 (UNI) 
WEBSITE: https://www.btbs.unimib.it/en   
SHORTNAME: UNIMIB 
LOCATION: Italy 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
The University of Milano -Bicocca is a multidisciplinary University where teaching (providing undergraduate, 
graduate and post -graduate education), research and technology transfer are pursued and offered to about 33.000 
students. The scientific team of the Department of Biotechnology and  Biosciences is composed of about 50 
faculties of the Bachelor and Master degree in Biotechnology and in Biological Sciences. Thanks to an agreement 
between Milano-Bicocca and Lombardy Region it has been created a Centre of Excellence for Biotechnologies.  
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
UNIMIB will lead WP5, developing the u pcycling of enzymatic degradation products (TPA, EG and alkanes)  to 
building blocks by biotechnological routes (T5.1). In WP6 they will be involved in the integration of the developed 
technology at pilot scale in the final A2C demonstrator (T6.1).  Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in 
communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience : They have a vast experience in applied microbiology and biotechnology, by tailoring 
recombinant microbial strains, mainly yeasts, for the production of heterologous proteins, fine and bulk chemicals, 
CETBIO respirometer CETBIO bioreactor 

Section 4,5,6-page 20 
 
biofuels, nutraceuticals . In particular they are experts in m etabolic engineering , synthetic biology, screen ing 
protocols. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
UNIMIB participation in A2C will allow to broad the knowledge of biotransformation processes from plastics wastes 
of Biotechnology and Biosciences Department. Increasing experience in dissemination activities and enlarging its 
European networking. Creation of new training lines for students. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dra Paola Branduardi (female). She is a graduated cum Laude in Biological Sciences at the University of 
Milano, Italy, and received a PhD in Cellular and Molecular Biology at the University of Milano, with an 
internship at the Vienna BioCenter, working on the yeast cell cycle progressi on. She moved in 2000 at the 
University of Milano Bicocca as Post-Doc, where she started to work on Industrial Biotechnology and she is now 
appointed as full professor in Chemistry of Fermentation and Industrial Microbiology. Paola’s group is interested 
in the development of sustainable microbial -based bioprocesses, mainly valorizing residual biomasses as in the 
concept of biorefineries. This is pursued by tailoring microbial strains, mainly but not exclusively Saccharomyces 
and non- Saccharomyces yeasts, for the production of fine and bulk chemicals, biofuels, nutraceuticals. Synthetic 
biology, metabolic engineering screening protocols and adaptive laboratory evolution are the approaches used to 
leverage microbial potential, including robustness against stress, to match industrial requirements. She published 
over 60 peer -reviewed papers, 7 book chapters, and she is (co -)inventor of 11 patent applications, 7 of which 
obtained the PCT status, and 5 were subsequently licensed. 
 Dr. Maximum Labra (male). Full professor at Department of biotechnology.. He has a documented experience 
in general and systematic botany and in plant molecular biology. His main research lines concern: Analysis of the 
genetic variability of spontaneous and cultivated species for their cha racterization and conservation. Evaluation 
of agroecosystems in order to study sustainable development strategies. Analysis of food quality and traceability 
of agri -food chains through the use of molecular DNA markers.  Study of food production processes an d the 
microbiome to implement food quality and determine their geographical origin. alorisation of waste from 
agricultural supply chains through phytoextraction processes and biotechnological approaches with the aim of 
obtaining bioactive compounds with high added value and supporting agro-production systems.  
 2 Assistant Professors that will be involved in the project will be appointed in the next months in the group of 
prof. Branduardi, expanding the competences described above also in the field of enzymatic biocatalysis. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
1) Gottardi M, Knudsen JD, Prado L, Oreb M, Branduardi P, Boles E (2017) “De novo biosynthesis of trans -
cinnamic acid derivatives in Saccharomyces cerevisiae” Appl Microbiol Biotechnol, 101(12): 4883 -4893. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-017-8220-x. 
2) Ortiz-Merino RA, Kuanyshev N, Byrne KP, Varela JA, Morrissey JP, Porro D, Wolfe KH, Branduardi P. (2018) 
“Transcriptional Response to Lactic Acid Stress in the Hybrid Yeast Zygosaccharomyces parabailii” Appl Environ 
Microbiol. Feb 14;84(5). pii: e02294-17. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02294-17 
3) Martani F, Maestroni L, Torchio M, Ami D, Natalello A, Lotti M, Porro D, Branduardi P. (2020) “Conversion 
of sugar beet residues into lipids by Lipomyces starkeyi for biodiesel production” Microb Cell Fact. Nov 
10;19(1):204. doi: 10.1186/s12934-020-01467-1. PMID: 33167962; PMCID: PMC7653891. 
4) Bertacchi S, Bettiga M, Porro D, Branduardi P. (2020) “Camelina sativa meal hydrolysate as sustainable biomass 
for the production of carotenoids by Rhodosporidium toruloides” Biotechnol Biofuels. 13:47. doi: 10.1186/s13068-
020-01682-3. eCollection 2020. 
5) P atent Application: CASTELLANI LUCA (IT); GIANNINI LUCA (IT); GUERRA SILVIA (IT); 
BRANDUARDI PAOLA (IT); DI LORENZO RAFFAELLA DESIRE' (IT). “Produzione di mescole elastomeriche 
comprendenti oli ad azione plastificante ottenuti a partire da cellule microbich e oleaginose”. Publication info: IT 
102020000006688. Italian Patent Application, Filing date: 31/03/2020. 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 Coordinator: “MYSUSHI - Microalgae and Yeasts SUStainable fermentation for HIgh quality fish feed 
formulation” granted by CARIPLO Foundation – Program “Ricerca Integrata sulle biotecnologie industriali e 
sulla bioeconomia” (April 2016 – June 2019). Total contribution: 285.000 Euro (192.530 Euro for UNIMIB) 
 Coordinator: “Microalgae based biorefinery for Oils and Fats Industry – MOFFI” granted by Fondo di Ateneo 
Quota Competitiva of the University of Milano-Bicocca (2018-2019) Total contribution: 25.000 Euro 
Section 4,5,6-page 21 
 
 PI local unit (Beneficiary): Marie-Curie MSCA European Joint Doctorates (EJD) H2020MSCAITN2017 (2017-
2021): "Yeast Biotechnology Doctoral Training Programme (YEASTDOC)” [REA grant agreement number 
764927] Total contribution: 3.094.944,48 Euro (516.122,64 Euro for UNIMIB); 
 PI local unit (Beneficiary) : “CARDoon valorisation by InteGrAted biorefiNery (CARDIGAN)” granted by 
MIUR (April 2019 –) Total contribution: 745.007,00 Euro (€ 129.716,00 for UNIMIB); 
 PI local unit (Beneficiary) : KIC RawMaterials – NoI KAVA – “MIneral RAw materials replacement with 
nanoComposites from renewabLe Resources Exploitation (MiRaCLE)” (2016-2018). 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Paola Branduardi manages fully equipped laboratories for cellular and molecular microbiology, including genetics 
and biochemistry, and has access to a dedicated biotechnology facility called “Biotechnicum” (Bicocca Biotechnicum 
Centre, BBC), which is aimed at the development of proprietary industrial strains, fermentation and bioconversion 
processes for the production of proteins, metabolites and enzymes. More in detail, the BBC comprises fermentation 
units and rooms for shake -flasks microbial cultivation equipped for strain development and pre -pilot scale 
fermentation (4x2L -2x10L fully instrumented bioreactors, Sartorius)  in GMP -like facility, HPLC and GC units 
included. Moreover, a dedicated flow cytometer instrumentation is used for validation and optimization assays. The 
team of Industrial Microbiology and Fermentation has earlier been engaged in the production of heter ologous 
proteins, fine and bulk chemicals, including biofuels, from metabolically engineered conventional and non -
conventional yeasts and bacteria, for more than 20 years. The team has also developed, patented and licensed the 
technology for the production of lactic and ascorbic acid as well as for butanol from metabolically engineered yeasts. 
They have participated to several EU project, from different editions of framework programme, two MSCA ITN 
actions (one currently running), and two COST actions are a lso ongoing. In addition to that, several national and 
regional programmes.  
The group can count on facilities and instrumentations of the Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, which 
are briefly listed here: 
-Regional infrastructure named NanoCosPha will be in place from 2021 with an agreement with Regione Lombardia 
and will comprise six integrated laboratories aimed at developing and validating new products in the field of 
biomedical nanomedicine and cosmetic nanoparticles. 
- Platform of Microscopy equipped with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Zeiss Gemini 500 with a Field 
Emission Gun (FEG), a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) Jeol 2100 Plus with a LaB6 emitter, a FEI Quanta 
3D, a dual beam instrument coupling a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with a Focused Ion Beam (FIB) column 
(Gallium ions), for sample cutting and machining (nanolithography); 
- A mass spectrometry facility for the analysis of small and large molecules from pure samples or complex matrices 
for quantitation, structural characterization and “omics” investigation by ultra-high resolution data. 
 
4.1.9 UA -UNIVERSIDAD DE ALICANTE  
 
PARTNER Nº: 9 (UNI) 
WEBSITE: www.ctcalzado.org 
SHORTNAME: UA  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
The University of Alicante (UA) is one of the best campuses in Spain, being a multidisciplinary university with 
study programmes in all fields of knowledge organised in six faculties and a polytechnic school. The university 
community is made up of about 3,800 academic and administrative staff members and over 32,000 students enrolled 
in official degrees.  
 
The research group 'Applied Biochemistry' (https://web.ua.es/en/appbiochem/)will be involved in A2C project. It 
is a multidisciplinary research group composed of professors and researchers from various areas of  knowledge 
(Biology, Marine Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics and Statistics and English Philology). The current lines of 
research in the group range from basic research processes on biochemistry and molecular biology of 
microorganisms, including the develo pment and optimization of technologies for microbial fermentation and 

Section 4,5,6-page 22 
 
downstream processing of biomass , to the study of potential uses of cellular biomass or its biocompounds in 
biotechnology. Likewise, the experience in research and process development of  its members allows the group to 
offer a wide range of services aimed at companies, such as: advice for the drafting of R&D&I projects, evaluation of 
R&D&I projects for national and regional certification agencies, physico-chemical water analysis and medium- and 
large-scale production of microbial biomass and proteins. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
UA will be involved in WP5, collaborating with CETBIO in the PHBV production and optimizing the production of 
carotenoids withut compromising the bioplastic production (T5.1.2). In WP6 they will be involved in the integration 
of the developed technology at pilot scale in the final A2C demonstrator (T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved in 
WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience: UA has a vast experience in the study of microorganisms and metabolic pathways, specially of 
extremophiles microorganisms. In particular, they have a deep knowledge about Hfx. mediterranei strain. UA has a 
strong expertise in molecular biology of microorganisms, transcriptomic, proteomic and metagenomic tools, in 
genetic manipulation of microorganism and characterization of gene regulation, and in in laboratory fermentation 
processes as wel l as in downstream processing for obtaining biomolecules and biocomposites from microbial 
biomass.   
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Thanks to their participation in this project, UA could broad its knowledge in a core area of 'Applied Biochemistry' 
research group by engineering Hfx. mediterranei and broad its experience in its fermentation for PHBV & carotenoids 
production. They will create new training lines for students. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dra. Rosa Maria Martinez-Espinosa (female), she is the leader of Applied Biochemistry research group. The 
focus of her research is related to the study of metabolic pathways of microorganisms, in particular from 
extremophilic microorganism, for the purification and characterization of biomolecules with potential applications 
in industry and biotechnology.  She is an Associate Member of the Spanish Society of Microbiology (SEM), of  
the Spanish Society of Biotechnology (SEBIOT) and of the Spanish Society of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology (SEBBM). In addition to the research and academic activity at the University of Alicante, since 2018 she 
is also Vice-Dean of Postgraduate programs and the academic coordinator for Mobility and Training at companies. 
Since 2015 she is also member of the Academic  Advisory  Board,  National  Agency  for  Quality  Assessment  
and  Accreditation  of  Spain (ANECA).  
 
 Dra. Carmen Pire Galiana (female), Senior Researcher. She holds a bachelor degree in Chemistry and a PhD in 
Chemical Sciences. Since 2017 she has been part of the “Applied Biochemistry” group and previously work as a 
researcher in the “Biotechnology of Extremophiles” group. She is  an expert in the study of extremophiles, 
especially in the study of the metabolism and industrial and biotechnological applications of archaea s. Her lines 
of research are focused on the kinetic and structural characterization of enzymes of extremophilic o rganisms, as 
well as the study of carbon and nitrogen metabolism of halophilic archaea.  In addition to the academic and 
teaching activity at the University she currently holds the position of Academic Secretary of the Doctoral School 
of the UA. 
 Ms Micaela Giani, (female), Predoctoral Researcher. She holds a Bachelor’s degree in Biology and a M.S. in 
Biochemisty and Molecular Biology. She has experience in genome engineering, research of new enzymes, 
biomolecules of industrial and biotechnological interest a nd bioplastics in extremophile organisms as cell 
factories.  
 Ms Lorena Simó (female), Laboraty technician. She holds a Bachelor’s degree in Biology and support research 
activities in the Applied Biochemistry group of UA. She has a vast experience in techni ques of microbiology, 
cultivation and isolation of microorganisms, fermentation processes and downstream processing of biomass for 
the extraction of biomolecules. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 Torregrosa-Crespo J, Pire C, Martínez-Espinosa RM, Bergaust L (2019) Denitrifying haloarchaea within the 
genus Haloferax display divergent respiratory phenotypes, with implications for their release of nitrogenous 
gases. Environ Microbiol. 21(1):427-436. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14474 
 Torregrosa-Crespo J, Bergaust L, Pire C, Martínez -Espinosa RM. (2018) Denitrifying haloarchaea: sources 
and sinks of nitrogenous gases. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 365(3). doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnx270. 
Section 4,5,6-page 23 
 
 Montero-Lobato Z, Ramos-Merchante A, Fuentes JL, Sayago A, Fernández-Recamales Á, Martínez-Espinosa 
RM, Vega JM, Vílchez C, Garbayo I. Optimization of Growth and Carotenoid Production by Haloferax 
mediterranei Using Response Surface Methodology. Mar Drugs. 2018 Oct 9;16(10).  
 Pérez-Pomares, F.; Pire, C.; Vegara, A.; Bautista, V.; Bonete, M.J.Amylolytic Activities Excreted by the 
Halophilic Archaeon Haloferax mediterranei to Assimilate Available Starch Depend on the Nitrogen Source. 
Journal of Advances in Biology &amp; Biotechnology. 18, pp. 1 - 15. 2018. ISSN2394-1081 
 Torregrosa-Crespo J, González-Torres P, Bautista V, Esclapez JM, Pire C, Camacho M, Bonete MJ, Richardson 
DJ, Watmough NJ, Martínez-Espinosa RM (2017) Analysis of multiple haloarchaeal genomes suggests that the 
quinone-dependent respiratory nitric oxide r eductase is an important source of nitrous oxide in hypersaline 
environments. Environ Microbiol Rep. doi: 10.1111/1758-2229.12596. 
 Kilic V, Kilic GA, Kutlu HM, Martínez-Espinosa RM (2017) Nitrate reduction in Haloferax alexandrinus: the 
case of assimilatory nitrate reductase. Extremophiles. 2017 Mar 21. doi: 10.1007/s00792-017-0924-4. 
 Torregrosa-Crespo J, Martínez-Espinosa RM, Esclapez J, Bautista V, Pire C, Camacho M, Richardson DJ, 
Bonete MJ (2016) Anaerobic Metabolism in Haloferax Genus: Denitrification as Case of Study. Adv Microb 
Physiol. 2016;68:41-85. doi: 10.1016/bs.ampbs.2016.02.001.  
 Torregrosa-Crespo J, Rodrigo -Baños M, Pire C, Garbayo I, Vilchez C, Esclapez J, Bautista V, Camacho M, 
Bonete MJ, Martínez-Espinosa RM (2016) Innovative applications o f haloarchaea to wastewater treatments 
and biotechnological uses of the biomass produced. New Biotechnology Journal, 33, 421.                            
 Martínez-Espinosa RM,  Richardson DJ, Bonete MJ (2015) Characterisation of chlorate reduction in the 
haloarchaeon Haloferax mediterranei . Biochim Biophys Acta. 1850(4):587 -94. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.12.011  
PATENTS: 
 Martínez-Espinosa  RM ,  Bonete  Pérez  MJ,  Martínez  Martínez  P.   Composite-based  freeze -dried  cell  
membranes. Country: Spain. Patent number: P200700272. Priority Date: 01/02/2007. Assignee: Universidad de 
Alicante. 
 
RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 upPE-T- Upcycling of PE & PET wastes to generate biodegradable bioplastics for food & drink packaging  
(H2020-NMBP-TR-IND-2018-2020). 
 Denitrification in haloarchaeal: effects on climate change and potential applications in bioremediation (National 
Project funded by the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of Spain; 2019-2021.  
 Contribution of haloarchaea in climate change and potential application in biotechnology and bioremediation 
(National Project funded by the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of Spain; 2014-2017.  
 Metabolic adaptations of haloarchaeas in response to different nutrient conditions (BIO2013-42921-P; National 
Project funded by the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of Spain; 2014-2016). 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
 
The research group 'Applied Biochemistry' of the University of Alicante possess a full microbiology equipped 
laboratory for the  culture and engineering of haloarchaeas and production and downstream processing of 
PHA at laboratory scale . The laboratory comprises equipment for bacterial culture and fermentation (incubators, 
glass material, inoculating loops, 2L and 5L bioreactors, a utoclave), genome engineering (restriction enzymes, 
shRNAs, siRNAs, plasmids), cell lysis and downstream processing (sonicator, centrifuge, ultracentrigue, filtration 
systems), analysis of proteins, DNA and RNA (Fast protein liquid chromatography –FPLC-, gas chromatography –
GC-, spectrophotometer (UV-VIS) equipped with Peltier cell, ,monodimensional and bidimensional electrophoresis, 
PCR, thermocycler). In addition, the research group has access to the technical research service at the UA: proteomic, 
DNA sequencing. 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 24 
 
4.1.10 WET -WETSUS - EUROPEAN CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE WATER 
TECHNOLOGY  
 
PARTNER Nº: 10 (RTO) 
WEBSITE: www.wetsus.nl 
SHORTNAME: WETS 
LOCATION: Netherlands 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PROJECT COORDINATOR. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Stichting Wetsus, European Centre of Excellence For Sustainable Water Technology, is a research institute dedicated 
to sustainable water technology. At WETSUS, a unique environment is created where over 100 companies and 23 
European universities participate in creating innovative solutions to water-related problems. The institute carries out 
multidisciplinary research performed by 60 PhD students and postdoctoral researchers who are mostly located in the 
WETSUS laboratories in Leeuwarden, the Netherlands. WETSUS is part of WaterCampus Leeuwarden.  
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
WETS will be involved in WP1, establishing in collaboration with CEW a strategy for water efficiency across A2C 
processes (T1.3) . In WP3 they will develop  in collaboration with CEW  the near zero liquid discharge water 
management facility focussed on water recovery (reverse osmose, ultrafiltration), micro-plastics removal and organic 
resource recovery (T3.1), by-products valorisation of enzymatic process (T3.5.3). In WP5 WETS will focus on the 
recovery of PHBV from the salty PHBV rich biomass. Wetsus will supply the design of the down-stream processing 
at pilot scale including process steps of cell lysis, dewatering and drying. The PHBV is extracte d at the solvent 
extraction pilot at Wetsus , and they will collaborate with CEW in the PHBV by -products valorisation (T5.1.2). In 
WP6 they will be involved in the integration of the developed technology at pilot scale in the final A2C demonstrator 
(T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience: WETS has the personnel, expertise and facilities to support the development and upscaling of 
novel technologies in the field o f sustainable water technology. WETS is located at the water campus where it has 
access to facilities for piloting and demonstration of water treatment installations. Experiments to support the 
upscaling work can be done in the WETS laboratories. The resea rchers have the support of competent technicians 
and analysts. The WETS research network and Water campus network are well organized and well equipped for 
complex and multidisciplinary projects. WETSUS is dedicated to transfer the generated IP to the parti cipating 
companies and support them to reach the commercial phase. Specifically, for the Agro2Circular project Wetsus will 
use it skills, experience and technologies from the research groups: ‘Biopolymers (PHBV) from water’, ‘Advanced 
water treatment’, Resource recovery’ and ‘Desalination’. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
By their participation in A2C project, WETS will increase its knowledge in a key area of its R&D strategy: the water 
treatment and microplastics challenge. The project implementation will also highly widening WETS networks, 
opening opportunities for new collaborations.  
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr. Erik de Vries  (male). He holds a master degree in biotechnology and a master degree in Business 
administration. He has 13 years of experience in sewage treatment, drinking water production, groundwater 
remediation and resource recovery. As project coordinator and process innovato r he worked for SME’s, local 
governments, utility companies and industry. He currently pursues an academic career and coordinates the tasks 
of WETSUS in EU H2020 project SCALIBUR. His focus is on upscaling of PHBV production technology with 
organic waste/p rimary sewage sludge and secondary sewage sludge as respectively feedstock and functional 
biomass.  
 Dr. Alan Werker (male). He is an environmental engineer with over 30 years of experience in both academic 
and industrial R&D and drove the PHA production te chnology from fundamental laboratory scale to its current 
stage. Alan led a trans -disciplinary team that peaked at 12 research engineers and scientists. Through this work 
he engaged in national and international academic, corporate, and public/private collaborations in basic research, 
thesis supervision, EU Consortium Projects, and in practical business development challenges for renewable 
resource value chains. As well as being the WETSUS ‘Biopolymers from water’ theme leader, Alan Werker is 
co-owner and c onsultant at Promiko AB, a Swedish SME, and an Adjunct Professor, School of Chemical 
Engineering, at the University of Queensland. 

Section 4,5,6-page 25 
 
 An engineer/researcher and postdoc will be appointed with respectively a MSc and PhD degree and 5 years of 
experience in the field of water technology, process engineering, (bio)chemical engineering or equivalent.  
The project will be supported by experts from WETSUS’ themes: ‘Advanced Water Treatment’, ‘Recourse 
Recovery’ and ‘Desalination’  
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 Werker, A., Bengtsson, S., Johansson, P., Magnusson, P., Gustafsson, E., Hjort, M., Anterrieu, S., Karabegovic, 
L., Alexandersson, T., Karlsson, A., Morgan-Sagastume, F., Sijstermans, L., Tietema, M., Wypkema, E., Kooij, 
Y. van der, Deeke, A., Uijterlinde, C., & Korving, L. (2020). Production quality control of mixed culture poly(3-
hydroxbutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) blends using full -scale municipal activated sludge and non -chlorinated 
solvent extraction (submitted). In M. Koller (Ed.), The Handbook of Polyhydroxyalkanoates. 
 Werker, A., Bengtsson, S. O. H., & Karlsson, C. A. B. (2012). Method for accumulation of polyhydroxyalkanoates 
in biomass with on-line monitoring for feed rate control and process termination (Patent No. EP 2 510 103 B1). 
European Patent Office. 
 Werker, A., Johansson, P. S. T., & Magnusson, P. O. G. (2015). Process for the extraction of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates from biomass (Patent No. EP2956493A1). European Patent Office. 
 Werker, A., Johansson, P. S. T., Magnusson, P. O. G., Maurer, F. H.  J., & Jannasch, P. (2013). Method for 
recovery of stabilized polyhydroxyalkanoates from biomass that has been used to treat organic waste (Patent No. 
EP 2 606 080 B1). European Patent Office. 
 Bengtsson, S., Werker, A., Visser, C., & Korving, L. (2017). PHARIO Stepping stone to a sustainable value chain 
for PHA bioplastic using municipal activated sludge. STOWA, Amersfoort. 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 The Wetsus research theme ‘Biopolyners from Water’ works on fundamental understanding and upscaling of the 
PHA production technology (Coordination by Alan Werker, currently 2 PhD’s and 1 researcher). The theme is 
sponsored by PAQUES ( http://en.paques.nl ), STOWA ( www.stowa.nl ), and Slibverwerking Noord -Brabant 
(www.snb.nl). The theme strongly believes that PHA production is the future in valorization of arganic waste. 
 H2020 project SCALIBUR (grant nr. 817788) which is currently running, aims to cut urban biowaste and replace 
it with a new production chain of biomaterials, forming a partnership of end users to recover and transform 
biowaste into value added products. Wetsus is responsible for upscaling of the PHA production and recovery from 
fermented organic waste and sewage sludge. A pilot scale PHA accumulation, recovery and evaluation 
infrastructure is being realized.  
 PHARIO was financially subsidised from the Topsector Energy program of the Dutch ministry of Economic 
Affairs (TKI Biobased Economy). It confirmed that surplus full-scale municipal activated sludge can be a robust 
raw material to make biopolymers of predictable and high quality for the bioplastics industry when combined 
with fermented regionally available organic residuals. The techno-economic feasibility for a regional bioplastics 
value chain was demonstrated. 
 EIT RawMaterials upscaling project coordinated by WETSUS on a novel magnetic route for phosphorus and iron 
recovery from sewage sludge (ViviMag). This project is being done in cooperation with TUDELFT (NL), Outotec 
(FI), ICL (IL) and Kemira (FI).  
 H2020 project coordinated by WETSUS on Storage and recovery of renewable electrical energy by reversible salt 
water dissociation (BAoBaB), Grant number: 731187. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Extensive lab and demonstration facilities for numerous water treatment and recource revovery technologies, in -
house and at members of the Water Campus.  
PHA accumulation pilot to produce dried PHA rich biomass from fermented organic waste and surplus activated 
secondary sludge from a municipal waste water treatment plan.  
PHA recovery pilot to extract PHA from PHA rich biomass with green solvents (ATEX proof lab facilities). 
PHA evaluation infrastructure to assess the PHA quality (Rheology, Thermogravimetric analysis, Differential 
scanning calorimetry, FTIR Spectroscopy,  Pyrolysis GC-MS). 
Section 4,5,6-page 26 
 
4.1.11 REG -REGENERA LEVANTE, SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 11 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.regeneralevante.com 
SHORTNAME: REG  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
REGENERA is an SME focused on energy efficiency, renewable energy and the environment. Regenera was 
founded in 2007 in Murcia, Spain. REGENERA is an ESCO with 5 main business lines, offering services, such as 
energy consulting, technical installation, maintenance,  energy services and R&D. We provide holistic solutions to 
increase energy efficiency and flexibility, harvest renewable resources, reduce the environmental impact of industrial, 
residential and commercial activities and boost the competitiveness of our cl ients. Our services include energy 
monitoring, environmental and energy audits, carbon footprint assessment, electricity tariff consulting, design, 
engineering and installation of solar PV solutions, indoor and outdoor lighting, power distribution lines, H VAC 
installations, preventive, corrective and conductive maintenance and ESCO contracts. Over the years we have worked 
on many different kinds of facilities and projects, and with gained experience and know -how, we are increasingly 
focused in the industrial field.  
We have 6 financed H2020 projects and 2 financed Life project, in addition to nationally and regionally funded 
innovation projects. Our R&D objectives are to digitalize energy processes in order to meet the energy challenges of 
the future and to turn companies’ energy reductions into their main competitive advantage, our focus of innovation 
being demand response and energy flexibility, grid services and smart grids and smart solutions for improving energy 
efficiency and decreasing energy costs, RES integration and management, smart city and mobility solutions, water-
energy nexus, circular economy and industrial symbiosis and other energy solutions and strategies. In addition, we 
provide work with market studies, value network analysis, regulatory and stakeholder analysis and framework, LCA 
as well as Environmental and social impact assessment. Our experience in R&D projects has given us firm know -
how in topics, such as smart solutions, Big Data, IoT, modelling, testing, simulation, digital twin, str ucturing of 
integrated ESCO business models and assessment of EMS and design related constraints and necessary updates. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
REG will be involved in WP1, establishing a strategy for energy efficiency across A2C processes (T1.3). In WP6 
they will carry out the energy performance of demonstrators by studying energy consumption analysis, electrical 
parameters, loads and renewable energies integration (T6.2). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in 
communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience: REGENERA has more than a decade of experience in the five business lines described before, 
being the energy monitoring, energy management and IT platforms the most related lines with this project. 
REGENERA has participated in 6 financed H2020 projects and 2 financed Life projects in the last 6 years. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
REG will increase the knowledge with a solution of great relevance for its products and clients. Promotion of a 
new business line in the circular economy. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr. Francisco David Gallego Martínez (male): Francisco is an industrial Engineer and Managing Director in 
REGENERA. He is a senior expert and executive with more than 20 years of experience combining a deep 
knowledge of business in both the public and private sectors. He has held various positions in business 
development, including commercial, contractual, financial, human resources and senior management roles. Used 
to work with multidisciplinary teams in international settings. High -level interaction at all levels of the 
organization, from technical managers to members of the Board of Directors. During his time working at INFO 
(Regional Development Agency of the Region of Murcia), he worked on two major European Projects: The 
Regional Programme of Innovative Actions of the Reg ion of Murcia –RPIA- and The Innovation Relay Centre 
Network –IRC Network-. As an engineer he has directed numerous major projects relevant to the areas of Energy, 
Services and Infrastructure as well as Technological Innovation. He has been involved in the  development of 5 
H2020 projects, 1 Life project and numerous regionally and nationally funded innovation projects. 
 Dr. Víctor Fabregat Tena (male): Víctor has a PhD in Chemistry, Master in Sustainable Chemistry and Degree 
in Chemistry. He is the Head of R &D Department, with responsibilities such as coordination, proposal 

Section 4,5,6-page 27 
 
preparation, financial reporting and project development of EU -funded (H2020, Life), National and Regional 
R&D projects with focus on Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency and Flexibility, S mart grids and cities, 
Demand side management, Circular economy, Nature -Based solutions, Water-Energy nexus, Water- and waste 
treatment as well as other industrial processes. Víctor has an extensive experience as project manager in public 
and private entit ies and as researcher in the University Jaume I of Castellón (Spain) and in the University of 
Bristol (United Kingdom). He been involved in the development of 6 H2020 projects and 3 Life projects, and 
numerous regionally and nationally funded innovation pr ojects. He speaks fluent three languages: Spanish, 
English and Catalan. 
 Ms. Juana María Pagán Carpe (female):  Juana is an engineer specializing in energy efficiency certification, 
energy studies and renewable energies. She has experience in energy studies and audits, in the study and 
optimization of electric tariffs, in energy quality studies and in the follow-up of energy efficiency measures. She 
has also experience in European projects related to energy studies within Horizon 2020 and in national projects  
related to energy management and study of flexibility of plants. She has worked as well in researches for Demand 
Response. In addition, she has knowledge in industrial design, in Lean Management and in programming and 
simulations. She has been involved in  the development of 5 H2020 projects, 2 Life projects and numerous 
regionally and nationally funded innovation projects. 
 Ms. Beatriz Castro Granados (female): Beatriz is a junior marine engineer with a Master’s Degree on Marine 
Renewable Energies Harnessing. She has experience in energy studies, mainly wind and photovoltaic. She has 
also experience in European projects related to energy studies within Horizon 2020 and in national projects related 
to energy management and study of flexibility of plants. She has been involved in the development of 3 H2020 
projects, 1 Life project and numerous regionally and nationally funded innovation projects.   
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 L. Cauret et al., “Flexibility provision through enhanced synergies between electricity, gas and heat systems: 
comparative analysis of market and regulatory frameworks in seven case study countries”, 2020, IET Energy 
Systems Integration, DOI: 10.1049/iet-esi.2019.0062 
 J. Haapola et al., "Peer -to-Peer Energy Trading and Grid Control Communications Solutions' Feasibility 
Assessment Based on Key Performance Indicators," 2018 IEEE 87th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC 
Spring), Porto, 2018, pp. 1 -5. d oi: 10.1109/VTCSpring.2018.8417871. URL: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8417871&isnumber=8417457 
 A. Pouttu et al., "P2P model for dist ributed energy trading, grid control and ICT for local smart grids," 2017 
European Conference on Networks and Communications (EuCNC), Oulu, 2017, pp. 1 -6. doi: 
10.1109/EuCNC.2017.7980652. keywords: {power markets;smart power grids;P2P model;ICT;local smart  
grids;peer-to-peer approach;P2P - URL: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7980652&isnumber=7980636 
 L. Cauret et al., “Flexibility provisio n through enhanced synergies between electricity, gas and heat systems: 
comparative analysis of market and regulatory frameworks in seven case study countries”, 2020, IET Energy 
Systems Integration, DOI: 10.1049/iet-esi.2019.0062 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 MAGNITUDE. Tools and technologies for coordination and integration of the European energy system. H2020 
LCE-05-2017. 
 NewTREND. New integrated methodologies and tools for retrofit design towards a next generation of energy 
efficient and sustainable buildings and districts. H2020-EeB-2015 
 RINNO.  Developing an integrated design methodology for energy retrofit (through a software tool) specified for 
use in individual buildings and at the district level, addressing all phases of the refurbishment process. LC-SC3-
EE-1-2019. 
 VPP4Islands. Development of virtual power plants (VPP) for interoperable and smart islands in Europe. LC -
SC3-ES-4-2020 
 LIFE DESIROWS. Elimination of brine from water through desalination processes, achieving salt crystallization 
and improving the quality of the recovered water for the agricultural sector at an affordable price. LIFE 19 
ENV/ES 000447 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 28 
 
4.1.12 CEW -CENTRE OF EXPERTISE WATER TREATMENT  
 
PARTNER Nº: 12 (RTO) 
WEBSITE: www.cew.nl 
SHORTNAME: CEW  
LOCATION: Netherlands 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
CEW is the knowledge and innovation centre when it comes to applied research in the water sector in the Netherlands. 
As a public private partnership between knowledge and research institutions, institutions for vocational education 
(Higher Education), Governmental organisations and entrepreneurs it has the primary goal to develop the knowledge 
of the increasing volume of talent for the International Water Sector and to shorten the valorisation process for the 
innovative industry.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
CEW will be involved in WP1, collaborating with WETS in  a strategy for water efficiency across A2C processes 
(T1.3). In WP3 they will collaborate with WETS the near zero liquid discharge water management facility focussed 
on water recovery (reverse osmose, ultrafiltration), micro-plastics removal and organic resource recovery (T3.1), by-
products valorisation of enzymatic process (T3.5.3 . In WP5 they will collaborate with WETS in the PHBV by -
products valorisation (T5.1.2). In WP6 they will be involved in the integration of the developed technology at pilot 
scale in the final A2C demonstrator (T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & 
dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience: The expertise of CEW relies on their team of professionals with different background that cover 
the whole spectrum of water technology, such as; membrane technologies, chemistry and microbiology, physics and 
modelling. All this knowledge and the know-how, allows to advise and create new concepts and test them reaching 
high TRL in short term.  CEW is participating and coordinated several European projects on water, food and energy 
innovation working closely with SME’s and water utilities to bring innovations to the market. The Water Test 
Network and the VIDA project are examples of it. In these projects, technologies are fostered and tested in a pilot 
scale with TRL ranging from 6 till 9. The expertise of CEW relies on their team of professionals with different 
background that cover the whole spectrum of water technology, such as; membrane technologies, chemistry and 
microbiology, physics and modelling. All this knowledge and the know -how, allows to advise and create new 
concepts and test them reaching high TRL in short term.    
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT   
CEW will broad their knowledge the wastewater characteristics from the plastic waste pre -treatment and/ 
decontamination, and near zero liquid discharge system with high water recovery. CEW will transfer knowledge to 
their associated companies of the wastewater and recycling sectors. Moreover, they will expand its European 
network. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr. Jordi Moreno (male), obtained his PhD degree in Membrane Science & Technology at the University of 
Twente, he authored several research articles in the field of membrane science. In his career as Innovation chaser 
for the Interreg Water Test Network project is advisin g several SME’s and Start -up companies to speed their 
Water Innovative companies towards commercialization and as R&D technologist he is developing the Blue 
Energy project in the Netherlands. He is or was participating in several H2020 projects such as Int elWATT, 
REvivED, RED-Heat-to-Power. 
 
 Ms Francisca Medina (female). Francisca is a project manager for CEW. She has a degree in Chemistry and a 
master in Environmental Engineering. In her career as a scientist, consultant and project manager, she has 
participated in R&D projects, related to developing advanced materials, electrochemical systems and biomining 
processes. She has supported companies as a regulatory and innovation advisor in Latin America and Europe. She 
is coordinating the INNOSUP-1 project VIDA, supporting over 90 SMEs innovating in the Food/Water/Energy 
nexus. 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 29 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 J.M. Dickhout, J. Moreno, P.M. Biesheuvel, L. Boels, R.G.H. Lammertink, W.M. de Vos, Produced water 
treatment by membranes: A review from a colloidal perspective, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, Volume 
487, 2017, Pages 523-534, 
 D. Dolar, M. Gros, S. Rodriguez -Mozaz, J. Moreno, J. Comas, I. Rodriguez -Roda, D. Barceló, Removal of 
emerging contaminants from municipal wastewater with an integrated membrane system, MBR –RO, Journal of 
Hazardous Materials,Volumes 239–240, 2012, Pages 64-69, 
 J. Moreno, S. Grasman, R. van Engelen, and K, Nijmeijer. Upscaling Reverse Electrodialysis. Environmental 
Science & Technology 2018 52 (18), 10856-10863 
 N. Garcia, J. Moreno, E. Cartmell, I. Rodriguez-Roda & S. Judd (2013) The application of microfiltration-reverse 
osmosis/nanofiltration to trace organics removal for municipal wastewater reuse, Environmental Technology, 
34:24, 3183-3189. 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 VIDA project, funded by the INNOSUP Call of HORIZON 2020 to support the innovation potential of small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) working across European food chains interested in improving the use and 
efficiency of water, food, energy and key enabling technologies (KET).  
 Water Test Network - Interreg NEW- The Water Test Network (WTN) project will establish a transnational 
network of testing facilities which can be used by SMEs in North-West Europe (NWE) to test, demonstrate and 
develop new products for the water sector. In this way, new innovations will be developed, and it will accelerate 
the time to market. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
CEW is helping to develop a sustainable plastic washing line together with and at the National Test Centre Plastics 
(NTCP) in Heerenveen, we aim to use this infrastructure that is located close-by our main office to test the innovation 
created in the Water  Application Center in the Water Campus in Leeuwarden whereas CEW performs its research 
and educational projects.  
4.1.1 3 CTNC -CENTRO TECNOLÓGICO NACIONAL DE LA CONSERVA  
 
PARTNER Nº: 13 (RTO) 
WEBSITE: www.ctnc.es 
SHORTNAME: CTNC  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: TECHNICAL LEADER.  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
CTNC is a private non-profit research association of companies, which is recognized by the Spanish Government 
as Innovation and Technological Centre, Office of Transfer of Research Results and it is declared of Public Use. 
CTNC works in all fields of the food sector: from agriculture to final processed project taking into account containers, 
natural ingredients, valorisation of wastes, environmental impact, etc. CTC has a staff of 32 persons. 
At National and Regional levels CTNC carries out several R&D projects both in the analytical and in the 
technological fields. 
In the analytical field some e xamples are: Suitability of some fruit varieties to be processed, Development of 
molecular methods (PCR and DNA Arrays) for identifying varieties and spices and/or quantifying transgenic DNA 
in food products, Monitoring mycotoxins in food and agricultural products by using latest generation analytical 
techniques, Application of immunochemical techniques for determining antibiotics in honey, Control of pathogens 
in frozen products by using molecular techniques (PCR), Development of new ELISAs for detecting i ntact, 
hydrolysed, toxic prolamins in cereals that are not tolerated by celiac patients, Automated detection of pathogen 
bacteria in food using PCR in real time (quantitative PCR), Development of sensorial analysis in fresh and processed 
fruit and vegetabl es, Nutritional characterization of food products, Pesticide controls in different fruits and 
vegetables, extraction of valuable molecules from agricultural wastes, etc. 
In the technological field, some examples are: Development of functional products in t he meat sector, Study of the 
factors that have an influence on the dissipation of phytosanitary waste during the industrial process of vegetables 
freezing, New active plastic containers for food products. Design of foods with immunizing capacity with an 
artichoke base, development of new food products containing algae, Valorisation of agriculture wastes of broccoli 

Section 4,5,6-page 30 
 
production, etc. In general CTNC’s expertise in food technology is related with the following technologies: minimally 
processed foods, aseptic processing and packaging, fourth and fifth game products, traditional heat process, freezing 
processes, active containers, by products valorisation, etc., and of course also in everything related with formulation, 
design of processes, shelf life studies, sensorial analysis, extraction of added value molecules from food side streams, 
application to new food products, etc. 
Other CTNC activities are related with technology transfer: ALINNOVA, for fostering innovation in the Spanish 
agrifood sector. (2001/2003),  AGROCSIC, for transferring to the industry the research results of the different 
institutes of the Spanish CSIC (Spanish Bureau of Scientific Research) (2005/2006), UNIAGRO, which objective is 
to transfer to the agri-food sector the research results of the Spanish universities, CTCAlimentacion magazine that it 
is issued every three months and it is received by more than 1500 agri-food companies, etc. Every two years CTNC 
celebrates (in collaboration with the Regional Development Agency INFO) an Internation al Symposium on Food 
Technologies and a Food Brokerage Event. On May 2019 it was celebrated its 9th edition. 
CTNC created the Agrofood Cluster of the Region of Murcia, an independent foundation located in CTC facilities. 
CTNC has a close relationship with many national and international research and technological institutions 
(Universities of Murcia, Complutense Madrid, Polytechnic Valencia and Cartagena, Porto Portugal, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, Liverpool UK, USAMV Romania, Centres like TUBITAK Turkey, CRIFFC T urkey, IBA Romania, 
SSICA Italy, National Research Centre Egypt, etc.). CTNC is member of ISEKI IFA Food Association and of the 
European technological platform Food4life Spain. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
CTNC is the technical leader of the project , being in charge of supervising and manage the development of 
technical activities. CTNC will be involve in WP1 collaborating in definition of A2C requirements (T1.1), 
establishing methodologies for food, nutraceutics and cosmetic formulations assessment an d compliance to 
food/cosmetic standards (T1.2), agrifood wastes characterisation and collaboration in residues management plan 
(T1.4). They will lead WP2, where they deals with agrifood wastes classification & conditioning (T2.1), research on 
extraction routes of high value-added substances at laboratory scale (T2.2), collaboration in extracts purification & 
stabilisation strategies (T2.3) and collaborating in the evaluation of extracts (T2.4). In WP4, they will collaborate in 
the formulations of new formulations using the extracts at small scale (T4.1), collaborate with CITRO in the design 
and implementation of the pilot plant for green extraction and ultrasound -assisted extraction and will evaluate the 
extracts (T4.2). In WP6 they will be involved in the integration of the developed technology at pilot scale in the final 
A2C demonstrator (T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities 
(T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience: They brings to the project key background including development of molecular methods (PCR 
and DNA Arrays) for identifying varieties and spices and/or quantifying transgenic DNA in food products, 
Monitoring mycotoxins in food and agricultural products by using latest generation analytical t echniques, 
Application of immunochemical techniques for determining antibiotics in honey, Control of pathogens in frozen 
products by using molecular techniques (PCR), Development of new ELISAs for detecting intact, hydrolysed, toxic 
prolamins in cereals that are not tolerated by celiac patients, Automated detection of pathogen bacteria in food using 
PCR in real time (quantitative PCR), Development of sensorial analysis in fresh and processed fruit and vegetables, 
Nutritional characterization of food product s, Pesticide controls in different fruits and vegetables, extraction of 
valuable molecules from agricultural waste, Valorisation of agriculture wastes of broccoli production, Development 
of functional products. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
CTNC will broad its knowledge in key areas for its R&D department as green extraction routes, and developing of 
food, nutraceutical and cosmetic formulations based on natural substances from agrifood wastes. They will transfer 
the acquired knowledge to the ir associated companies in the agrifood sector. They will increase their European 
network. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Presentación Garcia Gomez (female).  Technology Department Responsible, Ph D. Industrial Engineer. 
Working for more than 20 years in the development of new food products with traditional and new technologies. 
Expertise in both, thermal and non -thermal technologies. Expert in the management a nd valorization of by -
products and in extraction and purification technologies. She will be the technical manger of the A2C project. 
 Dr Miguel Ayuso Garcia (male).  Environmental Department Responsible, Ph D. Chemist. Working for 20 years 
for the agrofood industry. Specialized in wastes valorization, water treatments, soil fertility, environmental audits, 
Section 4,5,6-page 31 
 
etc.. Specialized in waste management and waste recovery techno logies: extraction of compounds of interest, 
biomethanization, compost, animal feed, new food products, agricultural recovery. 
 Pablo Flores Ruiz (male). Telecommunications and Industrial Engineer, Research Director working for the agri-
food industry during  more than 10 years. Participation in many projects related with environment, energy and 
water. 
 Angel Martinez Sanmartin (male). Technology Transfer Director. Industrial Chemist working for the agri-food 
industry during more than 30 years. Participation in many research projects always related with agri-food sector: 
AGFORISE, APIFRESH, SATIN (7FP), AGROWASTE (life+), etc. 
 Jenaro Garre Díaz (male). Industrial Chemist. Working for the agri -food industry during more than 30 years. 
Quality Area Manager. Expert in quality control and food processing. Coordinator of the analytical laboratories. 
Participant in numerous R&D projects. in regional, national and European programs. 
 David Quintin Martinez (male). Responsible of the Pilot Plant, Ph D. Food Engineer. Working for 20 years for 
the agri-food industry. Specialized in all kind of food technologies and food product formulations. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 ISI article: Livia Apostol, Claudia Moșoiu, Corneliu Sorin Iorga, San martin Ángel Martínez, “Effect of the 
addition of pumpkin powder on the physicochemical qualities and rheological properties of wheat flour”, 
Romanian Biotechnological Letters (RBL): ISSN 1224 - 5984. 2017. 5 -YEAR IMPACT FACTOR: 0.412 / 
IMPACT FACTOR: 0.404 / INFLUENCE SCORE: 0.160. Nr. on line - doi: 10.26327/RBL2017.80 
 Article in book. Title: ACTIVE BIOCOMPOUNDS TO IMPROVE FOOD NUTRITIONAL VALUE, Ref: 
TIFS_2017_257_R2, Journal: Trends in Food Science & Technology. Accepted for publication in March 2018 
 Co-author in the poster “Exploitation of the biotechnological potential of microalgae: the AlgaeCeuticals project” 
(Project N. 778263, H2020-MSCA-RISE-2017) 18th International Conference on Harmful Algae - ICHA 2018 
in Nantes, France from October 21th to 26th 2018. Identificator ICHA2018/466 
 5th International ISEKI-Food Conference in Stuttgart, Germany. 3/5 July 2018. Topic: R&D – Sustainable food 
production. Presentation Type: Poster - Conference with short presentation. POSTHARVEST PROJECT: BEST 
INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO MINIMIZE POST HARVEST LOSSES WITHIN FOOD CHAIN FOR VET 
 Article: Valorification as functional ingredients of some -by-products from dietary supplement processing (rbl -
2019-0049). Submitted by Dr. Nastasia Belc. Journal: Romanian Biotechnological Letters. Submitted for 
Evaluation June 2019 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 LIFE SOLIEVA-Circular economy applied to the treatment of table olives brines based on solar evaporation. 
LIFE17 ENV/ES/000273. LIFE + Environment Policy and Governance. 2018-2021. 
 AFTERLIFE-Advanced Filtration TEchnologies for the Recovery and Later conversIon of relevant Fractions 
from wastewater.Horizon 2020 / BBI-JU Call: H2020-BBI-JTI-2016  
 AlgaeCeuticals-Development of microalgae -based natural UV Sunscree ns and Proteins as cosmeceuticals and 
Nutraceuticals. H2020-MSCA-RISE-2017. 778263. 2019-2022.  
 POSTHARVEST-Best Innovative Approach to Minimize Post Harvest Losses within Food Chain for VET. P. 
Erasmus +, KA2 – Cooperation for innovation and the exchange of good practices, KA202 - Strategic Partnerships 
for vocational education and training.  
 LIFECITRUS-Recycling of citrus industry scrap into natural additives for food industries, LIFE + 2015/2018 Ref. 
LIFE14ENV/ES/000326  
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Modern facilities with well-equipped laboratories and pilot plants. All kinds of chromatography equipment as well 
as other analytical instruments (for food but also for containers) make CTNC laboratories one of the most important 
in Spain. The Technological area is integrated by different pilot plants for tradition al heat treatment and also other 
treatments such as aseptic processing and packaging, minimally processed foods, frozen foods, and different types 
of green extraction technologies as well. 
- Pilot plant equipment:  Aseptic processing and packaging pilot plant . Ultrasound technology. Modified 
atmosphere packaging pilot plant. Cross filtration pilot plant. Vacuum Concentrator pilot plant. Several equipments 
at pilot scale: crio freezer, retorts, pasteurizers, homogenizers, finishers, colloid mil, mixers, pumps, extraction 
equipments, ultrasound pilot plant, atomizer, lyophilizer. 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 32 
 
- Analytical Department equipment: HPLC, HPLC-MS, GC, GC-MS, atomic absortion, ICP MS, traditional and 
rapid microbiological analysis equipment, containers control equipment, nutritional equipment (Kjeldahl, Soxhlet, 
moisture, fiber, etc.). 
4.1.14 MCT -MARÍN MONTEJANO  AGROTRANSFORMADOS, SA   
 
 
PARTNER Nº: 14 (Large industry) 
WEBSITE: www.mocitos.es  
SHORTNAME: MCT  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
MCT was founded within the Marín Montejano Group in 1986 for the production of juices and drinks in glass and 
brick containers. Throughout the years, the facilities for the packaging of dairy products, wine and derivatives, 
water, gazpacho, jams and other fruit and vegetable preparations, aseptic production lines of fruit preparations 
for industrial use and citrus juice extraction have been extended. 
We have achieved a great development based on the diversification of products, the modernization of facilities and 
the internationalization of markets but without losing the familiar character that allows an agile management and a 
complete implication of the property in all the projects. 
We currently have a presence in over 40 countries, both with our own brands and with private labels and industrial 
semi-finished products. 
We also work as co-packers for different companies in the food sector, contributing our experience and knowledge 
to the needs of these clients. 
We cover the complete manufacturing process in our own facilities; design, development, manufacturing, storage, 
labelling and shipping. 
✓ Commitment to Quality and Safety : Every year we are successfully audited to maintain our IFS 
certification and operate under an ISO 9001 management system, as well as having our customers' own 
systems accreditations. 
✓ Social and Environmental Commitment: We have implemented a CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) 
system and are members of Sedex. We have received various awards such as the Commitment to Sustainable 
Development in the Region of Murcia and we are certified packers of organic products. 
✓ Commitment to R&D. In recent years we have been making a major effort to develop and market new 
products in the line of organic and healthy products. Likewise, we have achieved important improvements 
in the production processes with a view to improving the quality, s ustainability and competitiveness of our 
products. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
MCT will be involved in WP1, definition of A2C food formulations requirements (T1.1), collaborating in the 
implementation of methodology for new formulations with extracts from agri -food wastes (T1.2), collaborating 
Residues Management Plan and being one of the providers of agrifood and plastic multilayer wastes (T1.4). In WP2, 
they will collaborate in the agri-food waste classification and conditioning (T2.1). In WP4, they will collaborate in 
the new food formulations and validation at small scale (T4.1). In WP6, they will be end users validating the bioactive 
extracts in a real environment by development of new food formulations (T6.2). Moreover, they will be involved in 
WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: MCT has a platform devoted to R&D purposes aimed to develop high -quality products with 
innovative and effective solutions. They have a vast experience in the development of healthy enriched products and 
and their validation at laboratory scale, that will be a key knowledge for A2C. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
MCT will increase the knowledge with a solution of great relevance  (healthy enriched products) for its products 
and clients. with a high value and commercial path . I mprovement of their competitiveness based on a more 
sustainable activity and the use of their own waste and by-products as raw materials.  Promotion of a new business 
line in the circular economy. 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 33 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Vicente Moreno (male). Graduate in Chemical Sciences with more than 40 years of experience in the Food 
Industry. He has been Production Manager of leading companies such as Juver Alimentación, S.A. and J. Garcia 
Carrión, S.A. (Don Simón). He has been the Technical Director of t he Marin Montejano Group for more than 11 
years. He collaborates with the University of Murcia in promoting University-Company activities.  Degree in Food 
Science and Technology. Expert in process technology, in the development of new products.   
 Alejandro Sendon (male). Industrial Engineer with four years of experience abroad working in multicultural 
environments Doctorate from the École des Mines de Saint -Étienne in the analysis and resolution of complex 
"Material at Risk" problems in semiconductor manufacturing. Six years of experience in process engineering and 
control, research and development, coordination and teamwork, and testing and troubleshooting. Currently playing 
the role of production manager in the Marin Montejano Group. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
MCT actively collaborates in the technical journal CTNC Alimentación in the agro-food field and in the international 
symposium of food industries in collaboration with CTNC and the Instituto de Fomento de la Región de Murcia -
INFO which is held biannually in the Region of Murcia. 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 2012. National R&D project (CDTI) in conjunction with the University of Murcia, "recovery of dietary fibres from 
vegetable by-products". 
 2014-15. Private R&D in collaboration with CTNC. Development of a new drink with high functional performance 
based on innovative formulations. 
 2015-2016. Private R&D in collaboration with CTNC.  Development of innovative healthy cremogenates of high 
nutritional value. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
MCT facilities are perfectly equipped with different processing technologies and several lines of work depending 
on the manufactured products: thermal technologies, physical and chemical treatments . Aseptic packaging line, 
lines of different packaging formats, juice line, lines of cremogenated products, compotes, jams, purées. They 
have their own laboratory to test the quality of their products and to facilitate, improve and ensure their quality. 
They also have qualified personnel to carry out the relevant tests and research. For the project that is presented, MCT 
will put at the disposal of the programmed works, personnel of their production and quality departments, as well as 
their laboratory and the lines of elaboration of juices and compotes or another line  of products that c ould be 
developed. 
4.1.15 ALM -LABORATORIOS ALMOND, SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 15 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.naturgreen.es 
SHORTNAME: ALM 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Laboratorios Almond S.L.  was created in 1995 with the idea of manufacturing food supplements and 100% 
vegetable food preparations . The company offers a wide range of products 100% vegetable and free of most 
allergens, so they are suitable for people with allergies to milk protein and / or egg, lactose intolerances and / or 
gluten. The commercialization of the products is done under the brand NATURGREEN. 
 
Among its range of products are oils and dressings, soups, sugars, cereals, desserts, beverage all made with organic 
certification and non -dairy ingredients. Company has seven production lines: Bio oils, Bio syrups, Bio powder 
products, Bio vegetable desse rts and creams, fermented non-dairy desserts, Packaging in doy pack format of 
sweeteners and Packaging in doy pack format of dry food. 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 34 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
ALM will be involved in WP1, definition of A2C food formulations requirements (T1.1), collaborating in the 
implementation of methodology for new formulations with extracts from agri -food wastes (T1.2), collaborating 
Residues Management Plan and being one of the providers of agrifood and plastic multilayer wastes (T1.4). In WP2, 
they will collaborate in the agri-food waste classification and conditioning (T2.1). In WP4, they will collaborate in 
the new food formulations and validation at small scale (T4.1). In WP6, they will be end users validating the bioactive 
extracts in a real environment by development of new food formulations (T6.2). Moreover, they will be involved in 
WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: Laboratorios Almond are pioneered in the use of functional ingredients in a large number of 
vegetable products. ALM also has more than 20 years of experience in the development of 100% organic plant foods 
and food supplements. Having several different production lines allo ws the development of a wide variety of 
products: from refrigerated fermented desserts to spreads, sauces, dry soups. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Participation in A2C project will allow ALM to introduce a new circular business by using the natural carotenoids 
and phenolics compounds extracted from agrifood wastes to formulate vegetable desserts. It will allow enlarge the 
products offered to their clients. Improvement of their competitiveness based on a more sustainable activity and the 
use of their own waste and by-products as raw materials.  Promotion of a new business line in the circular economy. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
In order to execute this project, we will rely on the multidisciplinary work of the staff from different departments of 
the company.  
 Dra. Paloma Nallely Nuncio (female),  R&D Department in Laboratorios Almond, S.L. Degree in Food 
Engineering (Mexico), Master’s Degree in Food Science, Technology and Food Control; Ph D. Food Science and 
Technology. During her university career she has worked with different gas chromatography , liquid 
chromatography and mass spectrometry equipment. She has worked for 2 years as a project manager in a company 
dedicated to the realization of R & D projects for various companies in the food sector. For the last 3 years she has 
held a technical position in the R&D Department of Laboratorios Almond. 
 Dra. Mariola Gil (female),  Technical Director in Laboratorios Almond S.L. She has a degree in Veterinary, a 
Master Degree in Veterinary (Food Science Specialty), and an European PhD in Veterinary (Food Sc ience 
Specialty). She has twenty years of experience in the field of innovation and development in the food sector. She 
has directed several R&D projects financed by public and private funds. In addition, she has extensive experience 
in conducting industri al trials on a pilot scale at various production plants. She is currently leading a project to 
develop fermented vegetable desserts (an alternative to dairy yoghurt) for which the company has invested in a new 
manufacturing plant that features the latest technological innovations. 
 Isabel Gomez (female). Degree in Environmental Sciences. She has more than 10 years of experience in quality 
control. Until 2015 he worked in a consulting company for the implementation of quality standards. For the last 5 
years she has been responsible for the quality control of all the products manufactured by Laboratorios Almond. 
She has extensive experience in quality validation of different types of manufactured foods. Moreover, she also has 
extensive knowledge of regulations and legislation in various food areas (labelling, controls, organic certification) 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
Laboratorios Almond has more than 600 different products, being the leader in the organic food sector at a national 
level.  It currently has 6 packaging lines that allow it to process any type of product: from oils to syrups, seeds, sugars, 
etc. It also has two manufacturing lines for desserts and creams (one for room temperature products and the other for 
refrigerated products).  
Of all its resources, its new line for processing refrigerated fermented desserts stands out enormously. The research 
project carried out to manufacture different ranges of this type of product has been one of the main challenges faced 
by the company, having received subsidies from prestigious institutions. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Our company has a plant for the industrial processing of refrigerated fermented products . This line contains 
different grinding and mixin g equipment, reactor tanks, fermentation tanks and a complete packaging line. It also 
provides the project with a custard type vegetable dessert processing line consisting of tanks connected to various 
grinding, packaging and autoclave equipment. 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 35 
 
Similarly, it has three laboratories in charge of working on R&D  (for formulating new products), quality (to 
evaluate the viability of the product from a physical -chemical and sensory point of view) and microbiology (to 
complete the shelf-life studies of the new products developed). 
 
4.1.16 PROEX -PROEXPORT  
 
• PARTNER Nº: 16 (NPO) 
• WEBSITE: www.proexport.es 
• SHORTNAME: PROEX  
• LOCATION: Spain 
• ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
 
PROEXPORT, the Association of Producers-Exporters of Fruits and Vegetables in the Region of Murcia, 
defend the interests of the industry and fighting since 1975 to get the best results for our partners. Proexport 
companies are industry leaders in a 20% of moves that national exports of fruits and vegetables. 
 
PROEXPORT partners (> 50) employ more than 28,000 directly workers, selling a million tons of nearly various 
fruits and vegetables. In addition, we concentrate more than 70% of total regional production and export of these 
products, boosting the regional economy directly. An average of 1,2 million T ons of vegetables and fruits are 
exported each year by partners of Proexport and more than 60 countries consume products from our partners. They 
are a benchmark in quality and food safety, technological development, internationalization and CSR.  
 
Proexport is committed to the environment and collaborate in eco-friendly projects, improv ing the 
competitiveness  of horticultural  farms  in the Murcia  region   
PROEXPORT provides its members with services such as technical research, environmental programmes, marketing 
actions, phytosanitary measures, innovation plans and it talks on its members’ behalf in regional, national and 
European institutions. 
The Technical Department is in charge of the environmental, research and innovation, and phytosanitary measures 
to be adopted by the growers in order to improve their agricultural productions, organizational systems, 
environmental sustainability and any other issue needed or helpful to its members. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
PROEX will be  involved in WP1 defining the needs and characteristics that new agricultural films and food 
packaging should display to be used (T1.1), the requirements the residues management plan must meet and the basis 
to the setting-up plan (T1.4). In WP5, they will validate the new agricultural films compared to conventional films 
in horticultural soils (T5.4.2).   
Proexport will be one of the providers of the samples for the project developments (vegetable waste-WP2 and 
agricultural films-WP3) to be turned into new bioplastics compounds and will test the new packaging materials. 
 
PROEX will also collaborate on public engagement at regional levels ( T7.1), regional socioeconomic assessment 
(data collection on T.4), the elaboration of the A2C Circular economy action plan (within T7.5) as well as and on 
cross fertilization actions for multidimensional model validation (T7.7). 
PROEX will also participate on WP8: A2C Outreach, by being mainly involved in awareness and engagement 
actions (T8.3)  as well on T8.6 (knowledge transfer). 
 
Related experience: As fruit and vegetable growers and packers, Proexport and its members have a vast knowledge 
in the agrifood sector and are extensive users of agricultural films and packaging materials, such as multilayer 
plastics, so replacing fossil-based plastics with new agri-food debris-based plastics would mean a giant step towards 
circular economy. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
In joining this project, PROEX expects the producers and packers’ needs will be met regarding the systemic solution 
in the agrifood sector to be set up, moreover when the source of the new material will be the very plant debris and 
food waste currently pose a challenge.  PROEX will share the acquire d knowledge with their associated agrifood 
companies. They will enlarge their European networking.  
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 36 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 
 Mr Abelardo Hernández (male). Agricultural Engineer. After 25 years working in farming and marketing for 
different companies all over some countries (Spain, United Kingdom and Germany), he has got a specialised 
background in horticultural industry. From 2016 on, Abelardo has set up and managed two EIP-AGRI operational 
groups in order to carry out collaborative innovation projects, one about biodegradable mulch films (ACBD) and 
the other about nitrification inhibitors (NUVES). Nowadays, he is Proexport’s technical manager, accountable for 
crops phytosanitary management, and research and innova2tion projects in agricultural production area 
 Ms Pilar Sabater (female). Administration Head. In charge of giving administrative and financial support for 
the development of activities in Proexport. She has a key role in every project carried out, as accounting support 
is needed so as not to have problems with audits and administrative structure is necessary in any activity. She has 
been working as administration head in Proexport for the last 20 years. 
 Ms Nuria García (female). Journalist. With an extended experience in agricultural matters, she is responsible 
for diffusion and communication in Proexport, both to inform farmers about new projects that they can be 
interested in and to give out results of already finished or ongoing ones. She has developed some nice 
communication and marketing projects  on vegetables, such as “Alcachofa de España” (Spanish artichoke -
www.alcachofa.es), “Mas Brocoli” (plus broccoli – www.masbrocoli.com) or “Lechugas y ensaladas” (lettuces 
and salads -www.lechugasyensaladas.es). 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 Guide to speed up the degradation of biodegradable mulching films in Region of Murcia 
(www.acolchadosbiodegradables.es ) 
 Article “Biodegradable mulch films to reduce plastic footp rint in agriculture”. EIP -Agri Agriculture and 
Innovation Service Point. October 2020. 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 Operational Group ACBD (biodegradable mulching film), Project: New techniques to improve and to speed up 
degradation of biodegradable mulching films. Funded by FEADER into the Rural Development programme 
(2018-2020). Budget 200.000€ 
 Operational Group NUVES (sustainable plant nutrition). Project: Improving drip irrigation systems efficiency 
by using nitrification inhibitors in horticultural crops in the Murcia Region (2019-2021). Funded by FEADER 
into the Rural Development programme. Budget: 85.000€ 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
PROEXPORT has offices full equipped with administrative, computer and communication material to carry out its 
duties, but above all, PROEXPORT works side by side with its 50 members. They make their experience available 
to carry out projects and plans. In addition, experimental fields and testing  equipment from different members are 
available for research and innovation programmes. 
4.1.17  DMC- DMC RESEARCH CENTER SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 17 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.domca.com 
SHORTNAME: DMC  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
DMC Research Center SL is a technological-based entity with headquarters in Alhendín (Granada). The company 
was created in 2005 to create a specific R&D Department of the linked company DOMCA. DMC Research belongs 
to DMC business group constituted by DOMCA Spain and DMC Researc h Center SL. The group has a factory in 
Argentina (DOMCA Argentina), from where the products are distributed to America. Recently, the company has 
started to operate in Chile, with special focus on the aquaculture sector.  

Section 4,5,6-page 37 
 
The team of DMC is composed of hi ghly qualified professionals in Microbiology, Chemistry, Food Science and 
Technology among others. DMC Research has one of the leading research groups in Andalusia, having the greatest 
research activity in biotechnological applications. The research lines are very diverse and range from the selection 
of microorganisms and plant extracts with application for human and animal nutrition to the development of new 
food preservation technologies based on edible coatings, active packaging or air-sanitation. 
Currently, DMC Research Center is working in the following lines: 
 
1.- Obtaining new natural -based compounds (from plants and microorganisms) with technological and functional 
properties. 
2.- Development of new products against emerging pathogens. 
3.- Sanitation processes for the food industry. 
4.- Natural systems in post-harvest treatments and biological pest control. 
5.- Product development for new packaging methods. 
6.- Studies of stabilization and controlled release of active ingredients. 
7.- Use of by-products from the agri-food industry. 
8.- Development of functional ingredients for animal feed. 
9.- New functional ingredients from plant extracts intended for human nutrition. 
 
DMC Research Center collaborates with several Universities and Technological Centers, both from Spain and other 
European countries. The entity has collaboration agreements with different departments of the University of Granada, 
Sevilla or Murcia. As a result of these collaborations, the company has several patents, know-how transfer agreements 
and significant scientific publications. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
DMC will be involved in WP1, collaborating in the definition of the new food, nutraceutics formulations (T1.1), 
collaborating in the implementation of methodology for new formulations with extracts from agri-food wastes (T1.2). 
In WP2, they will develop in collaboration with CTNC and SSICA the hybrid route of green solvents+enzymatic 
hydrolisis+ microwave assisted extraction (T2.2), the y will collaborate in the purification and stabilisation of the 
extracts (T2.3) and will lead the evaluation of the extractions (T2.4). In WP4, they will be involved in the formulation 
of new food and nutraceuticals formulations at small scale using the extracts (T4.1), and they will implement at pilot 
scale at their facilities the green solvents+enzymatic hydrolisis+ microwave assisted extraction route (T4.2). In WP6, 
they will be end users validating the bioactive extracts in a real environment by develop ment of new food & 
nutraceuticals formulations (T6.2). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination 
activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience : DMC has a wide expertise in the implementation of natural product extraction methods, 
especially bioactive compounds extracted from allium species. DMC has been supporting the linked company 
DOMCA in developing high added value additives for food, nutraceuticals, feed and agriculture as well as 
characterizing the extracts and their properties (antioxidant, antimicrobial, etc.) with the most advanced technologies 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
The A2C project is fully aligned with the R&D priority lines of DMC. In fact, the activities included in the project 
will allow us to continue improving our capabilities with the aim to offer the best support and include the waste reuse 
as a desired objective in our extraction processes. New circular business. New products based on natural bioactives 
from agrifood wastes. Increasing their comtetitiveness. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr. José Manuel de la Torre Ramírez (male). Main Researcher. Jose holds a European PhD in Chemistry by the 
University of Jaén. He started to work in 2010 in Fundación Andaltec, a Technological Center of Plastic, in which 
he was responsible for the analysis and characterization of polymeric compounds, food safety assays in plastic 
packages, R&D project management and Quality Management Systems. In 2017, he started to work in NanoMyP 
(Spin-off company from the University of Granada) as Senior Researcher, specially focused on the design and 
development of new nanostructured polymeric materials with application in Biotechnology. From 2019, he is the 
head of the Organic Chemistry department in DMC Research Cent er, with focus on the synthesis and 
characterization of new organic compounds/natural extracts with antimicrobial activity with an intended use in food 
and feed. 
 Dra. Paloma Abad Campos (female). Researcher. Paloma holds a PhD in Analytical Chemistry and a Master’s 
Degree in Technology and Quality of Food by the University of Granada. She started to work in DOMCA in 2008 
Section 4,5,6-page 38 
 
in the Quality Department. One year later, she moved to the Analytical Chemistry Departmen t and has more than 
10 years’ experience participating in Research Projects for DMC Research Center SL. 
 Enrique Guillamón Ayala (male). Researcher 
Enrique Guillamón has a Master’s Degree in Chemistry and is currently finishing their PhD in Food Technology. 
He has several publications and is currently the Technical Director and expert in Regulatory issues of DMC 
Research Center. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 María Llana Ruiz -Cabello, Silvia Pichardo, Alberto Baños, Cristina Núñez, José M. Bermúdez, Enrique 
Guillamón, Susana Aucejo, Ana M. Cameán (2015). Characterisation and evaluation of PLA films containing an 
extract of Allium spp. to be used in the packagin g of ready -to-eat salads under controlled atmospheres. LWT -
Food Science and Technology 64, 1354-1361. 
 Abad, Paloma, Lara, F.J., Arroyo -Manzanares, N., Baños, A., Guillamón, E., García -Campaña, AM. (2014). 
High-performance Liquid Chromatography Method for the Monitoring of the Allium Derivative Propyl propane 
thiosulfonate used as Natural additive in animal feed, Food Analytical Method, 2014; 8(4). 
 Antonio Sorlozano -Puerto, Maria Albertuz -Crespo, Isaac Lopez -Machado, Juan Jose Ariza -Romero, Alberto 
Baños-Arjona, et al. (2018) In Vitro Antibacterial Activity of Propyl-Propane-Thiosulfinate and Propyl-Propane 
Thiosulfonate Derived from Allium spp. against Gram-Negative and Gram-Positive Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria. 
Biomed Res Int. DOI: 10.1155/2018/7861207 
 Teresa Vezza, Francesca Algieri, José Garrido-Mesa, María Pilar Utrill, María Elena Rodríguez-Cabezas, Alberto 
Baños, Enrique Guillamón, Federico García, Alba Rodríguez -Nogales, Julio Gálvez. The Immunomodulatory 
Properties of Propyl-Propane Thiosulfonate Contribute to its Intestinal Anti-Inflammatory Effect in Experimental 
Colitis. Mol Nutr Food Res. (2019) Mar;63(5):e1800653. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201800653. Epub 2019 Jan 9 
 Antonio Sorlózano-Puerto, María Albertuz-Crespo, Isaac López-Machado, José Manuel García-Madero, Enrique 
Guillamón-Ayala, Alberto Baños-Arjona and José Gutiérrez-Fernández, Department of Microbiology, University 
of Granada-ibs (2020) Human Health Pesticide Risk Assessment of Allium Spp. Allium: Ecology, Distribution 
and Cultivation. Nova Publishers.  ISBN: 978-1-53618-079-4. 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 BIOVEXO (H2020-BBI-JTI. Grant Agreement No 887281). Biocontrol of Xylella and its vector in olive trees for 
integrated pest management. Duration 5 years. Start year: 2020. DMC participates as a linked third company to 
provide 2 treatment strategies against Xylella: organosulfur compounds obtained from by-products of onions and 
antagonistic bacteria strains.  
 NATURPICK (multi-actor ITC_20181038, CDTI, Spain). Nutritionally enriched foods using bioactive 
substances obtained from unmarketable products of fruit  and vegetable industry. The aim of this project is to 
incorporate bioactive compounds to produce fortified foods using garlic and onion extracts.  
 OLIVALPORC (multi-actor IDI-20170523, CDTI, Spain). Technological and sustainable solutions in porcine for 
a healthy, functional and safe feeding that improves the properties of meat.  
 COCOBASE ( multi -actor  IDI -20191086, EUREKA -JORDANIA, CDTI, Spain).  Improvement of the 
antimicrobial properties of coconut oil using enzymatic processes for application in high added-value products. 
 ACESPRAY (multi-actor IDI-20120703. CDTI-Spain). Microencapsulation of extracts of high aromatic fraction. 
The role of DMC was mainly the selection and characterization of different extracts with high aromatic fraction, 
such as garlic for microencapsulation. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
DMC has a high-quality infrastructure with a manufacturing area divided into different sections: 
 
- General factory: for reception of raw material, storage area, nonconformity storage room, refrigeration and freezing 
chambers.  
- Production area: powder preparation area, coating rooms, biocide room, natural extracts plant production. 
 -R&D Department : Laboratory of mic robiology and molecular biology, laboratory of bioassays, experimental 
greenhouse, laboratory of chemistry of natural products, laboratory for physical -chemical tests, pilot plant for 
applications, pilot plant for obtaining and development of natural produ cts and greenhouse.  
In addition, DMC has a multi process Biotechnology plant  with different capacities of production and upscaling 
with  fermenters of 30, 300 and 3000 L and downstream technologies, such as nanofiltration,  ultrafiltration, and 
cross-flow filtration.   
Section 4,5,6-page 39 
 
4.1.18 CITRO -CITROMIL, SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 18 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.citromil.net 
SHORTNAME: CITRO 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
Citromil is a family company founded in 1991, whose main activity is the processing of citrus fruits. It is one of the 
main European lemon processors and a leader in the industrialisation of organic lemons. We export 90% of our 
products. We process the fou r most important groups of citrus fruits that can be found in our country: Lemon, 
Tangerine, Orange and Grapefruit, with Lemon as our speciality. We obtain a wide range of products: concentrates, 
purees, juices, essential oils, extracts, cloudiness, cells,  flavonoids, etc.  All CITROMIL products are 100% 
natural, without additives or preservatives.   
Our commitment to sustainable production and a healthy lifestyle is reflected in our work with organic fruit. Since 
2005, we have been working in collaboration with farmers committed to organic production, guaranteeing a supply 
of products that rigorously comply with the regulations and protocols required by the EU, USA, Japan and other 
markets. To this end, we are certified by the Organic Agriculture Council of the Region of Murcia, n: ES-ECO-024-
MU, which is included in the list of EU-approved certification bodies.   
Our commitment to sustainable production is also reflected in the use of different parts of the fruit to obtain different 
high-quality products which allows us to improve the competitiveness of the company.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
CITRO will be involved in WP1, definition of A2C food formulations requirements (T1.1), collaborating in the 
implementation of methodology for new formulations with extracts from agri -food wastes (T1.2), collaborating 
Residues Management Plan and being one of the providers of agrifood and plastic multilayer wastes (T1.4). In WP2, 
they will collaborate in the agri-food waste classification and conditioning (T2.1), they will develop in collaboration 
with CTNC and SSICA the hybrid route of green solvents+ultrasounds  assisted extraction (T2.2), they will 
collaborate in the purification and stabilisation of the extracts (T2.3) and in the evaluation of the extractions (T2.4). 
In WP4, they will be involved in the formulation of new food and nutraceuticals formulations at  small scale using 
the extracts (T4.1), and they will implement at pilot scale at their facilities the green solvents+ultrasounds assisted 
extraction route (T4.2). In WP6, they will be end users validating the bioactive extracts in a real environment by 
development of new food formulations (T6.2). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & 
dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: Citromil has more than 30 years of experience in citrus fruit treatment to obtain new products 
with high added value, from the different parts that make up the fruit: rind, pulp and juice. Their R&D strategy is 
focused on the development of sustainable, ecological, healthy and high added value products. CITRO also have vast 
experience in the use of different technologies for the extraction, processing and conservation of citrus fruits. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Participation in A2C project will allow CITRO to introduce a new circular business by using the natural carotenoids 
and phenolics compounds extracted from agrifood wastes to formulate enriched juices. It will allow enlarge the 
products offered to their clients. Improvement of their competitiveness based on a more sustainable activity and the 
use of their own waste and by-products as raw materials.  Promotion of a new business line in the circular economy. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dra Mª Inmaculada Romero (female).  Doctor of Agricultural Engineering. Head of the Development 
Department. Her activity within the company includes obtaining new citrus products, improvement of production 
lines, productivity control, shelf life and product viability studies. Experience in the develop ment of research 
projects. 
 Mr Roberto Vilaplana Pérez (male).  Agricultural Technical Engineer. Manager of Citromil, 35 years of 
experience in the citrus industry, both commercial and in the supply of raw materials, design of production lines 
and development of new products. 

Section 4,5,6-page 40 
 
 Mr Carlos Nicolás Nicolás (male). Graduate in Industrial Chemistry. Responsible for the Quality Department. 
Management of the quality, food safety and environmental systems implemented in the company. PCQi. 
Experience of more than 20 yea rs in the production of citrus derivatives and production and product quality 
control. 
  
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS  
Products: concentrates, purees, juices, essential oils, extracts, cloudiness, cells, flavonoids. All CITROMIL products 
are 100% natural, with no additives or preservatives. Our products are excellent candidates for the manufacture of 
products enriched with the extracts to be obtained in the project. 
Patents: FORMULATION OF COATINGS FOR THE CONTROL OF POST -CARRY POWDER OF CITRUS 
FRUITS P201631223. ES 2 660 010 A1. 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 AFTERLIFE-Advanced Filtration TEchnologies for the Recovery and Later conversIon of relevant Fractions 
from wastEwater —; Grant Agreement nr. 745737 - H2020-BBI-JTI-2016.  
 Private project with CEBAS-CSIC "Development and evaluation of natural coatings for the protection of lemons 
from harvesting to marketing". 2016. 
  
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT  
CITRO has modern processing lines for juices, essential oils, concentrates and extracts. They use a combination 
of modern and traditional technologies that ensure good yields and quality of our products: Technologies such as 
membrane filtration, controlled distillation, vac uum concentration, thermal treatments, membrane separators and 
centrifugation, refrigeration and conservation chambers. These lines will be at the disposal of the project, mainly in 
the phase of valorisation of the extracts and compounds of interest obtained in the first phases of the project.  
They also have their own control and quality laboratory with the appropriate instrumental equipment and qualified 
personnel that we will make available to the project in those tasks that require it.  
4.1.19 MKSI -MKS INSTRUMENTS ITALY, SRL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 19 (Large Industry) 
WEBSITE: www.mksinst.com  
SHORTNAME: MKSI 
LOCATION: Italy 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER.  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
MKS Instruments, Inc . is a global provider of instruments, systems, subsystems and process control 
solutions that measure, monitor, deliver, analyze, power and control critical parameters of advanced 
manufacturing processes  to improve process performance and productivity for our customers.  
 
Our products are derived from our core competencies in pressure measurement and control, flow measurement 
and control, gas and vapor delivery, gas composition analysis, electronic control technology, reactive gas 
generation and delivery, po wer generation and delivery, vacuum technology, lasers, photonics, optics, precision 
motion control, vibration control and laser -based manufacturing systems solutions.  
MKS Instruments has a proud history of innovations and inventions that have shaped the e volution of the key 
industries we serve. We hold over 2,200 patents, our team includes more than 900 scientists and engineers, and 
we have achieved many "best product" awards. Our ability to understand customers' strategic objectives and 
apply leading edge  science, engineering and technology has led consistently to breakthroughs that have changed 
what is possible.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT   
MKSI will be involved in WP2 designing and building a specific microwave for the extraction of phenolic 
substances and carotenoids from agrifood wastes  (T2.2). In WP4 they will assist the pilot scale up of the 
microwave (T4.2). In WP6 they will be involved in the integration at pilot  scale of A2C technologies (T6.1).  
Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 

Section 4,5,6-page 41 
 
 
Related experience :  MKS Instruments Italy have over 30 years of experience in the design and manufacturing of  
Microwave Generators for Industrial equipment at 2450 MHz and 915MHz used in advanced markets.  All our power 
supply are based on switch mode topology and we are also developing solid state microwave generators.  
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
By its participation in the A2C project, MKSI will broad its knowledge and experience in microwave applied to 
extraction systems for agrifood applications. New business lines. Increasing European networking. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Francesco Braghiroli (male). General Manager at MKSI. He holds a degree in Industrial Engineer. He is an 
expert in MW CVD processes and in product development related to power generation  devices. Experience in 
the development of research projects as production planner and projects cost developer. 
 Mr Maurizio Nerbano (male). Technical Manager at MKSI. He is an Electrical Engineer by the University of 
Parma. Solid state microwave designer. He has a vast experience in continuous time base-band systems for power 
management, RTC systems and LVDS transceiver. He is an expert in hardware and electronic circuits. Moreover, 
he has work as Project Manager more than 5 years. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 90GS02020 : 2kW @2450MHz microwave generator, magnetron based 
 90GS10040 : 10kW @2450MHz microwave generator, magnetron based 
 86SG2024 : 2kW @2450MHz solid state microwave generator 
 86SM940X4 : 2kW @2450MHz multichannel power supply 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
MKSI has a full equipped laboratory with different microwave generators (2-10kW), solid state, and magnetron 
based to carried out the research activities related to the microwave extractions. Moreover, they have technologies 
at industrial level  supporting the design and implementation of the microwave at pilot scale (power generation, 
environmental monitoring, data communications, PCB, emissions testing and food applications). 
4.1.2 0 SSICA - EXPERIMENTAL STATION FOR THE FOOD PRESERVATION INDUSTRY  
 
PARTNER Nº: 20 (RTO) 
WEBSITE: www.ssica.it  
SHORTNAME: SSICA 
LOCATION: Italy 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER.  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Since 1922, The Experimental Station for the Food Preserving Industry (SSICA),  operating through its 
headquarters in Parma and the section of Angri (Salerno), has been promoting the scientific and technical progress 
of the Italian food-preserving industry for the sectors of packaging, fruits, vegetables, meat and fish products through 
activities of research, consultancy, training and dissemination of information . In the production chain of the 
agrifood sector SSICA activity supplies suitable solutions to the food preserving industry in terms of product and 
process safety, innovation,  technology, methodology and use of raw materials. Applied research and pilot -scale 
experimental tests are carried out in SSICA chemical, instrumental, technological and microbiological laboratories. 
Thanks to its specialized staff and cutting -edge laboratories, SSICA is one of the most important applied research 
bodies in the preserved food sector in Europe and in the world and takes part in national and international research 
projects. The Institute includes area specific to different product sectors, as well as departments and laboratories in 
charge of more general activities; with its skilled staff and updated equipment it is able to experiment with new 
products, new processing and preservation procedures, also analysing their economic and social impact.  In 2016 
SSICA has become a national foundation for international research. 
 
  
 

Section 4,5,6-page 42 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
SSICA will be involved in WP2, where they will collaborate in the agri-food waste classification and conditioning 
(T2.1), they will carry out R&D in collaboration with CTNC in the green hybrid extraction routes (T2.2), they will 
lead the purification and stabilisation of the extracts (T2.3) and in the evaluation of the extractions (T2.4). In WP4, 
they will be involved in the formulation of new food and nutraceuticals formulations at small scale using the extracts 
(T4.1), and they will assist to MKSI & DMC in the implemention at pilot scale of the green solvents+enzymatic 
hydrolisis+microwave assisted extraction route (T4.2). In WP6, they will be in the integration of the technologies at 
pilot scale (T6.2). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 
8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: SSICA’s Sensory & Consumer Area has been dealing for years with the extraction of bio -
functional molecules from the waste of industrial processing of various plant species (apple, tomato, apricot, onions, 
strawberries, green beans, banana, kiwi, pear, to mato seeds, peas) and the subsequent optimization marketing & 
consumer based of food products formulas with these added substances. In particular, they have experience in the 
extraction, purification & stabilisation of functional substances (carotenoids, phytosterols) and also several phenolic 
compounds (naringenin, kaempferol, rutin, chorogenic acid, quercetin, quercetin 3 -O-β-glucoside, rhamnetin, 
miricetin, caffeic acid, vanillic acid, cumaric acid, ferulic acid, acido ellagic acid, gallic acid) have also been extracted 
from industrial processing waste. The undertaken studies were aimed at enhancing the waste from the food industry 
with a view to developing new functional ingredients and represent a possible solution linked to the onerous problem 
of the disposal of industrial processing waste; the transformation of the latter into added value ingredients on the one 
hand reduces the environmental impact associated with their disposal and, on the other, creates an economically 
significant commodity resource. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
By its participation in the A2C project, SSICA will broad its knowledge and experience in extraction, and stabilisation 
of bioactives from agrifood wastes, and in optimizing the ingredient composition of traditional as well as novel foods 
according to technological processes and in determining the driving factors (drivers) for the overall satisfaction of 
different consumer market segments. Moreover, they will promote the replication to show the innovation in the sector 
and will create new lines for training in the agrifood sector. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Prof. Sebastiano Porretta (male). Sebastiano Porretta is a senior researcher of the Italian Ministry of Economic 
Development (formerly Ministry of Industry) at the Experimental Station of the Food Preserving Industry, SSICA, 
Parma, Italy where he is head of the consumer science department. He is well known to the scientific community 
for research in the study of product development and quality. His original approach to studying t he interactions 
between foods and consumers and evaluating the effects of ingredients and processing on food acceptability is 
considered groundbreaking. He is a professor of food processing and sensory and consumer science in many 
universities and author o r editor of 25 books. Professor Porretta also serves on editorial boards of several 
international peer -reviewed journals. Since 1997 he has been the president of the Italian Association of Food 
Technology. 
 Dra. Giovanna Dellapina (female). Graduated in Biology in Parma University, researcher at SSICA since 1992. 
She has experience in new ingredients microencapsulation, consumer science qualitative and quantitative tests. Her 
activity mainly deals with analytical determinations (GC-MS, UPLC, Texturometer) and sensory data correlations 
as well as discriminatory, descriptive and ranking tests. 
 Dra Giovanna Poli (female).  Graduated in Biology in Parma University, researcher at SSICA since 1991. Her 
research work deals with product development related to particular nutritional needs and prototyping by 3D printer, 
sensory & consumer shelf life studies, early phases of product development/updating. She has experience in 
designing, organizing and coordination of sensory and consumer tests. She is author of publicati on on scientific 
national and international papers. 
 Dr. Andrea Brutti (male). He is a graduated in Food Science and Technology and PhD in Veterinary Medicine on 
food production and control at Parma University. Currently, he is researcher in Production Technologies section of 
SSICA since 2008. His research activity mainly deals with the improvement of food safety and the extension of 
food shelf life through the application of mild technologies. In particular, he has acquired a significant experience 
in management of pilot plants, improvements of industrial processes, development and application of innovative 
technologies for food treatments and preservation and scaling up of processes of extraction of high value substances 
from different matrices, as vegetables and their by-products. He is author of publications on scientific national and 
international papers. 
Section 4,5,6-page 43 
 
 Dra. Paola Mutti (female). Coordinator of Microbiology section – Graduated in Biology in Parma University, is 
responsible of Microbiological Area. She i s working in SSICA since 1988. Her research work deals with 
microbiological stability and food safety by a series of activities requiring the implementation of specific research 
projects. She has experience on process validation carrying out Microbial Chal lenge Testing, validation of the 
sterilization of aseptic devices using target microorganisms, study of kinetic inactivation of bacteria by systems 
such as thermal and chemical treatments. She is involved in quality assurance systems, quality control, measurement 
uncertainity, validation methods, Eropean Standard en iso/iec 17025. She is author of publication on scientific 
national and international papers. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 "Procedimento di produzione industriale, per estrazione da vegetali, di enzima ascorbico -ossidasi impiegabile nei 
sistemi protettivi antiossidanti biologici di sostanze alimentari." di: Istituto Sperimentale per la Nutrizione delle 
Piante, Roma e Stazione Sperimentale per l'Industria delle Conserve Alimentari, Parma; inventori designati 
Augusto Marchesini e Sebastiano Porretta (13/12/'91). 
 Howard Moskowitz, Stephen Rappaport, David Moskowitz, Sebastiano Porretta, Brigitte Velema, Livia Rossi, 
Margie Atwater, Product design for bread through mind genomics and cognitive economics In: Developing New 
Functional Food and Nutraceutical Products (pp.249-278) Edited by Academic Press, 2017. 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 MEDISMART-Mediterranean Citrus: innovative soft proce ssing solutions for S.M.A.R.T. (Sustainable, 
Mediterranean, Agronomically evolved, nutRitionally enriched, Traditional) products - https://prima-
med.org/funded-projects-2019/ (amount financed € 344,511) 
 PROLIFIC - Integrated cascades of processes for the e xtraction and valorisation bioactive molecules from 
legumes, fungi and coffee agro -industrial side streams (amount financed € 401,070). 790157 - H2020-BBI-JTI- 
2017 - BBI.2017.R4. 
 AGRIMAX - Agri & Food waste valorization co-ops based on flexible multi-feedstocks biorefinery processing 
technologies for new high added value applications, 720719 - H2020-BBI, 2016 -2020 - BBI.VC3.D5-2015 
(amount financed € 897,0540) 
 BIOCOPACplus-Sustainable bio-based coating from tomato processing by-products for food metal packaging - 
LIFE13 ENV/IT/000590 –2014-2017 (amount financed € 283,407). 
 Sustainable development (agronomic, varietal, qualitative, technological and market) of "new Bio -wholemeal 
traditional tomato derivatives" obtained by using High Hydrostatic Pressure (UHPP) technology. Juice and of bio-
active molecules production from industrial waste Prog. n. F/200008/01-03/X45 (amount financed € 654,600). 
  
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
SSICA has full equipped facilities including the following equipment: 
 
- pilot multi-functional lines, including mixer, colloid mill, cutter, homogenization units, decanter centrifuge 
(solid/liquid horizontal separation), centrifuge (liquid/liquid separation), air dryer, close type microwa ve pilot 
plant (OMAC plants s.r.l. Italy), ultrafiltration pilot plant, reverse osmosis pilot plant, atomization pilot plant 
(only for aqueous samples) and laboratory scale freeze dryer. 
- chemical analysis equipment: GC-MS, UPLC (with PDA and RI detectors), vacuum evaporator, GC MS MS 
triple quadrupole, UPLC HRMS orbitrap. 
- Sensory Analysis Laboratory, operating in accordance with ISO 8589 
- Encapsulator B-390 Bϋchi, to encapsulate various materials into a polymeric matrix using vibrating technology 
(prilling) to form beads and capsules with particle diameters between 80 µm and 4000 µm. The encapsulator is 
provided with a concentric nozzle system for creating core-shell capsules. 
 
In the project will collaborate the following sections: 
- The Factory section deals with research, projects and support to companies on plants and engineering issues, 
with particular regard to technology, process and product innovation, process validation (heat penetration 
during sterilization and pasteurization) and  plant validation (retorts and other types of sterilizers and 
pasteurizers) for the heat treatment of food.  
- The Chemical Safety section offers services and research activities mainly dealing with chemical food risks, 
in particular relating to contamination from pesticide residues, leaching from materials in contact with food, 
use of improper additives and, in general, intentional or unintentional contaminants.  
- The Consumer Science section  deals with the design and development of new products or the updati ng of 
existing ones will carry out a significant part of the project activity. The focus is mainly on the quality of food 
Section 4,5,6-page 44 
 
and the evaluation of compositional characteristics, identifying relationships between chemical, physical and 
sensory and market markers. Within the Department, the Sensory Analysis and Consumer Science Laboratory 
is operating in accordance with ISO 8589. 
- The Microbiology section. The main task of the section is to ensure the stability and the microbiological safety 
of food products thro ugh a series of activities that involve implementation of research projects on specific 
topics, direct assistance to companies through analysis and consultancy services, planning of training courses 
for food industry technicians. 
- The Microbiology area collaborates with the technological section so as to address the various issues with an 
integrated approach. 
4.1.21 KVC - KVELOCE I+D+I, SENIOR EUROPA S.L.  
 
PARTNER Nº: 21 (SME) 
WEBSITE: http://kveloce.com/   
SHORTNAME: KVC  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: SYSTEMIC APPROACH MANAGER 
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Kveloce I+D+i is an SME specialised in the development, implementation and exploitation of R&D projects with 
more than 10  years of experience. For years, our experience in supporting research consortiums in different 
complementary activities (e.g. exploitation and dissemination, co-creation methodologies, impact assessment, policy 
recommendations) has been applied to different health and social or environmental innovation projects. 
Our services include: 
• Management of R&D and innovation projects, individual or in collaboration 
• Knowledge management and business innovation processes 
• Social science theoretical & methodological expertise (including behavioural change models)  
• Evaluation (within research and innovation projects) including social acceptance 
• Citizen engagement strategies and co-creation methods  
Kveloce I+D+i has strong expertise in activities addressed to SMEs and Research Centres. We develop and 
implement courses and specific seminars as well as virtual and online learning platforms. Besides, the company is 
also involved in academic initiatives, participating and contributing with its expertise, for example, to the Master for 
research methodology in Social Science  and the EBT Master of Creation and Management of Technological Based 
Innovative Business, at the University of Valencia, and in the Mas ter of Business Innovation of 
the Universidad Católica de Valencia, to mention some.  
 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
KVC will manage the systemic approach of A2C, and will coordinate the WP7:A2C systemic solution adoption, 
replication and scalability. KVC will provide their expertise and background on SSH and RRI as transversal 
contents. Concretely, KVC will lead the tasks on: Public engagement and co -creation methodologies  (T7.1); 
preparation of the project implementation evaluation framework (T7.2); socio-economic and socio-cultural analysis 
(T7.3); validation of the A2C multidimensional model  through cross-fertlization activities with European clusters 
(T7.7). KVC will also support to replication partners on T7.7 while actively will collaborate along the WP7 as a 
whole, and specially will collaborate with UVEG on policy recommendations. KVC will also participate actively in 
A2C Outreach activities, especially on actions for knowledge transfer and capacity building (T8.6)   
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
Kveloce joins together a multidisciplinary team with a proven academic background and professional experience in 
health and social research, citizens’ engagement, impact assessment and policy analysis. Thus, Kveloce I+D+i has a 
sound experience in social impact assessment, dissemination, communication and transfer of knowledge , at 
national and European levels.  The added value of the knowledge and experience provided by the company  is the 
enhancement and optimization of the impact of project results. Several international projects provide strong evidence 
on the experience of Kveloce I+D+i in innovation projects, in particular supporting quality assurance and impact 
assessment, among others, the projects ValueCare (H2020), MatchUP (H2020), 3D TUNE IN (H2020), BOTSTEM 
(E+KA2), DOCMA (H2020), EFFICHRONIC (III Health  Programme), AppCare (II Health  Programme), or 
LUCAS+ (Erasmus+ Sport).  Moreover, KVC has coordinated process of citizens participation in diff erent EU 
projects. Among them, services for advice on the implementation of citizen participation processes in 
the neighborhood of Txomin Enea, San Sebastian, Spain (sample: 348 citizens; in total 12 interviews; 2 workshops 

Section 4,5,6-page 45 
 
of 24 and  18 participants), the P4Trans project (funded by Interreg Europe) developing diagnosis of current mobility 
behaviours and design of specific training on behavioural change to guide policy instrument development in 5 cities 
or regions (KVC analysed  320 surveys about mobility from 5 countries) and in the project MATCHUP (H2020) .In 
addition to the previous participative process implementing participatory methodologies with regional policies, 
members of KVC were responsible to deliver the  policy recommendations arisen from the EU  
project CAP4Access in order to promote the mobility of people with disabilities.  
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dra Maite Ferrando, PhD (female): Managing Director in Kveloce I+D+i. Systemic Approach Manager at 
A2C. Honors Degree in Psychology (1998) and PhD Cum Laude by the University of Valencia (2008). Master 
Degrees in Health & Clinical Psychology by the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (2000), and a Postgraduate 
course by the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (20 10) in Information and Knowledge Society. She has been 
granted for research at the University of Oslo, Stoony Brook University in New York, the University of 
Washington and the University of Berkeley, California. Since 2001, she has been leading the manage ment of 
projects funded by National and European funding programs including the FP6, FP7 and H2020 in the fields of 
ICT, health and environment, among others. Since 2008 her main activity has been focused on innovation in 
health, social policy and ICT rese arch, including ethical issues. Since 2011 she is also. She has chaired and co -
chaired many international conferences and events focusing on innovation and wellbeing. Since 2009 she is EC 
expert evaluator in several EC initiatives (FP7, CIP, H2020, EIT health, EIPAHA).   
 Dra Mireia Ferri, PhD (female): PhD in Social Sciences, Labour and Human Resources, and she has a Bachelor 
Degree in Management and Business Administration. Master Degree in Financial Management (Universidad 
Politécnica de Valencia). She participates in research projects at national and European level in different fields, 
with special participation in Tourism and Social Innovation projects. She has been external expert for the Spanish 
Service for the Innovation in Education (SEPIE). She co -coordinated the groups related with accessible spaces 
and ICT in the International Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing and she has recently been nominated 
member of the Board of Directors of the Covenant on Demographic Change. 
 Barbara Branchini (female ): BA in Political Science and Administration from the University of Florence, 
graduated with a curriculum focused on political sociology and political science research. She has also developed 
into the academic field the concept of Fundamental Rights and i ts evolution in the European constitutional 
discipline. Barbara Branchini has a wide experience in the evaluation of projects within international 
environments, in the management of big events of high technological value, projects and programmes of R&D 
and Innovation in Italy and Spain. She has managed several R&D projects in the fields of Energy, ICT (eHealth, 
TeleHealth, Videogames, Advergaming), Transport and political advocacy. She is currently studying an official 
postgraduate degree in public policy a ssessment (Complutense University of Madrid). She is implementing the 
citizen engagement strategy and social impact assessment in the H2020 lighthouse project MatchUp with seven 
European cities involved.   
 Beatriz Vallina (female). Bachelor Degree in Philosophy, Master Degree in Secondary Education and Vocational 
Training and Doctorate student in the field of Social Science research for Wellbeing (University of Valencia). She 
has a professional background as H2020 consultant, Dissemination Manager within th e 3D Tune -In Project 
(H2020; Ref: 644051) Project Manager, and a wide expertise in Social Media Marketing and Digital Communities 
Engagement. She has also experience in citizen engagement and communication campaigns and in the assessment 
of the communication and engagement strategies design and implementation. She is also in charge of the ethics 
management in different innovative education projects.   
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 Ferri, M; Ferrando, M. (2020). Report on t he co -design activities for the  ValueCare concept - protocol to 
develop the co-desgn activities at pilot sites. Available on: https://projectvaluecare.eu/deliverables/valuecare-d2-
6_report-on-the-co-design-activities-for-the-valuecare-concept-start-term/Branchini, B., Folco, G., Huovila, A., 
Kuusisto, J., Arnhold, L., Erdem , A. (2019). Social Evaluation Framework.  Retrieved from 
https://www.matchup-project.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/D5.3-Social-evaluation-framework_FINAL.pdf 
 Branchini, B., Azorín, F., Vallina, B., González, I., Matamoros, A., Meneghello, V., Fuentes, J., Perales, M. J. 
(2019). New citizens’ engagement strategies in Valencia- Second version. Retrieved from https://www.matchup-
project.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/MAtchUP_D2.26-New-citizens-engagement-strategies-in-
Valencia_2nd_final.pdf 
 Ferrando, M. , Kadyrbaeva A. &  Hoogerwerf E-J. (2019)- Transferability of digital solutions enhancing 
integrated care across  europe: identifying and prioritising barriers and  enablers.  https://aaate2019.eu/wp-
content/uploads/sites/24/2019/09/ProAct-digital-final-8.14.pdf  
Section 4,5,6-page 46 
 
 Francis, L; Ferri, M.; Durá, E.; Ferrando, M. (2016) “Policy recommendations to promote the use of digital 
social innovation and open data for better addressing the mobility requirements of people with disabilities”. 
Presented in the congress “Data for policy. Frontiers of Data Science for Government: Ideas, Practices, and 
Projections” in Cambridge (UK) the 15-16 September 2016.  
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 MAtchUP (H2020-774477). “MAximizing the UPscaling and replication potential of high -level urban 
transformation strategies” . MAtchUP project aims at strengthening the planning processes for urban 
transformation, consolidating the benefits of deploying large scale demonstration projects of innovative 
technologies in the energy, mobility and ICT sectors, by means of substantially improved models for replication 
and upscaling, based on impacts evaluation, and ensuring the bankability of the solutions by means of innovative 
business models, which lead to achieve real deployment further than the pilots carried out in the lighthouse 
cities. Kveloce is supporting the implementation of t he Valencia pilot and leading the communication -citizen 
engagement strategy in Valencia and the whole social impact assessment of the project.  Duration: From 2017-
10-01 to 2020-09-30, ongoing project. Website: http://www.matchup-project.eu/    
 URBANREC (H2020- 690103) ‘New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high 
added value  RECycled products’. URBANREC implements an eco -innovative and integral bulky waste 
management system (enhancing prevention and reuse, improving logistics and allowing new waste treatments to 
obtain high added value recycled products) and demonstrate its effectiveness in different EU regions, including 
a roadmap to improve Eco -efficiency on European waste man agement & Pro -active standardization 
strategy. Kveloce is supporting the eco -fragmentation pilot plant implemented in Valencia Region and the 
communication and citizen engagement strategy of relevant stakeholders. Duration: From 2016-06-01 to 2020-
11-30, ongoing project. Website: http://www.urbanrec-project.eu/    
 INVESTSOCIAL (AVI, INNTAL21/18/014). Impact Investment – a novel outcome -based financing 
mechanism to promote innovation and social well-being. Impact investments are those investments that direct 
capital towards projects with social and/or environmental impact. The double search for profitability and social 
/ environmental impact is what differentiates impact investments from other types of investments. Despite the 
fact that impact investment is gaining increasing attention and it has now become a relevant issue even on the 
EU public agenda, there is still much confusion about this emerging market. The application of such investment 
schemes is complicated and requires specific feasibility analysis.  This research focuses on the  study of one of 
these instruments, the Social Impact Bond,  and its potential application  for the  finance of local or regional 
interventions for energy poverty.  Duration: from 2018 -02-01 to 2020 -12-31, ongoing 
project. Website: http://kveloce.com/en/formacion/recursos/   
 Wellbased (H2020). Improving health, wellbeing and equality by evidenced -based urban policies for 
tackling energy poverty. WELLBASED will design, implement and evaluate a comprehensive urban 
programme to reduce energy poverty and their effects on the citizens health and well being, built on evidence -
based approaches in 7 different pilot cities, representing different urban realities but also a diverse range of 
welfare and healthcare models.  KVC is in charge of  developing,  together  with project  partners,  the  urban 
framework and participates in the Spanish pilot. Moreover, KVC is involved in the activities related to evaluation  
of  interventions,  policy  analysis,  scalability  and  transferability  as  well  as  dissemination  and communication. 
In particular, KVC will have a major role in exploitation activities, development of new/innovative business 
models and strategies as well as in the elaboration of policy guidelines and recommendations. 
 Txomin Enea (Fomento San Sebastián SL). Collaborative reflection process in t he fields of Energy, 
Mobility, ICTs and Collaborative services in the Txomin Enea neighborhood. The process was implemented 
within the framework of the district's urban regeneration process and made possible the visualisation of various 
possible scenarios of urban transformation. The general objective of the reflection process was to collect public 
perception about the present and future of Txomin Enea that allowed to jointly co-design a diagnosis and a battery 
of proposals for the neighbourhood. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
The company has the required tools and critical mass required for the implementation of specific qualitative and 
quantitative methodologies (e.g. IBM SPSS Statistics Base 22.0. MAXQDA 2019 Verbi  Software). Additional 
specific instruments for exploitation and dissemination activities are also part of the company tools (e.g. virtual 
learning environments; market research databases, participatory processes supporting instruments, etc.).  
The facilities of the company are distributed in three offices in Spain (Madrid, Asturias y Valencia) and the project 
will be implemented in the Valencia facilities.  
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 47 
 
4.1.22 UVEG -POLIBIENESTAR  
 
PARTNER Nº: 22 (UNIVERSITY) 
WEBSITE: www.polibienestar.org 
SHORTNAME: UVEG  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
The Universitat de València (UVEG) was founded in 1499 and, initially, was dedicated to the study of Medicine, 
Humanities, Theology and Law. Nowadays, it has become a modern European university opened to almost every 
branch of knowledge. Given the wide ran ge of studies offered as well as its humanistic dimension, the Universitat 
de València is now one of the largest, oldest, and most diverse universities in Spain. The University has 45,800 
degree and 8,600 postgraduate students. On our campuses (Blasco Ibañ ez, Burjassot-Paterna and Els Tarongers), 
over 3,300 teachers and researchers, who make up 90 departments, 17 institutes and other research units, carry out 
their work, aided by over 1,700 administration and service staff. Its libraries hold almost 1,5 mil lion books, are 
subscribed to more than 26,000 journals, and provide 4,300 reading places for its almost 60,000 users. Along with 
the human resources, the magnitude of its facilities and the available up -to-date instrumental equipment guarantee 
the quality of a vast scientific and technologic offer to the service of society.   
The UVEG is recognized as one of the most outstanding Spanish universities in both national and international 
rankings. It produces 63% of the indexed references of all Valencian univ ersities and ranks third among Spanish 
universities in indexed scientific production. More than 300 PhD theses are presented every year in the framework 
of 110 PhD programs, 31 of which have obtained the special Quality Award given by the Spanish Education  
Ministry. At last, its increasing research budget, over € 52 million, is an indicator of the scientific and technological 
capabilities of the UVEG.  The UVEG has experience in the development and management of more than 150 
European Projects under the fol lowing frameworks: the RTD European (I to VII) Framework Programmes, 
HORIZON 2020, Lifelong Learning Programme (Erasmus, Socrates, Leonardo) and Erasmus+, acting both as a 
coordinator and partner institution.    
In particular, Polibienestar Research Institute which belongs to UVEG, is composed by an interdisciplinary team 
with 38 senior and 18 junior researchers with national and European experience from nine different departments 
from the UVEG and six associated units from the Universities: Castellón, Murc ia, Castilla La Mancha, Castilla y 
León, Extremadura, and Politécnica de Madrid. The staff of Polibienestar is composed by researchers from different 
backgrounds working together to study health and social phenomena, including experts on medicine, psycholo gy, 
sociology, political science, social work, economy, law, education engineering, and architecture. This allows to carry 
out interdisciplinary research, innovation and social technology, technical advice, and training in the fields of health 
and social p olicies. Polibienestar also advises the Administration and private entities in the design, planning and 
implementation of health and social policies and services. To date, Polibienestar has participated and coordinated 
more than 40 R&D projects funded by Spanish Ministries and European programmes like the 6th and 7th Framework 
Programmes, the II and III Health Programmes, the AAL Programme, the Daphne III Programme, the Progress 
Programme, the ENPI CBCMED, the Youth in Action Programme, the Life Long Learni ng Programme, H2020, 
among others.    
Additionally, Polibienestar presents a broad experience in cooperation and participation in European networks due 
to its active role in European research and policy design. Among others, Polibienestar works together with CORAL– 
Community of Regions for Assisted Living and ENSA. Furthermore, Polibienestar participates actively in two 
Action Groups of the European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing (EIP on AHA) promoted by 
the European Commission: B3 Capa city building and replicability of successful integrated care systems based on 
innovative tools and services and D4 Innovation for age friendly buildings, cities and environments.   
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
UVEG will participate in the project providing a  horizontal perspective of SSH and RRI content to the project 
implementation. UVEG will lead the construction of the multidimensional model for A2C systemic solution  
adoption, replication and replication (T7.5) with a special focus on delivering policy&regulatory recommendations 
as well as on constructing the A2C circular governance model while it will actively participate along the WP7 , 
especially in close collaboration with KVC on; Public engagement and co -creation methodologies ; evaluation 
framework, socio-economic and socio -cultural analysis; validation of the A2C multidimensional model  clusters. 
UVEG will also participate in A2C Outreach activities, leading actions for knowledge transfer and capacity  
building (T8.6)   

Section 4,5,6-page 48 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT  
Polibienestar has strong leadership position and capacity to carry out number of activities related to the topic ID LC-
GD-3-2-2020, such as (a) policy recommendations and guidelines to advice policy makers in different topics, 
especially in the promotion of initiatives addressed to foster sustainable behaviors among citizens (circular economy) 
and wellbeing; (b) use of different assessment tools to measure the change of behaviors and the impact at social and 
health dimensions of citizens; (c) identification, analysis and evaluation of policies, programmes and interventions, 
including model definition and replication analysis; (d) detection, design and assessment of good practices and 
initiatives in the field; (e ) promote the participation of end -users, especially vulnerable groups, in the project 
activities; (f) implementing specific training activities. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 Carolina Moreno-Castro (female) is a Full Professor of Journalism and member of the Institute on Social 
Welfare Policy (POLIBIENESTAR) at the University of Valencia. She is also a member of the advisory board 
of the Studies Centre on Science, Communication, and Society from the Pompeu Fabra University (CCS-UPF); 
member of the director board of the Spanish Association of Science Communication (AECC); and of the 
Scientific Advisory Council of the GADEA for Science Foundation (GSF). She began her research career at the 
Institute for Advanced Social Studies (IESA) of the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), in 1993. All of 
her works have had a significant impact on media due to her great interest to the transfer of  the results of her 
research to society. At this point, she has been collaborating in the knowledge transfer with the Spanish 
Foundation for Science and Technology (FECYT), and with the Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI). 
Moreover, she has carried out research stays at international centres such as Cornell University (Ithaca, New 
York); the Austral University (Valdivia, Chile); the Quilmes University and the National University of Tres de 
Febrero (both of them, in Buenos Aires, Argentina); and at Harvard University (Cambridge, Massachusetts). 
During the last decade, she has been leading the ScienceFlows group at the University of Valencia 
(www.scienceflows.com), from where she currently coordinates and leads projects of the national research 
program and European calls (H2020 and Erasmus+). She is currently the coordinator of the  CONCISE project 
(H2020-SwafS-19-RIA-2018-2019), PERSIST_EU (2018-1-ES01KA0203-050827), NoRumourHealth and 
ESMODA-ECO. In addition, she participates actively in science popularisation activities which are organised 
by the  Scientific Culture and Innovation Unit of the University of Valencia,  such as “Expociencia”, 
“Experimenta” or “La noche de los investigadores”.  
 Dra Tamara Alhambra Borrás, PhD (female) has a PhD in Psychology by University of Valencia and a two 
Master Degrees: one in Resea rch and Interventions in Psychopathology and Health and a Master Degree in 
General Health Psychology, both by the University of Valencia. She is a researcher at Polibienestar Research 
Institute where she has large expertise in participating in European pro jects as researcher and also as project 
manager developing different activities such as conducting pilot studies in the field of health and performing 
evaluation tasks in research. Moreover, Ms. Alhambra-Borrás has experience working abroad in health-related 
projects, concretely in India and South Africa.   
 Dra Ascensión Doñate -Martínez (female) is PhD in Social Sciences (2017), has a Degree in Psychologist 
(2008) and is Post -graduated on Neurosciences (2010), by the University of Valencia. She is a researcher at 
Polibienestar Research Institute since 2010 where she has participated in mo re than 15 regional, national and 
European projects focused mainly on ageing, risk stratification of population, management of chronic diseases, 
social and health care pathways and public health policy. She has experience analyzing the impact of health 
services among their users in terms of QoL, satisfaction, consumption of services or usefulness, as well as 
collecting, analyzing and interpreting data. The results of her research have been published in journals indexed 
at ISI -Journal Citation Reports, such as Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics; and, moreover, she has 
presented their results in more than 20 national and international scientific and academic conferences. She has 
collaborated in several prestigious journals as referee and as external evalua tor at the National Agency of the 
Erasmus+ programme in Spain (SEPIE). Furthermore, she has been a visiting researcher in the Department of 
Public Health at the Erasmus Medical Centre in Rotterdam (2015) and in the Faculty of Social Work at the 
University of Iceland (2016).  
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 Alhambra-Borrás, T.; Alexandru, C.; Whitehouse, D.; Garcés -Ferrer, J. (2018) Enhancing the SCIROCCO 
maturity model tool using quantitative and qualitative methods. International Journal Of Integrated Care, 18(2), 
1-8  
 Doñate-Martínez, A.; Garcés, J.; Ródenas, F. (2018) Planning integrated care at primary care centres: lessons 
learnt through research in stratification tools in the Valencian Healthcare System. International Journal Of 
Integrated Care Informació addicional, 18(2), 1-8 
Section 4,5,6-page 49 
 
 Doñate-Martínez, A., Ródenas, F., Garcés, J. (2016). Impact of a primary-based telemonitoring programme in 
HRQOL, satisfaction and usefulness in a sample of older adults with chronic diseases in Valencia (Spain). 
Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 62, 169 - 175  
 Franse, C.B.; Voorham, A.J.J.; van Staveren, R.; Koppelaar, E.; Martijn, R.; ValíaCotanda, E.; Alhambra-
Borrás, T.; Rentoumis, T.; Bilajac, L.; Vasiljev Marchesi, V.; Rukavina, T.; Verma, A.; Williams, G.; Clough, 
G.; Garcés-Ferrer, J.; Mattace Raso, F.; Raat, H. (2017). Evaluation desi gn of Urban Health Centres Europe 
(UHCE): preventive integrated health and social care for community -dwelling older persons in five European 
cities.BMC Geriatrics. 17 - 209. 
 Valía-Cotanda, E.; Gil-Salmerón, A.; Alhambra-Borrás, T.; Garcés-Ferrer, J. (2018) Integrated care for elderly 
receiving hospital -at-home care: Designing an innovative home -based programme. International Journal Of 
Integrated Care, 18(S2) A367 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 SCIROCCO: Scaling Integrated Care in Context. Co-funded by the Health Programme of the European Union 
(ref.: 710033). Main researcher in UVEG: Jorge Garcés. Duration: 32 months. The project provided a validated 
and tested self-assessment tool to facilitate scaling up and successful transfer of good practices in integrated care 
through European regions. This tool is now been supported by the project SIROCCO Exchange funded by the 
same programme in which Polibienestar also participates. 
 CONCISE: Communication role on perception and beliefs of EU  citizens about science (H2020 SWAFS; 
European Commission).  Main researcher in UVEG: Carolina Moreno. Duration: 2018 -2021. CONCISE aims 
to generate a European -wide debate on science communication, involving a wide array of stakeholders, from 
media outlets to policy makers, from scientists to business companies, from science communicators to civil 
society organisations. 
 VALUECARE - Value-based methodology for integrated care supported by ICT. Funded under the Horizon 
2020 Programme of the EC (ref.: 875215). Main researcher in UVEG: Jorge Garcés. Duration: 2019-2023. The 
project delivers efficient outcome -based integrated (health and social) care to older people facing cognitive 
impairment, frailty and multiple chronic health conditions in order to improve th eir quality of life (and of their 
families) as well as the sustainability of the health and social care systems in Europe. 
 EURIPHI - European wide Innovation Procurement in Health and Care. Funded under the Horizon 2020 
Programme of the EC (ref.: 825922). Main researcher in UVEG: Jorge Garcés. Duration: 2019 -2020. This a 
CSA project aimed at developing a model of “Innovative Public Procurement” (PPI) across borders fostering 
acceleration in a change in procurement practices leading to a value-based approach resulting in most economic 
advantageous tendering.   
 Dinamising Circular Economy in the Innovation System in Valencia region  (funded by the regional 
government). Main researcher in UVEG: Jorge Garcés. Duration: 2018. The project fostered and reinforced the 
implementation of the circular economy initiatives among the universities and research institutes in the Valencia 
region. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
The main venue of Polibienestar is in Valencia. There its team develops its activity in different departments and a 
common research institute with 2 offices and one meeting room with all the requ ired facilities to develop research 
and training activities. Moreover, the UV offers other meeting rooms and facilities like libraries, and scientific 
resources. In addition, as mentioned, Polibienestar is composed  by  an  interdisciplinary  team  with  38  senior  and  
18  junior  researchers  with national  and  European  experience  from  nine  different  departments  from  the  UVEG  
and  nine different departments from the UVEG and six associated units from the Universities: Castellón, Murcia, 
Castilla La Mancha, Castilla y León, Extremadura, and Politécnica de Madrid. 
4.1.23 CJM -FUNDACIÓN CAJAMAR  
PARTNER Nº: 23 (NGO) 
WEBSITE: www.fundacioncajamar.es  
SHORTNAME: CJM 
LOCATION: SPAIN 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Fundación Cajamar is a Spanish non-profit foundation created by Cajamar credit cooperative bank in 2006 with the 
aim of ‘generating knowledge and disseminating it to the whole society’.  
 

Section 4,5,6-page 50 
 
Particularly, Fundación Cajamar encompasses three action lines: Financing lines and support to the agrifood sector, 
training programmes and dissemination actions, research activities related to the agrifood sector 
Financial support to the agrifood sector:  Fundacion Cajamar is committed with the agrifood sector, supporting 
the financing needs and offering financial solution through special financial lines tailored to each specific needs 
(some of them trough rural banks that are part of the Cajamar Cooperative Group) as well as offering a supporting 
service on financial assessment. Some of the financing lines are:  
 Agricultural / Livestock Campaign Loan to cover up to 100% of the expenses derived from your activity. 
Quickly granted and with preferential interest rates. 
 Campaign Loans for Cooperatives and Societies to meet the needs and unforeseen events that arise during 
the campaign. 
 Credit Account to cover the liquidity needs produced by the development of activities in the primary sector 
in a comfortable way, as a current account. 
 Agrofuerte credit that is available through the businesses adhered to this system, being able to choose the 
form of payment in each purchase. Allowing to adjust payments to the collection cycles of your farm. 
Knowledge transfer and dissemination actions: Cajamar Agrifood traini ng is another step in the search for 
synergies with the agri -food sector, and includes specific training actions designed with the aim of promoting 
innovation and competitiveness of the business throughout the entire agrifood value chain. 
Training and knowledge are the engines that contribute to innovation in the agrifood sector, promoting the economic, 
social and environmental sustainability of the sector, based on permanent contact with the rest of the agents in the 
value chain and through the incorporation of technology, professional training and sustainable practices. 
For this reason, we periodically organize transfer activities (conferences, seminars, workshops) and training courses 
for directors and managers of agrifood companies, as well as courses for young people in order for them to join the 
agrifood sector and develop their professional activity in it. 
Research activities: The research activity is carried out in its research centre located at the Southeast of Spain in the 
middle of the highest conc entration of greenhouses in Europe. This centre has been doing experimentation on 
greenhouse horticulture from its creation by Cajamar in 1975. The research activity is focused on the development 
of new technologies for the bioeconomy and the search of alt ernative productions for Mediterranean greenhouses, 
keeping always in mind the sustainability of the greenhouse system, both in terms of resources (water, nutrients, 
energy, etc.), waste management, revaluation of by-products of the agricultural sector. The research team has specific 
skills on improving water use and irrigation scheduling in horticultural greenhouse crops, biological pest control, 
fertigation management, cultivation techniques, greenhouse technology, bioeconomy and circular agricultural. 
 
The research activity is divided into four departments: Agri -Sustainability, Greenhouse Technology, Food and 
Health, and Bio-Economy. Furthermore, there is a horizontal Dissemination department. A constant communication 
with the different stakeholders of th e greenhouse industry, from growers and technical advisors (through the 
cooperatives) to greenhouse-related technology manufacturers, as well as with other research centres is promoted. 
Dissemination activity is a core objective and is carried out through the publication of technical documents (which 
are free -available in the following webpage: http://www.publicacionescajamar.es/), the organization of transfer 
activities across the country (more than 100 per year with almost 8,000 attendants), and attending  the visits to the 
centre (almost 4,000 visitors). 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
CJM will support UB in the development the Circular Economy business models (T6.4) focusing on the study of the 
specific financing needs of each partner arising from the CEBMs. Thus, CJM will identify the financing need of 
each generated business model related to the specific partner involved and will explore which private fund will better 
support each CEBMs. Moreover, CJM will actively participate in 7.1 on public engagement actions and in 7.5.3 
helping to delivering the financing recommendations for CEBMs adoption also at EU levels.  CJM will also 
participate in A2C Outreach activities, especially on actions for knowledge transfer and capacity building (T8.6)  
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
The implementation of this project and its results will provide CJM a valuable knowledge and understanding about  
the circular economy related needs which will enable to better adjust their financial instruments for the agrifood 
sector fostering their transition towards circular economy   
 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Miguel Ángel Domene Ruiz (male)  Director bioeconomy department. He is a chemist by the Autonomous 
University of Madrid. He has worked for 16 years at the Spanish Higher Council for Scientific Research (CSIC). 
Since 2008, he has been working as a researcher in the agri-food biotechnology laboratory where soil, substrates, 
plant and water amendments studies are carried out, as well as agri -food quality studies, where parameters are 
Section 4,5,6-page 51 
 
analysed of quality of fruits and vegetables, quantification of bioactive substances. Throughout the professional 
career he published 27 papers at national and international conferences, 2 book chapters, a patent for industrial 
application in a comprehensive model of restoration of arid and semi -arid areas, 7 international publications, 6 
national publications, a keynote speech on the 25th anniversary of the AEDN (Spanish Association of Dietitians 
and Nutritionists), He participated in 20 technical seminars and published 25 local publications. 
 Dra Alicia Mª González Céspedes  (female) PhD, is an agronomist specialized in economics matters working 
as a researcher in the Research Centre of Cajamar since 2003 with a PhD in Agronomy at the University of 
Almería. Since then she has been working in various areas and subjects related to intensive agriculture, irrigation 
and biotechnology of microalgae. Since 2007, she has been working as a researcher in the Bioeconomy Area, on 
issues related to microalgae production systems for different uses and in the application of microalgae for water 
purification and its’ use in agriculture. Product of the work in the aforementioned lines, she has directed 1 PhD 
on Wastewater treatment with microalgae in open reactors and she has tutored two End of Master Projects in 
these lines. She has published 7 works in international journals, 25 works in congresses. She has also participated 
in 8 research projects funded in calls for competitive competition and in 14 projects with companies. 
 Ms Maria Dolores Segura Rodríguez (female) is a technician of laboratory. Since 1995 she has been working 
at Cajamar Research Centre, performing technical position. She is a specialist in soil, water and plant analysis. 
In addition to nutritional quantification and bioactive substances. 
 Ms Eva Maria Martinez Fernandez (female) is a technician of laboratory. Since 1998 she has been working at 
Cajamar Research Centre, performing technical position. She is a specialist in soil, water and plant analysis. In 
addition to nutritional quantification and bioactive substances. 
 Mr Ieltxu Gómez Iturrioz (male), is the field trial coordinator at the Experimental Station. He is an agronomist 
from the University of Almería. Since 2020 he has been working at Cajamar Research Center, performing 
technical and research position as coordinator. He is currently responsible for the management of the horticultural 
crops. His main expertise is in trials of varieties and cultivation techniques of the main horticultural species, 
biological control, organic farming and protocols of minimum waste in greenhouses. 
 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 D. Massa, J.J. Magán, F.F. Montesano, N. Tzortzakis. 2020. Minimizing water and nutrient losses from soilless 
cropping in southern Europe. Agricultural Water Management 241. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2020.106395  
 R. Ortega; M.A. Domene; M. Soriano; M. Sánchez; C. Asensio; I. Mirallles. Improving the fertility of 
degraded soils from a limestone quarry with organic and inorganic amendments to support vegetation 
restoration with semiarid Mediterranean plants. Soil & Tillage Research. 204, pp. 104718. 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2020.104718 
 Abdelkhalik, A., Pascual, B., Nájera, I. M.A. Domene., C. Baixauli., N. Pascual-Seva. Effects of deficit 
irrigation on the yield and irrigation water use efficiency of drip-irrigated sweet pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) 
under Mediterranean conditions. Irrig Sci 38, 89–104 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00271-019-00655-1 
 R. Ortega; I. Miralles; D.E. Meca; J.C. Gázquez; M.A. Domene. Effect of organic and synthetic fertilizers on 
the crop yield and macronutrients contents in soil and pepper. Communications in Soil Science and Plant 
Analysis.47 - 10, pp. 1216 - 1226. 2016.  
 Bonachela S., Fernández M.D., Cabrera F.J., Granados M.R., 2018. Soil spatio-temporal distribution of water, 
salts and nutrients in greenhouse, drip-irrigated tomato crops using lysimetry and dielectric methods. 
Agricultural Water Management 203: 151–161. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 bioREFINA- Biorefinery from agricultural and livestock residual biomass to obtain self -consumption 
bioproducts in horticultural crops: Project whose objective was to develop an agricultural biomass treatment 
plant based on the biorefinery concept, to be installed in  fruit and vegetable farms allowing the production and 
self-consumption of bioenergy and biofertilizers with a reduced environmental footprint and high hygienic 
quality. 
 FAIRshare- Farm Advisory digital Innovation tools Realised and Shared H2020 project whose objective is to 
ensure that farm advisors and their organisations effectively use digital tools and services for supporting a more 
productive and sustainable agriculture. 
 SMARTPROTECT- SMART agriculture for innovative vegetable crop PROTECTio n: harnessing advanced 
methodologies and technologies. H2020 thematic network whose objective is to stimulate knowledge flow in a 
multi-actor approach and to enhance the innovative potential of advanced methodologies for IPM in vegetable 
production in Europe. 
Section 4,5,6-page 52 
 
 FERTINNOWA- Transfer of INNOvative techniques for Sustainable WAter use in FERtigated crops H2020 
thematic network whose objective was to collect, exchange, showcase and transfer innovative water management 
solutions and best practices in order to impr ove water use efficiency and reduce environmental impact of 
fertigated horticulture production systems. 
 BIOVEGE- Products of high value added from vegetable residues. BIOVEGE project whose main objective 
was to develop new technologies and / or adapt exist ing ones to value economically and environmentally 
efficiently the horticultural waste generated during its handling, transport and sale. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
The Research Center has a total surface of 14 ha (2.7 ha are occupied by 29 greenhouses and 8 ha are dedicated to 
outdoors fruit crops). Different infrastructures are available, namely: buildings, ponds, lanes, a conference room, a 
laboratory for chemical analysis and another for bio -productive controls, etc. There are also different facilities: 
automatic fertigation and climate controllers, drainage lysimeters, weather stations, etc. 
 
4.1.24 CARM - GOVERNMENT OF THE REGION OF MURCIA. REGIONAL MINISTRY OF 
PRESIDENCY AND TAXES  
 
PARTNER Nº: 24 (Public Administration) 
WEBSITE: www.carm.es 
SHORTNAME: CARM  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
The Regional Ministry of the Presidency and Taxes  is the Department of the Regional Government that  assumes 
financial matters; budgetary; collection; fiscal; patrimonial; intervening; accountant; coordination of the contracting 
services of the different ministries; planning and promotion of regional economic development; business financing; 
statistics; European funds; corporate information and communication systems, including computer planning and 
corporate network coordination; internal digital transformation of the administration and external; audiovisual 
communication; informa tion society and telecommunications; technological innovation linked to ICTs for 
application in society, administration and the knowledge society; civil service, administrative organization, 
automobile services; access control and security of buildings of the Public Administration of the Autonomous 
Community, as well as the organization and delimitation of the functions of its personnel, and any others assigned 
by current legislation. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
CARM will be in charge on identify, analyzing and assessing policy&regulatory and public financing 
dimensions  related actions, mainly at regional/national levels (Including exploring European Regional 
Development Fund and Cohesion Funds), thus actively participating in task T7.5.2 and T.7.5.3 and in delivering 
the recommendations for the improvement of these dimensions fostering circular economy deployment. CARM will 
also collaborate in constructing the circular governance model for the A 2C systemic solution ( T7.5.4), the 
construction of the multidimensional model for A2C adoption, replication & scalability (T7.5.5) (and their validation 
on T7.7) as well as on the elaboration of the A2C self -assessment tool (T7.5.6) and in the elaboration of the A2C 
Cluster Circular Economy Action Plan. 
CARM will also collaborate on Public engagement ( T7.1) and in WP8: A2C outreach activities, especially in T8.3 
(local/regional level) and T8.6 (knowledge transfer and capacity building) 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
CARM will gain valuable knowledge to be further applied at regional level on: European funds managing, design 
and implementation of economic policies fostering circular economy as well as on design and launching of grants, 
loan line and specific financing programs related to circular economy, agrifood entrepreneurship, etc.   
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr Joaquín Gómez Gómez (male)  – PhD. Managing Director of Strategy and Digital Transformation.  
Autonomous Secretary of Taxes  Doctor in Business Sciences from the University of Murcia and Engineer in 
Automation and Industrial Electronics from the Polytechnic University of Cartagena. Master i n "Diagnosis and 
management of innovation and technology in the company". He has been director of the European Center for 

Section 4,5,6-page 53 
 
Business and Innovation in Murcia, where he was previously responsible for the Innovation area, as well as vice 
president and member o f the Board of Directors of the National Association of CEEIs. Previously and since 
1999, he worked at the Murcia Region Furniture and Wood Technology Center, where he held the position of 
Head of Research, Development and Innovation. Since 2015 he has bee n General Director of the Institute of 
Development of the Region of Murcia.  
 Mr Antonio Mas Ferrer  (male): European Fund Department Coordinator . Industrial Engineer. As 
coordinator of the European funds coordination Service, he manages:   The preparation of  the documents that 
reflect the community intervention in the Region of Murcia (Community Support Framework, Operational 
Programs and others), in collaboration with the executing bodies of the Regional Administration and the 
competent services of the Central Administration and the European Commission; The administration, monitoring 
and control of the execution of the different forms of intervention financed by the European Regional 
Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund, in coordination with the executing b odies; The monitoring and 
control of the execution of the forms of intervention financed by the European Agricultural Guidance and 
Guarantee Fund, by the Financial Instrument for Fishing Operations and by the European Social Fund, in 
coordination with the executing bodies.; Permanent advice to the executing bodies of actions financed by the 
Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund.  
 CARM will hire 1 person to support on project related activities along all the project implementation. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 TRUST. digital TuRn in EUrope: Strengthening relational reliance through Technology. H2020-MSCA-RISE-
2020. 01-September-2021 to 31-August-2025. Grant Agreement ID.: 101007820. 
 CHERRIES. Constructing Healthcare Environments through Responsible Research Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship Strategies H2020-SwafS-2019-1. 01-January 2020 to 31-December-2022. Grant Agreement 
ID.: 872873. 
 ALICE. AcceLerate Innovation in urban wastewater management for Climate change. H2020-MSCA-RISE-
2016. 01-January-2017 to 31-December-2020. Grant Agreement ID.: 734560. 
 CITYnvest. Increasing Capacities in Cities for Innovative Financing in Energy Efficiency. H2020-EE-21-
2014. 01-February-2015 to 31-January-2018. Grant Agreement ID.: 649730. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
CARM as a public entity has access to all the required documentation and networks needed to the project 
implementation. 
4.1.25 UNE-ASOCIACIÓN ESPAÑOLA DE NORMALIZACIÓN  
PARTNER Nº: 25 (NPO) 
WEBSITE: https://www.en.une.org/ 
SHORTNAME: UNE  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
The Spanish Association for Standardization (UNE) is legally designated as the National Standardization Body of 
Spain. It is the national representative and member of the European (CEN/CENELEC), International (ISO/IEC) and 
Panamerican (COPANT) Organizations for Standardization, and member of the European Tel ecommunications 
Standards Institute (ETSI). More than 32.000 standards in catalogue, 200 national technical committees and 150 
responsibilities (chairpersons, secretariats, convenors) in international standardization committees are a sample of 
the experience developed as national standards body during more than 30 years. Formally, it is a non -profitmaking, 
private, independent and multisectoral organisation, recognised at national, European and international level. 
Through the development of technical stand ards UNE helps to improve the quality and competitiveness of 
companies, products and services. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
Advising, managing and developing all the activities related with standardization, carried out within WP8 framework, 
at tasks T8.8.1: Analysis of the applicable standardization landscape  (closely interrelated and in collaboration 
with T1.2: A2C methodologi es) and Task T8.8.2: Contribution to the ongoing and future standardization 
developments (closely interrelated and in collaboration with 7.5.2.:Regulatory, standardization and political 
relevant factors at European level.) 

Section 4,5,6-page 54 
 
The European Standardization Organizations CEN and CENELEC do not participate directly in research and 
innovation projects, delegating this participation to their national members. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
Representing the European standardization organizations CEN and CENELEC, UNE is participating in many 
research and innovation projects (Horizon 2020, FP7, Life+, CIP etc., see examples here) to support and manage the 
integration of standardization activities, increasing impact by fostering the dissemination of the results to the relevant 
European stakeholders and facilitating their market uptake. UNE is also an active member of the CEN -CENELEC 
Strategic Group ‘STAIR’ (STAndardization, Innovation and Research), which develops guidelines for the practical 
integration of these three activities and responsible for the Standards+Innovation initiative. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Fernando UTRILLA (male) : Mechanical Engineer (University of Zaragoza, 1999). Master’s Degree on 
Innovation Management (AENOR, 2010). Since 2012, Head of the Research and Innovation unit at the UNE 
Standardization Department, coordinating the participation of UNE as National Standards Body in more than 70 
R&I projects and 300 proposals, including Horizon 2020, FP7, Life+, CIP and other Programs. Responsible for 
information and training on standardization to R&I communities. Spanish representative in CEN -CENELEC 
‘STAIR’ (Standardization, Innovation and Research) Group. Technical Secretary of the Spanish (CTN 166) and 
European (CEN/TC 389) standardization technical committees on ‘Innovation Management’ and participating 
expert in the International one (ISO/TC 279). Previously worked fo r 11 years as Standardization Program 
Manager in UNE, giving support and carrying the Secretariat of several national and European Technical 
Committees in the engineering and innovation management sectors. Previous experience as Production Manager 
in the metal transforming industry. 
 Ms Elena ORDOZGOITI (female). Degree in Veterinary Science (Complutense University of Madrid). Animal 
production specialist. Master in Food Science (Leeds University). Head of Agrifood and Services unit at the UNE 
Standardization Department, coordinating the agrifood, health, quality, organizations governance and services 
sector. Comprehensive experience of over 20 years in the management of standardization technical committees 
carrying the secretariat of several na tional, European and international committees in these sectors. Spanish 
representative in CEN/CA “Strategic Advisory Group on Services” and Secretary of the Ad Hoc Group preparing 
the response to the Mandate M/517 addressed to CEN, CENELEC and ETSI for the  programming and 
development of European Standards on the Services field. In addition, responsible for the standardization 
activities in the H2020-projects ‘OPTOGENERAPY’ and ‘BioRoboost’. 
 Ms Marta FERNÁNDEZ (female) . Law Degree and Economics Degree (Unive rsidad Pontificia Comillas, 
Madrid). Since 2007, Program Manager on Social Responsibility and Services Sector at the UNE Standardization 
Department, giving support and carrying the secretariat of several national, European technical and international 
committees in the logistics and transport, packaging, facility management, maintenance, security, retailing 
commercial services sectors as well as terminology, translation and plain language, ethics, governance, social 
responsibility and compliance. In addition , responsible for the standardization activities in the H2020 -projects 
‘A4BLUE’ and ‘SMOOTH’. Previously 7 years of experience as auditor for ISO 9001 quality management 
systems certification at AENOR and 5 years of experience in financial sector. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
UNE has at least 17 national standardization committees and subcommittees related with nano -enabled bio-based 
products, their source materials and their production as well as possible applications, a mong them, CTN 49 
‘Packaging – Horizontal and Environmental Management Aspects’, CTN 53 ‘Plastics and Rubber’ including bio -
based products, CTN 57 ‘Paper and Cellulose’, CTN 77 ‘Environmental Aspects’ as mirror committee to CEN/TC 
444 “Environmental charac terization of solid matrices” or CEN/TC 292 “Characterization of Waste”, CTN 323 
‘Circular Economy’ etc. More than 600 published standards are directly related with these committees. The total 
number of standardization committees in UNE is over 200, involving more than 10.000 experts and having published 
more than 32.000 standards. 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 BRIDGIT- Bridging the gap between research and standardization – FPA – 2013-2014, and BRIDGIT 2 – 
Bridge the gap between standardization, innovat ion and research communities – FPA – 2017-2019 – 
http://www.cencenelec.eu/research/BRIDGIT2/Pages/default.aspx 
 CELLULOSOME PLUS - Boosting lignocellulose biomass deconstruction with designer cellulosomes for 
industrial applications – FP7: NMP – Nanosciences and Nanotechnologies – 2014-2017 - 
http://cellulosomeplus.eu/en/index.cfm 
 Valuewaste - Unlocking new value from urban biowaste – H2020 - CE-SFS-25-2018 - Integrated system 
innovation in valorising urban biowaste – 2018-2022 – http://valuewaste.eu 
Section 4,5,6-page 55 
 
 CIRC-PACK - Towards circular economy in the plastic packaging value chain – H2020 - CIRC-01-2016 - 
Systemic, eco-innovative approaches for the circular economy: large-scale demonstration projects – 2017-2020 
- https://circpack.eu/home/ 
 up-PET - Upcycling of PE and PET wastes to generate biodegradable bioplastics for food and drink packaging 
- H2020 (2020 – Transformation of Industry) – 2020-2024 - https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/953214. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
UNE, as a member of the European/International standardization system, has full access to its entire internal 
information infrastructure which will be required to fulfil the relevant tasks in the project. 
4.1.26 AGRO -FUNDACIÓN CLUSTER AGROALIMENTARIO DE LA REGIÓN DE MURCIA  
 
PARTNER Nº: 26 (FOUNDATION) 
WEBSITE: www.agrofoodmurcia.com  
SHORTNAME:  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
AGRO is a meeting point for business-oriented organizations which come together to work on common solutions for 
developing cooperation projects in their field of expertise, interest or influence. Agrofood is comprised of important 
institutions and firms in the agrofood industry, providing solutions to market needs through business cooperation and 
collaboration, and presenting valuable solutions and turnkey projects by working together because "true knowledge 
is a collective enterprise". 
AGRO offers solutions in product innovation, int ernationalization, implementation of new processes and 
environmental efficiency. The goal of Agrofood is to help entrepreneurs overcome strategic challenges and develop 
competitive solutions. 
Our work is endorsed by a Board of Trustees 
 MANUEL GARCÍA CAMPOY, S.L. 
 ESTRELLA DE LEVANTE, FÁBRICA DE CERVEZA S.A.U. 
 HIDA ALIMENTACIÓN, S.A. 
 JAKE, S.A. 
 MARIN GIMENEZ HNOS 
 CENTRO TECNOLÓGICO NACIONAL DE LA CONSERVA Y ALIMENTACIÓN 
 AGRUPACIÓN DE CONSERVEROS Y EMPRESAS DE ALIMENTACIÓN DE MURCIA, ALICANTE 
Y ALBACETE 
 FECOAM 
 CAJAMAR CAJA RURAL 
 UNIVERSIDAD DE MURCIA 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
AGRO as A2C cluster representative, will lead the elaboration of the A2C Circular Economy Action Plan (within 
T7.5). AGRO will also provide a valuable contribution on public engagement at regional levels ( T7.1), regional 
socioeconomic assessment (data collection on T.4) and on cross fertilization actions for multidimensional model 
validation (T7.7). AGRO will also actively participate on WP8: A2C Outreach, by being involving  in awareness and 
engagement actions tailored to companies in the Region of Murcia, as well as the general public ( T8.3)  as well on 
T8.6 by  facilitating the implementation of sustainable processes to achieve a Circular Economy in companies in the 
Region of Murcia. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
AGRO, within the geographical context of the food industry in the Region of Murcia, is focused on the valorization 
of ideas and inventions to transform them effectively and efficiently in social and business value. Eco -innovation, 
and the implementation of a circular economy, in the agri -food sector of the Region of Murcia, is a priority line of 
work for AGRO. In the almost 10 years since its creation, it has participated in regional, national and international 

Section 4,5,6-page 56 
 
projects related to the environmental aspect of companies, as well as in providing support to improve regional policies 
on water issues, achieving an international network of contacts. 
Its activities consist of contacting companies, evaluating companies in the agri-food sector and offering training for 
their technicians, as well as obtaining financing for them in calls for projects. In addition, it is aimed at the 
dissemination of information on food and water issues to the general population. 
AGRO is interested in the project to promote the circular economy in the agri-food sector of the Region of Murcia, 
in accordance with its Strategic Plan. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 Dra. Ana Belén Morales Moreno (female) Doctor Polytechnic University of Cartagena. Graduated in Chemical 
Engineering, with a master's degree in Environmental Engineering, at the University of Murcia. Since 2009, she 
has been working developing activities for the valorization of by -products of the agri-food sector and solutions 
for water in the agri-food industry. Since 2015, she has joined the AGROFOOD Cluster to promote, execute and 
manage R&D projects of interest to the sector at regional, national and international levels, as well as to organize 
and participate in technology transfer events. 
 Mr Antonio Vázquez Palazón: Graduated in Chemical Engineering, at the University of Murcia. Since 2001, 
he has developed his professional work as a trainer, technician in R&D projects for 5 years  and has been 
responsible for laboratory and quality in the food industry for 10 years. Since 2018, he has joined the 
AGROFOOD Cluster to offer technical assistance to companies in the agri-food sector. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 R&D project management 
 Organization of conferences/training courses for food industry technicians and interested parties. 
 Speaker at training courses for food industry technicians and interested parties. Theme: Eco -innovation in the 
agri-food sector: recovery of by-products, water in the food industry, etc. 
 Assessments of the agri-food sector, development of roadmaps and action plans. 
 Publication: Healthier food through the use of a new natural ingredient obtained during the recovery of citrus by-
products. Revista Alimentaria. Número 496, Septiembre 2018. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 LIFECITRUS-LIFE14 ENV/ES/000326 - Recycling of citrus industry scrap into natural additives for food 
industries. 
 FOOD ENERGY- AEI-010400-2014-255- INNOVACION EN LA GESTIÓN ENERGÉTICA QUE PERMITA 
MEJORAR LA EFICIENCIA EN LAS PYMES DEL SECTOR AGROALIMENTARIO DE LA REGION DE 
MURCIA. 
 RESTRUFOOD-AEI-010600-2017-165- DISEÑO DE NUEVOS ALIMENTOS HORTOFRUTICOLAS 
REESTRUCTURADOS. 
 INDICADORES DE ECOEFICIENCIA AMBIENTAL (HUELLA HÍDRICA) COMO PARÁMETRO 
DE CALIDAD EN LA PRODUCCIÓN Y COMERCIALIZACIÓN DE PRODUCTOS 
AGROALIMENTARIOS (Ayudas a las operaciones para el “Apoyo para la creación y el funcionamiento de 
grupos operativos de la Asociación E uropea para la Innovación en materia de productividad y sostenibilidad 
agrícolas”, correspondientes a la medida 16.1 del Programa de Desarrollo Rural de la Región de Murcia 2014 -
2020). 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
Offices 
 
 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 57 
 
4.1.27 EURA - ASSOCIATION EUROPÉENNE DES AGENCES DE DÉVELOPPEMENT  
 
PARTNER Nº: 27 (NPO) 
WEBSITE: http://www.eurada.org/ 
SHORTNAME: EURA  
LOCATION: Belgium 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
The European Association of Development Agencies (EURADA) was established in 1992 to support policy learning 
in regional development agencies. A Development Agency is an operational structure created by local or regional 
public entities to effectively support SME competitiveness in their territory. Development agencies identify sectoral 
or general development problems, choose a range of opportunities for their solution, and promote projects that can 
maximize solutions. 
The core activities of EURADA are directed towards sharing good practices to increase the impact of the 
development agencies and work on common projects, in special those dedicated to entrepreneurship, social 
innovation and support for SMEs. In practice, EURADA is a network of practitioners sharing their experiences and 
making common projects. To help them to contact with the other members of the network, EURADA organises 
several conferences, matchmaking events and workshops every year to foster the exchang e of experiences and the 
design of new projects.   
EURADA has established a framework of continuous dialogue with the European Commission and other EU 
Institutions to launch new policy to foster economic growth. In the framework of its dialogue, EURADA participates 
in several committees of the EU, like the Network of SME Envoys (E02666), Consultative and supportive Group for 
the Enterprise Europe Network (E02814), the experts’ group for the follow-up of the Small Business Act, the mirror 
group for smart specialisation or the expert group for the Structured Dialogue of ESI Funds (E03226).   
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
EURA will lead networking and clustering activities on T8.5 as well as will collaborate along the WP8, specially 
on T8.6 actions for knowledge transfer and capacity bulging.  
EURA will actively participate on Public engagement actions at European levels ( T7.1), and on T7.5: Analysis of 
European policies and financi al instruments related to the circular economy as well as collaborating on delivering 
recommendations fostering the circular economy. At this respect, EURA will be especially in charge on exploring 
Public procurement as well as on recommendations to foster it. 
EURA will also collaborate on the analysis of the A2C circular governance model as well as on the elaboration of 
the A2C multidimensional model and its self-assessment tools and its validation. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
As professional association of r egional economic practitioners, EURADA is committed to facilitate the replication 
of the outcomes of the project and in general to facilitate the outreach, communication, dissemination, and 
exploitation of results (WP9). The non-profit association has proven expertise in this area being the responsible for 
communication and dissemination in two ongoing H2020 projects (TeRRItoria and TetRRIs) and two Interreg Europe 
projects (SocialSeeds and Scaleup). Through its large network of local and regional economic practitioners, 
EURADA will act as an umbrella association reaching relevant stakeholders and disseminating the outputs of the 
project among them. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Esteban Pelayo Villarejo  (male) Director at EURADA. Esteban joined EURADA in 2015 as director. He 
started his professional career in 1996 within the Enterprise Europe Network helping companies to establish 
transnational technology transfer agreements. In 2000 he moved to the Regional Development Agency of Murcia, 
to coordinate the regional network of technology centers. Esteban is graduated as agriculture engineer, hold and 
advanced studies diploma on food technology is a Spanish certified patent and trademark attorney.   
 Ms Tessa Anné  (female) After obtaining her master’s degree in Linguistics and Literature, Tessa worked for 
various public and private companies in their communication and marketing departments. She joined EURADA 
in 2007 to strengthen the communication activities  of the association and to provide assistance in the 
administrative implementation of projects. During this time she has participated in and has been responsible for 
engaging stakeholders, organisation of events for best practice exchanges, and awareness-raising for EU-funded 
projects. Currently Tessa is the communication responsible of the SocialSeeds project on social innovation. She 

Section 4,5,6-page 58 
 
contributes to the daily management of the EURADA offices and deals with aspects related to administration, 
finance, and HR. 
 Mr Ivana Rae Almora  Female Project Officer Ivana graduated with a bachelor’s degree in European languages 
from the University of the Philippines -Diliman, where she majored in German and minored in Spanish. In an 
effort to steer her career toward international relations, she pursued a master’s degree in EU studies and human 
rights at the Universidad Católica San Antonio de Murcia (Spain). She first joined EURADA in the summer of 
2019 as an intern in fulfilment of her master’s requirements and is now a EURADA project officer for the Interreg 
project SCALE UP. She will also be in-charge of the EuropeAid projects called IUCR and TAMSALL. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 Kruszelnicki, J., Gołuński, M., Ciochoń, P., Noya, M., Pelayo, E., & Zyra, J. (2020). SME segmentation and 
regional development agencies’ innovation support measures. Regional Studies, Regional Science, 7(1), 511 -
531.  
 Pelayo, E ., Pastor, A., Kruszelnicki, J.: (2019) ‘Segmentation techniques for innovation support services’. 
Review of Economic and Business Studies. 12.2: 207-237.    
 Kirova, M., Montanari, F., Ferreira, I., Pesce, M., Albuquerque, J.D., Montfort, C., Neirynck, R., Moroni, J., 
Traon, D., Perrin, M., Echarri, J., Arcos, A., Lopez, E., Pelayo, E., (2019). Research for AGRI Committee – 
Megatrends in the agri -food sector, E uropean Parliament, Policy Department for Structural and Cohesion 
Policies, Brussels. ISBN 978 -92-846-5782-7| doi:10.2861/ 778046 | QA - 04-19-629-EN-C. 
http://bit.ly/MGT629Ag    
 Passas, I., Aroca, J. A., Guth, M., Pelayo, E ., Halvorsen, K., Lien Egerund, e t AL Komninos, N. (2006). 
‘StratinC: A regional policy blueprint highlighting the uses of strategic intelligence in cluster policy. 
  
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 Programme H2020; XPRESS: Support for Public Procurements to facilitate the collaboration between SMEs 
and public sector for the development and adoption in renewables in regions; from 09/2019 to 09/2022; budget 
project EUR 2,999,973;  
 Programme Erasmus+; U-eco: Upskilling for more creative circular economy; from 10/2019 to 09/2021; budget 
project EUR 245,422;  
 Tender European Parliament; Megatrends in the Agrifood Sector : Global Overview and Possible Policy 
Response from an EU perspective; from 07/2019 to 09/2019;  
 Programme H2020; TeRRItoria: Territorial Responsible Research and Innovation Through the involvement of 
local R&I Actors; from 02/2019 to 02/2022; budget project EUR 1,999,833.75;  
 Programme COSME; ReConfirm II : Regional Co -Operation Networks for Industrial Modernisatio n; from 
1/2019 to 1/2021; project budget EUR 2,088,000. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
EURADA’s Headquarters is located in Rue Montoyer, 24, Brussels.  EURADA’s venue has different spaces available 
for its members, partners and collaborators.  
Four meeting rooms are available in its premises. On the ground floor there is the Room Montoyer, a meeting room 
with a capacity of 15 people. Another meeting room on the ground floor is Room Belliard, with a bigger capacity of 
70 people. Aside from these, there is Room Science with a capacity of 15 people. Finally located on the third floor, 
another room with capacity of 15 people fully equipped to carry out videocalls and teleconferences with the inhouse 
teleconferencing services. All these rooms have a highly technical equipment.  
In addition to meeting rooms on the top floor, there is a Restaurant & Bar, ready to cater our visitors and large events. 
Its capacity is of 50 people seated and 75 standing up. 
 
 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 59 
 
4.1.28 UB - UNIVERSITA COMMERCIALE LUIGI BOCCONI  
 
PARTNER Nº: 28 (RTO) 
WEBSITE: www.unibocconi.it; www.green.unibocconi.it 
SHORTNAME: UB 
LOCATION: Italy 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
Established in 1902, Università Bocconi is a university of international standing in business, economics and law. Its 
research projects are funded by national and supranational institutions.  
Università Bocconi has participated in more than 100 projects funded by the European Union and other international 
and national donors. At present, it is involved (as coordinator or partner) in about 60 Socio-Economic Sciences and 
Health projects funded by the European Union and other international and national donors,  including 6 Starting 
Grants, 2 Consolidator Grants, 4 Advanced Grants of the European Research Council and 2 Marie Curie projects. 
Having hosted 18 grants funded by the ERC, Bocconi ranks 1st in Europe in the panel SH1 “Individual, Institutions 
and Markets: Economics, Finance and Management”. GREEN – Geography, Resources, Environment, Energy and 
Networks is the research centre which co-ordinates and conducts applied research in the following fields:  
• Energy economics, focusing on energy markets as well as on natural resources;  
• Environmental economics, focusing on environmental and climate policy, analysis and evaluation; circular 
economy. 
• Economics of public utilities focusing on energy, water and waste services.  
GREEN Bocconi (UB) is and has been involved in several national and European projects, both as coordinator and 
as partner (namely European projects funded on Horizon 2020, Intelligent Energy Europe, LIFE+, Alpine Space, 
MED). UB is specialized in providing support to policy elaboration, moni toring and evaluation through the 
application of several methodologies, including cost-benefit analysis, evaluation of externalities, economic modelling 
and scenario development.  
The main research areas regard multi -level policies for climate (mitigation,  adaptation), GHG reduction planning, 
GHG monitoring, resource efficiency, circularity, energy efficiency, environment and competitiveness, regulatory, 
economic and voluntary instruments for the environment, smart and low carbon cities, climate finance, environmental 
information and public participation. Thanks to the expertise of its research team UB adopts a multidisciplinary 
approach.  
UB has working relations with several research organizations. It is member of the Sustainable Development Solutions 
Network (SDSN), a global initiative launched by the United Nations involving academia, civil society, and the private 
sector to support sustainable development problem solving. It is an associated member of the Urban Europe Research 
Alliance (UERA). It is also  partner of: UN -HABITAT CPI initiative and UNEP’s GI -REC initiative on Global 
Resource Efficient Cities. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
UB will be responsible for the identification of circular business models in the agri -food sector with a special 
focus on the evaluation of local and territorial impacts , and will support partners in business models 
identification and analysis, and integrates natural capital accounting within the circular business models  
(T6.4). UB will be also involved in the financing analysis for the A2C CEBMs and it will be involved together with 
specialised partners in the study of financing schemes framework (T7.5), delivering recommendations for financing 
schemes fostering circular solutions and its dissemination/training related activities (T8.7). UB will also provide data 
for the evaluation and monitoring of the A2C cluster progress towards circularity and to benchmark A2C circular 
solution (7.2). UB will collaborate in the socioeconomic analysis (7.3) as well as support to replication partners on 
T7.7 on CEBMs related issues and participate in the validation of the A2C multidimensional model  for adoption, 
replication and scalability (T7.6)  
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
UB has participated in several research projects on circular economy approaches in different sectors, and circular 
economy is one of the main work areas of GEO – green economy observatory – a think -tank launched by UB 
involving more than 50 companies and o rganizations ( http://www.geo.unibocconi.it/ ). UB is also in charge of 
business model analysis and circular economy and evaluation in ongoing Horizon 2020 projects involving cities 

Section 4,5,6-page 60 
 
(UrbanGreenUP and MAtchUP) and CINDERELA project, supporting and guiding the construction sector towards 
circular economy. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr Marco Percoco  (male) - Director of GREEN Bocconi ( UB). Degree in Economics (2000, Università 
Bocconi), Ph.D. in Transport Economics. His research interests are in transport, economic geography and local 
policies for sustainable development. He has extensively published on international Journals (Journal of P ublic 
Economics, International Journal of Mathematics in Operational Research, transport policy).  
 Mr Edoardo Croci (male)  - Research director at GREEN Bocconi (UB), his research activity deals with 
environmental policy and management and climate change policies. He was project manager of the European 
LIFE project “DESAIR”, focused on local emission trading systems and project responsible for GREEN within 
“COOPENERGY”, a project co -funded on the Intelligent Energy Europe. He is also coordinator of GREEN’s 
Observatory on Green Economy and GREEN’s Smart City Observatory. He served as Milan City Councillor for 
Mobility, Transportation and Environment, as President of the Environmental Protection Agency of Lombardy 
and vice-president of FEDARENE (European Federation of Regional Energy and Environment Agency). 
 Mr Benedetta Lucchitta (female)  - Research fellow at GREEN -Bocconi ( UB), Urban Planner. MSc in 
“Planning and policies for cities and environment”. Her research activities are focused on ecosystem se rvices 
and local climate and energy policies. Within GREEN she is involved in the management of H2020 Urban 
GreenUP project and within the Green Economy Observatory. 
 Mr Tania Molteni (female) - Research fellow at GREEN Bocconi (UB), MA in Environmental Social Sciences 
(Geography). Her research activities are focused on regional and local policies for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation, circular and sustainable cities. Within GREEN she is involved in the management of H2020 
MAtchUP project and within t he Smart City Observatory.  She was involved in the IEE - funded Coopenergy 
project. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 Croci, E., (2020). Contribution in the “Addressing Finance And Capacity Barriers For Nature -based Solutions 
Implementation At City Level” report. White paper, Urban20 (U20). 
 Croci E., Molteni T. (2020), “Green business models per le smart cities”, in “Smart city. La prossima città. 
Volume II”, (edited by G.F. Ferrari). 
 Croci, E., Molteni, T. (2019), “Regions and cities cooperating fur sustainable energy in Europe: models of multi-
level governance”, Italian Journal of Regional Science, vol. 18, 1/2019, pp. 93.114. 
 Iraldo F, Scarpellini S, Croci E  (2018), Introduction to Special Section “Circular Economy: Concepts and 
Applications”, ECONOMICS AND POLICY OF ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT, n. 1-2 – 2017, ISSN 1125-
1263. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 CINDERELA (2018-2022) New Circular Economy Business Model for More Sustainable Urban Construction: 
The CINDERELA project aims to untap this potential by developing and demonstrating a new business model 
(CinderCEBM) to assist companies in setting up successful circular economy business cases based on waste-to-
resource opportunities. (https://www.cinderela.eu/ ) 
 MAtchUP (H2020, 2017 -2022): MAtchUP’s objective is to create and adopt solutions that can turn urban 
problems into smart opportunities to improve the citizens’ quality of life and boost the local economies. The final 
aim is to create a prosperous and more liveable urban environment for communities ( https://www.matchup-
project.eu/). 
 URBAN GreenUp (H2020, 2016-2022): The project aims at developing, applying and validating a methodology 
for Renaturing Urban Plans to mitigate the effects of climate change, improve air quality and water management 
and increase the  sustainability of our cities through innovative nature -based solutions 
(http://www.urbangreenup.eu/) H2020-EU-3.5-730426 
 COOPENERGY “Cooperating in Sustainable Energy Planning“ (Intelligent Energy Europe, 2013-2016): 
IEE project, aimed to foster the development of collaboration models in sustainable energy planning between 
regional and local public authorities. The project supported also the creation of mutually beneficial Sustainable 
Energy Action Plans (SEAP). 
 Heron (H2020, 2015-2018): HERON (https://heron2017.wordpress.com/) aimed at facilitating policy makers in 
EU at different levels to develop and monitor energy efficiency policies in building and transport sectors. H2020-
EE-12-2014 
Section 4,5,6-page 61 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
Offices and the required items to carry out the proposed work. 
 
4.1.29 VTT -VTT TECHNICAL RESEARCH CENTRE OF FINLAND LTD  
 
PARTNER Nº: 29 (RTO) 
WEBSITE: https://www.vttresearch.com 
SHORTNAME: VTT 
LOCATION: Finland 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd is a state owned and controlled non-profit limited liability company 
established by law and operating under the ownership steering of the Finnish Ministry of Employment and the 
Economy. VTT is an RTO whose activities are focused on three areas: Knowledge intensive products and services, 
Smart industry and energy systems, and Solutions for natural resources and environment. VTT is impact-driven and 
takes advantage from its wide multitechnological knowledge base to  strengthen Finnish and European industrial 
competitiveness.  
VTT has a staff of 2054, net turnover in 2018 was 159,7M€ and other operational incomes were 81,2M€. Over the 
years, VTT has gained vast experience from participation and coordination of numerous European projects including 
R&D Framework Programme projects and other thematic frameworks and programmes. VTT is ranked among the 
leading European RTOs. In December 2017, VTT has been recognised with the “HR Excellence in Research” award 
by the European Commission.  
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
VTT will lead the Task 7.3: Environmental assessment, LCA and A2C circularity monitoring, identifying, 
analyzing and addressing environmental impacts and externalities through and LCA methodology, providing the 
partner technology developers a valuable knowledge about their processes impact and how to address and minimize 
them within the project implementation. VTT will also benchmark cost (in collaboration with UB, from task 6.4) and 
environmental footprint with simil ar linear solutions as well as measure and monitoring the transition of the A2C 
cluster towards circularity.  
VTT will participate actively in Task 7.2 defining the evaluation framework, in Task 7.5 (multidimensional analyses 
of sustainability) as well as on the validation and (T7.6) and supporting replication partners on T7.7. 
VTT applies its knowledge and experience from the different life cycle based sustainability assessment methods, and 
the experience gained over 20 years when conducting LCA projects together with different companies. Experiences 
from coordinating the SAMT project (focusing on sustainability assessment methods and tools for the process 
industry, SPIRE 2015-2016), the knowledge gained from LCA-related standardization and PEF pilot studies provide 
a solid background for the work. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
VTT has a research node of 14 scientists specialized in sustainability assessment, life cycle based assessment methods 
and circular economy. Researchers in the field of sustainability assessment are experts in LCA and evaluating 
sustainability of products, technologies and processes within various industrial sectors. VTT’s researchers have 
actively taken part in international projects (FP6, FP7 ; Horizon 2020). VTT has also participated in international 
method development such as ISO -standardization in the fields of LCA (ISO14040 -14044), carbon footprint of 
products and organisations (ISO14067, ISO 14069), water footprint (ISO14046), eco -efficiency (ISO 14045) and 
social responsibility (ISO 26000). VTT has developed and maintains a commercially available SULCA software for 
LCA, carbon and water footprint calculations. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 Ms Tiina Pajula (female) M.Sc. (Tech), Principal scientist in the area of Sustainability Assessment has worked 
over 20 years on environmental research, LCA, sustainability assessment and carbon footprint. She has strong 
experience in coordinating projects using diverse methods to evaluate and communicate sustainability o f 
products or companies. She is the Head of Finnish Delegation ISO TC207, expert member of ISO standards ISO 
14040 and 14044 (LCA), ISO 26000 (Social Responsibility) and ISO 14067 and 14069 (Carbon Footprint). 
Coordinator of the SAMT project (2015 -2016) in  H2020 program, WP leader in several EU -projects, e.g. 

Section 4,5,6-page 62 
 
Ecotarget (2004 – 2008), SUNPAP (2009 – 2012), Biocore (2010 – 2014) and MORE (2013 -2016). She is 
working on methodology development of Handprint, and has acted 
as evaluator in H2020 and FP7 calls and projects. 
 Ms Katri Behm, (female) M. Sc. (Tech.), Research Scientist in the 
area of Sustainability Assessment at VTT since 2011. Over 10 years 
of experience in sustainability assessment, in the form of Life Cycle 
Assessment, Carbon Footprint and Water Footprint calculations and 
data collection in many fields of technology, including forest, bio, energy, chemical, mining and manufacturing 
industries. Katri is specialized in IPCC GHG emissions Guidance and land use aspects. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 Pajula, T. (2014). Life Cycle Assessment of Biobased Materials, Handbook of Green Materials, vol. 5, Chapter 
17. World Scientific (2014) 
 Vatanen, S.; Pajula, T .; Pihkola, H .; Behm,  K.; Hohenthal, C.; Grönman, K.; Soukka, R.; Kasurinen, H.; 
Sillman, J.; Leino, M. / The Carbon Handprint approach to assessing and communicating the positive climate 
impact of products: Final Report of the Carbon Handprint project. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 
2018. 74 p. (VTT Technology; No. 346). 
 Pihkola, H., Pajula, T., Federley, M., Myllyoja, J., Tapia, C., Ritthoff, M., & Saurat, M. (2017). Sustainability 
assessment in the process industries - Current practice and paths for future development: Conclusions an d 
recommendations from the SAMT project. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland. VTT Technology, No. 
299. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 EU ORIENTING (2020 -2023): Operational Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment Methodology Supporting 
Decisions Towards a Circular Economy H2020-CE-NMBP-42-2020 
 Carbon Handprint (Business Finland 2016 - 2018), An LCA based method to quantify and communicate about 
carbon footprint of products was created by VTT and LUT University alongside with 10 companies , 
https://www.vtt.fi/sites/handprint/PublishingImages/Carbon_Handprint_Guide.pdf 
 SAMT: Sustainability Assessment methods and tools to support decision -making in the process industries, EU 
Horizon 2020, 2015 -2016, Grant Agreement No. 636727. SAMT project focused on increasing integration of 
sustainability assessment methods in decision making by reviewing and making recommendations about the most 
potential methods, tools, and indicators for evaluating sustainability in process industries. Specific focus areas 
of the project included resource and energy efficiency (www.spire2030.eu/samt ) H2020-SPIRE-04-2014 
 CichOpt - Optimal use and valorization of biomass streams f rom Cichorium, FACCE SURPLUS project EU 
H2020, (2018-2021). VTT performs an LCA study for products from Cichorium waste streams. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
VTT has developed and maintains a commercially available SULCA software for LCA, carbon and water footprint 
calculations 
4.1.30 ICONS - FONDAZIONE ICONS  
 
PARTNER Nº: 30 (NPO) 
WEBSITE: www.icube.global 
SHORTNAME: ICONS 
LOCATION: Italy 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: A2C OUTREACH MANAGEMENT 
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Fondazione ICONS (ICONS) is an Italian private non-profit organization, whose mission is to improve human capital 
through knowledge sharing of European and international public -funded research achievements, transparent and 
inclusive science communication, citizens’ and stakeholders’ engagement, support to innovation for the benefit of 
society. For more than 20 years ICONS has been working in public science communication, social and business 
innovation to support researchers and projects in creating impacts on society improving awareness, engagement, 
social acceptance, uptake of research results. In 2004 ICONS launched the youris.com public science communication 

Section 4,5,6-page 63 
 
platform and acknowledged today as one of the most important on -line information centers on resear ch and 
innovation in Europe. 
ICONS partners with consortia in EU and public -funded projects and non -profit organizations (research centres, 
universities, associations, etc.) coordinating and managing communication, dissemination and exploitation and 
supporting social innovation to enhance dialogue with stakeholders and the public at large. ICONS masters: web - 
based knowledge transfer tools (in 2018 ICONS won two .eu Awards for the design and implementation of two 
H2020 projects’ websites: www.stardust-project.eu and www.fetfx.eu), dissemination materials, public 
communications formats distributed globally via online, social and TV media, participation in international events 
and networking with key European umbrella organisations. ICONS measures the impacts generated by 
communication and engagement strategies through a sound methodology based on innovative outreach and 
engagement indicators. To this end, ICONS also studies and develops social indicators to measure research impacts 
on society. As part of its expertise ICONS develops social innovation frameworks, strategies and methodologies and 
carries out social acceptance analysis in community -oriented pro jects. To complete the circular and integrated 
approach aimed at optimizing and maximising impacts, ICONS develops exploitation strategies of R&I projects’ 
results by identifying and mapping key exploitable results, defining exploitation pathways (e.g. economic, scientific, 
political, replication-related, etc.), managing IPRs, analysing the market potential, designing business models and 
business plans, producing exploitation, replication and sustainability plans, involving the enablers. 
Over the past 20 years, ICONS has successfully managed communication, dissemination and exploitation activities 
in over 50 EU-funded projects (under FP4, FP5, FP6, FP7, H2020 programmes) in different research domains: Smart 
Cities, Circular Economy, Energy Efficiency, Transp ort, Bioeconomy, Environment, Security, Health, 
Nanotechnologies, Society, ICT. ICONS is part of the consortium managing the Horizon Results Booster 
dissemination services to FP7 and H2020 projects. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
ICONS will lead WP8 -A2C outrea ch: Communication, dissemination, exploitation, training & policy 
recommendations. ICONS will prepare the A2C Outreach strategy  (T8.1) as well as will be in charge of the 
project identitity generation, project website construction  and maintaining and the A2C social networks 
management (T8.2). ICONS will be also lead the A2C Outreach beyond regional levels (T8.4) and will be in 
charge of the elaboration of the Exploitation strategy with the collaboration of all partners (T8.7) as well as will 
participate on knowledge transfer and capacity building actions (T8.6). ICONS will also contribute actively in public 
engagement related actions (7.1) and in the validation of the multidimensional model (7.7) 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
ICONS has a long track record in managing communication, dissemination and exploitation activities as well as in 
defining social innovation frameworks and social evaluation in different EU funded project, covering, among others, 
smart cities and communities, circular economy, nature based solutions, bioeconomy, climate change. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 Dr Giulio Mazzolo (male) – Project Manager at the iCube Programme of Fondazione ICONS. He holds a PhD 
in Physics from the Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics in Hanover (Germany). He has been member 
of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and is co -author of the paper reporting on the first observation of 
gravitational waves. For this reason, he has been awarded the 2016 Physics Breakthrough Prize (shared with the 
LIGO and Virgo Scientific Collaborations). As part of his University studies, Giulio has worked at the Fermi 
National Acceleration Laboratory in Batavia (Illinois, USA) an d at the National Laboratories of the Italian 
Institute for Nuclear Physics in Legnaro (Italy). Since 2016 he collaborates with the Mathematics division of the 
Zanichelli Editorial Group. In 2017 he completed a study programme in Science journalism and communication 
at La Sapienza University in Rome (Italy). Since then he has changed his area of interest on science and research 
communication. He is project manager and leader of communication and dissemination activities in H2020 
projects URBAN GreenUP (SCC02 NBS),  STARDUST (SCC01 Smart Cities), EFFECT (FET), PROTON 
(Security), ASTRABAT (Automotive/batteries) and HOUSEFUL (Circular Economy). 
 Ms Giuliana Folco (female) – A2C Outreach Manager. Research and Exploitation Manager at ICONS. She 
has a Master Degree in Economics and Social Sciences at the Bocconi University in Milan. She holds 20 years’ 
experience in market research and strategic consultancy on technology innovation in European indu stries and 
SMEs. She has worked on both standard research programs and complex custom engagements as lead analyst 
and research project manager serving both technology vendors and the European Commission. She has expertise 
in the assessment of business and social requirements and economic trends, analysis of innovation demand and 
supply, scenarios’ development, end-users’ surveys, data modelling and forecasting. Giuliana is responsible for 
the exploitation activities of EU-funded projects with focus on market research, business analysis, development 
Section 4,5,6-page 64 
 
and management of exploitation plans and for social innovation activities with a focus on design of social 
innovation frameworks and social impact models. In the Smart City area she is exploitation leader and soci al 
innovation main contributor for the MATCHUP and POCITYF projects and responsible for the development of 
the Social Acceptance Model & Strategy of the REMOURBAN project and other energy efficiency projects such 
as eNeuron. In the EeB and energy area she was responsible for the exploitation activities in the BUILDHEAT 
project. In the automotive and green-vehicles area, she manages the exploitation activities of DRIVEMODE. 
 Ms Veronica Meneghello  (female) - Project Manager at ICONS. She holds a Master of Science in 
Environmental Economics from University of Turin (Italy). Previously she graduated in Translation at the 
University of Modern Languages – IULM of Milan (Italy). She attended specific trainings on environmental 
journalism and communication. Veronica has been working in non profit organisations as project coordinator for 
national and international projects on environmental, economic and social sus tainability and communication 
since 2013. She has specific expertise in management of natural resources, sustainability, and communication. 
She is leading and managing Communication and Dissemination activities of the following EU-funded projects: 
, MATCHUP (Smart Cities and Communities), HOUSEFUL (Circular Economy), eTeacher and BAMBOO 
(energy efficiency), B-FERST (bioeconomy). 
 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 REMOURBAN Best Practices and Lessons Learned from our Lighthouse Cities. A collection of practices 
and their assessment in terms of replication from the three Lighthouse cities of the project for each pillar: energy, 
mobility, ICT, non -technical actions. (REMOURBAN H2020 project) Link: 
http://www.remourban.eu/technical-insights/best-practices-e-book/best-practices-and-lessons-learned.kl 
 REMOURBAN Best Practices Book: the REMOURBAN Best Practic es e -Book is focused on the  Urban 
Regeneration Model (URM) which can be considered the most important result of the project, including key 
learnings from the REMOURBAN experience and turn them into recommendations to the stakeholders and 
communities involved in smart cities projects. Link:  http://www.remourban.eu/technical-insights/best-practices-
e-book/best-practices-e-book.kl 
 CITyFiED Best Practices Book: this collection of Best Practices in Community Building, Community 
Engagement and Community Acceptance from the CITyFiED project (FP7) is aimed to help stakeholders to 
navigate towards a smarter future. Concrete examples of proven efficiency intend to push others ahead with new 
retrofitting projects and solutions beyond CITyFiED towards the trasformation of urban areas into more 
sustainable and inclusive environment. Link: http://www.cityfied.eu/?sec=38275&inf=330096&CMCE=0  
 The BioCannDo experience: Let’s talk about bio -based products – 10 Insights on communicating the 
bioeconomy. This publication offers the key take away on communicating about bio -based products, the 
bioeconomy and lessons learned of the BioCannDo project (H2020) through 10 insights, key questions to bear 
in mind and practical tips to communicate about this subje ct in a successful way. http://www.allthings.bio/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/BCD-Final-publication-WEB.pdf 
 ProBIO Final Publication “Helping bioeconomy research projects raise their game”: this publication offers 
an early glimpse into the experience and lessons learned of the ProBIO project (H2020) to allow other initiatives 
to build on the ProBIO achievements as part of their own efforts to help them raise thei r market profile and 
readiness level. http://www.probio-project.eu/pdf/ProBIO_brochure_web.pdf 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 URBAN GreenUP “New Strategy for Re-Naturing Cities through Nature -Based Solutions” ( 2017 – 2022),  
H2020-SCC-02-2016. Urban GreenUP aims at obtaining a tailored methodology (1) to support the co -
development of Renaturing Urban Plans focused on climate change mitigation and adaptation and efficient water 
management, and (2) to assist in the implementation of NBS in an effective way. ICONS is leader of URBAN 
GreenUP Communication and Dissemination activities, also involved in the definition of strategies for citizen 
engagement and co-creation activities, replication and exploitation activities. Website: www.urbangreenup.eu 
 HOUSEFUL “Innovative circular solutions and services for new business opportunities in the EU housing 
sector” (2018-2022), H2020-CIRC-2017 GA 776708. The main goal of the HOUSEFUL project is to develop 
and demonstrate an innovative integrated circular service in 4 full scale residential buildings, focusing on the 
optimal management/use of water, waste, energy and material resources for all stages of the life cycle of new 
builds or refurbishment of existing buildings. The service will be driven by a simple-to-use interactive Software 
as a Service (SaaS) whereby new circular economy business opportunities will be co -created and offered for 
replication for a successful transition to a circular model. Citizens shall be able to determine the efficiency of 
water, waste, energy and material and the costs of improvements through a user-friendly interactive calculation 
tool. ICONS is leader of communication and dissemination activities. Website: www.houseful.eu/  
Section 4,5,6-page 65 
 
 POCITYF “A Positive Ener gy CITY Transformation Framework” (2019 -2023), H2020 -LC-SC3-2019-ES-
SCC. POCITYF will combine positive energy blocks with grid flexibility, e -mobility and innovative ICT 
technologies and citizen engagement strategies. The overall aim is to help cities deliver positive energy districts 
while respecting their mixed urban settings that often include listed cultural heritage buildings. ICONS is leader 
of communication, dissemination and exploitation activities, and plays a key role in social innovation strategies 
and clustering activities with other EU-funded Smart City projects. Website: www.pocityf.eu 
 MAtchUP “MAximizing the UPscaling and replication potential of high level urban transformation strategies” 
(2017-2022), H2020-SCC-01-2017 - GA 774477. This project aims to drive the  transformation of Smart Cities 
in Europe, as part of the EU Smart Cities and Comm unities initiative. The MAtchUP project seeks to facilitate 
the urban transformation process by leveraging innovative solutions in the field of energy, mobility and ICT 
areas, with the involvement of citizens. ICONS leads Communication and Dissemination activities as well as the 
development of Exploitation strategies and plans. Moreover, ICONS contributes to the design and development 
of a social evaluation framework (leading social evaluation modelling and analysis) and to clustering activities 
with the Lighthouse Smart Cities projects cooperation network. Website: www.matchup-project.eu  
 STARDUST “Holistic and Integrated Urban Model for Smart Cities” (2017 -2022), H2020-SCC-01-2017 GA 
774094. In STARDUST, intelligent solutions for energy, mobility and ICT will be integrated in cities together 
with innovative business models, which will serve as blueprints for replication across Europe and abroad.  This 
synergy of actions will transform cities into living labs, pla tforms where citizens and community engagement 
will become the driving elements to improve not only their way of life but also their local economies. The project 
is fully aligned with the Clean Energy for All Europeans strategy and involves three lighthous e cities and four 
follower cities. ICONS leads Communication and Dissemination activities and contributes to clustering activities 
with the Lighthouse Smart Cities projects cooperation network. The STARDUST website 
(www.stardustproject.eu) developed by ICONS received the 2018 .eu Web Award  under the “Better World” 
Category. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
For public communication activities, ICONS will use its youris.com R&I public communication platform , to 
distribute public contents to the media and the general public. youris.com was established in 2004 as a media s pin-
off of a number of FP5 and FP6 Supporting Actions coordinated ICONS. Through youris.com, ICONS can rely on a 
record of more than 600 videos, articles and interviews produced on EU research and innovation, a global network 
of 120 national public TV broa dcasters and an audience of over 150 million TV viewers worldwide on TV media. 
youris.com videos are broadcast via the Eurovision News Feeds through a proprietary operational code (BEYOUR). 
4.1.31 PRIMA -FUNDACIÓN PRIMAFRIO  
 
 
PARTNER Nº: 31 (NGO) 
WEBSITE: www.fundacionprimafrio.com  
SHORTNAME: PRIMA 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER (LOCAL/REGIONAL OUTREACH DESK REPRESENTATIVE) 
 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
Primafrio Foundation was created from the evolution of the Social Responsibility of the Primafrio Group, with the 
aim of providing answers to social, economic, and environmental challenges of the Society with innovative proposals. 
Among its purposes are entrepreneurship and the Social Economy, linked to the defense of the environment, 
biodiversity, the sustainable use of natural resources and the prevention of pollution and climate change. Researching, 
development, and innovation (R+D+i) are our means of achieving this. 
Dynamizing agent for the expected change in behaviors and behaviors regarding the circular economy in the Region, 
through informative actions as a promoter of pilot projects, related to the efficient management of food waste and its 
incorporation into the chain, adding value and sustainability, incorporating, where appropriate, the social component 
into action. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
PRIMA will adopt the role of A2C regional Outreach desk and will lead related Task T8.3 Communication and 
engagement at local and regional level , implementing several actions at community/regional level also targeting 
young community as well as collaboratin on Task T8.6 on knowledge transfer actions. 

Section 4,5,6-page 66 
 
PRIMA will also implement a community based innovation scheme (7.1.1)  and actively c ollaborate on public 
engagement as a whole (T7.1)  
PRIMA will also collaborate on the elaboration of the A2C Circular Economy Action Plan (within T7.5) and will 
contribute to regional socioeconomic assessment  (data collection on T.4) and on cross fertilization actions  for 
multidimensional model validation (T7.7).  
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Our team is highly experienced both in research and innovation projects as well as in dissemination of knowledge 
and awareness-raising initiatives on the SDGs. Primafrio Fundación also collaborate actively in actions that promote 
entrepreneurship, participating in various projects related to the circular economy and social insertion. 
 
The Foundation is interested in participating in this project because it is aligned with it values and purposes. Since 
the range of action of this project is Región de Murcia, where the agricultural sector is crucial for its economy, and 
the care of the envi ronment related to agri -food sector is one of the main concerns of the Foundation, we find our 
participation convenient. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 Ms Esther Ballester Nieves  (female). Degree in Business and Administration. Responsible Head of the 
Foundation and with previous wide experience in being head of the administration department, she will be 
in charge of coordinate the activities carried out by the organization. She will be the responsible of the project. 
 Ms María Dolores Fernández Ayuso (female): Degree in Labour Relations and Human Resources and Msc 
in Pedagogy. Head of Communication department and with more than 15 years of experience in promoting 
social initiatives and awareness actions. She will be in charge on design and assuring the adequacy content 
of the local/regional Outreach actions.  
 Mr Adrián Valverde Mateo  (male): R+D+i Manager Graduated in Industrial Engineering Head of 
Innovation department, with 5 years the experience in search for partners, management and coordination of 
projects. In this project, he will be in charge of the organization and supervision of the work committees, 
meeting deadlines and delivering reports. 
 Mr Antonio Garre Ayala (male): Informatics engineer. Head of the IT department, with more than 20 years 
of experience, will  assure that all the necessary information from their own telematic systems and software 
to support decision-making are provided. 
 Ms Alicia Cánovas Hernández  (female): Graduated in Food Industries and Master degree in agricultural 
engineering. R+D Technician R&D technician, specialised in postharvest technologies due to her agri-food 
studies. She will be in charge of management of the project and she will participate a ctively in several 
activities. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
Grupo Primafrio do not have any patents or publications by the moment. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 LONGRUN (2020-2023)  -H2020-LC-GV-2019- Development of a low -emissions propulsion for long -
distance trucks and coaches. This project in linked with this H2020 because of the importance placed on the 
reduction of contaminant emissions and fuel. 
 CDTI PID (Spain) LOGISTICA 4.0.The main target of this experimental development of a platform that 
allows to digitally centralize and automate every process that take place in a transport logistics city and in 
order to reach the strategic objectives in the field of industry 4.0. 
 IDAE (Spain) IDAE PRIMATIME Commitment of reduction of at least 5% of diesel due to new software 
implementation, formation, or mechanical upgrades. Primafrio fleet as use case, data analytics. 
 INCOOVA- Participation in the INCOOVA Entrepreneurship Program, as a partner with two projects 
related to the reuse of tires and another, fighting against food waste, with the production of products based 
on surpluses of agricultural products of destruction or over production, combining the Economy Circular 
with social insertion. 
 Fundación Primafrio. Public engagement and awareness actions/workshops . Organization of days to 
disseminate the SDGs, with practical workshops and training, aimed at primary school students. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Fundación Primafrio has full access to the Primafrio Group's facilities, being the base in Alhama de Murcia, the place 
where most of the activities are carried out.  These facilities are equipped with the most modern information and 
Section 4,5,6-page 67 
 
communication systems, official workshops of the brand manufacturers of tractors, paint booths, electric recharging 
points, its own service station with the capacity to refuel 32 trucks simultaneously, laundry, rest areas for drivers, 24-
hour restaurant, gym, cafeteria, toy library, training rooms and auditorium.  
 
Primafrio, in addition to making all its training rooms available to the Foundation, a lso provides all the necessary 
materials and equipment that it may need. 
 
4.1.32 INFO - INSTITUTO DE FOMENTO REGION DE MURCIA  
 
PARTNER Nº: 32 (Public institution) 
WEBSITE: www.institutofomentomurcia.es 
SHORTNAME: INFO 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
Instituto de Fomento de la Región de Murcia (INFO Murcia) is the Regional Development Agency in Murcia. INFO 
Murcia is attached to the Regional Ministry of Enterprises & Industry responsible for co-ordinating most of aspects 
of regional economic development including promotion of technical and financial services to regional SMEs, (e.g. 
information services, entrepreneurship, business co -operation, export promotion, innovation schemes, cluster 
development, business facilities, RTD, etc), building soft infras tructures such as Technological or Business 
Innovation Centres and attracting investment to the region. Thus, INFO is considered to be a driving force behind 
the regional economy, promoting and supporting regional business sector through different aid mech anisms and 
technical services provided for the improvement of business competitiveness in the Murcia Region.   
INFO is considered the Innovation agency in the Murcia region. INFO encourages companies to incorporate 
innovation and R+TD based management stra tegies and get involved in technology transfer, ICTs, technology 
platforms and cooperation projects between companies, universities and research institutes. Furthermore, INFO 
fosters regional clusters as a key tool for industrial development, business coop eration and innovation. Thus, the 
regional cluster policy is axed through a regional network of 9 sectoral Technology Centres aimed to offer 
technological services to the industry.   
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
INFO as dynamiser role of the regional econom y and responsible for business development in the Murcia will 
collaborate in T6.4 with UB in the development of CEBMs for the territorial development of A2C solution as well 
as will support CJM in exploring the public financing opportunities for the A2C cluster partner’s needs.  
INFO will actively collaborate in the elaboration of the A 2C Cluster Circular Economy Action Plan, aligning 
the plan with with Smart Specialisation Strategy RIS3Mur. (Within T7.5 scope) 
INFO will also supports CARM in assessing the public financing schemes at regional level (T.7.5.3) and in delivering 
the recommendations for the improvement of these schemes at regional level fostering the territorial circular economy 
deployment. INFO will also collaborate in constructing the circular governance model for the A2C systemic solution 
(T7.5.4), the construction of the multidimensional model for A2C adoption, replication & scalability ( T7.5.5) (and 
their validation on T7.7) as well as on the elaboration of the A2C self-assessment tool (T7.5.6). 
CARM will also collaborate on Public engagement ( T7.1) and in WP8: A2C outreach activities, especially in T8.3 
(local/regional level) and T8.6 (knowledge transfer and capacity building), specially focusing on industrial 
community.  
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Our organisation has a long experience in EU funded projects over the last three decades. INFO is familiar to the 
management of European projects in the frame of a series of EU programmes and calls (further information on 
European projects recently develop ed or in progress is included in separate piece to this report). And also with a 
specialised department of European Projects providing advice, consultancy and expertise to SME and entrepreneurial 
organisations and municipalities and local development agencies to facilitate access to European funding. To know 
more: https://www.institutofomentomurcia.es/web/portal/en  
Furthermore, INFO is the public body responsible for the preparation and implementation of the Smart Specialisation 
Strategy (RIS3) in the Murcia region. To know more: https://www.ris3mur.es/ . In the Region of Murcia, with the 
support of the European Union, RIS3 (Investigation and Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialisation) is the driving 

Section 4,5,6-page 68 
 
force behind our economic transformation programme. It efficiently focuses resources on the most promising areas 
of specialisation based on comparative and competitive advantages. 
 
Last, INFO Murcia is  Coordinator of the Covenant of Majors in the Murcia región since mid 2013 
(http://www.pactoalcaldesregmurcia.es/). INFO is fully committed to have room for circular economy and 
sustainability issues if we want to work for a more competitive Region. Theref ore, we are decided to keep on this 
track and extend this knowledge and initiatives not only among municipalities through but also among companies, 
SMEs, etc. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Antonio Romero (m). Telecommunications Engineer. He is Head of Innovation and Competitiveness Unit 
in the Regional Development Agency and he has been working in the Agency for 25 years promoting innovation 
in companies. He has managed the design and implementation of the Inn ovation Voucher Programme of the 
Region of Murcia in 2009 and Cheque TIC Pilot Project in 2013. He is also project evaluator in the Agency, with 
a recognized specialization in ICT and he has participated in several European projects in the field of innovation. 
 Ms Inmaculada Espinosa (f). Chemical Engineer. She has been working in the Agency for 15 years promoting 
innovation in companies, in particular, advising companies on public financing for their R&D and innovation 
projects and intellectual property rights. She has participated in the design and implementation of the Innovation 
Voucher Programmes of the Region of Murcia and currently is also responsible for Patents and IPR in the agency 
 Mr Rafael Ataz (m) has a university degree in Law and specialisation in EU affairs. Responsible for EU projects 
at INFO over 3 decades, he has participated in more than 25 European funded Projects (also coordinating many 
of them). He is currently Head of EU funded programmes Unit at INFO. Acting as responsible for EU affairs for 
this project. 
 Ms Mª Luisa Lopez (f)  has university specialisation in Chemicals, and has managed as responsible for FP6 -
FP77-H2020 and bilateral R+D projects at INFO for 15 years. Responsible for EU matters at EEN -Seimed and 
project responsible to European Research and Development Programmes. 
 Mr Vicente Marco (m). Industrial Engineer. He has been working in the Agency for 15 years promoting 
innovation in companies, in particular, advising companies on public financing for their R&D and inn ovation 
projects. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
The main objective of INFO is to promote regional economic growth and competitiveness in the Region of Murcia 
by promoting the economy,  increasing investment, removing  obstacles and establishing an 
environment that favours competitiveness. With the aim of guaranteeing  enhanced development  and economic 
growth amongst regional SMEs, INFO focuses on the following lines of action: 
• Research & Innovation - For promoting technological development ensuring that each company can access 
the technology that best suits its needs. 
• Internationalisation - For boosting international corporate expansion through the Foreign Trade Promotion 
Plan.  
• Investment - For promoting investment, development and growth projects by providing companies from 
inside and outside the region with information and consultancy services. 
• Entrepreneurship - Support for entrepreneurs, creation, consolidation and transfer of companies. 
• Access to finance - For helping businesses to access lines of finance for investments in assets, quality, 
technology, internationalisation and industrial equipment. 
 
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 INDEMAND – H2020 FUNDED - https://www.indemandhealth.eu/  
 INNOVOUCHER – H2020 - https://innovoucher.eu/main/index.php  
 SCALE UP – INTERREG EUROPE - https://www.interregeurope.eu/scaleup / Supporting concentration 
and robustness of SMEs within the renewed EU industrial policy 
 SEIMED/EEN – COSME - https://www.seimed.eu  
 ZAL MURCIA – EU CONECTIVITY INSTRUMENT - http://www.zal-murcia.es/  
 
Section 4,5,6-page 69 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
Offices 
 
4.1. 33 ECO -ECOTRACE, SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 33 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.ecotrace.es   
SHORTNAME: ECO 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Ecotrace is a 4.0 engineering specialized in information systems that certify the traceability of materials in the 
environment. Our experience in process improvement and cloud programming allows us to create solutions in the 
circular economy market. We control raw materials and their quality standards. Our method is to analyze problems 
in real processes with our customer. Our multidisciplinary team proposes the simplest and most automated solution 
possible to increase the quality, profitability and efficiency of our client. It always incorporates dashboards for correct 
measurement of results and making strategics decisions. We program with cloud -web technology creating tools in 
mobility, flexible, fast and simple for the customer.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
ECO will lead the development of the digital tool DIS for the agrifood sector. They will be invo lved in WP1, 
collaborating in the A2C requirements inputs (T1.1), they will lead T1.5 focus on the development of the DIS tool. 
In WP6 they will implement the DIS as a digital tool with access to the public (T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved 
in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
 
 
 
Related experience : They have demonstrated experience in traceability of wastes by the introduction of the 
blockchain technology as a support to ensure the adequate recycling of agricultural plastics wastes produced in the 
Region of Murcia. This is a key background for A2C project. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Participation in A2C will allow ECO to be the first developer in Europe of a Digital Tool for the agrifood secto r 
ensuring the traceability of plastics and agrifood wastes and providing a Decission Support Tool to the agrifood 
stakeholders allowing them to select the most appropriate valorisation routes. Important competitive advantage. 
Increasing its European networking. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Igor Gonzalez (male). Director of Strategy and Operations. Senior consultant, expert in Lean Manufacturing & 
Sigma and Industry 4.0 enabler. His knowledge in the integration of machines, people and processes in companies 
has allowed him to participate in projects in the military sectors (naval, air, land), trains, health, emergencies, 

Section 4,5,6-page 70 
 
aeronautics, RPA -UAV, robotics, artificial vision, virtual reality, food and drinks, fashion, machine tools, 
software, telecommunications, public administration, etc. Its participation in developments based on process and 
technology innovation, the result in its projects creating new work systems that are implemented in production 
processes and their arrival on the real market. Co-designer of Ecotr@ce BETA. 
 Lorenzo Moreno ( male). Director of Programming and Development. Senior Programmi ng Engineer at 
Blockchain. Specialized in computer languages and integrated technologies in the industry 4.0 President and 
founding partner of AMURBIT, an association focused on the study and dissemination of Bitcoin, Blockchain 
and other assets based on c ryptography and decentralization. Murcia. Spain. Participation in projects based on 
infrastructure and services Cloud and Web, databases, machine communications, business management systems, 
artificial vision, machine learning, data science, cryptography, etc. Co-designer of Ecotr@ce BETA  
 Jorge Gonzalez (male).  Frontend Developer. Specialized in web programming, usability and user experience 
solutions. Web process analyst and its availability and functionality in web browsers. Developer of web and 
ecommerce platforms. 
 Leticia Bas (female).  Processes. Psychologist specialised in change management, process improvement and 
associated document management.  
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
Ecotr@ce Beta. Web application specialised in the traceability of plastic.  The system is designed as a first step 
towards meeting the needs of controlling the recycling of agricultural plastic and the circular economy. Its 
functionalities meet the requirements of quality standards and are easy to manage for users.  
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 Digitalization of citizen services from the Mazarron City Council ( www.maresdepapel.es). Mazarron City 
Council. web platform, QR, Big Data. 2020. 
 Identification, collection and analysis of data for the implementation of drones in monitoring and protection of 
wildlife in the natural environment of the Region of Murcia ( https://dgmn.approces.es ). Innovate "Forest 
Management".2018. The conclusions were based on the recommendations of the environmental agents through 
the use of different tests with 4.0 technologies, Drones (rpa - uav), artificial vision, augmented reality, cyber 
security, Big Dat a.The results defined a new process model for the administration, environmental agents and 
contractors. 
 Introduction of the blockchain technology as a support to ensure the adequate recycling of agricultural plastics 
wastes produced in the Region of Murcia  (www.ecotrace.es). State Framework Plan for Waste Management, 
2015. Ministry of Agriculture of Spain (PEMAR 2016-2022). This plan sets out the strategic lines and measures 
required to move towards the so-called circular economy and promote actions for the reuse and recycling of waste.  
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
In terms of  infrastructure and resources , ECO commits to contribute its - (i) Cloud based, secure Paradise IoT 
Platform, (ii) Edge (an Edge Computing software product), and (iii) Cybersecurity risk assessment framework. We 
also contribute computing devices (e.g. Raspberry Pi) and multiple Android powered devices suitable for Human-
Machine Interface for A2C project. DIGI is committed to sustain the project outcomes for long term through 
commercialization, future Horizon Europe projects. 
4.1.34 EQU -EQUMETRICS, SL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 34 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.shieldtags.es  
SHORTNAME: EQU 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER.  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
EQUMETRICS SL is a technical company focused on sensor and electronics engineering, to several applications. 
Also, the codes creation and traffic control of items in different logistic steps  is our second main activity. The 
company was created in year 2016 by two IT engineers and one business controller in view to develop and launch a 
device to control, through several sensors, the competition horse’s performance during its training process.  

Section 4,5,6-page 71 
 
The company has one Product R+D Department and one Commercial Department, including the Strategic direction, 
as main departments. The R+D is directed by the two technical shareholders and has a variable number of workers, 
depending on the projects charge. The R+D people is formed by technical engineers and basic workers. The 
Commercial Department has one director and one auxiliar. There is an external financial and accounting service, as 
well as labour and legal consultancy. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
EQU will be involved in WP1, collaborating in the A2C requirements inputs (T1.1), they will be involved in T1.5 
focus on the development of the DIS tool by  creating and developing efficient ways to create, transform and export 
unique identification code units; R&D to print high ext reme weather conditions resistant labels lasting at least 24 
months on plastic units; create the more efficient technical environment to acquire and manage the big data generated 
by the code’s scans.In WP6 they will collaborate in the implementation of the DIS as a digital tool with access to the 
public (T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 
8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: EQU has a vast experience in similar projects referred to codification and database control in 
logistics. This experience has been developed though our work collaboration with LinkReader Department of Hewlett 
Packard company (San Diego), as well to our different projects developed for Spanish companies and institutions 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Participation in A2C project will increase EQU knowledge in researching models to improve and increase the codes 
printing and control technology, in view to reach bigger data quantities and faster scanning and control to manage 
those data. Enlarging its European networking. Creation of new business lines. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Ricardo Ortín Tomás (male). CIO Equmetrics SL since 2016. Technical Engineer in Computer Systems - 
Industry and robotics specialty. Master in direction and management of people. University expert in Electronic 
Commerce. Senior technician in R + D + i project management. Project Manager and project management. CEO 
- CIO Grupo Tecnología Mantis, S.L since 2012. Extensive experience in IT applications for industry, server and 
database management, as well as digital security.  
 Mr Imad Fernando Khabbaz Cañavate  (male).  CIO Equmetrics SL since 2016 . Technical Engineer in 
Computer Systems and Degree in Computer Engineering Certifications: CISA and CISSP (ISACA), MCSA, MCP 
and MCT (Microsoft), CCNA (Cisco), Novell and VMware. Master in Information Technology and Advanced 
Telecommunications. CEO Byprox Development S.L. sin ce 2013, CEO BlueReady S. Coop. since 2015 .  
MoviSensor S.L. and expert in the application of sensors to industrial control systems, development of electronic 
boards and data control. 
 Mr Francisco Javier Paniello Salinas (male). CEO Equmetrics SL since 2016.  Graduated in Geology from the 
University of Barcelona. Diploma in International Trade (C.C. Barcelona). Master's Degree in Business 
Management ESADE FullTime. Specialization in Strategic Management Graduate Management Expansi on of 
International Electronic Commerce ESADE CREAPOLIS. International Manager Amelia González S.L since 
2009 and more than 30 years of experience in business management, with special emphasis on international trade 
and strategic management. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 EQUMETRICS device, wide system of physiological sensors applied to racehorses to control its constants during 
the hard trainings, including long data transmission to the main servers, using Bluetooth and GSM antennas. 
 SHIELDTAGS systems to print hidden watermarks easy to read on printed labels, focused on fighting against 
counterfeited marks and products. 
 SHIELDTAGS system to print hidden watermarks easy to read on printed labels, focused on increasing the added 
information value to the consumer. 
 UNNAMMED product, consists in a social distance control, worn on a jewelry piece (bracelet, pendant, brooch) 
to advise to the different users that they are too next to each other. With distance sensors, acceleration sensors and 
Bluetooth communication.  
 RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 72 
 
 Micropixel control to secure technical and legal files, as second secure level in pdf to avoid modifications and 
counterfeiting (on-going). 
 Communication system to send short, codified messages to jewels worn by receiver (on-going). 
 Fast and centralized parking control and payment without cards or physical supports (on-going). 
 Small and light sensor equipped device to air pollution control and real time data management (on-going). 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
- Medium size office with electronic laboratory, equipped with solders, circuit printers and 3D printers 
- Standard color digital printers, high performance computers, servers.  
- Acquired and own developed software, licenses and supports. 
4.1.35 EXUS -EXUS INNOVATION  
 
PARTNER Nº: 35 (Large Industry) 
WEBSITE: https://www.exus.co.uk/  
SHORTNAME: EXUS  
LOCATION: Greece 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
EXUS Software Single Member Limited Liability Company (EXUS)  was founded with the vision to transform 
the costly and complex enterprise software industry – making it simple, accessible and exciting. Our purpose is to 
improve the business of those we serve, simplifying complexity to enable intelligent action. 
EXUS designs, creates and markets software solutions and services in several business and application areas such 
as business, e-health, e-learning, business process management, collection, wireless applications. Currently, EXUS 
employs highly skilled professionals in areas such as software engineering & web development, project and product 
management, account management and research. The company aims at leveraging the successful track record of 
EXUS in view of delivering cutting edge innovation to its customers.  Both products and bespoke solutions built by 
EXUS, serve demanding and critical business applications and domains, covering all types of diverse sectors. From 
consumer banking applications, smartphones -based payment and transaction systems, augmented -reality mobile 
applications, large -scale and complex portals, extranets, Electronic Data Interchanges to secure cloud services, 
serious games and gamification mechanisms, data management and analytics, EXUS covers a wide spread of 
activities by leveraging the expertise of its 130+ people strong technical divisions that are led by expert project 
managers and senior consultants. EXUS has been awarded with the EFQM “Recognised for Excellence” award. 
EXUS is certified with ISO: 9001 for quality assurance. The project managers are certified according to the Project 
Management Institute as Project Management Professionals. Finally, EXUS is a Gold Microsoft and Oracle Partner 
for development and Integration works. 
Our vision is to transform research to successful marke t products. Products enhanced with intelligent services built 
upon novel data analytics algorithms, mechanisms and tools that are reusable and scalable across multiple application 
domains. EXUS actively contributes to the definition of new research and inn ovative opportunities harnessing the 
potential of Data.  
Our approach includes the following important aspects: 
• The successful transformation of primitive research ideas into large-scale innovation projects. 
• Its strategic management, quality control and efficient coordination of multinational projects. 
• Work closely with key industry and government stakeholders to provide real-world applications and drive impact.  
• Privacy by design, federated access control in heterogeneous environments (e.g., finance, energy, security, health). 
• Deal with different data quality: raw, processed, annotated, metadata. 
Finally, the company operates its internal Innovation department which manages the strategic research and 
development portfolio of the company. EXUS AI Labs manages a portfolio of initiatives that aim to pave the way 
for the introduction and take up of eme rging technologies. Leveraging the results of strategic research activities 
allows us to harness untapped niches in our market sectors of interest. We excel in driving innovation in software 
Section 4,5,6-page 73 
 
engineering, data management and machine learning to foster advan ces in key sectors such as: security, health, 
creativity and lifelong learning. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
EXUS will be involved in WP1, collaborating in the A2C requirements inputs (T1.1), they will be involved in T1.5 
focus on the development of the DIS tool by Big  Data for the predictive tool  implementation. In WP6 they will 
collaborate in the implementation of the DIS as a digital tool with access to the public (T6.1). Moreover, they will be 
involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: EXUS has developed predictive tools for different sectors: 1 ) Predictive model for patient 
readmission prediction which has shown excellent results in field tests. 2) Predictive Model for fraud detection that 
provide risk estimates for online transactions in real time. 3) Predictive models for boat engine fault prediction 4) 
crop failure prediction for insurance risk analysis. 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Thanks to their participation in the A2C project, EXUS will broad their knowledge in one of their key areas of their 
business the predictive tools models, by developing the first predictive tool for the agrifood sector. The project 
implementation will also highly widening EXUS networks, opening opportunities for new collaborations.  
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr. Anaxagoras Fotopoulos (Male)  is a Research Consultant at EXUS. He holds a B.Sc. in “Electronic 
Computing Systems Engineering” and received his M.Sc. in “Information Technologies in Medicine and Biology” 
with specialisation in Bioinformatics; with honours and scholarship (issued from the State Scholarships 
Foundation) finishing 2nd in Greece in the rankings of the category “Engineering & IT Sciences”. He has managed 
several projects (Interreg YESS, Erasmus+ AUDID, Interreg TRAP, Interreg SYMBIOSIS, Interreg PASSAGE, 
Hellenic Green Fund e -CLIMA, IN-PREP, CURSOR & INGENIOUS) plaques.    
Mr. Marcos Ernesto Varveris (Male) is a Research Consultant at EXUS. Marcos obtained a BSc i n Business 
Management and MSc in Entrepreneurship from the University of Surrey. During his postgraduate studies, he 
carried out market validation and research projects for UK fintech start-ups and scaleups operating in the mobile 
payments and forex industries. He has managed several European research projects in which he has had the role 
of Technical and Quality manager. Moreover, he has worked in the Business Development department of EXUS, 
with tasks pertaining to market research and European business growth. His research interests lie in the use of AI 
and Big Data analytics in the fintech industry and for social good. 
 Dr. Pantelis Z. Lappas (Male)  is an Artificial Intelligence (AI) Solutions Architect at EXUS AI Labs. His 
educational background includes a PhD in Operations Research, MSc degrees in Statistics with specialisation in 
quantitative statistical methods applied in decision making and in Information Systems with specialisation in 
Business Information Systems from Athens University of Economics an d Business. He has 10 years of 
professional/academic experience in applying machine learning and optimisation techniques in finance and 
business, whereas he has been involved in numerous applied qualitative and quantitative research projects with 
respect to credit default risk management. His interests are rooted in Operations Research, Statistics and AI and 
within these fields Risk Management, Bioinformatics, Optimisation, Decision Making, Machine Learning and 
Evolutionary Learning. He has published in sci entific journals and conferences as well as book chapters related 
to risk management and evolutionary optimisation in Supply Chain Management and Credit Risk Management. 
 Mrs. Maria Plakia (Female) has joined EXUS Innovation in January 2019 and is involved as a data scientist and 
technical project leader in various EU funded projects. She is the lead data scientist in ONCORELIEF and DataBio 
projects, while she was worked on INGENIOUS and CYBELE. Experienced on designing and developing 
prototypes and validate the results, that focus on predictive modelling, classification, clustering, feature selection 
and data visualization. She has strong background in Python, R and Matlab languages using Anaconda, RStudio, 
Jupyter Notebook and other frameworks. She worked as a research engineer at ICS-FORTH for mobile computing 
group (2016-2018) and as a research assistant for TNL lab (2013 -1016), her main activities were analysis and 
modelling of data for multimedia services and brain activity. She holds an M.Sc and a B.Sc. Degree in Computer 
Science from University of Crete. Her current research interests include machine learning, data modelling and 
statistical analysis. 
 Mrs. Theodora Galani (Female) joined EXUS in June 2017 as a Software Engineer. She holds a Diploma in 
Electrical and Computer Engineering from the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA). Also, she is a 
PhD candidate in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering of NTUA in the field of data management. 
She specializes in full stack web application design and development, using Java / Spring Framework and React. 
Section 4,5,6-page 74 
 
In EXUS, she has participated in several EU funded projects (SECUREGAS, CRISS, EMOTIVE, MAGELLAN 
FTI) and in one national project (METEORA), both as developer and technical lead (CRISS, METEORA). 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
EFS Financial Suite (EFS). The EFS Financial Suite is based on the outcomes of previous innovative research work 
conveyed by EXUS in the framework of EC co-funded projects. In specific, EFS uses best of breed technologies in 
the field of scalable data analytics, pattern recognition and analysis, machine learning for continuous adaptation and 
state of the art visualisation techniques. EFS provides the necessary tools for supporting all the steps of the Risk 
scoring and management, Loan Origination, Debt Collection and Recovery process for financial institutions or other 
organisations that deal with transaction -heavy processes in real -time applications (e.g. Telcos, Brokers, Insurance 
Companies etc.). EFS product enables non -IT expert users (collection managers) to develop detailed coll ection 
strategies and to define rules for implementing the strategies, visually through intuitive web tools. So based on the 
requirements of each customer, every step of the strategy can be set -up using the most suitable paradigm. The 
representation is tra nslated to specific business processes that are understandable and editable by the collection 
managers. The EFS enables on the fly changes, as well as the automated production of self-adapting strategies taking 
into account the whole cycle of the collectio n process from pre -collections (e.g. SMS notifications for high risk 
customers before the delinquency date) to early, restructuring, pre -legal, legal, write off and portfolio sale. To that 
effect, the EFS core engine aggregates disparate data sources both internal and external. Therefore, large historic data 
sets within the organisation are fully exploited for pattern identification and extraction while social media and other 
real-time consumer behavioural attributes are leveraged to yield a complete pictur e. EXUS is an expert in enabling 
intelligent action in enterprise systems through effective and value -adding real-time information management. In 
2016, EFS was ranked “Best in Class in the world” from the CEB Tower group. http://collections.exus.co.uk/loan-
collections-systems-technology-analysis 
 
Web and Mobile Apps. EXUS designs and develops sophisticated Web-based and Mobile (native/cross-platform) 
Apps in various d omains ranging from Banking and Telecom Markets (commercial products) to crowd safety and 
first responders, health and assisting living arenas (Research activities). These include running transaction -heavy 
intranets and extranets and e-learning, e-payment and iOS and Android phone apps. Indicative clients are Vodafone, 
WIND, Greek Public Power Supply Company, Historic Hotels of Europe, etc. By exploiting our rich experience in 
delivering complex and large scale Internet technology projects and our exposure to state -of-the-art research 
outcomes, we are currently introducing to the market an end-to-end solution covering the needs of fast and effective 
digital presence for all types of organisations. To that effect, our newly delivered platforms remove the comp lexity 
from the traditional approaches in building information -heavy portals and applications, to the benefit of the end -
user/customer. It is a fully cloud-deployable solution going under the PaaS model. It empowers non-technical people 
to create, design, parameterize, launch, market and manage all types of native applications exploiting smart-phones’ 
potential to the fullest. Its next release planned for Q4 2014, will entail a series of analytics functions in order to 
leverage the ability to monitor consumer/user behaviour for the delivery of increased value to EXUS’ customers.  
 
EXUS Analytical Framework. (EAF) . EXUS Analytics Framework Analytics Framework is built upon a 
distributed, multi-node Hadoop cluster backed by the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), running on Ubuntu 
Linux 14.04 LTS. More precisely, the Cloudera Distribution Hadoop (CDH) cluster that resides on Azure cloud 
platform is deployed. Cloudera provides a data -management platform designed specifically to address the 
opportunities and challenges of big data. By uniting flexible storage and processing under a single management 
framework and set of system resources, Cloudera delivers the versatility and agility required for modern data 
management. EXUS Analytics Framework is a gene ric analytics platform that can be adapted to the needs of the 
scenario under investigation and the data provided to the platform. The driving idea behind the design and 
development of EAF is the seamless facilitation of analytics functions for both batch and streaming data (including 
“Big Data”) by different typed of business users, without imposing strong requirements on expertise and 
specialisation. To achieve that, EAF employs a codeless approach in the sense that the end -to-end platform is 
integrated in such a way, so that the end users can interact with it, without requiring extra effort.  
EXus Artificial Intelligence TEchnologies EXAITE Suite.   
Section 4,5,6-page 75 
 
 
 
One of the key areas of focus within EXUS is predictive modelling and its application to a wide variety of fields. 
EXAITE Suite consists of computational intelligence tools to support the lifecycle of any potential artificial 
intelligence project. Exploratory data analysis techniques can be used to explore high-dimensional data with the goal 
of discovering s tructure or patterns that lend to the formation of statistical hypotheses, visualizing the data and 
analysing them. Depending on whether unstructured or structured transactional and relational datasets occur, deep 
learning approaches or deep feature synthe sis approaches are available in the context of an automated feature 
engineering. In addition to this, feature extraction techniques (e.g., Principal Component Analysis, Factor Analysis, 
Isometric Feature Mapping, Auto -encoders), as well as filter -based (e.g., Mutual Information) and wrapper -based 
feature selection techniques (e.g., Genetic Algorithm) are available to rank features and discover knowledge from 
raw data by selecting the most appropriate subset of features in a dimensionality reduction context.  Cutting edge 
artificial intelligence algorithms based on deep learning, extreme learning machine, ensemble tree -based models, 
evolutionary optimization and swarm intelligence are provided for prediction and forecasting purposes (e.g., time -
series machine learning). Clustering algorithms (e.g., weighted clustering, spectral clustering), bayesian networks, 
anomaly detection algorithms and fuzzy-rule based inference are available to design a decision support process for 
rational decision making and/or a risk assessment policy (e.g., early warning system) for threat/attack detection or 
fault detection purposes. EXUS has developed an internal library of AI tools that can be re-used across various fields. 
More specifically the suite has the following tools: 1) Predictive model for patient readmission prediction which has 
shown excellent results in field tests. 2) Predictive Model for fraud detection that provide risk estimates for online 
transactions in real time. 3) Predictive models for boat engine fault prediction 4) crop failure prediction for insurance 
risk analysis. 5) EXUS has applied state-of-the-art methods to develop recommenders that allow collection processes, 
in financial institutions, to be tailored to the customer. This is achieved by analysing response patterns of customers 
to collection actions, combining with freely available social media data and developing targeted models for 
recommending actions best suited to the customer. 6) Another broad area of focus of analytics work undertaken by 
EXUS revolves around the use of natural language processing (NLP). EXUS is actively engaged in developing AI 
powered chatbots and sentiment analysis to support customer interactions for its clients. Works undertaken focus on 
applying these advanced techniques to ut ilize textual and voice data retained by its clients to feed into predictive 
models that deliver actionable insights. EXUS has also undertaken several projects delivering visual analytics 
solutions in the Healthcare and Financial verticals. Solutions developed range from customizable dashboards to drive 
business intelligence (BI) to advanced analytics visualizations tailored for the customer data. EXUS is exploit and 
transfer this AI expertise in the security sector, developing predictive models, simulated scenarios and smart 
algorithms to facilitate the crisis operators and the first responders.   
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 H2020 IN-PREP (2017 - 2020). An INtegrated next generation PREParedness programme for improving effective 
inter-organisational response capacity in complex environments of disasters and causes of crises", https://www.in-
prep.eu/. H2020-SEC-01-DRS-2016. -Series Prediction, Graph Databases, Multilayer Artificial Neural Network 
and Social Media Sentiment Analysis. 

Section 4,5,6-page 76 
 
 H2020 INGENIOUS (2019-2022) “The First Responder (FR) of the Future: a Next Generation Integrated Toolkit 
(NGIT) for Collaborative Respon se, increasing protection and augmenting operational capacity” 
https://ingenious-first-responders.eu/. H2020-DRS-02-2018-2019-2020.  
 H2020 CURSOR (2019-2022) “Coordinated Use of miniaturized Robotic equipment and advanced Sensors for 
search and rescue Operations” https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/222585/factsheet/en.  
 H2020 DataBio (2017 -2020) ‘’Data -Driven Bioeconomy’’ https://www.databio.eu/en/ H2020-ICT-15-2016-
2017.  
 H2020 E2DATA (2018 – 2020), “European Extreme Performing Big Data Stacks”, https://www.e2data.eu/ 
H2020-ICT-2017-1 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
EXUS has implemented an architecture and services for intelligent data query, indexing, retrieval and storage based 
on models of NoSQL and hybrid SQL, coupling the approaches of Big Data, Big Analytics and Cloud Computing. 
In this architecture, EXUS has integrated an open source portal to automate the provisioning of a full suite of services 
on Windows servers that also supports provisioning of Windows and Linux Virtual Machines. We use an Orchestrator 
for aligning workflows suitable for provision with commercial and open -source software. The Orchestrator uses 
methodologies for a data centric and homogeneous representation of the various technical components for maximum 
independence from proprietary solutions and is significantly used in the development of application processing chains 
based on open platforms with end user involvement.   
Moreover, EXUS can provide the following infrastructure for the development, technical testing and integration of 
the project: 
 
1. Privately owned cloud infrastructure located at in-house ISO:27001 secured data-center. 
2. EXUS Network of Sensors to support IoT projects consisting of: 
• 40 x Raspberry Pi 4 Model B/2GB  
• 45 x  Raspberry Pi 7" Touchscreen   
• 40 x SmartiPi Touch 2   
• 45 x 16GB MicroSD with NOOBS (new OS for Raspberry Pi 4)   
• 40 x Raspberry Pi 4 Official Power Supply 3A (15,3W) USB-C  
• 5 x Raspberry Pi 3 Model B+  
• 5 x SmartPi Touch  
• 5 x Raspberry Pi 3 Official Power Supply 3A (15,3W) Micro-USB 
3. Dedicated server-farm infrastructure for testbeds consisting of 5 servers: 
• 2 X DELL PowerEdge R420  
• Intel Xeon processor E5-2400 2CPU 16 cores 2.4GHz , Cache 2.5MB per core, 6,4GT/s QPI  
• Ram 128 GB DDR3 up to 1600MT/s (12 DIMM slots up to 348GB)  
• HDD 1TB (up to eight 2.5” hot-plug SSD, SAS, or SATA or up to four 3.5” hot -plug SAS, SATA, or 
SSD, up to total 16TB)  
• PERC H310 Integrated RAID Controller 
• 16X DVD+/-RW Drive 
• iDRAC7 Enterprise 
• 2 PCIe 3.0-enabled expansion slots 
• Dual Hot Plug Power Supplies 550W Platinum efficiency 
• 3 X DELL PowerEdge R210 II  
• Intel Xeon processor E3- 1200 1CPU 4 Cores 3.1GHz , Cache up to 8MB  
• RAM 32 GB DDR3 1333MHz (4 DIMM Slots up to 32GB)  
• HDD 1.4 TB (2 x 3.5'' or 4 x 2.5'', SATA SSD, SAS, nearline SAS, SATA )  
• 1 PCIe x16 G2 slot  
• PERC S100 RAID controller 0,1 
• Embedded Broadcom 5716 Dual port Gigabit Ethernet 
• iDRAC6 Express 
• 1 slim ODD DVD +/-RW 
Power Supply (1 PSU) 305W (80+ Bronze) 
Section 4,5,6-page 77 
 
4.1.36 EVRY - EVRYTHNG SÀRL  
 
PARTNER Nº: 36 (Large industry) 
WEBSITE: https://www.evrythng.com 
SHORTNAME: EVRY  
LOCATION: Switzerland 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
The EVRYTHNG Product Cloud™ helps the world’s consumer product brands run their businesses with data-driven 
intelligence through the digitization of products at scale and the use of data generated by those products. With 
EVRYTHNG, global consumer brands in sectors ranging from apparel, beauty, and personal care, to home goods, 
food and beverages can now know what their products know™. EVRYTHNG’s customers see and learn from each 
product’s journey from factory to consumer. EVRYTHNG helps businesses use this information to operate with more 
agility and integrity, and gather and apply rea l-time data intelligence. EVRYTHNG is a World Economic Forum 
Global Innovator helping on Blockchain for Supply Chain projects and Technology Pioneer, originated the 
technology driving the GS1 Digital Link global barcode upgrade and won Fast Company’s World  Changing Ideas 
Award for most impactful change driver for the consumer products category. Learn more at EVRYTHNG.com and 
@EVRYTHNG. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
EVRY will be involved in WP1, collaborating in the A2C requirements inputs (T1.1), they will be involved in T1.5 
focus on the development of the DIS tool by blockchain  implementation. In  WP6 they will collaborate in the 
implementation of the DIS as a digital tool with access to the public (T6.1). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 
in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
 
Related experience: EVRY has an extensive experience in Digital Identity, supply chain traceability, experience in 
the integration of public blockchains (IOTA, ETHEREUM, OriginTrail, Tierion, etc.) as well as driving supply chain 
standards such as the GS1 Digital Link and EPCIS 2.0 standard. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Participation in A2C will allow EVRY to be involve in development of the first Digital Tool for the agrifood sector 
in Europe ensuring the traceability of plastics and agrifood wastes. New business lines in their key areas a blockchain. 
Important competitive advantage. Increasing its European networking. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Dr. Dominique Guinard (male) - Dominique is the CTO and co-founder of EVRYTHNG, the IoT Product Cloud 
managing the digital twins of billions of consumer products. Before that, Dom was a Web of Things pioneer at 
ETH Zurich and MIT where he worked on his Ph.D. Dom is also an IoT expert  with more than a decade spent 
working on projects for Oracle, the Auto-ID Labs, Nokia and SAP. He drives IoT and supply chain standards with 
W3C, GS1 and as blockchain advisor for the WEF and the Blockchain Research Institute. Dom built the 
EVRYTHNG Blockchain Integration Hub and the interface to 6 public blockchains used in production projects. 
Dom wrote 30+ academic papers, 10+ patents and authored “Building the Web of Things”. 
 Dr. Joel Vogt (male)  - Joel is a machine learning scientist in EVRYTHNG’s lab s team. He focuses on key 
innovation projects at EVRYTHNG (machine learning, blockchain, etc) and assists the product team in developing 
early prototypes to unlock new customer opportunities. Prior to joining EVRYTHNG, Joël worked in CERN’s 
Radiation Prote ction Group as a software engineer and researcher. He was awarded the degree of Doctor of 
Economics and Social Sciences by the University of Fribourg, Switzerland and Doctor of Science: Information 
Technology by the transnational University of Limburg, Belgium. 
 Mr Niall Murphy (male) - Niall Murphy is CEO and co-founder of EVRYTHNG, linking every consumer product 
to the web and helping consumer product brands to run their business differently by knowing what their products 
know. A computer scientist by training, Niall is a technologist, serial entrepreneur, and angel investor with 25 years 
of experience in innovation and future thinking. At EVRYTHNG, Niall leads the company’s contribution to the 
World Economic Forum as a Technology Pioneer and is a member of the World Economic Forum’s prestigious 
Global Innovators community. Passionate about the use of data and digital intelligence to create a more sustainable 
planet, EVRYTHNG recently won Fast Company’s 2020 World Changing Ideas award for bringing transparency 
to the consumer products industry. A frequent speaker at venues around the world including TED, Niall is an avid 
mountaineer and resides in Switzerland with his wife and children. 

Section 4,5,6-page 78 
 
 Mr Dale Jacobs (male)  – Dale has 10+ years experience in retail and supply chain technology, includin g SaaS 
inventory intelligence products. He has extensive experience conceptualizing, building and growing B2B products, 
working at the intersection between people and digital technology.  
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 Blockchain Integration Hub - https://evrythng.com/introducing-the-evrythng-blockchain-integration-hub/ 
 Supply Chain Traceability solution - https://evrythng.com/supply-chain-manager/ 
 Product Cloud - https://evrythng.com/product-cloud/ 
 GS1 Digital Link - https://evrythng.com/gs1digitallink 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 TagItSmart. Smart Tags driven service platform for enabling ecosystems of connected objects. H2020-ICT-2015- 
https://www.tagitsmart.eu/ 
 COMPOSE. The market place of the Internet of Things. EU P7 Programme. - https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
market/en/news/compose-market-place-internet-things 
 EPCIS 2.0 Standard . GS1 standard for the integration of supply chain information systems  - 
https://www.gs1.org/sites/default/files/docs/gsmp/epcis_2.0_cta_final.pdf 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Large scale Product Cloud and underlying cloud infrastructure. Tags scanners and verifiers. 
 
 
4.1.3 7 SOLP -SOLPLAST, SA  
 
PARTNER Nº: 37 (Large industry)  
WEBSITE: www.solplast.com 
SHORTNAME: SOLP  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER.  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
SOLPLAST is a strong national leader specialized in agricultural plastics, with the highest production figures in 
Spain, and a major global competitor, exporting to more than 40 countries worldwide.  SOLPLAST belongs to the 
Armando Álvarez business group, which is currently the largest Spanish processor of polyethylene plastic films 
with an annual volume of 300,000 tonnes.  
The Group consists of 15 companies, call complementing one another, specializing in different segments and 
applications in the plastics market, enabling us to have a global vision of the sector, integrate a variety of solutions 
and serve as a launch pad for new technological developments. The Armando Álvarez Group is present with its 
own offices in Germany, Benelux, France, United Kingdom, Portugal, United States, Mexico, Morocco and 
Turkey. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some of the SOLPLAST most significant worldwide clients are: 
• AGROQUÍMICOS LOS TRIVIÑOS 
• BONNYSA 
• INTEGRAL S XXI 
• SUREXPORT 
• FRUTAS MARIPI 
• SAT BIONEST 

Section 4,5,6-page 79 
 
• UNION INVIVO 
• GOLDCROP 
• BEISELEN GMBH  
SOLPLAST has an annual production capacity of 60,000 metric tons, using multilayer coextrusion technology. 
In manufacturing their films, SOLPLAST combine low -density polyethylene (LDPE), linear low-density 
polyethylene (LLDPE), metallocenes and ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA)/butyl acrylate (EBA) copolymer, along with 
other types of specific, more technical polymers. SOLPLAST can extrude films from 10 microns (40 gauge) and up 
to 1 mm (4,000 gauge), and with widths up to 20 m. SOLPLAST adapts its production to its clients’ requirements in 
terms of dimensions , mechanical & barrier characteristics  and different bobbin presentations. 
Its knowledge of different markets, service capacity and logistic development means they can offer the most advanced 
solutions in agricultural plastics and continue contributing to more sustainable and profitable crops. 
 
SOLPLAST applies active R&D&I policies, testing new applications with polymers and additives in conjuncti on 
with its suppliers, universities and research institutes. They also work shoulder-to-shoulder with their clients to adapt 
their developments to their specific applications. SOLPLAST constantly invests in new technologies and create new 
products to solve highly specific problems based on each crop and field of application. SOLPLAST works actively 
to protect the environment by applying techniques that minimize production emissions and waste while conducting 
research into reducing the environmental impact of all its products. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
SOLP will be involved in WP1 collaborating in the definition of the A2C agricultural plastics requirements (T1.1). 
In WP3 they will collaborate in the developments of processable recycled plastics compounds (T3.5). In WP5 they 
will be involved in the plastics compounds transformation into agricultural films at small scale (T5.4). In WP6 they 
will be end users by producing ag ricultural mulch films and disinfection films at relevant and industrial relevant 
environment to demonstrate our solution at TRL6-7. 
 
Related experience: SOLP is one of the key European players in the plastics transformation into agricultural films, 
having a vast experience in cast and blown extrusion. Moreover, they are committed to the innovation by a R&D 
structure focus on the development of its own products, new systems and materials. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
SOLPLAST has a leading position in the international agricultural market . Since its creation, it has tried to 
maintain a level of quality and service to customers, which results in a continuous growth and development, both in 
the national and international market. The development of a high barrier agriculture films as alternat ive to current 
multilayers as well as biodegradable mulch films produced will give a competitive market advantage. Moreover, they 
will increase their knowledge in recyclable and biodegradable compounds. Increasing their European networking. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr José Mª Musso Muñoz (male). He holds a degree in Economy from the University of Murcia. He started in 
SOLPLAST in 1992 being part of the Commercial department and since 1997 is the Deputy Director of 
SOLPLAST. 
 Mr Pedro Pablo Diez Marcos (male). He holds a degree in Physical Sciences from the University of Cantabria. 
He is expert in plastic materials, ISO 9000 and ISO 14000, Equipment calibration and FTIR spectrophotometer. 
He began his professional career as an assistant in the Quality Department of the company ASPLA PLÁSTICOS 
ESPAÑOLES. In 1991, he joined SOLPLAST S.A. as head of the area of Quality, R+D and Environment. 
 Mr François Cárceles Piñero  (male).  Graduated as Agricultural engineering technician, he developed his 
professional career in the Export Department of the company BARBERET & BLANC, as Assistant to the Export 
Director. He is expert in transformation of plastic material, applications of manufactured products and Health 
and Safety activities. Since 2003, he works in SOLPLAST S. A. as Head of Logistics. 
 Mr Oscar Gónzalez Salas  (male). He is a Chemical Engineer and holds the position of Quality Control 
Technician and Environmental coordinator at SOLPLAST S. A. He has specific training and experience in the 
field of plastic materials.   
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
SOLPLAST route map for innovation involves field work to establish the real needs of farmers, the crop development 
and agricultural practices. They cover all market needs from beginning to end with the broadest, most specialised 
universe of agricultural plastics. 
Section 4,5,6-page 80 
 
▪ Greenhouse covering: 
 INDASOL: Films manufactured by multilayer coextrusion, using combinations of homopolymers (LDPE 
and LLDPE), copolymers (EVA and EBA) and metallocen e resins . Excellent mechanical properties: 
combining the flexibility of the EBA/EVA copolymers in the central layers with the rigidity and mechanical 
strength of the LLDPE materials and the metallocenes in the outer layers. The INDASOL films are thermal 
(they reduce cooling inside the greenhouse at night) and are available in different thicknesses and presentations, 
depending on the end application. Highly efficient heat-insulation, making the INDASOL films an ideal solution 
for geographical areas with sharp nighttime temperature drops. 
➢ INDASOL White 
➢ INDASOL Yellow  
➢ INDASOL White Plus 
➢  INDASOL Yellow Plus  
➢ INDASOL Q4tro 
➢  INDASOL Cristal 
➢  INDASOL TRITERMIC  
➢ INDASOL SOLAIR 
 
 DURASOL: Films manufactured by multilayer coextrusion, using homopolymers (LDPE and LLDPE), 
copolymers (EVA and EBA) and metallocene resins, combined to maximise their properties . These 
materials are non-thermal and are available in different thicknesses and presentations, depending on the end 
application. Good mechanical properties, prov iding excellent performance against damage due to weather 
conditions and handling in application. The DURAPLAST versions (White and Yellow) are specially designed 
to resist chemical degradation caused by treatments used inside greenhouses, withstanding an S content of up to 
3,000 ppm and a Cl content of up to 200 ppm. The DURASOL Antithermal and Shadow products are specifically 
designed for high-radiation areas, when the crop requires a high temperature peaks inside the greenhouse to 
be lowered. 
➢ DURASOL White  
➢ DURASOL Yellow  
➢ DURASOL Shadow  
➢ DURASOL Antithermal  
➢ DURAPLAST White  
➢ DURAPLAST Yellow 
 
 DURATERMIC: Films manufactured by multilayer coextrusion, using combinations of homopolymers 
(LDPE and LLDPE), metallocene resins and EVA/EBA copolymers . High light diffusion. This prevents 
shadows forming in the greenhouse, thus producing greater uniformity of radiation and preventing irregular crop 
growth. Excellent thermal effect, which reduces temperature drops inside the greenhouse when there is no 
external energy supply, thus reducing the risk of frost. Due to its heat-insulating efficiency, DURATERMIC 
film is specially indicated for geographical areas that produce sharp drops in temperature at night, although 
it is also suitable for milder climates.  There are different varieties within the DURATERMIC range specially 
designed for installing in macro-tunnels for growing strawberries and raspberries. 
➢ DURATERMIC White 
➢ DURATERMIC Yellow  
➢ DURATERMIC Strawberry 
➢ DURATERMIC Raspberry  
➢ DURATERMIC Antivirus 
➢ DURATERMIC Antithermal  
➢ DURATERMIC Grape 
▪ Mulch: 
 The SOLPLAST mulch products are manufactured in multilayer structures, with a combination of LDPE, 
LLDPE and metallocene resins. They are manufactured in different thicknesses and presentations, dep ending 
on the end application, but always maintaining high mechanical and agronomic qualities. Relevant for the 
present project is that SOLPLAST already commercializes a biodegradable PLA mulch film. 
➢ ACOSOL Nt NATURAL MULCH 
➢ ACOSOL Ng BLACK MULCH  
➢ ACOSOL NG WHITE/BLACK MULCH  
➢ ACOSOL Pt-Ng SILVER/BLACK MULCH  
➢ ACOSOL Fs PHOTOSELECTIVE MULCH  
➢ ACOSOL OD-Nt NATURAL OXO-BIODEGRADABLE MULCH 
Section 4,5,6-page 81 
 
➢ ACOSOL OD-Ng BLACK OXO-BIODEGRADABLE MULCH 
➢  ACOSOL Bd BLACK BIODEGRADABLE MULCH 
 
▪ Disinfection:  
 SOLPLAST soil disinfection films are manufactured in multilayer structures, with a combination of LDPE, 
LLDPE and metallocene and/or barrier resins, as well as the necessary additives. They are manufactured 
in thicknesses ranging from 20 to 50 micras, maintaining high mechanical and  agronomic qualities. Special 
high gas-barrier resins are used to reduce gas loss through the plastic (DESINFESOL Special DS) or practically 
impede such loss (DESINFESOL Barrier). Relevant for the present project is that SOLPLAS T already 
commercializes a multilayer disinfection film with until 7 layers-extrusion multilayer technology. 
▪ Double screen: 
 Double screen films are produced using resins which considerably improve light transmission into the 
greenhouse, minimising losses in the area of cultivation.  In addition, they have a thermal effect that 
strengthens that of the greenhouse roof. The SOLPLAST double screen films are manufactured at thicknesses 
starting from 37.5 micras (150 gauges). They are produced using EVA/EBA copolymers and/ or metallocenes, 
in multilayer structures, which considerably improve light transmission into the greenhouse, minimising losses 
in the area of cultivation. 
 
▪ Small tunnel: 
 Small tunnels are light, simple structures for protecting crops from the weather and external agents. Their 
small size produces very low thermal inertia, heating rapidly during the day and releasing heat rapidly at 
night. For crops or geographical areas that do not require thermal properties, SOLPLAST offers th e products 
TUNESOL Natural and TUNESOL Natural UV . These films have excellent mechanical properties, providing 
the crops with physical protection from external harm. The ultraviolet stabilization provided by TUNESOL UV 
gives it a longer life if required by the application. When a more technical product is required for this application, 
SOLPLAST offers its TUNESOL Thermal Diffuse and TUNESOL Thermal Cristal films. The composition of 
these materials includes resins with thermal properties, as well as a packag e of IR additives that improve heat 
retention, avoiding sharp drops in temperature, especially during periods of frosts. 
➢ TUNESOL Natural  
➢ TUNESOL Natural UV  
➢ TUNESOL Thermal Diffuse  
➢ TUNESOL Thermal Cristal 
 
▪ Silage 
 Silage is a conservation technique for moist grass and grain using plastic covers . It involves spontaneous 
lactic fermentation in anaerobic conditions (lack of O2). This fermentation produces acidification (pH 
reduction to around 4.2), inhibiting the activity of micro -organisms, which can degrade the product, and 
fungal activity. This process enables feed to be stored after harvesting, maintaining its nutritional quality and 
strength, thus increasing the animal count per hectare and replacing or complementing feed concentrates. 
SOLPLAST silage films are manufactured in multilayer structures, with a combination of LDPE, LLDPE and 
metallocene resins. 
➢ SILASOL Ne  
➢ SILASOL Ne+  
➢ SILASOL BN  
➢ SILASOL BN+  
➢ SILASOL Ve-Ne SILASOL  
➢ Ve-Ne+ SILASOL B 
➢  SILASOL Gr-Ne  
➢ SILASOL Gr-Ne+ 
▪ Reservoirs 
 These products for waterproofing are manufactured in thicknesses from 250 µ to 1 mm , for the 
GEOEMBALSE Standard and 500 µ for the GEOEMBALSE Welded. The GEOEMBALSE Standard is 
manufactured with a combination for LDPE and LLDPE resins, which giv e the end product high mechanical 
strength, especially against penetration and impact, making the product particularly suitable for this application. 
The GEOEMBALSE Weldable is manufactured with a three -layer structure, using LDPE, LLDPE and other 
specific material to optimize product performance in the application. 
▪ Special products 
 This group includes films manufactured for construction, protection for boats or large machinery, product 
storage and packaging, pallet fumigation, protection from external agents and more. In all cases, these films 
are characterized by their easy installation and handling and their flexibility for use in different applications. 
Section 4,5,6-page 82 
 
SOLPLAST adapts these types of products to each specific application, modifying their properties to ob tain the 
desired results in each case. 
➢ B/W FILM FOR HYDROPONIC CULTIVATION: Two-tone (black/white) sheet manufactured using LDPE, 
LLDPE and metallocenes, in thicknesses starting at 100 µ (400 gauges). It is used as a medium for hydroponic 
cultivation substrates (without soil) 
➢  STRETCHABLE CUCUMBER FILM: This product is designed specifically for packaging cucumber. Its 
mechanical and optical properties (high gloss and transparency) and its capacity to stretch make it particularly 
suitable for this application.  
➢ PROTECTION FILM: This group includes films manufactured for construction, protection for boats or large 
machinery, product storage and packaging, pallet fumigation, protection from external agents and more. 
➢  BULK CONTAINER LINER: Liners are used throughout the world to sent raw materials that require moisture 
control, odour protection and good protection against contamination. They are also used as a physical 
protection barrier to avoid contamination of the container carrying the product, thus permitting very different 
types of product to be loaded, using the same container for successive journeys. Container and flex tank liners 
are frequently used as an economical solution for the bulk transport of chemical products, grains, cereals, 
liquids, granulated products and more. The materials are designed in multilayer structures, using combinations 
of metallocene resins and EVA/EBA copolymers, which strengthen the mechanical properties of the product. 
This prevents problems of tearing due to the pressure exert ed by the load inside the liner, as well as possible 
damage caused by movement of the load during the journey. 
 
Presentation of the products: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS  
 
▪ Greenhouse solution to avoid film cover U.V. & sulphur degradation (Acronym: GREENAVOID). FP7-SME-
2012. 
▪ Concurrent product -process development of a new mono -layer packaging system for the transport of bulk 
oxygen-sensitive liquids. Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities. 
▪ Biodegradable padded film with improved properties and longer life (IDI -20120321). Spanish Ministry of 
Science, Innovation and Universities. 
▪ Plastic greenhouse cover with high resistance to solar r adiation and chemical degradation (IDI -20120655). 
Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities. 
▪ Development of active greenhouse cover (IDI-20151036). On-going project. 
▪ Development of cold films for greenhouse coverings in hot climates (IDI-20160731). On-going project. 
 
RELEVANT PATENTS  
▪ ES2161133-Production of a film protecting asparagus plants consists of incorporation of dyes and 
unsaturated fatty acid in polyolefin. Applicant: SOLPLAST S.A. 
▪ ES2161134-Production of a protective sheet for red rose petals consists of incorporation of benzothiazole in 
e-g. polyolefins to exclude virus attack and discoloration. Applicant: SOLPLAST S.A. 
▪ ES2255418- Manufacturing method for reinforced plastic film, involves sprinkling air -pressurized cold 
water to film during extrusion. Applicant: SOLPLAST S.A. 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 83 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
SOLPLAST facilities are located in Lorca (Murcia, Spain) with an area of 40,000 m 2. SOLPLAST has the most 
advanced technology in the manufacture of agricultural plastics, coextrusion in three , five and seven layers that 
satisfies the highest quality and service demands of any farmer in the world. Furthermore, SOLPLAST has sales 
offices in Almería, Motril, France, Portugal, Morocco, Turkey and Mexico, through which they can quickly supply 
the needs of the main agricultural areas on plastic. 
►R+D FACILITIES.  The R&D area of SOLPLAST, in addition to covering everything related to the stud y and 
development of its own products, new systems and materials, plays a technical advisory role to the farmer. For this, 
it has a laboratory specialized in specific analyses for plastics intended for agricultural applications. 
Its equipment consists of: 
❖ Equipment for the analysis of the mechanical properties  
❖ Equipment for the analysis of optical properties. 
❖ Equipment intended for the determination and control of the type and quantity of additives used to manufacture 
the film. 
❖ RX Analyzer, to analyse heavy metals, Sulphur and Cl in the films. 
❖ Equipment for the determination of specific thicknesses of samples. 
❖  Equipment for the analysis of basic properties of polymers (density, melt flow index, degradation, etc ). 
❖  Equipment for the determination of melting points of materials, as well as oxidation induction times. 
❖  UV weather simulated plastic accelerated aging equipment 
 
All these material resources are complemented by a very skilled team trained and prepared for technical assistance 
to the farmer as well as the development of new products and applications. 
 
4.1.3 8 EVER -EVERSIA, SA  
 
PARTNER Nº: 38 (Large industry) 
WEBSITE: www.eversia.es  
SHORTNAME: EVER  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
EVERSIA is a company specialized in Integral solutions in packaging and big manufacture of bags, waste bags and 
paper bags. Eversia was founded in 1979 by Romero´s Family. Last year Eversia closed 2019 year with a turnover 
of 82 M€ (20 M€ in export sales). In 2019  Eversia produced 40.000 ton of plastics and 5.000 of paper. We are 
working in the company about 350 people at the moment.  
Our facilities in Molina de Segura, Murcia, in the Southeast of Spain, cover more than 30,000 m2, produce more than 
40,000 tons of plastic, 3,000 tons of paper and 2,000 tons of film for automatic packaging, which are shipped by our 
customers to millions of homes in 15 different countries.  
We have three main processes: 
 
• Plastics Extrusion 
• Plastics and Paper Printing  
• Paper and plastic Bags Converting.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
EVER will be involved in WP1 collaborating in the definition of the A2C packaging plastics requirements (T1.1). 
In WP5 they will be involved in the plastics compounds transformation into packaging at small scale (T5.4). In WP6 
they will be end users by producing packaging at relevant and industrial relevant environment to demonstrate our 
solution at TRL6-7. 
 
Related experience:  Eversia has one of the most advanced Research and Development (R&D) departments in the 
country, since 2010. Our lines of investigation are aimed at developing compostable and biodegradable materials and 
also highly recyclable products, given our commitment to circular economy.  Our research and innovation work are 
directed to design new innovating films, such as different standard materials coextrusion or bioplastics coextrusion; 

Section 4,5,6-page 84 
 
and implementing new methods and techniques that will help us gradually reduce the environmental impact of our 
activity. Eco -efficiency and sustainability are our two main lines of development. Our constant investment in 
technology and our new R&D and innovation projects place us at the forefront of the flexible packaging market. 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Eco-efficiency and sustainability are our two main lines of development  that highly fit with A2C . Our A2C 
participation will place us at the forefront of the flexible packaging market. New business lines in recyclable barrier 
packaging as alternative to current multilayers. Enlarging our European networking. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Mr Salvador Martínez (male).  He is a M Sc. Chemical Engineer graduated from the University of Murcia 
(Spain). Nowadays he is the Director of Research and Development of Eversia. He start ed working in the 
European Project LIFE (Agrowaste) and has been working in several food industries. During his period in Eversia, 
he has developed many projects like: RECUBIO, REBORNSTAR, FOODINFIVE, SCAVENPACK, 
COAT4PACK, REBIO, and GENERACERO. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
• VII International Seminar Biopolymers And Sustainable Composites. Speaker. Salvador Martínez. March 2020 
• Chemplast Expo. Speaker: Salvador Martínez. May 2020 
• MADE FROM PLASTIC, Chelo Romero. Ponencia “Normas como elemento de competitividad y llave de 
acceso a nuevos mercados y al comercio internacional”. Lugar ANAIP (Madrid), 1 de maezo de 2019. 
Organzia ANAIP y AENOR.  
• JORNADA ECONOMÍA CIRCULAR Pedro Melgarejo. Lugar Ayto de Molina de Segura (Murcia), 7 marzo 
20019.  
• MEETING PACK. Salvador Martinez, ponencia "Casos de éxito y nuevos desarrollos en envases flexibles 
sostenibles". Lugar AIMPLAS (Valencia), 28 mayo 2019. 
• Eversia manufactures 40,000 tons of polymer annually in the following product types. A 3% of this production 
is bioplastic. 
• Commercial bags (39 %) 3% bio 
• Rubbish (garbage) bags (32 %) 3% bio 
• Polymer film (food packaging) (11 %) <1% bio 
• Industrial segmented bags (9 %)<1% bio 
• Polymer coated paper for food packaging (3 %) <1% 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 RECUBIO (National project CDTI; ITC-20151223; 2015-2016)  
Development of flexible bio-degradable multi-layer structures for use as barrier for packaging  
 SCAVENPACK (National project CDTI; ITC-20151262; 2015-2017)  
Active packaging technologies for the lengthening of the shelf life of firs-range horticultural products 
 COAT4PACK (National project; RTC-2016-5352-2;2016-2018) 
Development of barrier coatings for flexible packaging for food 
 REBIO (National project; RTC-2016-5539-5; 2016-2018) 
Development of products from bio-degradable production waste for a circular economy 
 GENERACERO (National project; IDI-20170146; 2017-2022) 
Development of novelty flexible packaging formulation and technologies highly committed to the environment 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT  
Extrusion: we have 23 blown extruders. We have coextrusion up to five layers. Mainly we process polyethylene, 
although we can extrude other polymers such as polyamide, polypropylene and biomaterials (PLA, PHA, stretch, 
PBAT and others). 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 85 
 
                     
 
Printing: EVERSIA has flexographic printing upt to 10 colors. We have 8 printer. Two central tambor with solvent 
based ink and 5 stack technology with water based ink.  
               
Lamination and converting: In addition, we have a laminating machine with solventless glue for the lamintation of 
complex made up of different polymers such as PET, BOPP, PPCAST, ALUMINIUM, etc. And also bio materials 
as PLA, Cellulose materials. This complex can be cutted to any width in our two rewinders. laminate our polymers 
with other polymers or papers through a lamination without solvents.  
     
 
Laboratory equipment: In our quality department we have physical and chemical tests. For the physic-mechanical 
characterization of the film we have got a Elmendrof equipment for valuate the tear resistance, a taction equipment 
for the strenth and the elongation of the film in both directions of the film (MD and TD) a measuring device for the 
thickness, MFI equipment for the determination of the Melt Flow Index of the polymer and a dard impact test. Also, 
we have got methods for the chemical characterization of the Polymer as the DSC and TGA technologies for the 
qualitative characterization of the materials and the quantity of inorganic compounds presents in a sample.                      
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 86 
 
4.1.38 LOL -LOLO BIO COSMETICS . TRIBU BIO & WILD S.L.  
 
PARTNER Nº: 38 (SME) 
WEBSITE: www.lolobio.com 
SHORTNAME: LOL 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
Lolo Biocosmetics is a company specialised in the manufacturing and commercialisation of biocosmetic and vegan 
products. LOL supports fair trade and ethically sourcing its ingredients without child labour or dangerous overseas 
factory conditions. Their products protect, nourish and nurture the skin being natural and organic, certified toxic free 
cosmetics and palm oil free. Our products  contain no animal derivatives.  
Our main business lines are focused in the vegan, vegetarian, organic, natural, palm-oil free, fair trade, paraben-free, 
mineral based. 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
 
LOL will be involved in WP1 collaborating in the definition of the new A2C cosmetics requirements (T1.1). In WP4, 
they will be involved in the formulation of new cosmetics formulations at small scale using the extracts (T4.1). In 
WP6, they will be end users validating the bioactive extracts in a real environment by development of new cosmetics 
formulations (T6.2). Moreover, they will be involved in WP8 in communication & dissemination activities (T8.2, 
8.4, 8.5, 8.6,8.7). 
Related experience: LOL has a wide expertise in the development of cosmetic formulations based of 100% natural 
products, especially bioactive co mpounds such as phenolic substances. Their R&D strategy is focused on the 
development of sustainable, ecological, and organic high added value products.  
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
The A2C project is fully aligned with the R&D priority lines of LOL. In fact, the activities included in the project 
will allow us to continue improving our capabilities with the aim to offer the best support and include the waste reuse 
as a desired objective in o ur new formulations. New circular business. New products based on natural bioactives 
from agrifood wastes. Increasing their competitiveness. 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 María Cánovas Conesa (female). R&D Manager at LOL. Industrial Engineer by the Polytechnic University of 
Valencia and PFD (Derivative Financial Products) by the École Nationale Supèriore d’Arts et Mètiers 
(ENSAM). 
 MBA from the ENAE business school. With 18 years of experience in the development of new products and 
quality control. 
 Juan Antonio Mompéan Pérez (male). Project Manager at LOL. He holds a Business Sciences degree by the 
University of Murcia , MBA by the Fundesem Business School.  He has +25 years of experience in business 
projects in different sectors and has been national vice president of the Association of Young Entrepreneurs of 
Spain (CEAJE), as well as a member of the boards of directors of Yes for Europe, Aje Región de Murcia and the 
CROEM.  
 Thomas Alburquerque (male). Digital Communication & Marketing Manager  at LOL. He holds a Degree in 
Illustration at the Murcia School of Art. Thomas has +10 years of experience in marketing and communication in 
food and cosmetic sectors. 
 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
LOL products:  
 
 Zero Waste Solid Range: Cosmetics biodegradable without plastics for personal hygiene. 
 Reusable Range: Creams and mask biomarins packed in PET cans reusable. 
 Outdoor Range: Vegan solar, moisturizing and lipstick in 100% recyclable aluminum can. 
 Homewelness Range: Body oils moisturizers and other wellness products. 

Section 4,5,6-page 87 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT   
LOL has a full-equipped infrastructure with a manufacturing area divided into different sections: 
- General factory: for reception of raw material, storage area, nonconformity storage room, refrigeration and freezing 
chambers.  
- Production area: powder preparation area, coating rooms, biocide room, natural formulations production. 
 -R&D Department: laboratory of chemistry of natural products, laboratory for physical-chemical tests. 
4.1. 40 TCA -TECNOALIMENTI S.C.P.A  
 
PARTNER Nº: 40 (NPO) 
WEBSITE: www.tecnoalimenti.com 
SHORTNAME: TCA 
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
Established in 1981 by the Italian Research Ministry for promoting, co -ordinating and carrying out research for 
the agri-food industry, Tecnoalimenti is as a non -profit research consortium of 30 food sector industries  and 
one financial institution, Intesa San Paolo, as trustee of ministerial funds. Its member industries account for about 
12% of Italian food sales.  
In almost 40 years of activity, the organisation has acquired high-level skills in: (i) industrial research, carrying out 
food chain studies, technological feasibility assessments, eco -compatibility and cost -benefits analyses of new 
processes, (ii) research project set-up and management, (iii) dissemination activities to industries and SMEs at 
national and international level through its wide industrial network.  
 
Tecnoalimenti has a wide experience in networking industries (large and SMEs) for research activities, due to its 
institutional function of bridging industry and research players. Further, Tecnoalime nti participated/participates to 
food chain projects with a specific role of carrying out studies, training activities, steering and animating Industrial 
Platforms, thanks to its wide experience in approaching food SMEs.  
 
Tecnoalimenti is in the steering board of two clusters, the Italian Agrifood Clusters at national level (CLAN) and 
the Lombardy High Tech Cluster for Agrofood CATAL that set up in the last decade. TCA is also an active member 
of and other national Platforms, such as Security Research in I taly SERIT and M2Q (Public -private laboratory for 
R&D in the agro-industrial field). This facilitates the networking and the identification of new value chains.  
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT   
Tecnoalimenti will be involved in WP7, where they will lead the replication task (T7.6) aimed at demonstrate the 
A2C replication and scalability potential through preparing a specific replication plan based on the lessons learned, 
making it ready at projec t end the future implementation of the circular economy business models specifically 
identified for the Lombardy Region and based on A2C our solution while provides relevant territorial inputs to project 
other tasks (those within T7.5). Moreover, they will be involved in the Validation of the A2C multidimensional 
model through cross-fertilization (T7.7).  
TCA will actively participate in Task T7.1 analyse within their region successful community -based innovation 
schemes in order to further deliver within the A2C systemic model. 
They will also participate in T8.6 on knowledge transfer activities and in WP8 as a whole , providing a valuable 
contribution to A2C Outreach impact through their wide networks.  
 
Related experience: TCA has an extensive knowledge in the agrifood sector since they work closely with several 
agrifood companies  of different sectors as fruits & vegetables, meat,  cured-meat, dairy, bakery, farinaceous, 
beverages and they integrate horizontally and vertically the main industrial players of the agrifood chain. TCA, 

Section 4,5,6-page 88 
 
can also bring all its Network and connections in the agrifood sector such as Italian agrifood clusters at national level 
(CLAN) and the Lombardy High Tech Cluster for Agrofood (CAT.AL) 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Participation in A2C project will allow TCA increasing knowledge in innovative circular business models and 
introducing them to their clients. Moreover, they will promote the replication to show the innovation in the sector 
and will create new lines for training in the agrifood sector. 
 
KEY PERSONNEL 
 
 Ms Marianna Faraldi (female): Project manager in Tecnoalimenti since 2001 . University degree in 
Pharmaceutical Technologies at the Faculty of Pharmacy of the University of Milan in 2000. Setting-up and co-
ordination of research projects at national and European level. Project Coordinat or of BBi-JU BioBarr project. 
Expert in validation activities close to industry. Expert in market analysis and IPR management. She will be the 
exploitation manager coordinating project exploitation activities, including IPR management. 
 Mr. Raffaello Prugger (male): He holds a University degree at the Faculty of Agriculture of the University of 
Padova, studied at the University of California, Davis, CA, holds a Masters SMEA in agricultural economics and 
a post-graduate degree in Management of Technology. Dir ector General of Tecnoalimenti S.C.p.A, he worked 
for 30 years in agrifood research and innovation co -ordinating, as agronomist, a number of European research 
projects with significant dissemination and communication activities. As non -profit consortium of 31 agrifood 
industries, Tecnoalimenti, provides institutional D&C to significant communication networks such as the food 
industry associations in Confindustria and Assolombarda, the food clusters CL.AN and CAT.AL, the European 
House Ambrosetti Innovation network, and the Ministry of Research.  
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 
 Palermo M., Prugger R. “The role of food and drink industry for a competitive packaging research & innovation” 
- 1st International Advances in the Packaging Industry Product and Process 
 Pedersen B., Gerevini M. et al, - “Protecting our food: Can standard food safety analysis detect adulteration of 
food products with selected chemical agents?” – Trends in Analytical Chemistry – May 2016.  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165993615302259; 
 Hoorfar J., Prugger R. et al “Food Chain Integrity. A holistic approach to food traceability, safety, quality and 
authenticity” Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, 2011. 
 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 
 upPE-T - Upcycling of PE and PET wastes to generate biodegradable bioplastics for food and drink packaging 
H2020 (2020-2024). 
 BioBarr - New bio-based food packaging materials with enhanced barrier properties,2017-202 (H2020 BBI JU- 
2016) - Project Coordinator and RTD performer: TCA.  
 MED food- Trace & Trust Hubs for MED food (PRIMA IA Section 1 Call 2019 - Agro-food Value Chain). 
 Encircle- European CBRN Innovation for the Market Cluster (H2020-SEC05–2016 CBRN Cluster). 
 Vivopack - New integrated biodegradable and compostable conditioning system for the valorisation of made in 
Italy agro-food products (National Project, Industria 2015 – New Technologies for “Made in Italy” Call). 
 EDEN- End user driven Demo for cbrNe- FP7-SEC-2012.1.5.1 
 Safe&Smart - New enabling technologies for food safety and for the integrity of the agri -food supply chains in 
a global scenario (National Project 2015 Sicurezza del Cluster Nazionale CL.AN) 
 
-Moreover TCA has been Ambassador for the Agrifood sector in  OPEN DEI (DT-ICT-13-2019) focused on 
Digitising and transforming EU industry and services. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
 
Data banks, wide network of industrial contacts, possibility to work through the laboratories of the own members. 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 89 
 
4.1.41 LPK -LIETUVOS PRAMONININKU KONFEDRACIJA  
 
PARTNER Nº: 41 (NGO) 
WEBSITE: www.lpk.lt  
SHORTNAME: LPK  
LOCATION: Spain 
ROLE IN THE PROJECT: PARTNER. 
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY  
 
The Lithuanian Confederation of Industrialists (LPK) is a major business association in Lithuania which represents 
the interests of industrialists and employers. LPK is an independent, non -political organization that represents public 
interests of all busi ness groups in Lithuania. LPK unites  50 trade and seven regional business associations with  over 
3000 major business and manufacturing enterprises of the country, as well as 26 largest non-associated enterprises 
and corporations.  LPK members include most L ithuanian production enterprises, banks, trading companies, 
representative offices of foreign firms, research institutes, and educational establishments. 
 
The Confederation in an umbrella organization uniting 51 branch and 5 regional associations  which comprise 
over 3000 medium and large enterprises from various public and private sectors.  
Main objectives of the LPK are:  
 To create the most favourable conditions for economic, technical and social progress of Lithuanian 
enterprises regardless their ownership form,  
 To represent rights of the members of LPK and to defend their interests in the governmental, social and 
international structures, to expand markets for products and raw materials, to improve conditions of exports 
as well as for imports in order to  enable Lithuanian industry to contribute a proper contribution to the 
strengthening of the national economy,  
 To represent entrepreneurs and defend their social and legal interests,  
 To make contacts among Lithuanian manufacturers and their counterparts a broad through international 
exhibitions and available information systems.  
The member of LPK acting in Agrifood sector is  Lithuanian Food Exporters Association (LitMEA) which 
unites food industry companies and coordinates SMART FOOD cluster and Digital I nnovation Hub 
‘AgriFood Lithuania’ which brings together major research, business and public stakeholders in Lithuania for the 
common mission of transforming agriculture, food and associated sectors with digital-based innovations.  
 
The DIH in Lithuania focused exclusively on agriculture and food, the DIH is extensively working with and 
promoting the application of breakthrough technologies in agri -food, with experience in key technological areas of 
Artificial Intelligence, remote sensing, Internet of Things, Robotics, distributed IT systems, and other digital -based 
technologies. The DIH links its stakeholders with international and cross-sector initiatives, provides all-round support 
in the research, development and deployment of agri-food innovations, and has been acknowledged by the EC Joint 
Research Centre as an example DIH with excellence in sectorial specialization.   
AgriFood Lithuania participates in international R&D&I projects (such as SmartAgriFood, Robotics4EU, CoRoSect, 
FLEXIGROBOTS) and together with a consortium of partners under the EDIH4IAE.LT initiative has been selected 
as Lithuania’s first proposed choice for becoming a European Digital Innovation Hub . The DIH organizes annual 
international events, such as the ‘AgriFood Forum’ (www.digitalfarm.lt) for business and policy leaders, and ‘HACK 
AgriFood’ (www.hackagrifood.lt) – the first annual agri-food technology hackathon in Lithuania. 
 
MAIN TASKS IN THE PROJECT 
LPK will be involved in WP7, mainly in replication task (T7.6) where they will prepare a specific replication plan 
based on the lessons learned, making it ready at project end the future implementation of the circular economy 
business models specifically identified for the NUTS -2 Baltic region (Lithuania and Latvia) and based on A2C our 
solution while provides relevant territorial inputs to project other tasks (those within T7.5). Moreover they will be 
involved in the Validation of the A2C multidimensional model through cross-fertilization (T7.7).  
LPK will actively participate i n Task T7.1 analyse within their region successful community -based innovation 
schemes in order to further deliver within the A2C systemic model. 
They will also participate in T8.6 on knowledge transfer activities and in WP8 as a whole , providing a valuable 
contribution to A2C Outreach impact through their wide networks.  
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 90 
 
INTEREST IN THE PROJECT 
 
Participation in A2C project will allow LPK increasing knowledge in innovative circula r business models and 
introducing them to their associated. Moreover, they will promote the replication to show the innovation in the sector 
and will create new lines for training in the agrifood sector. This project will offer a valuable opportunity of 
international cooperation among agrifood clusters, enabling creating synergies and increasing regional 
competitiveness. 
  
KEY PERSONNEL 
 Ms Kristina Šermukšnytė-Alešiūnienė (female) holds a master’s degree in European Studies from Vilnius 
University. Kristina has been an organizer and facilitator of national and international ICT-based agriculture and 
food technology development, innovation and support projects for over 13 year. She is also a certified senior 
product development manager with a successful professional history in the information technology and services 
industry, and is skilled in Software Development Management, Agile Methodologies, and End-user Acceptance 
Assessment. 
 Mr Gintaras Vilda  (male) is International innovation expert of Lithuanian Confederation of Industrialists 
(LPK). His main responsibility is coordination of LPK international Science, Technology and Innovation 
initiatives in KICs, CPPPs, CERN, ERA, ESA, etc.  Assessing the R&D&I potential of companies and 
developing recommendations for their involvement in international value chains. Mr. G. Vilda  represents the 
members of LPK  in Lithuania and abroad in the field of promotion of R&D&I activities. Former coord inator 
of Lithuanian plastic cluster responsible for Management of Cluster, Project management, Representation of the 
Members in Lithuania and Abroad in areas of Export, R&D&I in SME’s, Promotion and improvement of the 
quality of education and professional orientation. 
RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS, PRODUCTS, SERVICES, OR OTHER ACHIEVEMENTS 
 Innovation support services . AgriFood Lithuanian DIH is a one -stop-shop for agriculture and food industry 
innovations, and provides its members and stakeholders with all -rounded services supporting innovation 
development, demonstration and commercialization. This includes: (1) Collaboration, stakeholder ecosystem 
building and synergy creation; (2) Facilitating international technology, competence and know-how transfer; (3) 
Innovation co-creation, R&D project development support and funding accessibility; (4) Solution prototyping, 
use case validation, end -user testing and market need assessment; (5) Innovation business development, 
commercialization and investment readiness services; (6) Mentoring, training and experience sharing. 
 International innovation events . AgriFood Lithuania DIH has expertise in organising international events 
focused on agriculture and food technologies, innovations and novel business practices, as well as events aimed 
at innovation consulting for local farmers. The DIH is co-organizing annual events, such as the ‘AgriFood Forum’ 
(www.digitalfarm.lt, international conference for agri -food sector experts, policy makers and business leaders) 
and ‘HACK AgriFood’ ( www.hackagrifood.lt, the first annual hackathon in Lithuania focused exclusively on 
agriculture and food technologies). 
 Outreach to stakeholders and competence networks. AgriFood Lithuania DIH is a member of and participant 
within cross-European competence networks (SmartAgriHubs, EIT Food) and national (Smart Food Cluster, 
Lithuanian Farmers Union Lithuanian Farmers’ Union, Chamber of Agriculture, National Paying Agency) 
business and public stakeholders. 
RELEVANT PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES 
 ERASMUS+ (2018-2020): CIM “Promoting Creativity and Innovation Management in an innovative blended 
learning and validation programme at the interface between higher education (HE) and business” (CIM) 
 “Partners 4 Value”  initiative is the Consortium established between the Lithuanian Confederation of 
Industrialists (LPK) and the leading Lithuanian universities The Initiative  is established at national level in 
Lithuania aiming to expand “real life” training opportunities for students and university personnel through 
Business-International Organisations-University partnerships. 
 GLL Business Advisors  program is connecting international Lithuanian experts passionate about helping 
Lithuanian businesses to get ahead. The program brings together Lithuania’s most successful and experienced 
international professionals to advice to Lithuania’s growing companies, emerging innovators and entrepreneurs.  
 SmartAgriHubs: Connecting the dots to unleash the innovation potential for digital transformation of 
the European agri-food sector (2018-2022) – project under the H2020 framework (H2020-EU.3.2.1.3., grant 
no. 818182) with a consortium of 105 initial international partners, coordinated by Wageningen University & 
Research (Netherlands). SmartAgriHubs is dedicated to accelerate the digital transformation of the European 
agri-food sector. It will consolidate, activate and extend the current ecosystem by building a network of Digital 
Innovation Hubs (DIHs) that will boost the uptake of digital solutions by the farming sector. This will be 
Section 4,5,6-page 91 
 
achieved by integrating technology and business support in a local one-stop-shop approach involving all 
regions and all relevant players in Europe. The project is formed by 28 flagship innovation experiments 
demonstrating digital innovations in agriculture, facilitated by DIHs from 9 Regional Clusters including all 
European member states. SmartAgriHubs will improve the maturity of innovation services of DIHs so that 
digital innovations will be replicated across Europe and widely adopted by European farmers. 
(https://smartagrihubs.eu) 
 FLEXIGROBOTS: Flexible robots for intelligent automation of precision agriculture operations (2021-
2024) – project under the H2020 framework (H2020-EU.2.1.1., grant no. 101017111) with a consortium of 16 
international partners, coordinated by Atos (Spain). FlexiGroBots proposes a Platform for developing 
heterogeneous multi-robot systems and applications which allows for i) more versatility by using the same 
robots for different observation and intervention tasks, in different missions, throughout the crop life cycle, ii) 
more cooperation between heterogeneous (ground and aerial) robots to accomplish more complex missions; iii) 
more valuable data to generate accurate insights into the fields, crops and robotics operations by combining 
data from IoT sensors, satellites and data collected by the robots; iv) more autonomy for real-time adaptation of 
mission plans as well as robot behaviour at the crop level, given operational conditions and real-time insights; 
v) more precision to carry out specific tasks in a very localized way, gaining accuracy and lowering costs. 
 Development of the Future Technologies Digital Innovation Hub (2021-2024) – joint major national 
investment project (€10,7M budget with €6M in public funding) by Visoriai Information Technology Park and 
AgriFood Lithuania DIH for the development of digital innovation hub infrastructure and its innovation 
support services. The project will provide funding to support start-ups, SMEs and innovation end-users with 
test-before-invest demonstration, novel solution validation, adaptation, market innovation and similar support 
services based on the de minimis model within the upcoming 3-year period. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND/OR ANY MAJOR ITEMS OF TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT 
Offices, data banks, wide network of industrial and association contacts
4.2 THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT 
 
 
PARTNER 1 CETEC 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not be 
sub-contracted)? If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted. 
 
YES 
CETEC will subcontract the analysis of potential contaminants in plastics, including NIAs analysis  to Technical 
University of Cartagena-UPCT ( https://www.upct.es/ ) in order to implement the A2C methodology for plastics food 
contact assessment & compliance to agriculture standards (T1.1). 
Total Budget: 10,000€   
 
 
 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties?  If yes, please 
describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen 
tasks to be performed by the third party. 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 
12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)?  If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions:  
 
              
NO 
  
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement?  If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their 
contributions. 
   NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARTNER 7 CETBIO 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not be 
sub-contracted)? If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted. 
 
YES 
CETBIO will subcontract the characterisation of the PHBV developed to establish PHBV properties for 
compounding and the design of the PHBV production reactor for scale up (T5.1.2) to the University of Murcia-UMU 
( https://www.um.es/web/acti/  )  
Total Budget: 3,500€   
  
Section 4,5,6-page 92
4.3 STAKEHOLDERS PANEL 
 
A Stakeholders Panel will be established during A2C implementation representing the main audience and sectors 
of the A2C (agrifood sectors, plastic recycling, packaging, agriculture, biotechnology, bioeconomy & circular 
economy, environment, policy makers, SSH & gender).  
The Stakeholders Panel will support the Consortium during the project developments with recommendations and will 
be involved in the communication actions. The board will be formed by experts from these disciplines as is it shown 
in the following table.  
Currently, we have the letter of adhesion to our Stakeholders Panel of the Unione Nazionale Consumatori Umbria 
(see letter of adhesion attached in Section 6). Unione Nazionale Consumatori Umbria is a branch of Unione Nazionale 
Consumatori (UNC) and it is the first consumer association in Italy . Its foundation dates back to 1955. UNC is 
independent from political parties and trade unions and is a social promotion association. Its exclusive purpose and 
main objective is the protection and representation of consumers , pursued through the proposal of new 
regulations, assistance, information, education and orientation activities aimed at citizens through its branches. 
At the same time, UNC is an important channel of communication thanks to its National Consumer Council 
membership at the Ministry of the Economy, sponsored by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour. It is a social 
promotion association approved by the M inistry of Labour and Social Policies  and it is registered in the list of the 
Umbria Region ex l.r.17/2014, Transparency Register EU No 734603432102-03. 
Furthermore, European Commission recognize UNC as a consumer association in Italy. UNC is a member of 
Consumers' International, of Consumers' Forum and of the Centre for Juridical Studies on Consumer Rights. 
Its activities also have the recent patronage of the Senate of the Italian Republic. 
UNC collaborate with public authorities such as the Region of Umbria, the Province of Perugia, the Chamber of 
Commerce, Industry, Crafts and Agriculture, educational institutions and various Umbrian municipalities and we 
have organized numerous training conferences and activities for the territory 
Main activities of  UNC include: 
▪ Protecting the health, economic and legal interests of consumers and users, as well as their right to adequate 
information and proper advertising 
▪ Promoting the development of a more informed and influential relationship with the manufacturers, distributors 
and services providers 
▪ Promoting critical, responsible and conscious consumer education and informing and educating consumers with 
every possible means and with appropriate information, advice and assistance services 
▪ Controlling and improving the safety and quality of products and services, including actions to encourage new 
traceability and quality systems 
▪ Participating in the sustainable development of the regional economy and society, in particular in the meanings of 
corporate social responsibility 
▪ Promoting the dissemination of consumption practices oriented towards respect for environmental and ethical 
values 
▪ Promoting events and initiatives such as conferences, meetings, seminars and courses, including school and 
university about information, education and orientation and using journalistic space, radio and television to raise 
consumer awareness on the importance and influence of their more rational and more supportive behaviour, being 
informed of the prices and the quality o f the products and services available on the market, in order to do not to 
be victims of abuse, speculation and fraud; 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties?  If yes, please 
describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen 
tasks to be performed by the third party. 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 
12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)?  If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions:  
 
              
NO 
  
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement?  If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their 
contributions. 
   NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 93 
 
▪ Promoting and implementing appropriate professional training courses, qualification and retraining, oriented 
according to the public interest requirements to the actual consumers protection; 
▪ Promoting, within the statutory purposes, respect for the territory, the natural resources and ecological and 
environmental education initiatives as well as the protection of health, promotion of healthy lifestyles and healthy 
eating; 
▪ Encouraging forms of social aggregation and social mediation, activating information, training and support 
courses for disadvantaged, weak citizens both european and non -european (e.g. Against bullying, stalking, 
racism); 
▪ Promoting initiatives to fight the cost of living and protect the weak and elderly in general, including by activating 
information, training and social/welfare projects (also with innovative forms of intervention, e.g. Cohousing). 
 
Contribution to A2C: UNC will collaborate in the communication & awareness activities and in the elaboration 
of policy reviews across A2C.
4.4 EUROPEAN CLUSTERS SUPPORTING A2C 
 
The following table shows the European clusters that have been already engaged in project proposed actions: co 
creation, training and transference of knowledge actions . This table highlights the main sectors that represents 
through their members, the networks/initiatives that they belong to and that will be put at our disposition as well as 
the size in terms of multi-actor composition of the clusters and in terms of number of involved actors, that highlights 
the potential for scalability.  Please see their commitment to participate through support letters in section 6.2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 94 
 
Table  1. European clusters engaged in A2C proposal 
CLUSTER Country Sectoral Industries Membership to European Strategic Cluster 
Partnerships/Others SIZE (scalability and actor´s type) 
1 AgroBioAlliance 
(AgroBioCluster) 
PL ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Food Processing & 
Manufacturing 
 
✓ UNIMOS ALLIANCE: 
www.unimosalliance.com 
Total number of members: 52 
Number of SME members: 39 
Number of larger company members: 2 
Number of RTOs: 3 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 8 
2 EUROPEAN CLUSTER 
ALPE ADRIA PANNONIA 
 
RS ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Education & Knowledge 
Creation 
 
 Total number of members: 85 
Number of SME members: 25 
Number of larger company members: 10 
Number of RTOs: 18 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 32 
3 AGRO KLASTER 
HOMOLJE ZAGUBICA 
 
RS ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Food Processing & 
Manufacturing 
 Total number of members: 54 
Number of SME members: 38 
Number of larger company members: 10 
Number of RTOs: 6 
 
4 PARCO 
AGROALIMENTARE FVG - 
Agrifood & Bioeconomy 
Cluster Agency 
IT ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Food Processing & 
Manufacturing 
 
✓ CTN CL.A.N. - Cluster Agrifood Nazionale 
✓ http://www.clusteragrifood.it  
✓ CTN SPRING - Sustainable Processes and 
Resources for Innovation and National 
Growth 
✓ http://www.clusterspring.it  
Total number of members: 20 
Number of SME members: 19 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 1 
Number of larger company members: 0 
Number of RTOs: 1 
5 Vitagora 
 
FR ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Food Processing & 
Manufacturing 
 
✓ New Frontier in Food 
✓ NF4 
✓ Wagralim: www.wagralim.be  
✓ Valorial: www.pole-valorial.fr  
✓ FoodValley: www.foodvalley.nl  
✓ Clusaga: 
www.clusteralimentariodegalicia.org  
Total number of members: 550 
Number of SME members: 272 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 95 
Number of larger company members: 83 
Number of RTOs: 112 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 83 
 
6 foodRegio 
 
DE ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Baltfood: www.baltfood.org 
✓ Go cluster: www.gocluster.de 
✓ Beltfood: www.beltfood.dk 
Total number of members: 81 
Number of SME members: 51 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 1 
Number of larger company members: 16 
Number of RTOs: 7 
Section 4,5,6-page 95 
 
✓ German Food Cluster: 
www.germanfoodclusters.org  
Number of other ecosystem actors : 4 
 
7 CTA Agrifood 
 
SP ✓ Business Services 
 
✓ ConnectEO 
✓ TRACK 
✓ Biobased Industries Consortium (BIC) 
https://biconsortium.eu/bio-based-industries-
consortium  
✓ European Regions Research and 
Innovation Network: https://errin.eu /  
✓ Cotec Foundation: http://cotec.es/  
✓ Food Nexus:http://www.foodnexus.eu/  
✓ Climate Technology Centre & Network 
(CTCN): https://www.ctc-n.org/ 
Total number of members: 17 
Number of SME members: 8 
Number of RTOs: 9 
8 FEMAC 
 
SP ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ TCI NETWORK: https://www.tci-
network.org/organization/149/ 
Total number of members: 58 
Number of SME members: 48 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 5 
Number of larger company members: 4 
Number of RTOs: 5 
Number of other ecosystem actors: 1 
9 National Food Cluster 
Lithuania 
 
LI ✓ Food Processing & 
Manufacturing 
✓ Education & Knowledge 
Creation 
 
✓ UAB Rūta: http://www.ruta.lt 
✓ Institute of Horticulture: 
https://www.lammc.lt/en 
Total number of members: 21 
Number of SME members: 17 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 1 
Number of larger company members: 1 
Number of RTOs: 1 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 1 
10 Lithuanian food exporters 
association LitMEA 
LI ✓ Food Processing & 
Manufacturing 
✓ Food knowledge & Market 
 Total number of members: 20 
Number of SME members: 18 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 0 
Number of larger company members: 2 
11 Animaforum - Associação 
para o Desenvolvimento da 
Agro-Industria 
 
PT ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Food Processing & 
Manufacturing 
 
✓ NATUREEF: 
https://www.clustercollaboration.eu/esc
p-profiles/natureef 
Total number of members: 128 
Number of SME members: 101 
Number of larger company members: 7 
Number of RTOs: 11 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 7 
 
12 AgroTransilvania Cluster RO ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Romanian Cluster Association: 
www.clustero.eu 
Total number of members: 83 
Number of SME members: 57 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 2 
Section 4,5,6-page 96 
 
✓ Education and Knowledge 
Creation 
✓ Northern Transylvania Clusters 
Consortium: 
http://transylvanianclusters.ro/ 
Number of larger company members: 3 
Number of RTOs: 5 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 7 
13 Polish Cluster of Composite 
Technologies 
 
PL ✓ Plastics, Textile 
Manufacturing 
 
 Total number of members: 80 
Number of SME members: 65 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 3 
Number of larger company members: 2 
Number of RTOs: 7 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 5 
14 Packaging Cluster 
 
ES ✓ Paper and Packaging 
✓ Plastics 
 
✓ FoodPackLab 
✓ AdPack 
✓ AdPack² 
✓ SAFE SMART FOOD 
 
Total number of members: 102 
Number of SME members: 93 
Number of larger company members: 14 
Number of RTOs: 4 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 5 
15 CAT.AL, High Technology 
Agrifood Lombardy Cluster 
(Parco Tecnologico Padano) 
 
IT ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Biopharmaceuticals 
✓ EU4FOOD 
✓ SPACE2ID 
✓ IASP - International Association of 
Sciencce Parks and Areas of Innovation: 
http://www.iasp.ws/  
✓ APSTI - Italian Association of STPs: 
http://www.apsti.it/  
✓ WoFIN - World Food Innovation Network: 
http://www.wagralim.be/Wofin.php   
✓ CEBR - Council of European Bioregions: 
http://www.cebr.net/  
Total number of members: 56 
Number of SME members: 27 
Number of larger company members: 3 
Number of RTOs: 15 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 11 
16 Clubster-NHL FR ✓ Biopharmaceuticals 
✓ Food Processing and 
Manufacturing 
 Total number of members: 300 
Number of SME members: 180 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 59 
Number of larger company members: 24 
Number of RTOs: 27 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 1 
17 Subcarpathian Flavours 
Cluster 
PL ✓ Business Services 
✓ Food Processing and 
Manufacturing 
✓ Stowarzyszenie Polska Ekologia: 
www.polskaekologia.org 
Total number of members: 67 
Number of SME members: 64 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 0 
Number of larger company members: 5 
Number of RTOs: 1 
Section 4,5,6-page 97 
 
18 SPRING  - Italian Cluster of 
Green Chemistry 
IT ✓ Downstream Chemical 
Products 
✓ Education and Knowledge 
Creation 
 Total number of members: 105 
Number of SME members: 30 
Number of larger company members: 15 
Number of RTOs: 33 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 27 
19 DREAM Cluster 
(WaterTeam) 
 
FR ✓ Environmental Services 
✓ Information Technology 
and Analytical 
Instruments 
 
 Total number of members: 101 
Number of SME members: 45 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 3 
Number of larger company members: 15 
Number of RTOs: 2 
20 AgriFood Lithuania DIH LI ✓ Agricultural Inputs and 
Services 
✓ Food Processing and 
Manufacturing 
✓ Smart Agri Hubs: 
https://www.smartagrihubs.eu/ 
✓ EIT FOOD: https://www.eitfood.eu/ 
✓ IoF2020: https://www.iof2020.eu/ 
✓ agROBOfood: https://agrobofood.eu/project/ 
✓ Agrifood cooperation platform: 
https://mapping.dih-agrifood.com/ 
Total number of members: 87 
Number of SME members: 60 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 10 
Number of larger company members: 20 
Number of RTOs: 4 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 10 
21 Finance Innovation 
 
FR ✓ Financial Services 
✓ Insurance Services 
 
 Total number of members: 600 
Number of SME members: 350 
Number of larger company members: 100 
Number of RTOs: 50 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 100 
 
22 AFIL - ASSOCIAZIONE 
FABBRICA INTELLIGENTE 
LOMBARDIA 
IT ✓ Metalworking Technology 
✓ Production Technology 
and Heavy Machinery 
✓ Vanguard Initiative: 
http://www.s3vanguardinitiative.eu/ 
✓ S3 Platform on Industrial Modernisation 
https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/thematic-
areas 
✓ 4 Motors 4 Europe: 
http://www.4motors.eu/en/ 
Total number of members: 151 
Number of SME members: 87 
Number of larger company members: 39 
Number of RTOs: 13 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 12 
 
23 SMART ENERGY BALTIC 
DIH 
LI ✓ Energy and climate  Total number of members: 20 
 
24 Polish Construction Cluster 
 
PL ✓ Construction Products & 
Services 
 Total number of members: 314 
Number of SME members: 157 
Number of start-ups among SME members: 0 
Number of larger company members: 100 
Number of RTOs: 7 
Section 4,5,6-page 98 
 
25 ICONIC Cluster 
 
RO ✓ Business Services 
✓ Information Technology 
and Analytical 
Instruments 
 
 Total number of members: 24 
Number of SME members: 52 
Number of larger company members: 0 
Number of RTOs: 3 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 1 
 
26 Cluster Construcción 
Sostenible 
 
ES ✓ Construction Products & 
Services 
✓ European Innovation Partnership on Smart 
Cities and Communities https://eu-
smartcities.eu/  
Total number of members: 20 
Number of SME members: 16 
Number of larger company members: 1 
Number of RTOs: 1 
Number of other ecosystem actors : 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 99
4.5 OTHER RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS SUPPORTING A2C 
 
We also count with the valuable support of different companies and organizations, as is shown in the table below, 
which have provided a letter of support for our A2C proposal. 
Table  2. Stakeholders supporting A2C 
Stakeholder  Sector Country 
1. CEN & CENELEC European Committees for Standardization  Standarisation Belgium 
2. Municipality of Alhama de Murcia, Region of Murcia  
 
Policy makers 
 
Spain 
3. Municipality of Nea Smyrni (MoNS) Greece 
4. Tarım A.Ş. Bursa Hayvancılık  Turkey 
5. Ayuntamiento Murcia, Región of Murcia Spain 
6. Ecoplastics  Plastic recycling Belgrade 
7. Bio-mi Plastic & bioplastics Croatia 
8.Packaging Technology of Lappeenranta-Lahti University of 
Technology  
Packaging Finland 
9. ARHIPELAGO 
 
Circular economy & 
Business 
Romania 
10. DROSOSTALIDA Social Innovation Greece 
11. ASM – Market Research and Analysis Centre Ltd Polonia 
12. European Network of Social services Brussels 
13. Veneto Region Brussels Office Brussels 
14. ELISAN France 
15. Technological Platform Food for Life-Spain  
Agri-food 
 
Spain 
16. ISEKI-Food Association Austria 
17.UPC-FECOAM-COAG-Chair of Sostenible Agriculture of Cartagena Spain 
18. Food and Agro-Industries Technology Center-FAITC Egypt 
19. Hortamira Spain 
20. Primaflor Spain 
21. Agenso Greece 
22. Federación de Cooperativas Agrarias de Cataluña  
23. Posidonia  Cosmetics  Spain 
24. Assobiotec-Federchimica Biotechnology Italy 
25. Microomcis systems Spain 
26. Digitouch Digital technologies Estonia 
27. RCTT Republican Center for Technology Transfer Scientific & 
Technology Transfer 
Belarus 
28. University of Murcia Spain 
29. Dunarea de Jos University Romania 
30. Cátedra de Ecoeficiencia Hídrica de la Universidad de Murcia Sustainability Spain 
31. Egypt National Cleaner Production Center Egypt 
 
 
5.ETHICS AND SECURITY
5.1 ETHICS 
 
Section 1: HUMAN EMBRYOS/FOETUSES YES/NO 
Does your research involve Human Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs)? NO 
Does your research involve the use of human embryos? NO 
Does your research involve the use of human foetal tissues / cells? NO 
Section 2: HUMANS YES/NO 
Does your research involve human participants? YES 
Does your research involve physical interventions on the study participants? NO 
Section 4,5,6-page 100 
 
Section 3: HUMAN CELLS / TISSUES YES/NO 
Does your research involve human cells or tissues (other than from Human Embryos/Foetuses, see 
section 1)? 
NO 
Section 4: PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA YES/NO 
Does your research involve processing of personal data? YES 
Does your research involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including use of 
preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)? 
NO 
Does your research involve publicly available data? 
 
NO 
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non -EU countries? Specify the type of personal 
data and countries involved 
NO 
 
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU? Specify the type of personal 
data and countries involved 
NO 
Section 5: ANIMALS YES/NO 
Does your research involve animals? NO 
Section 6: THIRD COUNTRIES YES/NO 
In case non-EU countries are involved, do the research related activities undertaken in these countries 
raise potential ethics issues? Specify the countries involved: 
NO 
Is it planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, live 
animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples, etc.)? 
NO 
Is it planned to import any material from non-EU countries into the EU? For data imports, see section 
4. For imports of human cells or tissues, see section 3 
NO 
Is it planned to export any material from the EU to nonEU countries? NO 
In case research involves low and/or lower -middle income countries, are any benefitsharing actions 
planned? 
NO 
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the research at risk? NO 
Section 7: ENVIRONMENT & HEALTH AND SAFETY YES/NO 
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals 
or plants? 
NO 
Does your research deal with endangered fauna and/or flora /protected areas? NO 
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research 
staff? 
NO 
Section 8: DUAL USE YES/NO 
Does this research involve dual -use items in the sense of Regulation 428/2009, or other items for 
which an authorisation is required? 
NO 
Section 9: EXCLUSIVE FOCUS ON CIVIL APPLICATIONS YES/NO 
Could your research raise concerns regarding the exclusive focus on civil applications? NO 
Section 10: MISUSE YES/NO 
Does your research have a potential for misuse of research results? NO 
Section 11: OTHER ETHICS ISSUES YES/NO 
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? NO
5.2 SECURITY 
Does your research involve activities or results raising security issues? NO 
Does your research involve 'EU-classified information' as background or results NO 
 
AGRO2CIRCULAR and the national legal and ethics requirements of countries and institutions involved.   
The present section reviews ethical issues attached to both  research in this project  and the development of 
TECHNOLOGIES FOR PLASTIC AND FOOD WASTE. Ethics is an integral part of research that will be 
considered from the beginning to the end of the project implementation, in particular, because of the participation of 
workers, some of them low-skilled. The system will be implemented in environment such that workers will be 
involved; circular economy and agri-food sector comprise both together high-skilled and low-skilled workers. 
The last group is considered vulnerable due to their psycho -social risks, the credentials obtained, the salary 
income and, even, health conditions and exposition to risk factors. Other ethical issues are also examined in-light 
on the current evidence.   
Section 4,5,6-page 101 
 
In this regard, it should be emphasised that all academic  and/or research entities involved currently have Ethics 
Committees. These committees could follow different protocols and approval procedures , but, at first instance, the 
research entity must justify all issues considering the informed consent and data privacy/anonymization of the 
information collected exposing why the research to be carried out is necessary, relevant and appropriate. Then, the  
Ethics Committee could proceed to approve, amend, or reject the research activity.  
Companies and for -profit entities, and also those without an internal Ethical Committee, should guide their 
procedures in line with the statements and agreements reached during the Ethics Management process, as well as the 
Ethics framework, drafted along this section 5 and formally delivered at the beginning of the project.  
Thus, all the activities developed along the project will comply with ethical principles and relevant national, EU and 
international legislation, for example, the  Chapter of Fundamental Rights of the EU and the European Convention 
on Human Rights.  
Provisions of Directive 95/46/EC and the General Data Protection Regulation (proposed in (European Commission, 
2012)) are shown to be highly relevant to the protection of research participants and service users.   
The General Data Protection Regulation  
Observing existing European regulation already provides many safeguards ensuring that data privacy  is 
maintained throughout any research or service delivery process. By transposing Directive 95/46/EC, Member States 
jointly set legally binding rules for the protection of individuals  regarding the processing of personal data. The 
European Commission recently drafte d a Regulation (European Commission, 2012) with the intention of 
comprehensive reform of EU data protection rules. The following assessment is primarily based on the Directive 
currently in force (European Parliament, 1995), but is expected to remain substa ntially unchanged under the 
Regulation.  
The notion of data subjects' consent to processing is to be harmonised and the criterion added consent be "explicit". 
The data will be accessible only for the participants involved in the project and no transfer to any third party will be 
made. During the project, the project board must make a decision on the date of destruction. A common trend in this 
area is to destroy them after 10 years from the project end date.  
Data controllers will be required to implement co nformant policies and processes (Art. 22) including notifying any 
breach without delay. Data subjects' rights to have data deleted - "right to be forgotten" (Art. 17) - and to receive free 
copies of their data, are to be strengthened. Privacy impact assess ments will be required if processing is deemed 
risky, and all but the smallest companies must appoint a data protection officer and notify details to their national 
authority.   
These provisions will effectively implement an intended ‘privacy by design’ (A rt. 23), though many details remain 
to be finalised. The draft Regulation gives the Commission powers  to extend the rules subsequently  by means 
of delegated and implementing acts.   
When approved, the Regulation would apply from 2015 on, uniformly across t he EU, unlike the current Directive 
which has seen variable transposition into national legislation. It  is therefore intended that the project conforms to 
the requirements of the Regulation in research processes and in service design addition to national legislation in force 
based on the Directive.   
The project coordinator (CETEC) commits to following the relevant national legislation supported by all partners - 
and later EU regulation - where it  applies to  the work carried out. All measures necessary to i mplement the 
appropriate legislation will be taken. At an early stage in the project, a review of national legislation and relevant 
good practices will be carried out to enable the elaboration of a comprehensive data protection management roadmap 
for the entire project duration. The roadmap is:   
1. to provide a detailed specification of how these are to be met in terms of processes, tools, 
responsibilities and timing and   
2. to contain a clear assignment of tasks and responsibility to the persons that need to be involved.   
3. To monitor and follow up the implementation of adequate cyber-security measures  
It is concluded that observation of existing safeguards and procedures will allow the project to complete its 
programme of research in an ethically acceptable way and enable development of services which in their turn can be 
expected to establish Best Practice in meeting current ethical concerns attached to collect or use any personal data 
where privacy concerns can be paramount.   
As well as conforming to law both in force and in preparation, a well-accepted approach to ethics in service provision 
will be adopted, upholding the central principles of autonomy, beneficence, non -malfeasance and justice in all 
operations and as built into service design.  
 
Addressing Ethics issues and Challenges  
In particular, various  ethical issues raised from the research and innovation challenge proposed 
by AGRO2CIRCULAR. These are furtherly explored below.  
  
Research objectives   
Section 4,5,6-page 102 
 
The data collection aims at:   
• Determining the means and ways in which the public engagement can be enhanced 
• researching into current techniques and procedures  
• improving them on the basis of an evidence-based research, so, determining which protocols will 
be cost-effective, even optimal    
• research into the accomplishment of all objectives and expected impact outcomes 
Research methodology  
Ethical issues arise within the project in three respects , namely concerning data privacy, informed consent of 
participants and ensuring ethical compliance for the solution design. In concrete:  
• Data privacy issues will arise in the context of observation of interactions and activities in the job 
place but also in workshops and focus groups, as well as other events for raising the public 
engagement  
• Informed consent will be provided for the participation of individuals directly and indirectly involved 
during the pilot phase (so, directors, mangers and workers, also administrative staff and providers visiting 
the job place if any)    
• The Ethical Solution Design must address the most important risks linked to the  aforementioned 
research and training activities.  
The following sections discuss these points in more detail. Based on an initial review of the regulative situation, it 
will be ensuring that ethics follow not only international but also national regulations.   
A key aspect of any research involving human beings - beyond the researcher(s) actually conducting the research - 
is to protect the interests of participants. When it comes to the proposed research p lan, individuals will be involved 
in the public engagement strategy and other relevant actions (see Section 1 on Excellence). As it has been explained 
above, these individuals could be directors, explicitly consenting the participation of the whole staff in the pilot phase, 
managers and workers, some of them low -skilled and, consequently, particularly considered attending to their 
vulnerability. The implementation of AGRO2CIRCULAR requires the intervention and participation of 
workers, some of them being po tentially low-skilled and/or living under vulnerable conditions. Thus, in this 
case is crucial and essential to assure the confidentiality of data, the proportionate use of those data 
obtained and also the minimal risk of psycho-social or physical harm to all participants. The European Union 
has stipulated that all research activities are to be carried out in compliance with fundamental ethical 
principles according to Section 4 of the Administrative form (part A).   
In addition, any ethical requirement, inc luding randomisation process will follow the protocols agreed by the 
international research community (see section below).    
 
Data privacy  
The basic principles for processing personal data centre on transparency, general prohibition, legitimate purpose and 
proportionality:  
Transparency: The data subject has the right to be informed when his/her personal data are  being processed. The 
data controller must provide his/her name and address, the purpose of processing, the recipients of the data and all 
other information required to ensure the processing is fair (Art. 10). Data subjects – or their legal representatives - 
have the right to access all personal data referring to them and to demand the rectification, deletion or blocking of 
data that is incomplete, inaccurate or not being processed in compliance with the Directive (Art. 12).  
General prohibition: Personal data may not be processed unless one of the following circumstances apply (Art. 7):   
• the data subject has consented to the processing;  
• processing is necessary: for the performance of or the entering into a contract, for compliance with a legal 
obligation, to protect the vital interests of the data subject or for the performance of a task carried out in the 
public interest or in the exercise of official authority;  
• processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the controller or by the third 
party or parties to whom the data are disclosed, unless overridden by fundamental rights and freedoms of the data 
subject  
While to process personal data referring to religious beliefs, political opinions, health, sexual orientation or race are 
neither required nor scoped within the project, this information could be inferred from some surveys and focus groups 
within the Social Impact assessment tasks. It is being stated a general prohibition to collect this information (Art. 8). 
To process religious or political data without the explicit consent must require additional safeguards; as a 
consequence, it will be avoided.   
Legitimate purpose: Personal data can only be processed for specified explicit and legitimate purposes and may not 
be processed further in a way incompatible with those purposes. The  Member States  are required to lay down 
appropriate safeguards for personal data stored for longer periods for historical, statistical or scientific use. (Art. 6)   
Proportionality: Personal data may be processed only insofar as it is adequate, relevant and not excessive about the 
purposes for which they are coll ected and further processed. The data must be accurate and, where necessary, kept 
Section 4,5,6-page 103 
 
up to date; every reasonable step must be taken to ensure that data which are inaccurate or incomplete, having regard 
to the purposes for which they  were collected or for which they are further processed, are erased or rectified. The 
data should not be kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects (that is, as  personal data) for longer 
than is necessary for the purposes for which the data have been collected or processed.   
 
As is the nature of the minimum harmonisation of the Directive, national regulation may add to the principles set out 
there, and their jurisdictions may develop particular interpretations of the stipulations in the Directive, after 
translation and transposition. It will take into account throughout the project’s lifecycle. A data protection framework 
will be developed and applied as part of a dedicated data protection management task. Also, the data protection 
management task in the work plan helps ensure that the project will comply with any national regulation relevant to 
the project in the validation site countries involved.   
 
Hands-on guidance on how to ensure data privacy throughout the project’s lifecycle research will  be derived from 
this. An initial set of rules to be followed has been derived at this stage already and will  be consolidated during the 
start-up phase of the project:  
• Only personnel within the participating organisations will have access to non -exploited and unprocessed 
data. Then, these data should be anonymized if applicable.  
• Only aggregate summaries of data will be available to external parties.   
• Participants will  be voluntarily involved in the project and  treated with respect at all  times, and their 
anonymity will be protected. They will be able to abandon the project at any time.  
• All data will be kept in anonymous form wherever possible.  pseudo-anonymization though codes will be 
used to replace any conventional identifiers within the data where full  anonymization is not possible for the 
purposes declared and followed: By making data anonymous, the privacy of individuals will be maintained. The 
essential point is that the  AGRO2CIRCULAR partners analysing the data will not be in a position to associate 
the data with an identifiable individual. The pseudo-anonymization process starts once a participant allows the 
use of data in the study. At this moment,  AGRO2CIRCULAR will designate a responsible to carry out this 
process. First of all, he/she will create a  database (with restricted access, only available with his/her password) 
in which he/she will add files containing the reference of the data that is going to be used. These references and 
the file name will be a random code obtained using certified and secured pseudo-anonymization software.   
• The data security supervisor designated in each centre will verify that files have been codified properly and 
that they accomplish with privacy rights; at this time, files can be transferred to the rest of the partners.  
• Organisations holding the data are the guardians and should exercise due diligence of its protection.    
 
Implementation and personal data. Personal data - e.g. from transcribed interviews, if any, conducted during the 
implementation and during the WP7 and the public engagement activities will be stored securely at all times and 
deleted as soon as the purpose of their collection has  been fulfilled. Storage and destruction of data storage media 
will be documented. A list of all researchers given access to any per sonal data will  be set  up and 
maintained. Quotations from interviews will  be included  in reports and publications arising from the research. 
Quotations will be anonymised using e.g. a pseudonym. If participants wish to talk to interviewers about sensitive 
issues which they wish to remain confidential, interviewers will not use what they hear in this context in any part of 
the research.   
 
 
Informed explicit consent  
Explicit informed consent by data subjects is a vital part of any process involving human subjects, to respect their 
rights of free choice and to data privacy. The whole consortium will ensure that the potential subjects can reach a 
truly informed decision about whether or not to participate in the research.  Their explicit informed consent must be 
given freely, without coercion, and must  be based  on a clear  understanding of what participation involves, 
including any personal data to be processed and the purposes of the same. Each partner responsible for involving 
end-users will guarantee the coll ection of explicit consents, signed by representatives as stated above before any 
empirical activity affecting them, including but not limited to the collecting of personal data. As in the case of data 
protection, consolidated hands-on guidance in this res pect will be collected from relevant sources at an early stage 
of the project. A preliminary investigation  has revealed some principles that should be considered about achieving 
informed consent from users participating in the project:  
• Each potential subject must be adequately informed of the aims, methods, anticipated benefits and potential 
hazards of the research and any discomfort it may entail;  
• The expected participation of individuals and the approximate duration of each activity.  
• Any documentation given to potential participants should be  comprehensible, and there should be an 
opportunity for them to raise any issues of concern;  
Section 4,5,6-page 104 
 
• Consent should  be given  in writing and records of consent should be maintained; considering the 
particularities in the workplace and the risks that it may entail, the following measures may be also considered:  
o Workers’ representatives consent: If to obtain individual consent from each worker is not feasible, 
labour unions representatives will discuss and agreed on the parti cipation with the staff and, then, sign 
in the consent.    
o Consent Form: The information in the consent form should be  individualised and communicated in 
a way that is more sensitive to needs of participants. The number of questions in the “Consent Form” has 
to be appropriate to the participants’ profile (high -skilled workers and managers, chiefs and directors, 
low-skilled workers, labor union officers, etc.)  
• Potential participants must be informed that they are free to withdraw consent to participation at any time;  
• There should be a procedure for making complaints and participants should be made aware of this;  
• All participants should be volunteers. Considerable care should be taken where consent is sought from those 
in a dependent position.     
• Any inducement offered to participants should be declared and should be by appropriate guidelines;  
Potential impact of the research    
Beyond the issues of data privacy, a broader range of ethics issues potentially arise when designing and implementing 
new services for citizens. One aspect is the  input collected from persons’ data, such as movements, procedures in 
the job place, customs, etc. and the other one is the interaction of the project with the daily routines and processes 
in the job place.    
Pseudo-anonymisation of data  
As regards the Data Collection, and beyond the issues of data privacy, a broader range of ethics issues 
potentially arises. One aspect is the input collected from the entities taking part in the pilot phase and, specifically, 
workers involved.      
AGRO2CIRCULAR obtains and deliver data about human subjected from a vast range of activities, mainly the 
implementation of the system and the public engagement activities; all differentiated legal frameworks as regards the 
protection of workers, although issues related to data privacy, are harmonised under the RGPD.   
Exploitation of data  
The exploitation of data refers to the re-use of massive data, instead of personal data. However, the use of these data 
(secondary use) is regulated within the Digital Single Market and also regulated by directives related to consumers’ 
rights, personal data and the GDPR, among others.    It is expected to facilitate the exchange of data between agri -
food players. However, it depends on the regulations for the Public Sector Information (PSI) within the Digital Single 
Market; currently, a group on Data Policy and Innovation works along the data -value chain to provide a legal and 
political framework that allows public authorities, companies and citizens to make the most of data in all sectors of 
the economy and many aspects of society. Results from the consultation 1 and new legal frameworks and directives 
will be revised by the consortium as the project progresses-   
The European Commission announced the foundation of a Support Centre for Data Sharing between research and 
private sector data, under the Connecting Europe Facility. This Support Centre will provide tools and guidelines that 
should be followed during the AGRI2CIRCULAR project.    
Ethical risks and AGRO2CIRCULAR potential  
The field of innovation and research often finds difficult to assign a specific code; the vast majority of them are based 
on the  teleological approach (utilitarian and consequentialism) or the  deontological perspective. The Ethics Code 
aims at determining the proper courses of action and indicate which ones should be followed. The Ethics and the 
Data Protection strategy are being differentiated within this project, if the Ethics Code must be consistent with the 
European directives but its implication are wide and should be justified for a wide range of individuals independently 
of their cultural background and environment.   Ethics are also important in this area because of the power that 
researchers and developers working on Data Sciences and  monitoring tools have to affect the social and physical 
environment.   
From a practical point of view, the principle -based approach to Ethics allows for the incorporation of elements of 
ethical theories through the formulation of core principles.  These core principles must be considered to design and 
implement the co-creation, as well as during the whole Pilot Phase. Similar perspectives could be found in the work 
performed by ethics committees in the bioethics field and has also been adopted by many professional guidelines 
and codes of conduct,  as well as in more general formulations of guiding principles; for instance, the  European 
Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE)   
In the case of AGRO2CIRCULAR, these principles are being accepted by the consortium:  
• Autonomy: the idea behind the principle of autonomy is that the decisions and choices of grown -up 
persons need to be respected and not interfered with (within the limits of one’s autonomy, harm to ot her 
persons is not tolerated);   
• Beneficence: the idea behind the principle of beneficence is that we ought to do other persons good;  
• Non-malfeasance: means avoiding doing harm and harming other persons with our actions;  
Section 4,5,6-page 105 
 
• Justice: justice is about the distribution of benefits and burdens and finding a just way of doing so. 
Often justice is simply referred to regarding fairness. Depending on our interpretation of justice, different 
solutions to redistribution of scarce resources can be found. Examples inclu de distribution according to 
need and merit.  
These principles, together with utility, intrinsic value, equal consideration of interests and consequences over time 
will guide the procedures and the Ethics framework, ensuring an evidence-based and robust framework.  
Main risks related to innovation and research activities, specifically in the AGRO2CIRCULAR project, are:  
Ethical 
risk 
No.  
Description  Mitigation  
ER1  The system gathers data from the 
workplace   
Principle of autonomy.  
Principle of non-malfeasance.  
Principle of Beneficence.  
The Principle of Explicability  
A vast amount of information about workers and their routines, customs and habits will 
be gathered and some of  this information is out of the scope of the data gathering and 
refers to personal issues.  
This information supposes a major risk, as long as it could be used against the worker 
(e.g. mobbing). At the same time, if the worker is aware about this observation and data 
gathering, it may reduce his/her autonomy in the job plac e and might interfere with 
private issues which do not affect the performance and productivity.   
It is necessary to get approval by the representatives (e .g., labour unions if any) and to 
guarantee that the data regarding workers will be treated in a fair and adequate manner.   
Specific measures will be implemented and delivered to the EC when elaborating the 
Ethics protocol in order to ensure that the information obtained and non-relevant for the 
assessment of the performance in the job place will not be used against the persons 
involved.  
ER2  The project could only show an 
instrumental value, neither intrinsic nor 
societal value  
Principle of Intrinsic value  – Innovation and research must be intrinsically valuable, 
going far beyond their  instrumental value. AGRI2CIRCULAR goes beyond the state 
of the art providing new tools for preventing food and plastic waste and for enhancing 
circularity and circular economy innovative business models, showing a long -term 
impact on the environment and, also, the sustainability of jobs.   
ER3  AGRO2CIRCULAR potential for 
improving current wellbeing and life 
conditions of end-users is limited  
Principle of Utility  – Innovation and research must improve the life and wellbeing of 
their users, fulfilling the needs of the clear majority of people  and, specifically, their 
end-users at long-term. At least, Data Collection, analysis and open data/sharing must 
have the potential for improving the  current life conditions  for as much people as 
possible, avoiding thos e interventions that could  undermine their  well-being and 
produce a foreseeable damage.  All unforeseen risks must be monitored and mitigated, 
even avoided. From the point of view of the whole society, the impact on the 
environment is quite clear; however,  the impact on workers and the potential of these 
systems for improving their lives and job conditions at medium and long -term is 
particularly challenging. This risk is linked and considering jointly with the next one:  
ER4 AGRO2CIRCULAR partnership is no t 
considering including all potentially 
affected interests  
Principle of equal consideration of interests  – While companies and research entities 
can follow their legitimate purposes as regards efficiency and business growth 
respectively, the  AGRI2CIRCULAR consortium should both  include all affected 
interests when calculating the rightness of a certain innovation or research activity. In 
this case,  the public engagement strategy and activities in WP7 will integrate the 
public’s views and voices within the project lifecycle.   
ER5 AGRO2CIRCULARmust show posit ive 
consequences and changes at long-term  
Principle of consequences over time : The research and innovation impact must be 
assessed at long-term for evaluating its Ethical adequacy in-light of the considerations 
previously detailed.  
   
The gender and ethnicity must be taken into consideration overcoming all potential barriers detected with this regard 
in order to raise the positive impacts over the vast majority of the individuals.  
 
 
6. ATTACHEMENTS 
 
In this section are shown the letter of adhesion fo r the Stakeholders Panel of UNC (subsection 6.1), the letters of 
support of European Clusters (subsection 6.2), and the letters of support of other stakeholders from different sectors 
supporting A2C showing their interest for the project development. (subsection 6.3). 
 
 
 
Section 4,5,6-page 106
6.1 STAKEHOLDERS PANEL AGREEMENTS 
 
UNC adhesion letter to A2C Stakeholders Panel: 
Section 4,5,6-page 107
6.2 SUPPORT LETTERS OF EUROPEAN CLUSTERS FOR A2C CLUSTERING 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 108 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 116 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 117 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 134
6.3 SUPPORT LETTERS OF OTHER RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS FOR A2C 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 138 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 145 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 150 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 151 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 156 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 163 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4,5,6-page 165 
 
 

This proposal version was submitted by Jose A PLAZA on 25/01/2021 22:59:55 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)