3.1 Work plan   
The AI-CUBE project will be implemented through 3 key project phases:   
  
1. Phase 1: Set -Up - Stakeholder engagement strategy, MLA methodology and initial technology 
assessment  
2. Phase 2: Gap analysis - AI-CUBE business cases and gap analysis vs. current STATUS  
3. Phase 3: Roadmapping - translate gap analysis into skills, data and RD&I requirements per SPIRE 
process industry sector  
4. Phase 4 : Take-up - Disseminate and promote the AI -CUBE roadmaps towards the wider process 
industries stakeholder communities  
The activities of the project will be structured in 6 work packages (WPs) as shown in fig. 16.  
  
Figure 16. PERT Chart  

   
  
In the set-up phase 1 of the project, WP1 will start with an extensive literature and stakeholder analysis, to 
establish the current technological and industrial landscape regarding AI and BD technologies and process 
industry sectors in Europe, setting the basis of the following WPs work in defining mapping tools and the 
roadmap for AI and BD. In parallel, in WP2 a stakeholder engagement strategy will be set -up based on the 
MAMCA methodology, to work in a continuous way with the stakeholders and to design a framework to assess 
and categorize current Maturity Levels of AI and BD technologies’ applications and deployment. Phase 2 of 
the project will be targeted at carrying out a gap-analysis. First, WP3 will assess the maturity level of the 
previously identified technologies, while W P4 will define AI and BD driven Business Cases and Business 
Models for the process industries of the future. In WP4 a mapping of such visionary Business Cases and  
Models against the current STATUS (WP3) will be carried out to establish gaps and development needs per 
SPIRE process industry sector and per macro -application process areas (as defined in the CUBE). In the 
roadmapping phase 3 , results from the previous phases will be translated into development needs and 
recommendations in terms of skills, data and RD&I requirements. As such WP4 will define a roadmap on AI 
and BD application in process industries for all the SPIRE industrial sectors. WP5 and WP6 will be horizontal 
to the whole project, focusing on dissemination and project coordination respectively, and culminating in the 
last Take-up phase 4, where the results of the project (the CUBEs, MLA framework, learnings and roadmaps) 
will be promoted towards the wider process industries communities (starting with > 100 industrial parks 
already identified in the previous INSPIRE project) and working in close collaboration with A.SPIRE.   
Based on previous experience with SPIRE and FoF CSA’s, the AI -CUBE consortium, aims for an early 
involvement of A.SPIRE in the project, already discussed with the A.SPIRE office. This will be leveraged to 
steer the project towards optimal and usable results, that can be taken-up by the eight (plus possibly pulp and 
paper, glass, etc.) process industries, as they come available in the course of the project.  
 
 
 
Figure 17. AI-CUBE Gantt chart