1.2  Relation to the work programme  
Both the objectives and the expected impact of AI-CUBE are fully in line with the challenges and scope of the 
H2020 topic SPIRE-11-2022: Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Technologies for Process Industries.  
  
SPIRE-11-2020  AI-CUBE  
Identification, based on a mapping of digital 
technologies in process industries and their 
level of penetration, which specific AI - and 
big data technologies are most relevant, and 
what are, or could be, the most relevant 
application cases and/or pilots in process 
industry.  
WP3, receiving input from WP1 and WP2 will develop in 
Task 3.2 a mapping on AI and BD technologies per sector 
and macro area, as well as a cross -comparison of the 
researched AI and BD technolog ies and the fields of 
application in different process industries. An assessment 
of the level of penetration / maturity degree of the different 
AI and BD technologies will also be performed, identifying 
the technology application to each industry and AI 
technology combination.  
A roadmap should be developed for all the 
different sectors in the process industries to  
AI-CUBE roadmap in AI and BD technologies will be 
developed in WP4 (Task 4.3). This roadmap will be a  
  
take full advantage of AI and big data and give 
clear and p ragmatic recommendations for 
researchers, managers, and operators planning 
to harness their potential.  
guideline in the implementation of these technologies of 
application in process industries for all the SPIRE 
industrial sectors with specific recommenda tions to guide 
researchers, managers and operators in the implantation of 
these technologies. The roadmap will allow all the SPIRE 
sectors to benefit and share the knowledge gained to boost 
the competitiveness of the European industry. Industrial 
stakeholders and associations will validate the process 
(WP2) and accompany the roadmap analysis.   
 
7 Wang, Yaxing et al. Research on the Impact of Big Data on Logistics, Zhengzhou University, China, 2017  
8 Rügheimer, Hannes. Lässt sich ein Computer in die Irre führen? https://intelligente-welt.de/sicherheit-machine-learning/, 2017  
  
   
  
The roadmap should explore, inter alia, actions 
on:  
• Research and innovation management, 
planning, and design (e.g. new chemical 
synthesis strategies, health and safety 
assessments)  
• Process control: yield and accuracy 
enhancement  
• Supply chain management and scheduling 
of connected processes, plants and/or sites 
(e.g. for industrial symbiosis), process 
flexibility  
• Predictive maintenance  
• Product  customisation  and 
 product traceability  
WP1 will classify the AI and BD technologies application 
identified in the five “macro” areas (Task 1.3). (e.g. RD&I, 
process control, SC management, predictive maintenance 
and product customisation and traceability). A first 
mapping of AI and BD technologies and an industrial 
processes analysis per sector will be performed in WP1. A 
plan update for the subsequent WP of the project will be 
outlined, focusing on the AI and BD technologies 
application in the five “macro” areas. An extended and 
complementary literature review will be done to assure that 
the following areas are adequately assessed, while any 
other area not identi fied until this moment could also be 
taken into consideration.   
This classification will be considered during all the 
following work packages.