2.1 Expected impacts  
The process industry is a key one for the European economy (contributing to the EU Jobs and Growth agenda 
with 6.3 million jobs directly created and further 19 million indirectly created in Europe) 31. SPIRE PPP aims 
at boosting investments in Europe generating global competitiveness for EU Process Industries, better jobs and 
welfare for its citiz ens. In order to do so, SPIRE PPP envisions “Connecting the dots – investing for smart 
integration of process industries across Europe”. AI and BD can play a key role in connecting the dots for 
Process Industry. AI-CUBE will accelerate the take -up of AI and BD in this industry, thus translating into a 
cascading effect that will create value across Europe and down to the end users.   
  
Expected impacts from the Work Programme  
AI-CUBE project will address the expected impact in the following way:  
Expected impact  AI-CUBE impact  
Better exploitation of AI potential for all the 
different sectors in the process industries, and 
strategies for developing AI applications, 
including the generation of data  
AI-CUBE consortium will apply a MAMCA methodology to 
guarantee the involvement of wide stakeholder numbers who will 
contribute in the validation of the roadmap and guidelines resulting 
from the project activities. These stakeholders will also contribute to 
the definition and validation of conc epts and constructs throughout 
AICUBE development. This deep stakeholder involvement aims at 
achieving a widely shared understanding of AI and BD technology 
potential in the process industry, but also detecting procedures and 
steps for those technologies i mprovement and effective application, 
along with the identification of the necessary ecosystem (e.g., 
technological coupling, infrastructures, expertise, etc.) capable of 
boosting data -driven technologies application, scaling and diffusion 
across industry sectors and value chains.  
 
31 SPIRE 2050 Vision https://www.spire2030.eu/sites/default/files/users/user85/Vision_Document_V6_Pages_Online_0.pdf  
  

   
  
Identification of existing and future data 
requirements for the development of data 
driven technologies (eg. ontologies and data 
formats, how to handle data heterogeneity, 
data availability, quality and reliability, 
access and p latforms, security and 
confidentiality)  
The above -mentioned collaboration with stakeholder of the sectors, 
identified through a dedicated analysis, will guarantee the involvement 
of actors with experience and knowledge of data -driven technologies 
and of t he requisites they need to present, i.e. specs that data need to 
meet in terms of formats, availability, quality and reliability, etc.   
AI-CUBE activities will identify the methods, tools and processes 
already available to acquire relevant data; the processes through which 
firms can identify the type of information necessary to improve 
financial, operational, and environmental performance; the potential 
contribution of AI to the collection and analysis of such data / 
information and its involvement in the decision-making processes.  
Seamless collaboration of human operators 
with process control systems and plants: 
acceptance, identification of skills gaps and 
ethical, legal & social implications (ELSI)  
AI-CUBE identifies existing and possible fields of machine -
humaninteraction (HMI) along with interviews. Workshops with 
experts are used to point out on respective acceptance levels and 
necessities to develop specific skills and adaptation of technologies to 
allow further integration of HMI.  
AI-CUBE will dedicate Task 4.4 to the revisi on of the ethical, legal 
and social implications of AI and BD developments. This task will 
revise the required skills for a seamless collaboration of human 
operators and will analyse the current skill gaps in the industry to get 
ready for new implementation.   
Implementation and further elaboration of the 
strategic research and innovation agenda  
AI-CUBE embraces the combination of several methodological 
approach, including systematic analyses of the extant literature,  
  
announced in the EC Communication on  
Artificial Intelligence   
technological trends, and stakeholder landscape, along with the 
application of MAMCA, to widely involve sector stakeholders in the 
formulation of constructs and their validation, and ELSI, to detect 
potential AI and BD technologies impact on society, values and human 
rights. This combination of approach and perspectives considered will 
provide a thorough understanding of the factors driving AI and BD 
technologies application in the process industry, and the potential 
barriers hindering their development and diffusion. Furthermore, 
AICUBE activities will shed light on the  wider socio -economic-
cultural impact that data -driven technologies can have. All these 
elements together allow the drafting of comprehensive roadmap not 
only to foster further application of the technologies, but also to guide 
strategic decision making both at the research and policy level, on the 
elaboration of RD&I activities in Europe.  
  
Expected impacts of data driven technologies on process industry  
Process industries are working in a “brown field” environment (as opposed to “green field” applications which 
means in a new -build factory), which means that existing plant, control and IT -systems cannot easily be 
replaced completely by new solutions. Therefore, interfaces between new systems and existing equipment are 
necessary. Keywords in this field are SCADA, MES -MOM, ERP, ISA95/IEC62264, Data Warehouse, Data 
Lakes, Cloud Computing, Edge Computing, noSQL, and Streaming technologies, etc.  
In combination with the data and information collection, the problems of the amount, quality and reliability of 
data must be mentioned. In this sense, the demands of process industries are extremely high because any kind 
of wrong decisions related to little or poor data could lead to unstable production processes with unforeseeable 
and potentially dramatic consequences. Appropriate solutions to handle situations of poor data quality in an 
industrial environment do not exist today and are one of the main research needs for the future.  
Up to now, typically only case-specific solutions have been developed and implemented, while no systematic 
approach exists to develop solutions for different types of problem and roll out these solutions subsequently to 
all possible application examples. This is strongly conn ected to the project -based implementation of AI 
solutions, with the consequence that no systematic long -term maintenance, update and re -check of the 
deployed AI solutions after the end of the project is undertaken.  
 
  
  
Potential barriers, obstacles or factors endangering the achievements of the expected impacts  
  
Potential barriers, obstacles or 
factors  
Measures to be undertaken  
Human: lack of the skilled 
personnel needed to implement  
AI and BD  
WP3-T3.2 will identify technological gaps and implementation challenges as well 
as possible skill gaps with regard to human-machine-interaction.  
In the roadmapping phase 3 (WP4 -T4.3), results from the previous task will be 
translated into development needs and recommendations in terms of skills, data 
and RD&I requirements.   
WP4-T4.4 will identify the skills required to allow a seamless collaboration of 
human operators  
Organisational: lack of a 
competitive business case, clear 
and with strategic vision  
WP4 will define AI and BD driven Business Cases and Business Models for the 
process industries of the future. A mapping of the future Business Cases and 
Models against the current STATUS (WP3) will be carried out to establish gaps 
and development needs per SPIRE process industry sector and per 
macroapplication process areas.  
Technological: unbiased data, 
lack of interoperability and 
cybersecurity  
T3.2 will result in concrete application possibilities developed individually for 
each sector. The task also identifies possible barriers for the use of an AI methods 
& BD technologies in each industry sector along with the transfer of solutions 
between the sectors. T3.2 provides an overview of the major challenges faced in 
the introduction of AI and BD methods and identifies areas in which overcoming 
these challenges result in an increasing economic value.  
Legal: lack of regulation in 
security and privacy  
T4.4 is devoted to the revision of the ethical, legal and social implications of AI 
and BD developments, considering the values encoded in algorithms, the need to  
 evaluate outcomes, and issues of bias and transferability, data ownership, 
confidentiality and consent, and legal, moral and professional responsibility. The 
potential effects for clients and different actors in the supply chain (human 
operators), including privacy.