3.2 Management structure and procedures  
The overall aim of the project management is to ensure a successful execution of the project to meet its 
objectives. To achieve this, the project manager and the partners will undertake all the necessary management 
and supporting actions to ensure high quality of its outcomes within the predefined time schedule and budget 
of the project.  
3.2.1 Organisational Structure and Decision making   
The organisational structure is characterised by the following constitutional elements (fig. 18):   
  The Coordinator   
  The Work Package and Task Leaders   
  The Contractual Partners forming the “Project Consortium and Decision Board”   
  The Experts forming the “AI-CUBE Expert Group”   
  The Stakeholders’ Community forming the “AI-CUBE European Process Industry Network”   
   
Figure 18. AI-CUBE Structural elements  
Source: Own elaboration  
The Coordinator  
The coordinator will ensure a smooth and successful implementation of the project. The coordinator is 
responsible for the execution of the activities and the overall achievement of the project’s objectives and thus 
for all contractual obligations towards the Commission. He may delegate specific subjects to the partners 
without however sharing partner’s responsibility. The coordinating organisation provides the secretarial and 
organisational service for the project, including contractual and financial issues, reporting, the coordination of 
input to documents and their finalising, dissemination, or delivery, preparation of project meetings, the 
settingup and running of an infrastructure for internal and external communication, and running the every-day 
business of the project. The coordinator will report on regular basis to the EC (Project Officer, PO).  
Project management and coordination will be carried out according to the highest quality, transparency and 
efficiency standards, and will be under the responsibility of PNO who will make use of its experience and 
expertise from the successful management of and participation in multiple EU funded projects, such as and the 
CSAs INSPIRE, NEXT-NET, New_Innonet and BioLinX, the RTD ROBOX, the RIA MEMERE, Indus3ES, 
in H2020, CSAs BIOTIC, R4R, CRM_INNONET, the IAs DESTINY and REE4EU and many others in 7FP. 
The coordinator will be Ronald Weerdmeester, European Innovation Manager, with more than 20 years’ 
experience in managing EU funded projects and advisor to both CEFIC, Suschem and SPIRE. He will work in 
tandem with Chiara Eleonora De Marco, Innovation Consultant, and other sectorial experts within PNO.  
The Work Package and Task Leaders   
Work package and task leaders are contractual partners responsible for a work package or a task respectively. 
They have responsibility for the preparation and execution of the activities in their work packages or tasks 
according to the work plan. They may delegate specific sub -tasks to partners without however giving up the 
responsibility for the overall work package or task. Work package and task leaders are also responsible for  

 
 
958402  AI-CUBE  Part B providing general guidelines and interfacing with and for coordinating 
work with o ther work packages or tasks, in particular in meeting the deadlines for results delivery as these 
deliverables are needed as input for tasks to be timely performed in other work packages. They are also 
responsible for regular reporting on the work progress to the rest of the Project Consortium and Coordinator. 
In case of major developments that may impact the overall work plan, or problems in carrying out the tasks, 
they need to inform the Coordinator as soon as possible and discuss with him procedural and strategic issues 
in order to take common decisions to reach the project’s objectives.   
The Contractual Partners forming the “Project Consortium and Decision Board”   
The contractual partners forming the project consortium encompass all staff from partner organisations 
involved in the project. They contribute to the achievement of the AI -CUBE CSA and accept that they are 
responsible for the tasks assigned to them according to the contract between the consortium and the European 
Commission. More specifically, they:   
• participate in regular meetings,   
• contribute to reports/deliverables,   
• cooperate in elaborating procedures and the work to be carried out in the project,   
• implement and carry out the activities as outlined in the work programme, mobilising the necessary 
resources and building up contacts with third parties as far as necessary,   
• submit and review milestones and deliverables according to the responsibilities  defined and agreed 
within the consortium and according to the quality assurance procedure,   
• inform each other - and the coordinator, in particular - on all relevant events and activities related to 
the INSPIRE project,   
• deliver cost statements and input to project activity and financial reports and provide information and 
data to the coordinator in order to ensure timely elaboration and submission of documents,   
• collaborate and contribute to the elaboration of documents, tools and material,  •  carry out 
dissemination and promotion activities and represent the project exterally.   
The consortium of AI -CUBE is small and involves only 5 partners. Together they will form the Project 
Decision Board, which is the actual decision making entity of the CSA; i.e. the place where procedural and 
strategic issues are discussed and decided in order to reach the project’s objectives. Decisions may regard 
strategic, general and operational issues, e.g. the implementation of procedures and structures; the definition 
of activities to be carried out, the allocation and re-allocation of budget (in accordance with the EU contract); 
the management of conflicts and the monitoring of proc edures and activities, and the inclusion of additional 
Associated Partners. One representative duly nominated by each partner organisation participates in the Project 
Decision Board. Should the nominated representative not be able to participate, he/she will nominate a deputy. 
Regular Project Decision Board meetings will be quarterly held physically or remotely - and according to 
necessity. Detailed decision -making processes within the consortium will be defined in the Consortium 
Agreement. Decisions will be taken by a simple majority vote. The voting will be open (non-secret), with one 
vote per partner. The Experts forming the “AI-CUBE Expert Group”  
This Expert Group will gather recognised experts in the various domains that are key to Europe’s process 
industry and digital technology sector. They will participate in the AI -CUBE processes through consultation 
and validation processes and will be asked to review the related results and deliverables. They will also be 
given the opportunity to contribute to the results by delivering input to AI-CUBE activities of assessment and 
investigation of AI&BD technology deployment in European process industry. The experts will represent a 
broader community of specialists in Europe and beyond. International experts to be invited to the Expert Group 
and already identified within the individual networks of AI -CUBE partners are Mr. Jacques Komornicki, 
representing the European Technology Platform SusChem; and Prof. Da. Ir. Greet Van Eetvelde at the Ghent 
University, representing the SPIRE EPOS project (Enhanced energy and resource Efficiency and Performance 
in process industry Operations via onsite and cross-sectorial Symbiosis). Prof. Maria Chiara Carrozza, Member 
of the Task Force on Artificial Intelligence at the Agency for  Digital Italy, Full Professor of Biomedical 
Engineering and Robotics at Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, member of Member of the Steering Committee of 
the Quantum Tech FET Flagship, DG Communication Networks, Content and Technology. Emilia Garito, 
CEO at Quant um Leap IP, EU Innovation Expert for AI and Robotics. Dr. Francesca Lazzeri, Machine 
Learning Research and Applications at Microsoft (MA -USA). Robert Hoyle Brown, Vice President, Center 
for the Future of Work at Cognizant Technology Solutions (CA-USA). Prof. Roberto Zicari, ethical AI Goethe 
University Frankfurt.  
Furthermore, as already anticipated to A.SPIRE representatives, in the desirable case AI -CUBE will result 
successful and receive EU funding, A.SPIRE will be invited to take part in the AI-CUBE Expert Group.  
 
 
The Project Consortium will continuously work to expand this Expert Group with relevant representatives of 
the European process industries throughout the project. The Experts are involved in AI -CUBE activities but 
have no direct contractual obl igations towards the EC. In return, they will not benefit from financial 
contributions except the reimbursement of travel expenses.   
The Stakeholders’ Community forming the “AI-CUBE European Process Industry Network”   
This  network extends the circle of contractual partners and experts and includes all relevant stakeholders.  This 
includes all relevant actors from inside and outside the European process industries, starting from the members 
of the INSPIRE project list of 100 European industrial parks and related industrial stakeholders (process 
industries, users, and orchestrators applying AI&BD technologies to a minimum extent, and AI solution 
providers). The AI-CUBE stakeholder list will also tap into the European network created within the NEXT -
NET project to reach a critical mass of relevant stakeholders from process industry, manufacturing, logistics 
and distribution. AI -CUBE European process Industry Network will iteratively test and expand AICUBE  
concepts eventually towards the wider European network of stakeholders, across the 8 SPIRE process industry 
sectors. The network will include international, European and national stakeholders representing the ICT 
community: users, technology suppliers, policy makers, SME associations, and research organisati ons. 
Moreover, from the Network will also contribute to the validation activities of the concepts and roadmap 
generated within the AI-CUBE project  
Also, these stakeholders may build strong links to other relevant networks and stakeholder groups. As such 
they not only complement the expertise of the consortium, but also ensure the involvement of a wide 
stakeholder community, especially in the dissemination activities described in section 2.2. The Network  will 
be engaged into the project activities by the p articipatory dissemination channels and through extensive 
networking activities, with the goal of planting the seeds for a network initiative that endures over the project 
duration and beyond.   
3.2.2 Internal Quality Control   
The detailed procedures of the quality management will be defined within the quality management plan (Task 
6.3). In all elements of the work plan, at least 2 partners will contribute to the implementation of work packages 
and tasks, allowing an internal responsible/reviewer scheme. Each object (work package, task, deliverable, and 
milestone) is assigned to a responsible person in charge of the implementing the foreseen actions, producing 
the related deliverable and/or achieving the milestone. Reports will be reviewed by another projec t partner 
before evaluation by the coordinator. If the deliverable or milestone is rejected, the responsible partner will 
have to rework and resubmit the result. This workflow will be implemented through e -mail exchanges and 
videoconferences.   
3.2.3 Operational planning   
To ensure a smooth running of the activities to be carried out and ease the monitoring of the actions, the 
consortium will elaborate a detailed work plan based on the work plan submitted within this proposal, updating 
the tasks to be carried out in each work package, including the respective budgets and the division of labour 
among partners. The work plan will be supplemented by an updated time -schedule. This will be the essential 
planning and basic monitoring instrument of the project. The optimisation of resources to deliver the best value 
and larger impact will be targeted while driving the operational planning.