4. Section 4: Members of the consortium  
  
4.1. Participants (applicants)  
  
Partner  CiaoTech s.r.l / PNO Group B.V.  
Short Name  PNO  Type  Large Enterprise  
Role  Coordinator and Innovation 
Management services  
Country  Italy  
Website  www.pnoconsultants.com   Logo  
 
  
Description of the legal entity  
CIAOTECH s.r.l., a company 100% owned by the PNO 
Group B.V. (hereafter PNO), is the largest independent 
public funding and innovation consultan cy in Europe, with 
30 years of hands -on expertise with more than 600 
innovation projects funded per year in most EU countries, 
annually raising approximately 1 Billion Euro for its clients. 
Created in 1985, PNO is a high-growth knowledge-intensive 
company, supporting over 2.000 clients throughout Europe, 
annually developing over 250 European consortia. PNO has 
offices in 7 European countries and in Israel, employing in 
around 500 professionals including scientists, engineers, 
consultants, a Brussels policy advisory service, as well as 
financial and legal experts, with consolidated experience in 
innovation processes an d funding in international working 
environments. The company specialised in Grants and 
Innovation Management, providing support services in 
Innovation processes, Technology Transfer, IT solutions and 
funding for research, development and innovation. PNO 
“Innovation Management” services deliver high quality 
support to large companies,  
SMEs, Universities, Research Institutes, Associations and clusters in the full cycle of the innovation process, 
including:  
• Analysing, defining and planning innovation processes; • Building innovation 
networks, partnerships and projects;  
• Managing Projects and driving innovation.  
  
PNO projects involve both small, medium sized and multinational industries, as well as Universities  
and Research institutes, amongst which are European and international leaders such as Amsterdam Schiphol Airport, 
BASF, Booking.com, DOW Chemical, CERN, Finmeccanica/Selex, Fraunhofer Institute, Harbours of Rotterdam and 
Antwerp, HP, Intel, Microsoft, Philips, Procter &  
Gamble, Solvay, TomTom, the Universities of Bordeaux, Ghent, Leuven, Rome, Naples, Utrecht, Warwick, 
Politecnico of Milano, Turin and many more.  
PNO is key partner and advi sor to the European Technology Platform (ETP) SusChem and the European Council for 
the Chemical Industry (CEFIC) and PNO recently (2019) co -developed the latest Strategic Innovation and Research  
Agenda. PNO has furthermore supported A.SPIRE in the developm ent of its first Roadmap and recently (2019) the 
annual monitoring report on SPIRE funded projects . Furthermore, PNO manages several European EC funded network 
projects to build communities of valuable SMEs, large industries, Universities and Research Ins titutes, to further 
innovation in specific sectors, such as the bio -based product market (BIOCHEM), transport (SMART), security 
(OSMOSIS), open source and embedded software (SHARE), Chemical Reg ions for Resource Efficiency (R4R) to 
name a few.   
Leveraging on its insights and knowledge on innovation methodologies and practices, PNO increasingly supports its 
clients as partner in strategic European research, development and innovation projects, to  carry-out market and  
 

 
 
functional analyses, develop and implement road mapping, dissemination and exploitation strategies and business plans 
and support professional project management.  
PNO participates in a significant number of European H2020 project that relate to the topic of the AI -CUBE one. 
Specifically, PNO has recently concluded the INSPIRE Coordination and Support Action (CSA) targeted at analysing 
the future of the European process industry, more particularly how novel technologies, such as AI, may lead to novel 
Business Models for the eight SPIRE process  industries. The Business Model Innovation Game developed together 
with SPIRE partner TNO, as well as the research needs paper from INSPIRE, will provide the basis for a dedicated 
AI-CUBE Business Model Game which can h elp to focus the AI and BD roadmap de velopments. Furthermore, PNO 
participated as partner to the NEXT-NET Coordination and Support Action, targeted at analysing long-term megatrend-
scenarios for the process – manufacturing – logistics supply chain, and developing a research roadmap for the su pply 
chain of the future. The output of INSPIRE and NEXT NET will provide direct knowledge and tool base for the AI -
CUBE project.    
  
Main tasks and responsibilities within the project  
PNO will be the coordinator of the project and therefore lead WP6. Also, PNO will lead WP5 “Dissemination, 
Communication and Exploitation”, that is designed to maximize awareness around the project results and create a 
sustainable dissemination and exploit ation platform, based on stakeholder involvement at regional, natio nal and 
European levels. Also, PNO will technically contribute to the other work packages with their expertise.  
  
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed a ctivities  
Ronald Weerdmeester   Profile    https://www.linkedin.com/in/ronweerdmeester/  
Several decades of consulting experience in Innovation strategy, visions, roadmaps and strategic resea rch and 
innovation agendas development.  
  
Ron WEERDMEESTER currently works as PNO Group Innovation Manager. Graduated in law at Rijksuniversiteit 
Groningen and holds a Certificate Degree in "Information Systems in Organisations", from Boston University. Member 
of the board of the PNO’s units PNO I nnovation and CiaoTech. Expert in innovation strategy, intelligence and 
innovation funding for industries, academia and public organisations. 25 years’ experience in development of 
technology development projects with a European dimension and EU funding (f rom FP4 to HORIZON 2020). 
Development of more than 100 successful EU projects. Co-author of multiple visions, roadmaps and strategic research 
and innovation agendas for sector organisations (process industry, chemistry, bioeconomy, water). Project manager of 
various Economic and Technological Intelligence actions, assisting industry in their innovation needs, developing 
European networks. Regular training to SMEs, multinationals and research organisations from vari ous European 
countries, on issues as Europe an research and innovation policies, open -innovation project building, project 
management in networks, technology transfer and the development of European partnerships.  
  
Chiara Eleonora De Marco  Profile   www.linkedin.com/in/chiaraedemarco   
  
Chiara (female) is an Innovation Consultant in the Strategic Innovation Services Team of CiaoTech/ PNO Group. She 
holds an International PhD in Innovation Management from the Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa (IT), a Master’s 
Degree in International Relations and International Protection of Human Rights, and another one in Diplomatic Studies, 
both awarded form the Società Italiana per l’Organizzazione Internazionale (SIOI) of Rome (IT). She graduated summa 
cum laude in International Law from LUMSA University, Rome (IT).  
Chiara has working experiences both in National and International environments, embra cing academia, public and 
private sector. She was Postdoctoral Scholar at Haas School of Business of the University of California, Berkeley (US), 
working on Corporate Capability Building Programs for Digital Transformation, and at the Institute of Manageme nt 
of Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna (Pisa, IT), conducting research and leading national and international projects on open 
innovation, digital business model and strategy, innovation policy, small business R&D, research spinoffs, technology 
and knowledge tra nsfer. Over her years in Academia, she conducted research on and led consultancy project for the 
private sector (both SMEs and large corporations) and the pub lic one (European Commission, JRC), joining theory 
and practice of open innovation to identify and  help addressing bottlenecks and pain points in corporate strategy, but 
also recommendation for decision makers in the field of innovation.  
As member of the Organizing Committee of the World Open Innovation Conference 
(https://woic.corporateinnovation.berkeley.edu/), she is in charge with the management of Indus try Sessions and 
Workshops.  
 
Chiara disseminated her research work in several international conferences and forums, joining the international 
innovation community across the EU and the US. Her work has been published on peer -reviewed, international 
academic journals, EU publications, national publications, specialised blogs and newspaper.   
 
 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to the call 
content  
  
Analysing, defining and planning innovation processes  
• Market, stakeholder & Technology Intelligence. Provides a helicopter view on who’s doing what in the EU and 
beyond, benchmarking target technology with other technologies and solutions, analysing and identifying the 
essential markets that need to be targeted;  
• Systematic Innovation using advanced methodologies (eg: TRIZ). Discovers new technologies, partners and 
markets, structuring and driving open innovation processes in multi-stakeholder contexts, or for individual clients;  
• Vision and roadmap development. Shows where to focus, organising, supporting and reporting on vision and 
innovation roadmaps of interest.  
  
Building innovation networks, partnerships and projects  
• Develop innovation projects, proposals and consortia. Builds innovation proje ct with in ternational partners 
supported by public funding, bringing the best funding expertise, relevant networks and hands -on support;  
• Effective linking to innovation ideas, partners and funding across sectors and Europe. Enables becoming a partner 
in projects supported by public funding to discover or bring innovation and technology to new markets, unlocking 
networks of projects and stakeholders.  
  
Relevant Publications  
• The Value of Water, Multiple Waters, for multiple purposes and users, Ron Weerdmeester et al. (2016) – WssTP, 
The European Water Platform, URL: http://wsstp.eu/publications/  
• Spire Roadmap, Ron Weerdmeester, Pablo Tello (2016) – SPIRE Sustainable Process Industry through Resource 
and Eneregy Efficiency, URL: www.spire2030.eu/what/walking-thespire-roadmap/spire-Roadmap  
• Knowledge Management Maturity Model / Roadmap, Ron Weerdmeester, Chiara Pocaterra, Mark Hefke (2003)  
 –  Information  Societies  Technology  Programme,  URL:  
www.providersedge.com/docs/km_articles/KM_Maturity_Model_of_VI SION_Project.pdf  
• Supporting Technology Innovation Processes in Manufacturing, Paolo Salvatore et al. (2016) – 2nd International 
Conference on Quality Engineer ing and Management, Cluj -Napoca, Romania. URL: www.market-
itproject.eu/wpcontent/uploads/2012/08/SMEs_Innovation_QIEM_2012-Final.pdf   
  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subj ect of this proposal  
  
PNO’s excellence and expertise on topics related to the main tasks in AI -Cube project 
is grounded on the involvement in several European projects in the area of supply chain, 
digital technologies as well as roadmapping and forecas ting. Being partner in mul tiple 
EU-funded projects (FP7, H2020, SPIRE and eco -innovation projects) and several 
commercial assignments, PNO fully qualifies as a relevant and positive long -term 
stakeholder within the European process industry community. PNO has been the  
architect and is currently participating in several industry support networks with Support from the European 
Commission in the Security, Transport, Biotech and Chemical sectors, promoting the establishment of industry 
collaborations, knowledg e transfer and  technology acceleration. PNO is also involved as advisor in roadmap 
development for the chemical industry towards Public Private Partnership Programmes in HORIZON 2020 (eg: 
SPIRE), with an important focus on industrial processes, as well as European networking and incubator projects with 
various smart specialisation regions which will provide a real life experience base. In the SPIRE domain, the following 
list represents the most recent projects related to AI -Cube topics both from the technol ogical and the  organizational 
point of view:  
  
2018-2022 DESTINY (IA - H2020 – SPIRE: Development of an Efficient 
Microwave System for material Transformation in Energy Intensive processes for an 
improved Yeld). The project focused on the development of an innovative, scalable, 
sustainable and resource efficient solutions for energy -intensive process industries. 
Within DESTINY, PNO is responsible for conducting strategic analysis and 
intelligence on  
 

 
 
the market and stakeholder landscape, to develop inno vative busines s models and strategies for the 
commercialization and impactful exploitation of the results generated by the project activities.  
  
2017-2019: NEXT -NET (NMPB37 -2016-CSA: Next generation 
technologies for networked Europe). The project develop ed a joint 
roadmap where the effort of different initiatives like EFFRA, SPIRE, 
ALICE and ICT initiatives were put together to define the future of  
supply chain based on a distributed model for customized and sustainable production and distribution. Starting from 
the creation of a European network involving the most important ETPs and PPPs, NEXT -NET reached a critical 
mass of relevant stakeholders from all targeted industries and scientific domains by mean of direct actions along the 
whole project life. Th e project identified future industrial scenarios for 2030, through the analysis of the 
socioeconomic analysis of trends and drivers in the market and their impact on innovation & t echnology 
development.  
Furthermore, simulation or system dynamics were used  to formalize the industrial scenarios. PNO’s role in the 
project was to represent the interests of process industry, and keep the contacts with stakeholders, especially in the 
steel and chemical. PNO was in charge of the collaboration mechanisms with stakeholders and the validation of the 
action plan. Being the Project coordinator of the project INSPIRE, PNO kept the contacts with this project and 
assured the transferability of the results to optimize its impact on NEXT-NET. Moreover, PNO will maintained the 
contacts with the SPIRE community.  
  
2016-2017: INSPIRE (CSA – GA n° 723748, SPIRE -06-2016-CSA: Business models for 
flexible and delocalized approaches for intensified process ing). PNO and the AI -CUBE 
consortium will build on and follow up to their experience in the INSPIRE project, of which 
PNO was coordinator, while ZLC and CNR were partner. INSPIRE targeted at analysing 
market trends and their impact on supply chain configurations. INSPIRE explored how these 
configurations in industrial locations ca n be flexibly designed based on state of the art of 
enabling technologies, as well as how resource efficiency benefits and hence environmental  
footprint can be optimised. INSPIRE contributed to the analysis of the current European 
networks, for the first time supporting the integration between process industry and discrete manufacturing, and 
identifying current practices of delocalization, opportunities for and barriers against fle xibility/delocalization, and 
current practices for joint resource management  and industrial symbiosis. The role of PNO in the INSPIRE project 
concerns activities of networking in the European Technology Platform and PPPs, and with relevant stakeholders. 
PNO will build on this experience to conduct its activities in the AI-CUBE project.  
  
2015-2020: MEMERE (RIA – GA n° 679933, H2020 -SPIRE-05-2015: MEthane activation 
via integrated MEmbrane Reactors). The key objective of the MEMERE project was to the 
design, scale-up and validate a novel membrane reactor for the direct conversion of methane 
into ethylene with integrated air separation. The foc us of the project was on allowing 
integration of different process steps in a single multifunctional unit and achieving 
significantly higher yields in comparison with the conventional reactor technologies, 
combined with improved energy efficiency. PNO role in the project was to develop business 
model and  
business plan; support exploitation plan and activities, and the dissemination, with special focus on industrial 
stakeholders.  
  
2015-2019: REE4EU (IA, GA n° 680507, H2020-SPIRE-07-2015: Integrated High  
Temperature Electrolysis (HTE) and Ion Liquid Extraction (ILE) for a strong and independent 
European Rare Earth Elements (REE) Supply Chain). The project developed new 
technologies to recover  and recycle Critical Raw Materials. The consortium was led by 
SINTEF, and PNO supported stakeholder analyses and business modelling. The REE4EU 
pilot has successfully treated several tons of in -process wastes and end -of-life products 
containing rare earth elements, resulting in the recovery of almost hundred kilos of rare earth 
alloys directly from the mixed rare earth oxides feedstock produced. The alloy will be reused 
in the manufacturing  
of permanent magnet products.   
  
Description of any significant  infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
PNO will make available to the project its virtual Open 
Innovation Platform www.innovationplace.eu, proprietary 
online networking, community building, management and 
dissemination tool, hosting more than 15.000 registered 
users, all with a relevant innovation profile.  

 
 
   
Partner  Zaragoza Logistics Center  
Short Name  ZLC  Type  Research Center  
Role  Partner  Country  Spain  
Website  www.zlc.edu.es   Logo  
   
Description of the legal entity  
  
Zaragoza Logistics Center (ZLC) is an international center of excellence for research and education in logistics and 
Supply Chain Management that actively engages with industry and the public sector to develop and disseminate 
knowledge to accomplish its mi ssion. ZLC acts as a catalyst for innovation and research in the area of logistics and 
SCM. A core purpose of ZLC is to integrate supply chain management into the business enterprise.  
ZLC was established by the Government of Aragon in Spain, in partnership with the MIT Center for Transportation 
and Logistics (CTL-MIT) and the University of Zaragoza. ZLC is directly linked to the development of PLAZA – the 
largest logistics park in Europ e - and has partnered with the Center for Transportation and Logistics at MIT to form 
the MIT -Zaragoza International Logistics Program. Also, the MIT Global SCALE (Supply Chain and Logisti cs 
Excellence) Network was initially formed in 2004, with the opening of ZLC, and it now spans four continents with the 
addition of the Center for Latin American Logistics Innovation (CLI -Colombia), the Malaysia Institute for Supply 
Chain Innovation (MISI) , the Luxembourg Center of Logistics (LCL) and the Ningbo Supply Cha in Innovation 
Institute China (NSIIC). In 2006 the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science designated ZLC as the National Centre 
of Excellence for research in the area of logistics and s upply chain management (CNC -LOGISTICA). 
CNCLOGISTICA acts as coordin ator of the Spanish Technology Platform in Logistics, Intermodality and Mobility 
(Logistop).   
The research program is aligned to Zaragoza Logistics Center’s (ZLC) mission of focusing on e nhancing economic 
growth and competitiveness through innovation. To this end ZLC has developed 100+ R&D collaborative projects 
with regional, national and European industry focused on logistics and SCM. At European level, ZLC has participated 
in 25+ European Union funded projects, being ranked as the Spanish entity with mo st EU funded projects in the field 
of logistics.  
The Advanced Inventory Management Research Group works on issues focused on developing inventory management 
strategies and models to increase supply chain value, particularly using stochastic inventory models where randomness 
could originate from either demand or supply.  
ZLC is also a founding member of ALICE (Alliance for Logistics Innovation through Collaboration in Europe), which 
is the European Technology Platform for Logistics. The Director, Dr. Susana  Val Blasco, is a member of the ALICE 
Steering Group and ZLC faculty participate actively in ALICE Working Groups, one of them devoted to Systems & 
Technologies for Interconnected Logistics.    
Furthermore, ZLC has a strong network of contacts and collaborators that involves relevant European and international 
contacts in the value chain sector, including policy makers, process industries, academia and research organisations.  
  
Main tasks and responsibilities within the project  
  
ZLC will lead WP4 devoted to the definition of a roadmap on AI and BD technologies of application in process 
industries for all the SPIRE industrial sectors. ZLC will analyse the gaps and opportunities of data driven technologies 
among processes and sector s looking for synergies. A cases study on business models will be performed following 
business models game developed in INSPIRE project.  
ZLC’s wide experience in the participation in European projects related to logistics and supply chain makes it the ideal 
partner to this consortium within the framework of the AI-CUBE project and participate in its technical workpackages.  
  
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities   
Mustafa Çagri  Profile   www.zlc.edu.es › dr-mustafa-cagri-gurbuz  

 
 
  
Dr. Mustafa Çagri Gürbüz (male) is Professor of Supply Chain Management at the MIT -Zaragoza International 
Logistics Program. He is also a Research Affiliate at the MIT Center for Transpor tation and Logistics. He completed 
his PhD at the Department of Managemen t Science at the University of Washington in July 2006. He earned his BS 
and MS degrees from the Department of Industrial Engineering at Bilkent University, Turkey in 1999 and 2001, 
respectively. His main research interests are inventory and supply chain management, optimizing distribution systems, 
contracts, and modelling operations systems. Mr. Gurbuz has been a consultant to AT&T Wireless, AREX, and 
RENFE. He has been a visiting professor at MIT CTL in 2009 and City University of Hong Kong in 2014. He has also 
published in journals such as Management Science and Operations Research Letters.  
  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements re levant to the call 
content  
  
• Boyonas M. I., Olavarría L., Sáenz M.J., Scenario Planning: Preparing the Future of Global Supply Chains. 
Designing and Implementing Global Supply Chain Management. IGI Global Book. Book Chapter  number 4. 
Pp.51-91, December 2015 (Editors: Sudhanshu Joshi & Rohit Joshi).  
• Val S., Kehinde A., Machado A., Ciprés C., Supply Chain Network Design. Tackling Regulations, Lead Time 
and Cost Efficiency. Sustainable Logistics and Supply Chains: Innovations and Integral Approaches 
(Contributions to Management Science). Springer, Book chapter, October 2015 (Editors: Joost de Bock & Meng 
Lu).  
• Maestrini, V ,  Luzzini, D, Maccarrone, P.,   Caniato, F. Supply chain performance measurement systems: A 
systematic review and research agenda. Inte rnational Journal of Production Economics. Vol. 183, Jan 2017, pp. 
299-315  
• Diaz, R., Marsillac, E. Evaluating Strategic Remanufacturing Supply Chains Decisions.  International Journal of 
Production Research. Volume 55 (9), 2017, pp. 2522-2539  
• Xu, J. Serrano, A. Lin, B., Optimal Production and Rationing Policy of Two -Stage Tandem Production System, 
International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 185, March 2017, pp 100 – 112  
  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
  
• INSPIRE: Towards growth for business by flexible processing in customer -driven value chains 
(01/09/201931/08/2018) - https://www.zlc.edu.es/research/projects/towards-growth-for-business-by-flexible-
processing-incustomer-driven-value-chains/   
• NEXT-NET: Next generation Technologies for networked Europe (01/10/2017 – 31/12/2019) -  
https://www.zlc.edu.es/research/projects/next-generation-technologies-for-networked-europe/   
• SELIS: Towards a Shared European Logistics Intelligent Information Space – (01/09/2016 – 31/08/2019) - 
https://www.selisproject.eu/default.aspx   
• CLUSTERS 2.0: Open network of hyper connected logistics clusters towards Physical Internet – (01/05/2017 – 
30/04/2020) - http://www.clusters20.eu/   
• SENSE:  Accelerating  the  Path  Towards  Physical  Internet  - 
 (01/10/2017  –  31/03/2020)  -  
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/212876/factsheet/en   
  
Description of any significant infrastr ucture and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
Not expected  
  
  
    
 
Partner  Fraunhofer Gesellschaft zur Foerderung der angewandten Forschung e.v.  
Short 
Name  
Fraunhofer  Type  NGO  
Role  Partner  Country  Germany  
 
 
Website  www.fraunhofer.de/en.html   Logo  
    
Description of the legal entity  
  
The Fraunhofer Society is the largest research organization for applied research in Europe. Its research fields are 
orientated towards persons’ requirements: health, safety, communication, mobility, energy and the environment. The 
Society is spread amongst 60 institutes on different fields of applied science. Within AI-CUBE the Institute for Material 
Flow and Logistics (IML) participates, which is said to be the first address in holistic logistics research and currently 
combines digitalisation and artificial intelligence in their Silicon Economy strategy.  
Fraunhofer IML was founded in 1981 in Dortmund, Germany, the IML currently occupies 315 employees as well as 
250 post-graduates and students to works in all fields of internal and external logistics. In line with the Fraunhofer idea 
a twofold approach is f ollowed: Fraunhofer IML once develops problem solutions for direct use by companies, and 
secondly, conducts prelimi nary research of two to five years. Teams form according to project and customer 
requirements to create cross-industry and customer-specific solutions, inter alia in the field of supply chain management 
& its simulation, closed loop economy and business pr ocess modelling. Artificial intelligence, smart finance and the 
Internet of Things are among the current research focal points. Fraunhofer IM L coordinates the Internet of Things 
throughout Fraunhofer. With the current strategic focus on Silicon Economy, it  explores new business models via 
platform economy approaches that centre on digitalisation and artificial intelligence.  
  
Main tasks and responsibilities within the project  
  
The key role from Fraunhofer IML within AI -CUBE lies within the expertise of  AI and its use within supply chains 
and supply chain management. Fraunhofer IML supports the project twofold. Firstly, it provides strong experience in 
material stock management and supply chain for the process industry. Secondly, it supports on the use and application 
areas of AI within the field of supply chain management.  
Fraunhofer IML will be work package leader of WP3. With its expertise for AI and knowledge about the process 
industry, Fraunhofer IML guides the categ orization of current AI and BD te chnologies. Being involved in the EU 
project “Transforming Transport”, Fraunhofer IML can refer to vast experience in the field of big data technologies in 
the area of transportation and create respective synergies. Its exp erience from the EU project “Next Net” supports 
methodologically for the evaluation of technologies used per sector and their level of maturity. Within the consortium 
Fraunhofer supports the exploitation of AI methods and BD technologies.  
Fraunhofer IML furthermore involved in the tasks T1.3, T2.2 and T2.3, as well as 4.3 and 5.3 to enable insights towards 
AI throughout the project.  It thus enables a continuous and streamlined approach and knowledge exchange.  
  
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities  
Saskia 
Sardesai  Profile   www.iml.fraunhofer.de/en/fields_of_activity/enterpriselogistics/supply_chain_engineeri
ng/team.html  
  
Saskia Sardesai (female) spend her first working experience with a logistics service provider in India. Having joined  
Fraunhofer IML, she now focuses on supply chain planning, AI in supply chain management and simulation studies. 
In her current position as a Senior Scientist SCM Research and Strategy, she puts a strong focus on Research Projects 
with innovative Supply Ch ain and Collaboration aspects based on AI. She guided the EU CSA “Next Generation 
Technologies for Networked Europe” as a project leader from Fraunhofer IML.  
  
Andreas 
Nettsträt
er  
Profile   de.linkedin.com/in/andreas-nettstr%C3%A4ter-9894b086  
  
Andreas Nettsträter (male) studied Computer Science, with minor Mechanical Engineering at the University of  
Dortmund. He is responsible for strategic initiatives with focus on European activities at the Fraunhofer -Institute for  
Material Flow and Logistics in Dortmund. His focus is on innovative IT solutions for logistics, supply chain  
management and manufacturing. He is also Executive Group Member and vice chair of the working group “Information 
systems for interconnected logistics” of the European Technology Platform ALICE. He has participated in several FP7 
and H2020 European research projects.  
   

 
 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to the call 
content  
  
• Wenzel, Hannah; Smit, Daniel; Sardesai, Saskia. A literature review on machine learning in supply chain 
management. In: Proceedings of the Hamburg International Conference of Logistics (HICL). epubli GmbH, 2019. 
S. 413-441.  
• Moroff, Nikolas Ulrich; Sardesai, Saskia. Machine learning in demand pl anning: cross -industry overview. In: 
Hamburg International Conference of Logistics (HICL) 2019. epubli GmbH, 2019. S. 355 -383.  
  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
  
European Projects  
• European  project  CSA  NextNet  –  Next  Generation  Technologies  for 
 Networked  Europe  
(https://nextnetproject.eu/) provided a strategic research agenda for the development of future supply chains  
• Transforming Transport is a Big Data Value Lighthouse project for more efficient and sustainable transport 
(https://transformingtransport.eu/)   
  
National Projects  
• Innovationlab “Hybrid services for logistics” (founded by BMBF)   
• Competence Center Machine Learning Rhine-Ruhr “ML2R” for the development of modular ML applications 
(https://www.ml2r.de/en/landingpage/)  
• Machine Learning Research Clan (https://leistungszentrum-logistik-it.de/)  
  
Several industrial projects have been conducted in terms of local stock managemen t and transfer to global inventory 
management. This includes a simulation study to streamline shipping structure and packaging lines.  
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
Not expected  
  
  
    
 
Partner  IRIS Technology Solutions S.L.  
Short Name  IRIS  Type  SME  
Role  Partner  Country  Spain  
Website  www.iristechnologygroup.com/  Logo  
 
  
Description of the legal entity  

 
 
IRIS Technology Group (http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/) is an advanced engineering Group 
that was established in Barcelona in 2007. IRIS Technology Solutions S.L, located in Barcelona, 
specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based realtime 
quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, 
predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product 
line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for at-line and in-line process monitoring.   
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of 
MEMs, Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we 
leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining 
techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support systems. In addition to 
photonics-based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for 
smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are 
cloudbased for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.   
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior 
Management, and an Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation 
roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future:  
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process 
optimisation  
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms)  
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation  
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private 
projects with industry partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in 
collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, 
FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff 
with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet 
chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO  
9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. 
We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D 
services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE 
and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of 
companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry).  
 
 
 
  
  
Main tasks and responsibilities within the project  
  
IRIS will lead WP1 where they will evaluate the current landscape  for AI and BD technologies presence in industry, 
mapping the existing technologies, their applicability in process industry environments and their current uptake in 
different process industries. Coming from this status analysis, a plan will be developed to generate relevant impact on 
the 5 selected macro application areas.   
IRIS is an active member of A.SPIRE with a relevant involvement in coordinating and participating in 
process and manufa cturing innovation projects in H2020 framework. IRIS has a matrix  of 
multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in engineering and science. 
With its team and resources, including electronics, mechatronics, mechanical, optical, industrial design 
engineers, as well as specialists in systems en gineering, application programming and web 
development. The group can carry out full system design and engineering, including electronic design 
and assembly, firmware and software development , electrical harnesses and interconnections, 
mechanical design fo r enclosure and prototype integration, as well as installation, validation and 
industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in production plants. In addition to this broad 
crossdisciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of data scientists , chemometricians, 
chemists and physicists, among others, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed.  
  
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities   
Elodie Bugnicourt  Profile   https://www.linkedin.com/in/elodie-bugnicourt-696a881/  
  
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT (female) Project manager and Leader of the innovation unit in IRIS since 2009.  
Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from   
National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Coordinated several European projects in the fields of  
 
bio-based packaging materials development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: 
Arkema; Wacker Chemie, Ashland.  
  
Albert Torres  Profile   https://www.linkedin.com/in/albertorres/  

 
 
  
MSc ALBERT TORRES. PMO Manager (Male) at IRIS. Masters in Industrial Engineering (2009) from the 
Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC -ETSEIB) in Barcelona. Postgraduate i n Project Management (2013) from 
the University of Barcelona (UB -IL3) and currentl y developing a Postgraduate in Business Innovation, from the 
University of Catalonia (UPC). He spent almost 5 years as being member of the International Project Office of LEITAT  
Research Centre, where he could deployed the knowledge and experience of mana ging and coordinate Public Funded  
Research Projects under the different financial International, National and Regional schemes: H2020, ERA-Nets, JTIs, 
CIEN, RIS3CAT,… sharing experiences with the top R&D performing entities around Europe. At IRIS, he is l eading 
the PMO Office with a team of five Project Managers, leading them with passion and optimistic attitude, believing that 
great results are achievable in well-functioning teams. Moreover, contributes on the business strategy development and 
commercial decision-making, sharing his experience in risk management and portfolio management.    
  
David Nettleton  Profile   https://www.linkedin.com/in/dnettleton/  
  
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON. (male) Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat  
Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of 
Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.S c. (Hons) Co mputer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has 
over 20 years experience of applying data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical 
techniques (including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, 
such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search 
behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured at two universities. 
He has published a diversity of articles in specialised data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He has 
participated in several competitive multi -partner research projects and has a European patent application for a graph 
matching algorithm.   
  
Ignacio Montero  Profile   http://www.innovationatiris.com/capacities/  
  
MEng IGNACIO MONTERO CASTRO (Male). Project and Innovation Manager. Chemical Engineer from University 
of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, and Master in Process Engineering from Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain. 
Ignacio comes from a background in pr ocess control and industrial safety, developing applied research in 
selfoptimizing control strategies for industrial facilities and environmental risk analysis for the Catalan department of 
Industry. He spent almost 3 years on the Circular Economy unit of LEITAT Technological Centre working as R&D 
engineer and technical project manager. During this period, he was responsible for management, execution and 
proposal writing of Public Funded Research Projects under the different financial International, National and Regional 
schemes: H2020, CIEN, LIFE. Since joining IRIS in July 2018, he has been providing business management services 
to support the award, coordinatio n and implementation of EU funded projects on Applied Photonics, ICT & 
Digitalisation and Circular & Bio-economy sectors.  
  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to the call 
content  
  
• Predicting rice blast disease: machine learning versus process-based models. Nettleton, D.F., Katsantonis, D., 
Kalaitzidis, A. Sarafijanovic-Djukic, N., Puigdollers, P., Confalonieri, R. BMC Bioinformatics 20, 514 (2019) 
doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3065-1  
• A. Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing Plants. 
Monitoring and Improvement.  Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley-Vch. Print ISBN: 978-3-
527-34074-3    
• Relevant product lines: Monitoring devices for real-time quality control: o  Visum PALM: NIR technology for 
incoming material quality control and detection of adulteration.    
o Visum In-line In-Line NIR monitoring for product standardization and increase of production efficiency.   
o HSI: Hyperspectral imaging solutions for the industry  
• B2B contracts in the field of process industry monitoring and digitalisation.  
1. Related services: Chemometrics model development and training.  
  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the s ubject of this proposal  
 
 
  
• SPRING, H2020 SPIRE, GA 767412, Setting the framework for the enhanced impact of SPIRE projects  
• SHAREBOX, H2020 SPIRE, GA 680843, Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources  
• PROPAT, H2020 SPIRE, GA 637232, Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving 
standards and optimising industrial operations  
• DIY4U, H2020 FOF, GA 870148, Open Innovation Digital Platform and Fablabs for Collaborative Design and 
Production of personalised/customised FMCG  
• DATAMINE 4.0, H2020 MSCA, GA 752907, Advanced Data Modeling and Analysis Applied to next  
Generation Industry 4.0 settings and the Internet of Things  
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to t he 
proposed work  
Not expected  
  
  
     
 
 
 
Partner  National Council of Research  
Short Name  CNR-STIIMA  Type  Research Organization  
Role  Partner  Country  Italy  
Website  www.stiima.cnr.it   Logo  
 
  
Description of the legal entity  
  
CNR-STIIMA is the Institute of Intelligent Industrial Technologies and Systems for Advanced Manufacturing of the 
National Council of Research. Its strategic mission is the growth of competitiveness and sustainability of 
manufacturing in Italy and Europe throug h research and industrial innovation. The RTD activities of the institute aim 
at innovating products, processes and organisations in several research areas, by focusing its competences on following 
applicative areas: mechatronic knowledge -based systems, ro botics, multi -layer adaptive control systems, 
microsystems, virtual prototyping and integrated simulation of mechatronic manufacturing systems and supply chain 
models.   
CNR-STIIMA acts as a strategic player in the continuous process of definition of the European, National and Regional 
visions on the manufacturing sector, through the participation in initiatives and platforms devoted to the formulation 
of new paradigms in the area of Manufacturing. In fact, CNR -STIIMA is among the contributors who inspired the 
creation of the ManuFuture platform and is a founding member of the EFFRA association and contributes to the EFFRA 
Strategic Roadmap outlining the guidelines for European research and innovation activities in the discrete 
manufacturing sector.  
CNR-STIIMA is also founder and is part of the management body of the National Cluster of Intelligent Factories in 
Italy (www.fabbricaintelligente.it), cluster of almost 300 organizations including research centers, industrial 
companies and associations.   
At the moment, CNR-STIIMA has active more than 30 EU projects in the areas of FOF, NMBP, 
ICT, SPIRE and CIRC and more than 10 national projects.  
  
Main tasks and responsibilities within the project  
  
CNR-STIIMA is involved in AI -CUBE for its experience in roadmappi ng and forecasting developed in previous EU 
and national projects. During the project CNR -STIIMA will be involved in the activities related to the analysis and 
mapping of technologies and in particular into the definitio n of a assessment framework to evalu ate the level of 
application of these technologies for the definition of a roadmap. The knowledge and background on Supply chain 
topics will be also used to developing project content in the macro-areas asked by the call.  
  
Profiles of persons primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities  
Rosanna Fornasiero  Profile   it.linkedin.com › rosanna-fornasiero-47a24614  
  
Rosanna Fornasiero (Female) is a researcher at CNR working in the area of Supply Chain Management, Mass 
Customization, Innovation and industrial policies. She has experience in many EU projects (FP6, FP7 and H2020) and 
she has acted as scientific manager a nd project coordinator in EU FP7 and H2020 projects in the area of NMP, FOF, 
ICT. She is responsible of the Roadmapping g roup of the Italian Cluster of Intelligent factories 
(www.fabbricaintelligente.it). She works with industrial associations to support r egional research projects and 
technology transfer process to SMEs. She has more than 60 publications in scientific journa ls and conference 
proceedings and she is part of the scientific committee of conferences in the IFIP are like PRO -VE (IFIP-WG5.5), 
APMS (IFIP-WG5.7), ICE conference.  
  
Other CNR-ITIA staff members who will be involved in the project activities are industrial and management engineers 
experienced in research and industrial projects related to managerial implication of digitalization, model s for 
collaborative networks, digital technologies.  
  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services, or other achievements relevant to the call 
content  

 
 
  
• Pessot, E., Zangiacomi, A., Berkers, F., Hidalgo -Carvajal, D., Weerdmeester, R., & Fornasiero, R. (2019, 
September). Investigating Supply Chains Models and Enabling Technologies Towards Collaborative Networks. 
In Working Conference on Virtual Enterprises ( pp. 335 -343). Springer, Cham. PRO -VE conference 2019, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-28464-0_29  
• Zangiacomi A., Pessot E., Fornasiero R., Bertetti M.& Sacco M. (2019) Moving towards digitalization: a multiple 
case study in manufacturing, Production Planning & Control, DOI: 10.1080/09537287.2019.1631468   
• Zangiacomi A., Oesterle J., Fornasiero R., Sacco R. & Azevedo A. (2017) The implementation of digital 
technologies for operations management: a cas e study for manufacturing apps.  Production Planning & C ontrol 
Vol. 28 , Iss. 16, 2017.  
• Camarinha-Matos, L. M., Fornasiero, R., & Afsarmanesh, H. (2017). Collaborative Networks as a Core Enabler 
of Industry 4.0. In “Collaboration in Data rich environment” (pp. 3-17). Springer.  
• Macchion, L., Fornasiero, R. and Vinelli, A., 2016. Supply chain configurations: a model to evaluate performance 
in customised productions. International Journal of Production Research, pp.1 -14.  
  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
  
STIIMA-CNR Scientific and Technological background and excellence on topics related to the main tasks in AI-Cube 
project is grounded on the involvement in several European projects in t he area of supply chain, digital technologies 
as well as roadmapping and forecasting. The following list represents the most recent projects related to AI-Cube topics 
both from the technological and the organizational point of view and are:  
  
• 2017-2019: NEXT-NET (NMPB37-2016-CSA: Next generation technologies for networked Europe). Role: 
Project coordinator and principal investigator. Most important scientific activities: development of a strategic 
research agenda for supply chain of 2030; future scenarios definition, future st rategies to integrate smart 
manufacturing and logistics processes.  
• 2016-2017: INSPIRE (SPIRE-06-2016-CSA: Business models for flexible and delocalized approaches for 
intensified processing). Role: partner. Most important scientific activities: roadmap for the Integration of process 
industry and discrete manufacturing through innovative technologies. Definition of supply chain models for 
process industry.  
• 2017-2019: DISRUPT project (http://www.disrupt -project.eu/): Decentralised archit ectures for optimised  
operations via virtualised processes and manufacturing ecosystem collaboration, funded under FOF11 -2016 
H2020. Main activities are related to development of CPS system with industrial application in automotive and 
white goods sectors. Moreover, development of inbound logistics management tool for automotive sector.   
• 2014-2017: APPS4aME project (FoF.NMP.2012-6: Engineering Apps for advanced Manufacturing  
Engineering) Main actitivies: tools and methods for mobile applications in the ma nufacturing sector.  
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work  
Not expected