2.2 Measures to maximise impact  
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation (DCE) activities play a key role in the AI-CUBE project, as 
they contribute to foster impact, both during the duration of its EC funded lifecycle as well as beyond it, during 
its possible business oriented follow up. The aim of DCE activities is the maximization of awareness of the 
results achieved by the AI -CUBE project and the generation of a sustainable dissemination and exploitation 
platform based on the involvement of different audiences that have an interest in the output of the project. The 
aim of AI -CUBE is to provide an overview of the state of play in AI and BD applications throughout the 
European process industry and deliver an in-depth research and innovation agenda, including indication on the 
priorities on which solution providers (e.g. universities, software developers and the process industries 
themselves) should focus in the upcoming decennia. The agenda would also include policy recommendation, 
outlining how policies may (or may not) favour data -driven technology developments and take -up in the 
European process industries, going towards increased competitiveness and sustainability of an industry 
underpinning all economic sectors in Europe, as its key material and solutions providers.   
  
Therefore, targeted audiences for the AI-CUBE project are:  
1) The eight SPIRE process industries sectors  themselves, through A.SPIRE  as well as the INSPIRE 
European Process Industry Forum A.SPIRE association has been already contacted and they have agreed 
to being invited to the Steering Committee. Furthermore, feedback from A.SPIRE Board of Directors 
will be facilitated thanks to the appointment of Ms Oonagh MacNerney, CEO of IRIS, as honorary 
member representing SMEs. A relevant set of more than 100 industrial parks already identified in the 
A.SPIRE project INSPIRE targeting novel Business Models for the process industry, amongst others 
based on digitalisation and sustainability. This platform will enable the EU process industry to share 
   
  
knowledge and expertise achieved through the AI -CUBE Project concerning: 1) the level of maturity 
and penetration, and 2) the strategic exploitation of synergies and similarities in AI and BD technology 
application; and 3) guidelines and new business models for a flexible implementation across different 
process industry.  
2) The Value Chain Partners of the European process industries . Being the process industry a key 
material supplier in the Value Chain, it increasingly integrates and tunes its Supply Chain Planning with 
Value Chain partners such as the (discrete) Manufacturing industries (e.g. automotive, electronics, etc.) 
and Logistics. Digitalisation and data -driven technologies will play an increasingly important role in 
optimising, dynamizing and (re)configuring the Value Chains in an ever more modularised process and 
manufacturing industry. The AI -CUBE project will leverage on the recently concluded NEXT -NET 
project, to share knowledge of possible AI and BD applications that foster such collaborations, using 
the stakeholder community of VC partners from Manufacturing and Logistics.   
3) AI solution providers: the AI-CUBE project will provide an overview of the white spots for AI in the 
process industry and, hence, whether and how they can re present an opportunity to develop, offer and 
exploit AI solutions. The project will reach out to this community with relevant information and 
recommendations, also through easy to read infographics and informative video.  
4) Policy Makers : Policies such as GDPR and standardisation of data -formats that facilitate AI 
applications across multiple VC partners play an important role in fostering AI applications. Policy 
makers are hence a relevant audience for recommendations of the AI-CUBE project.  
  
The AI -CUBE Project will identify the most common AI and BD technologies and define their level of 
maturity and penetration in different EU process industry. In so doing, it will also identify the drivers and 
barriers for the diffusion of these tec hnologies, analysing the synergies to be leveraged for a cross -sectoral 
implementation of the technologies, and the challenges embedded in their development and application.  
The PPs strongly believe that, in order to create synergies among different proce ss industries, it is crucial to 
make concrete showcases and disseminate project outcomes and knowledge available to an increasingly 
expanding audience. This includes networking partners and stakeholders achieved through an iterative 
stakeholder expansion s trategy, based on the INSPIRE project, a list including more than 100 European 
stakeholders that have been individually approached by the members of INSPIRE to be involved in project 
activities. The process will select form the INSPIRE list of 100 the industrial stakeholder, users, orchestrators, 
and solution providers, which are already applying AI and BD technologies to a minimum extent. The process 
will then iteratively test and expand towards a wider EU network of stakeholders, industrial clusters and parks, 
creating a ‘platform’ of actors collaborating with and interested in the AI -CUBE Project activities. The 
platform will be made available in open access to the maximum extent possible, in compliance with Intellectual 
Property Rights (IPR), company policies, and trade or industrial secrets. Not shareable results, i.e. covered by 
confidentiality agreements, will be adapted and made available to all targeted groups (i.e. 8 SPIRE process 
industry sectors, Value Chain partners of the European process indust ry, AI solution providers, and Policy 
Makers). The relevant project material will be made available through the AI -CUBE Project website and 
published through the project communication channels, including newsletters and other public materials. The 
coordinator, PNO, together with the PPs, will organize the dissemination so to obtain the maximum reach 
while controlling licensing and IPR issues related to the contents.  
  
The dissemination and exploitation strategy consist of three separate dissemination expansion phases:  
  
1. Inward Oriented Exploitation and Dissemination:   
a. Validation of the AI-CUBE business models, tools, knowledge base, and solutions in a contained set 
of stakeholders, identified through an ad hoc stakeholder analysis. In this phase, the stak eholder 
analysis will also be complemented with the MAMCA methodology in order to reach wider support 
and consensus to the activities of the project and consult a broad community of stakeholders 
representing the main sectors of the SPIRE industry in Europe.  
 
  
b. The analysis will start from the members of the 100 European industrial parks included in the 
INSPIRE lists already mentioned and will further be refined by focusing on the stakeholders that are 
already applying AI and BD technologies to a minimum exten t. This specific focus on AI and BD 
aspects will allow the definition of a subset of relevant process industries potentially interested in the 
activities of the AI -CUBE Project. From this initially limited number (e.g. 3) of process industry 
sectors, the Project will identify good practices and tools to further explore in a larger cross-sectoral 
European-wide network. Indeed, in the first phase of the AI -CUBE Project, a European-wide study 
will be conducted in the WP1, with 50 -100 relevant stakeholders to c ollect relevant practices and 
design potential interviews and workshops to be developed in the WP2 (2.1)  
c. In this phase, dissemination will focus on general communication about the AI-CUBE Project to the 
general public (e.g. through the website) in order t o make knowledge, business solutions and 
practices available to facilitate the smaller initial group of stakeholders and its enhancement.   
d. The Consortium will share the task fostering project results in regional contexts, supporting the 
exploitation approach with pilot cases and replication potentials in other industrial setting, pursuing 
the early involvement of stakeholders from other sectors of the process industry. To support this 
communication and dissemination activity, the Consortium will use supporting materials developed 
under the WP5 (5.2), such as project leaflets, brochure, poster, roll -up, infographic and video 
contents.  
  
2. Intra-Industry Oriented dissemination and communication:   
a. Expanding the number of industrial stakeholders involved in the process and validating the AI-CUBE 
business model for AI and BD implementation in process industry and required research needs on a 
larger scale. This phase will involve (approximately 30 -50) additional stakeholders from European 
process industries.  
b. In this phase, dissemination activities will focus on fine -tuning the knowledge base and research 
needs on the results of the project, making them available in a user-friendly mode, to a wider audience 
across different process industries.  
  
3. Externally oriented dissemination and communication:  
a. Expanding the audience of the AI -CUBE knowledge base and AI&BD technology implementation 
practices to a much wider audience across the process industries (50 -100) and related stakeholders 
(500-3,000) throughout Europe. The AI-CUBE project will foster the take -up of its results, related 
pilot cases and roadmap for AI&BD technology implementation, targeting a vibrant interconnected 
European network of cross-sectoral process industries.   
b. Dissemination activities will focus on further assessing the knowledge acquired in the AI -CUBE 
Project on the AI and BD technology level of maturity and implementation, and guaranteeing a wider 
audience of relevant stakeholders with the appropriate knowledge about the AI -CUBE Project and 
its results, in order to stimulate their take -up and acceleration of AI and BD deployment across 
different process industries in Europe.  
c. Exploitation activities will be targeted to the development of a roadmap to secure a “sustainability 
strategy” for the AI-CUBE results on the implementation and penetration of AI and BD technologies 
across different process industries, leveraging potential cross -sectoral synergies. The project will 
investigate how the network of stakeholders active in AI and B D technology implementation can 
become a boosting element of AI and BD cross-industry diffusion beyond the H2020 project.  
  
In order to properly execute and monitor the dissemination and exploitation activities, a detailed plan will be 
designed at the beg inning of the AI -CUBE Project and updated regularly. This plan will include the more 
detailed definition of the deliverables and any additional activity required and will refine the approach to 
delivery outlined above. The following subsections present the preliminary dissemination, communication and 
exploitation activities for the AI-CUBE Project.  
  
   
  
b) Communication activities  
Communication related to promoting the AI -CUBE project and its results will be implemented through 
strategic and targeted measures f or communicating and possibly engaging in a two -way exchange with the 
targeted groups. The AI-CUBE consortium will closely collaborate with SPIRE in its communication activities 
and with process industry experts identified per each sector. The target groups (i.e. 8 SPIRE process industry 
sectors, Value Chain partners of the European process industry, AI solution providers, and Policy Makers) will 
receive easily understandable information on technical project results, through user -friendly infographic and 
video contents. The communication plan will apply diverse communication regimes to different stakeholders, 
based on the importance they have for the project and their interest in the outcomes of AI -CUBE. Targeted 
group would be identified starting from industry sections that would be first AI-users:   
  
1. Research   
2. Management (C-suite, HR)  
3. Operation  
4. Logistics and VC managers  
  
The initial phases of AI -CUBE project will only foresee generic news dissemination and communication, 
focusing on generating stakeholder awareness of the AI -CUBE Project and its potential role in assessing the 
process industry’s needs for business model fa vouring the application and penetration of AI and BD 
technologies. In this phase, AI-CUBE will create a coherent identity for the project, supported with the design 
of a logo, leaflets, brochures, banners, posters, roll -up, infographic and video contents e tc., and will deploy 
generic communication measures, such as the project website and periodic newsletters with generic 
information about the overall projects and related news on the EU process industry community. The AI-CUBE 
website will also offer general information, news & events, download and interactive sections, providing the 
opportunity to engage the audience over the duration of the project. The website will also be one of the means 
through which target audience will be invited to play an active rol e in the process of collecting, reporting, 
analysing, and disseminating content, e.g. blog/video -blogs, wikis, RSS, tagging and social bookmarking, 
music/photo/video sharing, podcasts. Such e-services will contribute to the involvement of end-users as active 
participants.   
  
As the AI-CUBE Project progresses, the results will become available on the websites and more insights will 
be provided to the stakeholders that would be more attracted to the project activities. The information becoming 
available will provide the opportunity of involving additional external stakeholders into the project network 
by addressing their perceived interest in and attitude towards the project with targeted information. Strong 
media coverage will be another major target: media campaigns will be organized in relevant social networks 
to disseminate the AI -CUBE Project and raise awareness of the general public towards its key messages. In 
the end, scientific dissemination of project results will be pursued participating in internat ional conferences, 
workshops, and seminars, and aiming for the publication of the project results and insights in academic 
journals, whose peer -review publication processes will further validate the scientific validity of AI -CUBE 
Project results. All publication will preferably have an open access status. For a more effective dissemination 
of the results, the AI-CUBE consortium will generate user-friendly infographic and video contents aiming at 
providing simplified visual graphics for the different process  industries. These contents will include the 
CUBEs, visualising the current maturity and penetration levels of AI and BD technologies in different process 
industries and core processes; the AI-CUBE AI and BD Business Model Game, as a tool supporting industries 
in designing future business models; business cases that can potentially inspire AI and BD diffusion in process 
industry; and the roadmap providing detailed descriptions on how AI and BD should be better developed and 
can be taken-up.  
c) Data Management and Management of IPR  
 
  
Data and information collection, analysis, and dissemination will be crucial for the activities of the AI-CUBE 
Project. Therefore, the Consortium will adopt the following specific rules for data management throughout the 
process:  
• Data generated during the projects and shared with the community will be validated as public 
information. If the results cannot be shared due to confidentiality issues, they will be presented in an 
adapted form for all targeted groups.  
• Before any publication and/or wider use of the generated information, the content of the documents 
will be validated by the core group. This will contribute to ensuring the quality of the contents and 
the management of data confidentiality.  
• Each strategy document an d deliverable will be validated by the coordinator of the AI -CUBE 
Consortium, PNO, before the submission.  
• AI-CUBE Project will manage a dedicated contact database and ensure that personal contact details 
will not be used elsewhere without specific agreeme nt, thereby complying with the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR). Contacts will be inserted in the communication database only after 
explicit agreement.   
• Most of the data collected in the frame of the AI-CUBE project will be managed through its website, 
which will include a private and secured interface dedicated to the communication within the 
consortium partners.  
Further details about the AI-CUBE data management, data protection, and confidentiality policies are available 
in Section 5 “Ethics and Security”.  
3. Implementation