1.3  Concept and methodology; quality of the measures  
1.3.1 Concept and approach   
AI-CUBE concept  
  
The AI-CUBE concept – as visualised more in detail in Figure 3 above – is based on a tri-axial mapping of 
AI and BD technologies  in the different process industry sectors and macro -application-process areas. It 
allows to map and visualise the STATUS of AI & BD use and penetration per SPIRE sector (cement, ceramics, 
chemicals, engineering, minerals and ores, non -ferrous metals, steel and 
water) and per macro -application- process areas (e.g. research and 
innovation management and planning,  process control, supply chain 
management, predictive maintenance, product customization). These 
application areas and related AI & BD technologies, will be pre -defined 
based on literature research, including research on previously funded 
projects, but cyclically updated during the project, when most promising 
business cases to be defined through a bottom -up engagement process 
with industry stakeholders, become clear. As confirmed by research9 57% 
of companies expect AI to have an impact on ‘business areas ’ that are 
entirely unknown to us today, indicating that value drivers, pre-defined macro-application areas and future AI 
& BD business cases, are currently merely indicative.   
The ‘cube concept’ allows to set the stage for the development and integration of four sets of key results which 
are key to drive the opportunity assessment and take -up of AI and BD by the European process 
industries:   
   
1. MLA: A novel AI and BD Maturity Assessment Level model based on five activities: inception, 
elaboration, construction, deployment and maintenance.   
  
2. The AI-CUBE tool: to be used as mapping tool by individual industries or the secto r to assess their 
state of advancement in AI and BD, and needs for further development  
3. A set of inspirational AI and BD Business Cases in the process industries and a AI -CUBE 
Business Model Game: to be used by industries or the sector, to stimulate reason ing about how AI 
and BD can change their Business Models and Value Chains for the future, and hence what actions to 
take  
4. Roadmaps and Infographics: A set of several roadmaps and easy to consult Infographics, that outline 
the path towards:   
a. transferring good AI & BD practices form one SPIRE sector to another  
b. further developing and taking-up technology solutions towards AI & BD Business Cases of 
the future for the different SPIRE process industry sectors.  
 
9 EY Report “Artificial Intelligence in Europe. Outlook for 2019 and beyond  
  

 
  
  
The AI-CUBE Approach  
The methodological AI-CUBE approach (see Figure 4), uses the “cube -concept”, to assess and visualise the 
AI and BD STATUS (3.1.) based on literature research and stock-taking with SPIRE industries stakeholders 
(1.1. and 2.1.). Based on the initial STATUS assessment in the first phase of the project, the definition of 
future AI and BD business cases in the second phase, resulting from the MAMCA stakeholder engagement 
process, as well as a detailed gap -analysis, in the third phase a set of actions to realise the targeted AI and 
BD strategies and roadmaps will be developed (4.3.).   
  
  
Figure 4. The AI-CUBE Approach  
  
Once the AI and BD STATUS  has been established, a Maturity Level Assessment (MLA) method and 
standards will be developed (2.2.) by the AI-CUBE team, and validated with the stakeholders’ group through 
a series of interviews and Workshops (2.1.) following a Multi-Actor Multi-Criteria Analysis methodology. 
This methodology (see 1.3.3.1) will be used to obtain a widely supported and consensus -based action plan 
for the industrial consultation including a broad stakeholder community representing the main industry actors 
throughout all the SPIRE sectors. This stepwise and scientific approach allows AI -CUBE to involve a large 
group of stakeholders and interested actors in the process. The project consortium has strong connections with 
SPIRE industries and will use its support and experience to integrate all the sectors and reach all the involved 
actors by engaging strong and committed stakeholders. Several large process industries have already expressed 
their support to the AI -CUBE project (see letters of Support) and will be engaged in the process. The 
MultiActor Multi-Criteria Analysis (MAMCA) approach will be used to define the business areas, business 
cases and models, related organisational core processes and related AI &BD technologies, in relation to where 
the largest impact of AI and BD technologies is expected by the stakeholder communities, as well as gap 
analysis and validation of development requirements.  
Based on an initial stock-taking and status assessment (the “CUBE”), together with industry stakeholders, the 
most promising AI and BD Business Cases of the future (4.1.) will be developed, taking into account both 
industrial competitiveness and sustainability objectives (SPIRE 2050 and Green Deal). A Business Model 
Innovation Game, developed and validated within the previous INSPIRE CSA, will be adapted for AI-CUBE 
to engage the industry stakeholders through a “serious game approach”, to define the impact of AI and BD 
on their process industries. Using the CUBE, promising business cases and models will be mapped against 
STATUS (3.1) and a gap analysis will be carried out (4.1.). This will allow for the identification of AI and 
BD development areas, as well as those solutions for which good practices already exist in other SPIRE process 
industries, which can be adapted and transferred (3.2.). Methods to transfer and better exploit AI and BD 
will be defined (3.3.), and the impact (3.3.) of these potential developments will be assessed together with 
stakeholders through a series of Workshops with stakeholders (2.1.). The promising AI and BD Business Cases 
for the future, will be further analysed through case-studies and business models (4.2.) will be discussed with 
the stakeholder community, as input for the final results: the development of individual roadmaps for each 

   
  
SPIRE process se ctor to progress towards these targeted AI and BD business cases. Finally, to foster 
dissemination and take -up of results, the AI -CUBE partners will design easy to use and digest AI and BD 
Infographics, to help realise one of the key final challenges of CS A type projects, to transfer the acquired 
knowledge and tools towards the wider (process industry) stakeholder community.   
The AI-CUBE roadmaps will investigate:   
  How to identify the major business problems/opportunities and develop AI business strategie s, based on 
the long-term strategic issue faced by the process industry in Europe? What type of AI to deploy, given 
the uncertainty regarding which technology will become widespread?    
  How to make use of the lessons learned from the implementation of AI s olutions so far (most likely in 
technology-focused firms) in process industry? What would be the major/particular challenges that the 
process industry would face in deploying AI? AI-CUBE will analyse success stories and failures in similar 
settings and industrial applications (e.g., targeted marketing, dynamic pricing, manufacturing automation) 
to answer the question: How to manage AI related risks?   
  What kind of new technologies should be coupled with AI in sectors with heavy assets and long production 
cycle times, such as some sectors in process industry? The purpose is to identify the potential of such 
technologies (e.g., machine and deep learning, image recognition) in facilitating the implementation of the 
recommendations from AI solutions for achieving meaningful impact on different value chain functions 
(i.e., design, innovation, sourcing, making, storage, delivery, marketing, sales, use, after -sales, 
recycling/remanufacturing). This would help decision makers in process industry to take full advantage of 
AI, to close the “AI gap” and not to fall behind technology-focused industries.  
  What are the available methods/tools/processes to acquire relev ant data? How can the companies in the 
process industry establish processes to identify the type of information necessary to improve 
financial/operational/environmental performance and how AI can contribute to the collection and analysis 
of such data/information? How to increase the involvement of data science in the decision-making process 
at higher levels?  
  How to scale deployment of AI technologies across industries/locations? What kind of AI ecosystems 
need to be established (e.g., IoT infrastructure, I T expertise, top AI talent)? How would this benefit not 
only single firms, but also value chains or industrial parks (e.g., industrial symbiosis, supply chain 
coordination)? How to guarantee that the process industry workforce is adequately trained in applying and 
benefiting from the use of data-driven technologies, such as AI and BD? How to recruit employees with 
the proper digital skill set?  
  How to determine the tasks/decisions that need to be automated? What would be the process governing 
the human-machine interaction (e.g., how would the recommendations from the AI solutions be handled, 
under what conditions would the human decision maker accept or reject the decision proposed by the AI 
solution)?   
  What would be the impact of the deployment of such AI technologies and BD on different stakeholders in 
a value chain? Would some players (e.g., freight forwarder or a distributor in a supply chain, humans  
in individual firms) run the risk of being disintermediated because of AI solutions? Do the AI solutions  
have the potential to create all-win solutions?  
  
1.3.2 State of the art   
1.3.2.1 State of art: Data driven technologies  
In recent years, digitalization has become more and more important, so that it has a high significance in the 
manufacturing and planning processes of the process industry.   
Europe is indeed the third country at world level for what concerns AI players and investments (see fig. 5) 
with a growing shift of investments both from the public and private sector.  
  
In 5 years from now (see fig. 6), the market is expected to grow almost ten times compared to the market 
revenues in 5 years and, according to a study by IDG Research Services10, up to 25% of companies would like 
to deal with the topic of artificial intelligence and machine learning in the coming years, so that it can be said 
that these topics already have a high influence in the economy today and their importance for future economic 
success is very present.  
  
 
10 Reder B (2018) Studie Machine Learning/Deep Learning.  
 
  
 
Figure 5. Top 10 world geographic areas by n. of AI players: Absolute&Relative to GDP (€ bn), 2009-2018.  
  
  
Figure 6. Expected growth of AI market revenue worldwide 2018-202511  
Borrowing the definition from the report “ Accenture Technology Vision 2018: Intelligence Enterprise 
Unleashed”, AI can be defined as “any form of machine learning”. The ultimate goal is to obtain predictions 
and recommendations based on big data. “Deep learning” and “reinforcement learning” are two growing areas 
of machine learning, according to the same report (Accenture, 2018). These learning methods aim to recognize 
patterns in structured/unstructured data (e.g., images, text, videos, quantitative data) and make predictions and 
continuously improve (retrained prediction models) the performance by analysing new large data sets.  
  
  
AI is considered a tool with great potential that will enable the firms increase profits in general. In fact, the 
results from a survey of over 3,000 business leaders in 2017, show that 85% of the respondents believes that 
AI will make their businesses remain competitive. Despite the promising solutions AI might provide, not all 
the businesses have fallen for the hype yet. Adoption rates are still quite low, around only 23% adopting some 
AI technology and a mere 5% having extensively deployed AI solutions and mostly in support functions such 
as IT and customer service12.  
  
Nevertheless, there are success stories in regards to the deployment of AI, not only in back -end IT solutions, 
but also core business functions (e.g., sourcing decisions, storage, deliver y, design). In what follows, it is 
discussed how the AI technologies have been used and the generate impact in different industries:   
• Use of AI powered automated machines by Abundant Robotics 14 to harvest apples, increasing the 
efficiency of the physicall y demanding apple picking process and avoiding issues with low labour 
supply,  
• Use of AI (Salesforce Einstein) that prioritizes leads with a higher likelihood of converting to a sale, 
enhancing the sales process via enabling sales people to focus on the right leads increasing conversion 
rate in U. S. Bank,  
 
11 Statista, https://www.statista.com/study/68108/artificial-intelligence-in-italy  
12 Sam Ransbotham, David Kiron, Philipp Gerbert, and Martin Reeves, “Reshaping Business With Artificial Intelligence,” MIT 
Sloan Management Review and The Boston Consulting Group, September 2017, p. 1. 14 https://www.abundantrobotics.com 
(accessed June 26, 2018).  
  
  
  

   
  
• AI allowing Stitch Fix to analyse customer taste (data on colour, pattern) and purchasing behaviour 
(style), and consequently propose new personalized product designs that will match customer needs 
faster,   
• Use of reinforcement learning by Airbus/Autodesk to make airplane partitions that are 45% lighter by 
applying patters for slime mould and mammal bones,   
• Use of machine learning to provide customized products in less than 3 days, analysing customer photos 
and skin tones by Shiseido/MatchCo,   
• Use of AI by IBM’s Watson as a result of end -to-end visibility from data across systems, to spot 
obsolete parts identifying product changes and recommend procurement managers to order 
new/different parts leading to lower inventory levels and scrapping costs, as well as predicting which 
components have a risk of supply shortage to minimize disruption risks,   
• Use of machine learning to improve maintenance and increase uptime of wind turbine machines by 
predicting ne ar time failures from sensors placed on turbines by MidAmerican Energy 
Company/Uptake,  
• Use of machine learning by Big River Steel/Noodle.ai to increase profitability by estimating prices of 
scrap and finished steel and projecting demand,   
• Use of machine learning by OhmConnect to analyse house-hold level energy usage data, demographics 
and weather forecasts to optimize customer segmentation improving the efficacy of energy saving 
campaigns.  
  
Artificial intelligence and machine learning have the potential  to transform the management and structure of 
global value chains. New technologies in critical areas such as natural language processing, sensors, robotics, 
edge computing, machine and deep learning, and image recognition, provide significant opportunitie s to 
improve how products and services are designed, made, delivered, marketed, and used. Industry applications 
include targeted marketing, dynamic pricing, product design, manufacturing automation, and supply chain 
coordination.  
  
  
Since data is so central to contemporary AI development, several data-related concerns are frequently raised 
during debates about AI. AI engineers spend as much time thinking about data as algorithms. They need lots 
of good quality data to perform effective ML, and even more to test the results. 'Data mining', is a field of 
computation focused on the automated identification of patterns and anomalies in datasets. The dataset could 
be anything from text posted on social media to precise measurements of underground geological formations, 
and the mining process could deploy ANNs, statistics and modelling to identify useful features. 'Big data' 
refers to datasets that are so large and complex – including content from different sources, in different 
formats, and with different degrees of authenticity and accuracy – that they cannot be stored or processed in 
the same way as smaller datasets. Figure 5 shows the different steps of implementing big data within a 
company. This reaches from ensuring the 
necessary infrastructure up to the involvement 
of the staff to prepare and enable a  proper 
 human-machine-interaction environment. 
Fig. 7 shows the early information activities to 
be conducted before actually implementing the 
first big data project.  
  
Figure 7. Implementation of Big Data in a company13  
  
 
13 IBM Global Business Services. Analytics: Big Data in der Praxis, Oxford 2012  
  

 
  
Despite the potential of AI in helping companies create smart, resilient, and agile value chains, there are several 
reasons why no abundance of successful implementations of AI technologies can be found yet. Bel ow, we 
present some of the main barriers against the widespread deployment of AI:   
  
• Lack of AI expertise in areas such as data collection and preparation (disaggregation and formatting), 
data analysis, model training,   
• Lack of IT infrastructure, talent,  technologies and financial support for deployment of such 
technologies,   
• Lack of AI solutions relevant for particular business needs (especially core functions),   
• Existence of traditional systems with heavy assets and/or long production cycles, in which  adopting 
AI solutions and integrating with the system is not as straightforward,   
• Change management (especially when AI solutions introduce significant changes to the processes)  
• Uncertainty regarding AI being a job creator or job destroyer, from a socia l welfare perspective for 
policy makers,   
• Risk of AI -based decisions not always being well understood or justified, creating difficulties in 
decision making and accountability issues,  
• Difficulties in implementing AI solutions in heavily regulated sectors  (e.g., healthcare and financial 
technology), under strong data protection laws and privacy issues in relation to accessing and 
processing data,    
  
  
  
Fig. 8 shows the adoption of AI in different 
sectors.   
  
Apparently, some sectors are leading in the 
deployment of AI (e.g. high tech and telecom) 
whereas some, such as construction industry, 
have had limited use of AI to improve operations 
and manufacturing (see Fig. 6).   
  
Our objective in this industry is to research what 
the role of AI could be for the SPIRE community 
in particular, and how the adoption rates could 
be improved for the process industry at large.   
  
  
Figure 8. Sectors leading in AI adoption (source www.mckinsey.com)  
  
Technological Gaps for AI  
Early AI adopters are from sectors already investing at scale in related technologies, such as cloud services 
and big data. Those sectors are also at the frontier of digital assets and usage 14. This suggests that the 
 
14 MGI, M. G. I., 2016. Digital Europe: Pushing the frontier, capturing the benefits.  

   
  
technological gap will increase due to AI since there is limited evidence of sectors and firms catching up when 
it comes to digitization, as each new generation of tech builds on the previous one.  
  
Independently of sectors, large companies tend to invest in AI faster at scale, also typical of digital adoption. 
Early adopters are not specializing in one type of technology. They go broader as they adopt multiple AI tools 
addressing a number of different use cases at the same time.  
  
Companies investing at scale do it close to their core business. Early adopters that adopt at scale tend to be 
motivated as much by the upside growth potential of AI as they are by cutting costs. AI is not only about 
process automation, but is also used by companies as part of major product and service innovation. This has 
been the case for early adopters of digital technologies and suggests that AI -driven innovation will be a new 
source of productivity and may further expand the growing productivity and income gap between 
highperforming firms and those left behind15.  
  
Sectors leading in AI adoption today also tend to grow their investment the most. AI technology early adopters 
are industries with long histories of digital investment. Automotive and assembly was one of the first sectors 
that implemented advanced robotics at scale for manufacturing, and today is also using AI technologies to 
develop self-driving cars.  
A major gap of AI is that the used algorithms have difficulties to un derstand the context of the data that they 
are handling. The patterns and correlations found by the algorithms often go unnoticed to human experts, so 
that decisions may even confound the engineers who created the algorithms16.   
For some AI systems missin g creativity might also be a problem and steps need to be done for improving 
capability of natural language processing17. The high costs of implementation are also a key gap for AI.   
  
  
The need for specialised workforce is growing, but statistical, tec hnical and IT skills  related to AI and data 
science are still rare when considering the entirety of computer science specialisations.18,21 For these reasons, 
the lack of human experts with specialised knowledge need to be investigated also in process industry and new 
paths need to be defined in order to fill the skill gaps.  
  
Implementation Challenges for AI   
Important issues for AI are the data collection, access and processes therefore very much in relation with BD 
handling. AI algorithms work best when there are vast quantities of data, available in real -time. Therefore, a 
high data quality and availability and the implementation of the right algorithms and learning processes, are 
the biggest challenges for AI 19. In many cases, process industries do not have enough data available to apply 
machine learning techniques in a suitable way. New technologies must be developed which are able to work 
with a significantly lower amount of data to produce similar results. Evolution from “Big Data techniques” to 
“Smart Data methodologies” combining process modelling and AI learning. Furthermore, even “Smart Data” 
are not available due to the difficulty of generating data points; for instance, when it requires building physical 
prototypes for testing, or complex simul ations that may take days to run. In these cases, it is desirable to be 
able to start building models with very few data points, here called “Small Data”, and continue learning as 
new data become available.  From a social point of view, the automation or “ robotisation” is another 
implementation challenge not only for process industry but in general for societies and governments to jointly 
 
15 Zeebroeck, J. B. a. N. v., 2017. The right response to digital disruption. MIT Sloan Management Review.  
  
16 Dickson,  B.  (2017),  “Artificial  Intelligence  has  to  deal  with  its 
 transparency  problems”,  available  at: https://thenextweb.com/artificial-intelligence/2017/04/23/artificial-
intelligence-has-to-deal-with-its-transparency-problems/  
17 Vosloo, S. (2018), “Alexa, When Will Natural Language Processing Revolutionize ICT4D? Your Weekend Long Reads”, available 
at: https://www.ictworks.org/natural-language-processing-revolutionize-ict4d/#.WuHUzG4vz3g  
18 Smit, J., Kreutzer, S., Moeller, C. and Carlberg, M., Industry 4.0, European Parliament's Committee on Industry, Industry, Research 
and Energy (ITRE). Brussels: Policy departments A: Economic and Scientific Policy 21 
https://www.worldmanufacturingforum.org/key-recommendations-2019  
19 Wuest, T., Weimer, D., Irgens, C. and Thoben, K. -D. (2016), “Machine learning in manufacturing: advantages, challenges, and 
applications”, Production & Manufacturing Research, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 23–45  
 
  
develop mechanisms to adapt to these changes and some steps for understanding the ethical implication of this 
approach are already in place but need to be developed and customised for the process industry context20.  
  
Technology Gaps for BD  
Another technology gap is the collection, storage and processing of the vast amounts of data itself. Terabytes 
of data will take larg e amount of time to get uploaded in cloud. Moreover, this data is rapidly changing 
rendering it hard to be uploaded in real-time. Most data storage technologies provide a different interface and 
abstraction as relational databases, which increases the comp lexity in adapting existing applications also in 
process industry. At the same time, the cloud's distributed nature is also problematic for big data analysis. 
Heterogeneous and incomplete data are big problems as the algorithms expect homogeneous data and cannot 
understand nuances. Therefore, it is not possible to devise absolutely fool proof, fully reliable, fault tolerant 
machines or software. When talking about BD, it is also important to consider the related problems of 
cybersecurity.  
  
Implementation Challenges for BD  
Regarding the technology gaps, the main implementation challenges are the reduction of the probability of 
failure to an acceptable level, and the creation of storage and processing capabilities for the vast amounts of 
data. Therefore, the definition of the IT architecture, the easy access to and use of data sources are decisive 
[207]. The testing of the data-intensive algorithms and systems will also be a big challenge21 .  
As the application of data science increases the complexity in data and computation governance, the control 
of data integrity, security and distribution, as well as the development of standards are other important 
challenges for implementation.  
  
Data/information sources and data/information collection methods and practices – Big data to support 
AI  
  
All AI methods are highly dependent on the necessary input information. This information is in many cases a 
large amount of data but could also be several forms of knowledge like rules or semantic descript ions of 
knowledge domains. The ways and means to collect all this information and to store it in a suitable way are of 
high importance for the success of all AI technologies22.  
  
70% 
60% 
50% 
40% 30% 
20% 
10% 0% 
 
20 Wright, Scott A., and Ainslie E. Schultz. "The rising tide of artificial intelligence and business automat ion: Developing an ethical 
framework." Business Horizons 61.6 (2018): 823-832.  
  
21 Big Data Value Association (BDVA) (2018), “Big data challenges in smart manufacturing Discussion Paper on Big Data challenges 
for BDVA and EFFRA Research & Innovation roadmaps alignment”. Available at: http://bdva.eu .  
22 Source: Kurgan LA, Musilek  P (2006) A survey of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining process models. The Knowledge 
Engineering Review 21:1–24.  
Understanding of 
Domain 
Understanding of 
Data 
Data Preparation 
 Data Mining 
 Evaluation of 
Results 
Deployment of 
Results 
   
  
1.3.2.2 State of art: Data-driven technologies in the process industry  
In its position paper regarding the view of AI in the process industry 23, SPIRE PPP identified the potential of 
AI technologies to support the Process Industry. Nevertheless, it also highlighted the fact that process industry 
was lagging behind in terms of AI implementation.   
  
While different SPIRE projects funding by Horizon 2020 have focused on areas such as advanced process 
control, digital platforms or industrial symbiosis, next steps in R&D for process industry should tackle AI 
applied to Process Industry.  
  
Indeed, data driven technologies have the potential to support process industry companies to adapt to disruptive 
transformations in different industrial processes (product development, plant and supply chain operation).  
   
The following general AI application areas in the process industry can be identified up to now:   
• Modelling of static and dynamic systems while coping with uncertainty  
• Detection of causality and correlation (e.g., of quality defects)  
• Realisation of smart sensors (e.g., in the field of vision, as inputs for higher level  systems like 
PLCcontrollers)  
• Intelligent plant and process monitoring  
• Online process control and optimisation  
• Supervisory control such as through-process product quality control  
• Control of industrial robots ensuring their capability for collaborative work together with human 
operators  
• Decision Support Systems for repetitive tasks which require higher level cognitive operations (e.g.  
situation awareness) in combination with complex data processing tasks • 
 Applications in predictive maintenance.  
  
All these applications are oriented to the technical processes and their control and optimisation. Furthermore, 
there are applications which do not differ from other industries such as manufacturing industry and which deal, 
for example, with process mining of business processes or machine learning techniques to analyse future 
behaviour of customers based on intelligent analysis of information sources like the World Wide Web. 
However, the required processing of raw data, or even of information, refers to specific ontologies and issues.  
 
23 Artificial Intelligence in the Process Industry – A view from the SPIRE PPP (2019)  
  
 
  
The above-mentioned application areas are driven by AI technologies which do 
not differ from AI applications in other technological fields, such as other 
industrial areas or telecommunication or social networks, for example. 
Nevertheless, there are significant differences, not in the technologies 
themselves, but more in the preparation of the necessary input information like 
data or knowledge, and in the way to implement them in a complex environment 
for online purposes.   
The most commonly used AI technologies are (see fig. 10):  
• the different forms of machine learning such as supervised (e.g. deep 
learning neural networks or random forest of decision trees or Support 
Vector Machines, etc.) and unsupervised (e.g. clustering techniques like  
SOM/DBSCAN or dimension reduction techniques like AutoEncoder)  
• reinforcement learning (e.g. Deep Q Network or Q-Learning, etc.)  
• all the techniques of machine-based reasoning, like Expert System 
Technologies (rule-based knowledge description in combination with 
inference mechanisms) or other knowledge driven techniques  like 
Ontologies (semantic knowledge descriptions) also in combination with 
inference machines  
• an emerging field is the combination of AI methods with other 
technology like Multi-Agent-Systems, which can help to solve 
different kinds of optimisation problems in complex environments 
because they can be excellently adapted to the needs of the highly 
distributed systems used in industrial production.  
  
For process industries, it is important is to be able to combine different AI methods with more classical ways 
of modelling (like 1st principal or statistical models) or other IT techniques.  
The European Commission (EC) has put in place several initiatives on the AI landscape and a deep 
understanding of how it can impact on socio -economic system, offering useful insights for possible policy 
initiatives. The analysis identified six non-mutually exclusive thematic key areas within the AI technological 
domain, used to describe the strengths of econom ic players and geographical areas in AI subdomains. These 
thematic areas are: (i) Natural Language Processing (NLP); (ii) Computer Vision, (iii) Machine Learning 
(ML), (iv) Robotics and Automation, (v) Connected and Automated Vehicles (CAVs), (vi) AI Appli cations 
and Services.  
The analysis implemented in the EC AI watch project24 is conceived as an analytical framework and replicable 
methodology to analyse and describe the dynamics of specific ecosystems, by exploiting different types of 
factual data inclu ding non -official heterogeneous sources. This approach helps mapping AI technologies, 
monitoring and benchmarking its main players, their locations and R&D activities. One of the results is the 
creation of the thematic profile per each geographical area considering the distribution of the activities related 
to the six areas between 2009 and 2018. The analysis maps the ecosystem of AI in Europe compared with 
major competitors worldwide. This can be a starting point for the technology assessment in the AI -CUBE 
project that has to consider the activities and applications of AI and BD in the SPIRE sectors: cement, ceramics, 
chemicals, engineering, non-ferrous metals, minerals, steel, water.  
  
A lot has been told on the role of AI in manufacturing, logistics, a nd other value chain phases, and about 
organizations’ future plans to deploy the technology. Even so, current information on the actual AI technology 
 
24 The AI Techno-Economic Segment Analysis. 
https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC118071/jrc118071_the_ai_techno-economic_segment_analysis_1.pdf  
Figure  
10 
. 
  
Most  
commonly used AI  
   
  
deployment in the industry is limited and survey data show that this deployment is low, particularly in SM E 
and industries where information technology is not core to the business 25. AI adoption is greatest in sectors 
that are already strong digital adopters. At the same time, AI and BD technologies are being planned, piloted 
and deployed increasingly in all sectors, including the process and manufacturing sectors (see fig. 11 with an 
assessment of the status of AI maturity, as analysed by EY in a recent Report “Artificial Intelligence in Europe 
Outlook for 2019 and beyond”) 61% of companies is still in the planning or piloting phase.  
  
Figure 11. Assessment of the status of AI maturity  
Fig. 12 provides a summary of how AI technologies can create value by driving process efficiency, process 
enhancement, and/or product process innovation:   
  
Figure 12. Summary of value drivers: AI creates value by driving process efficiency, process enhancement, or 
product/process innovation26.  
  
 
25 Hau L. Lee, H. M. S. R. L. B., 2018. Value Chain Innovation: The Promise of AI. Value Chain Innovation Initiative 2018.  
  
26 Hau L. Lee, H. M. S. R. L. B., 2018. Value Chain Innovation: The Promise of AI. Value Chain Innovation Initiative 2018.  

 
  
1.3.3 Methodologies  
AI-CUBE will explore data driven technologies, AI and BD applications and maturity levels in process 
industry sectors, based on a combination of different methodologies  that will lead to key results including 
the drafting and validation of a roadmap and guidelines to drive the implementation of AI and BD technologies 
across mentioned sectors.   
  
1.3.3.1 Data-driven innovation intelligence and stakeholder analysis  
The starting point of the exploration activities within AI-CUBE will be the systematic analysis of technological 
trends and stakeholder landscape across the eight process industry sectors of SPIRE. Partners will conduct 
indepth systematic literature reviews  to systematize extant knowledge in the fields and identify potential 
technological trends to be explored. The output of this first search will be an overview of the main research 
and innovation trends in the field of data -driven technologies in the process industry. This will be compiled 
using not only the review and analysis of scientific and sectorial literature, but also carrying out a data-driven  
analytical assessment on AI and BD relevant projects funded by the EU, European Countries, the US and 
Canada, as well as patents granted in the last 5 -10 years. Partners will make use of PNO’s propr ietary 
dataanalysis tool, WheesBee (see Fig. 13), featuring more than 500.000 publicly funded projects from various 
EU programmes (incl. FP7, H2020) as well as various national RD&I funding programmes from EU member 
states, the United States and Canada.   
  
Figure 13. PNO’s data-driven Innovation Intelligence tool with globally funded RD&I projects  
The statistics will show how the number of funded projects and granted patents varies over time and in different 
countries. These analyses will be complemented by the exploration of the European process industry 
stakeholder scenario, in order to identify relevant actors and potential best practices and case studies (to be 
explored in T4.2) in the application of / R&D on AI and BD technologies. The go al is to shed light on what 
data-driven technologies are applied, in which industrial sector and/or process, by who and where; which are 
the drivers for and barriers to technological development and application, and how they can be boosted. These 
analyses will provide elements to be assessed in terms of levels of penetration and maturity, and the results 
will therefore allow populating the AI-CUBE framework presented above, in Fig. 3.   
  
Additionally, AI-CUBE will encompass the following specific methodologies:  
   
- Multi-Actor Multi-Criteria Analysis  
- Maturity Level Assessment (MLA) Model  
- ELSI (Ethical, Legal and Social Implications)  

   
  
  
1.3.3.2 Multi-Actor Multi-Criteria Analysis  
In order to obtain a widely supported and 
consensus–based action plan, the Multi-Actor  
Multi-Criteria  Analysis  (MAMCA) 
methodology27 is used to consult a broad 
stakeholder community representing the main 
sectors of the SPIRE industry in Europe. This 
stepwise and scientifically sound approach allows 
the consortium of the project to involve a large 
group of stakeholders in the process of analysis if 
the AI and BD technologies implemented in the 
SPIRE industry.  
  
MAMCA enables the evaluation of different 
alternatives (policy measures, business concepts, 
scenarios, technologies, etc.) by explicitly taking  
into account the objectives and framework conditions of the actors involved in the decision -making process. 
MAMCA thus develops a separate value tree for each stakeholder instead of just one value tree for all 
stakeholders (MCDA), which allows an individual view of the results for each stakeholder.   
In order to get a more detailed understanding of the MAMCA method , the seven phases shown in fig. 14 are 
briefly described.  
• Step 1: Definition of the problem and the identification of the alternatives  
• Step 2: Stakeholder identification and in-depth understanding of each stakeholder group’s objectives  
• Step 3: Definition of criteria and their weights   
o Criteria: goals and objectives of the stakeholder o 
Weights: importance  
• Step 4: Creation of indicators (evaluation criteria) o Step 5: Construction of an evaluation matrix, 
aggregating each alternative contribution to the objectives of all stakeholders  
• Step 6: Sensitivity analysis  
• Step 7: Implementation and feedback loop  
In Step 1, AI-CUBE will define the specific problems around maturity of AI and BD in the process industry; 
after that, the project will customize th e steps 2 to 7 to the specific stakeholders involved (process industry, 
ICT community) and the relevant criteria (aligned with the Maturity Level Assessment described below).  
There are other evaluation methods such as CBA (Cost/Benefit Analysis), CEA (Cost-Effectiveness Analysis) 
or EEA (Economic Effects Analysis); however, these methods put the economic effects in the focus, so that 
the MAMCA method results to follow a more holistic perspective.    
1.3.3.3 Maturity Level Assessment (MLA) Model  
The definition of the Maturity Level Assessment (MLA) Model is based on five activities: inception, 
elaboration, construction, deployment and maintenance28. The model can be used for three purposes29:  
  
1. to assess the as-is situation of the organization/process;  
 
27 Macharis, Cathy & Witte, Astrid & Ampe, Jeroen. (2009). The Multi-Actor, Multi-Criteria Analysis Methodology (MAMCA) for the 
Evaluation of Transport Projects: Theory and Practice. Journal of Advanced Transportation. 43. 183 - 202. 10.1002/atr.5670430206.  
28  Garcia-Mireles, G.A., Moraga, M.A., Garcia, F.: Development of maturity models: a systematic literature review. In: 16th 
International Conference on Evaluation Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE 2012), pp. 279–283 (2012)  
29 De Carolis, A., Macchi, M ., Negri, E., & Terzi, S. (2017, September). A maturity model for assessing the digital readiness of 
manufacturing companies. In IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production Management Systems  (pp. 13-20). Springer, 
Cham.  
Figure  
14 
. MAMCA methodology 
1 
. 
  
 
  
2. to approach maturity improvement in order to positively affect business value;  
3. to enable benchmarking across companies; in particular, a model of this nature would be able to compare 
similar practices across organizations.  
  
In the literature, there are some MLA models to evaluate the overall digital maturity level of a company, where 
it is possible to obtain the digitalisation level of a company with a benchmark comparison to the rest of the 
population analysed. These are systems that gain importanc e as far as they manage to involve larger number 
of cases. For example, the assessment of the DREAMY model (Digital REadiness Assessment MaturitY 
model), developed by the Industry 4.0 observatory of Politecnico di Milano, is based on business processes 
grouped in strategic areas for the digital transformation: (1) Design and Engineering; (2) Production 
Management; (3) Quality Management; (4) Maintenance Management; and (5) Logistics Management. Each 
of these processes is evaluated based on different analysi s dimension: Process, Monitoring and Control, 
Technology and Organization. The model has 5 levels of maturity named: initial, managed, defined, integrated 
and interoperable, and digital oriented.  
  
Another important model is the Industry 4.0 Maturity Model developed by  Schumacher et al. 33, including a 
total of 62 maturity items which are grouped into nine company dimensions: strategy, leadership, customers, 
products, operations, culture, people, governance, technology. The definition of maturity level is based on the 
mathematical relationship between the considered factors and the related weights given by the community 
under consideration.   
To go beyond these maturity level models for digitalization, there are already some specific initiatives related 
to AI and BD: McKinsey has developed an AI readiness index to compare the adoption and diffusion of AI at 
country level (considering in EU and USA). The system is based on the measurement of an AI Readiness 
Index34 based on: the number of AI startups per capita, automation potential of job activities, digital maturity, 
the availability of scientists and engineers, ICT business model creation, R&D expenditure, ICT 
connectedness.   
  
Capgemini has developed a tool to map the readiness and the performance of the countries in the AI field. The 
AI readiness is the extent to which a country and its institutions & businesses have the ability to reap the 
benefits of AI; the dimensions considered are: (1) institutional environment, (2) IT maturity and  (3) IT Skill 
Advancement. Five components have been defined as the foundation of AI performance: (1) Personnel, (2) 
Monetary Impact, (3) Competitiveness, (4) Research & Education and (5) Technology. [1]  
  
All these MLA models will be analysed in details and a new framework specifically for AI and BD 
penetration on the process industries will be developed to: (i) provide an impartial and complete evaluation 
system updated with the state -of-the-art; (ii) understand the industrial needs in terms of technolog ies (iii) 
identify a cross-sectorial comparative system to define maturity level and furthermore suggest new actions for 
improvement. The framework will take into consideration the technological maturity of a company weighting 
the level of usage with the level of diffusion in the company culture and with the awareness of the workers. A 
special session of the model will consider also criteria to evaluate maturity towards ELSI (Ethical, Legal, 
Social Issues). This framework will be developed in WP2, and used and applied in WP3.  
Within the cube approach, some dimensions to be taken into consideration to evaluate the readiness to AI of a 
company, and then of a sector, are related to: (1) Strategy definition, (2) Smart factory, (3) Smart operations, 
(4) Smart products, (5) Data-driven services, (6) Employees, and (7) Supply Chain.   
  
  
33 Schumacher, A., Erol, S., & Sihn, W. (2016). A maturity model for assessing Industry 4.0 readiness and maturity of manufactur ing 
enterprises. Procedia Cirp, 52, 161-166  
34 McKinsey Global Institute (2019). Notes from the AI frontier: Tackling Europe’s gap in digital and AI.  
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/featured%20insights/artificial%20intelligence/tackling%20europes%20gap%20in%20 
digital%20and%20ai/mgi-tackling-europes-gap-in-digital-and-ai-feb-2019-vf.ashx  
   
  
  
[1] Capgemini Consulting (2018). Artificial Intelligence Benchmark. https://www.capgemini.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/AIReadiness-Benchmark-POV.pdf   
1.3.3.4 AI and BD ELSI (Ethical, Legal and Social Implications)  
Artificial intelligence and big data technologies will significantly impact society, values and human rights30. 
What will change for the better, and what will change for the worse? Which values could change and who 
will be most affected?  
  
The EDPS Opinion reflected in the Ethics Advisory Group Report 2018, identifies several technological trends 
that require a rethinking of the relation between technology and human values, thus calling for the formulation 
of a ‘new digital ethics’: big data generated from a variety of sources, from public administrations and private 
companies, social networks and other  online platforms, the internet of things and networked sensors, cloud 
computing, and artificial intelligence, in particular machine learning. These digital technologies require what 
the Opinion calls a ‘big data protection ecosystem’: an interactive and a ccountable assemblage of 
‘futureoriented regulation’, ‘accountable controllers’, ‘privacy -conscious engineering’, and ‘empowered 
individuals’.  
  
  
Figure 15. ELSI impacts36   
  
The right to data protection is key to regulating a digitised industry. In li ght of recent technological 
developments, such a right appears insufficient to understand and address all the ethical challenges brought 
about by digital technologies.  
AI-CUBE will revise the ethical, legal and social implications of AI and BD development s, considering the 
values encoded in algorithms, the need to evaluate outcomes, and issues of bias and transferability, data 
ownership, confidentiality and consent, and legal, moral and professional responsibility. The potential effects 
for clients and different actors in the supply chain, including confidentiality.  
  
1.3.4 Relation to previous initiatives  
The AI-CUBE project will exploit the strong synergies existing with the A.SPIRE project INSPIRE (H2020, 
Grant Agreement n°723748), focused on the development of new business models for flexible and sustainable 
manufacturing value chains, along with the definition of guidelines to measure these business models 
performance in different scenarios. INSPIRE greatly involved the stakeholders of the process ind ustry and 
discrete manufacturing both in the design of the innovative business model and their performance assessment 
in different scenarios. This way, European process industry and discrete manufacturing sector would be 
 
30 Whittlestone, J. Nyrup, R. Alexandrova, A. Dihal, K.  Cave, S. (2019) Ethical and societal implications of algorithms, data, and 
artificial intelligence: a roadmap for research. London: Nuffield Foundation. 3636 https://www.sienna-project.eu/robotics/elsi/  
  

 
  
enabled in flexibly adapting to the proposed paradigms and catching value from highly dynamic future trends. 
AI and BD are among these trends and, building on the results and methodologies developed by INSPIRE, the 
AI-CUBE project will conduct an effective and comprehensive assessment of th e state of maturity and 
penetration of AI and BD within the different levels of process industry organizations. Moreover, AI-CUBE  
  
will also involve stakeholders into the consolidation of this assessment and, finally, the identification and 
validation of guidelines for a cross -sectoral implementation and diffusion of AI and BD technologies. The 
AICUBE project aims at creating synergies with and leverage on the INSPIRE European Process Industry 
Forum, in order to actively involve stakeholder f rom the more than 100 European Industrial Parks that 
INSPIRE partners already approached individually. The AI -CUBE project plans to tap into this existing 
platform to reach effective collaboration with interested stakeholders of process industry sectors, b ut also 
dissemination and communication targets.  
  
Concerning the macro-area Supply chain (SC), the project will benefit of the results of NEXT -NET project 
(H2020, Grant Agreement No. 768884), where a set of SC strategies have been identified and related research 
and innovation priorities as well, where some of them are strictly related to AI&BD. The paths identified in 
NEXT-NET will be further developed and specified specifically for the process industry.   
  
AI-CUBE will also build upon the results of the following projects:  
  
Table 1. Projects related to data driven technologies and process industry already identified by AI-CUBE.  
 Project name  SPIRE sectors  Description   
 
   
 
Innovative Nanoinformatics models 
and tools: towards a Solid, verified 
and Integrated Approach to 
Predictive (eco)Toxicology  
(NanoSolveIT)  
CHEMICALS  Ground-breaking in silico Integrated Approach to Testing 
and Assessment (IATA) for the environmental health and 
safety of Nanomater ials (NM). Decision support system 
packaged as a standalone open software and a Cloud 
platform  
X          
 
Intelligent Open Test Bed for 
Materials Tribological  
Characterisation Services  
ENERGY  
STEEL  
CHEMICALS  
IT-platform for materials and tribological data 
harmonisation, management, analytics, sharing and 
mining. Lab -to-field upscaling tools combining testing 
with computation   
X          
 
From discovery to scale up of cluster 
based electrolytes for Ultra -high 
energy storage flow batteries  
CHEMICALS  AI driven discovery system of the ERC Advanced Grant 
SMART-POM to discoveR new metal oxide molecular 
polyoxometalate (POM) clusters  X          
 
Artificial-Intelligence Driven 
Discovery and Synthesis of  
Polyoxometalate Clusters  
CHEMICALS  New platform for the preparation, understanding, and 
exploitation of precisely defined nano -molecules / 
polyoxometalates using automated intelligent feedback  X          
 
Combination of AI techniques and 
software with advanced reactor 
equipment for efficient kinetics 
analysis in the chemical industry  
CHEMICAL  Combination of AI techniques and software with 
advanced reactor equipment for efficient kinetics 
analysis in the chemical industry  X          
 
Optimization and performance 
improving in metal industry by digital 
technologies  
STEEL  
NON FERROUS  
High-level supervisory control systems for different 
production plants to enable autonomous operation of 
the processes based on embedded cognitive reasoning.    X        

   
  
 
MOdel based coNtrol framework for 
Site-wide OptmizatiON of 
dataintensive processes  
STEEL  Multi-scale model based predictive controls on 
predictive monitoring of plotlines, targeting early 
detection of anomalies and potential optimization gains    X    X    
 
Future Directions of Production 
Planning and Optimized Energy- and  
Process Industries  
CHEMICALS 
WATER  
Machine learning tools for diagnostics, data 
reconciliation, and decision support, production 
planning and process optimization including model -
based control  
  X    X    
 
Energy-aware Factory Analytics for 
Process Industries  
STEEL  ML and analytical tools at different level to create a 
cognitive factory to understand the behaviour of 
complex process systems  
  X    X    
 
 Project name  SPIRE sectors   Description   
 
   
 
Improved energy and resource 
efficiency by better coordination of 
production in the process industries  
CHEMICAL  Methods and tools for process monitoring and optimal 
dynamic planning, scheduling and control of plants, 
industrial sites and clusters under dynamic market 
conditions  
  X  X      
 
Cognitive platform to enhance 360º 
performance and sustainability of the 
European process industry  
CHEMICAL  
STEEL  
Advanced data analytics to extract valuable information 
from processes and their effect on production plant’s 
overall performance     X        
 
Implementation of a smart 
RETROfitting framework in the 
process industry towards its 
operation with variable, biobased 
and circular FEEDstock  
CERAMIC  
CEMENT  
STEEL  
Decision support system able to perform a diagnosis of 
the impact in the process of different retrofitting 
solutions so plant managers and operators can decide on 
the most suitable retrofitting action for their companies  
  X    X    
 
Robust and affordable process 
control technologies for improving 
standards and optimising industrial 
operations  
CERAMIC  
STEEL  
MINERALS  
Versatile global control platform for data acquisition, 
data processing & mining and User Interface to measure 
properties of process streams and products, accurately 
and in real-time (self-learning & predictive )  
  X        
 
cognitive plants through proactive 
self-learning hybrid digital twins  
STEEL  Digital twin of the process used to develop models with 
cognitive capability for self -learning and predictive 
maintenance  
  X    X    
 
 Hyperconnected  Architecture  for  
High Cognitive Production Plants  
CEMENT  
CHEMICAL  
STEEL  
Hyper-connected network of digital nodes to catch 
outstanding streams of data in real -time with high 
computing capabilities  
  X  X      
 
Secure Management Platform for 
Shared Process Resources  
CERAMIC  New analysis and optimisation tools for flexible energy 
use and material flow integration to optimising symbiosis     X  X      
 
Open Innovation Digital Platform and 
Fablabs for Collaborative Design and 
Production of personalised / 
customised FMCG  
CHEMICALS  Web-based portals to allow users to design their own 
products from home with a broad range of performance 
attributes and then have these produced and delivered 
in a “designed for you” way  
    X    X  
 
 Advanced  Data  Modeling  and  
Analysis Applied to next Generation 
Industry 4.0 settings and the Internet 
of Things  
ENG  Modelling and analysis of data coming from complex 
industrial and organizational applications to identify 
hidden casuistic relationships to calibrate production and 
organizational control systems  
    X    X  
 
 RObot  enhanced  SenSing,  
 INtelligence  and  actuation  to  
Improve job quality in manufacturing  
ALL  Enhanced robot sensing capabilities for the deployment 
of AI to optimise productivity and safety, and natively 
collaborative manipulation technologies    X        
 
Smart tomographic sensors for 
advanced industrial process control  
ALL  Fundamentals of integrating imaging sensors into 
industrial processes and functional feasibility 
demonstration  
x  x           

 
  
 
High accuracy water leakage and 
apparent loss detection  
WATER  Intelligent BD Analytics solutions to reduce Water Losses, 
or Non -Revenue Water (NRW) and for related 
applications   
         x  x  
 
 Blockchain  Platform  to  Track  
Chemicals along the Value Chain  
CHEMICALS  Open-source global blockchain platform to transfer 
information on hazardous chemicals along the value 
chain  
   x  x        
 
Predictive  Cognitive  Maintenance 
Decision Support System   
ALL  Sensors with BD analytics to track machine -tool 
performance forp redictive cognitive maintenance 
decision-support system  
x        x     
 
 Distributed  Digital  Twins  for  
industrial SMEs: a big-data platform  
ALL  Testbeds for digital twins in manufacturing and facility 
management sectors, integrating data from APIs, 
historical, embedded sensors and open data  
   x     x     
 
Seamless and safe human - centred 
robotic applications for novel  
collaborative workplaces  
ALL  Soft robotics collaborative Production Station. Novel 
human – centred interaction, collaboration and  
awareness (AI enabled cognition)  
x  x           
1.3.5 Gender dimension  
The consortium supports gender balance and integrates the gender dimension in the ELSI implications.  
2. Impact