4. Convene a stakeholder community to provide  insights on stakeholder perspectives and to gather 
regulatory input to gain and understanding of how to make the adoption and regulatory approvals of 
AI-enhanced automated advanced therapy manufacturing system as efficient as possible; 
5. Develop and implement a plan to sustain project assets by validating business models that take into 
consideration the health economics of engineered T-cell therapy.  
 
This translates into the following innovation, impact and exploitation objectives:  
Innovation Objectives  
 Automated and robot-assisted cyberphysical manufacturing pilot to pave the way towards autonomous 
self-adaptive CAR-T manufacturing flow operating with hospital infrastructure 
 Compilation of a comprehensive data-base for patient derived variability of CAR-T performance, from 
existing data of our clinical partners and high throughput experimentation (e.g. Capturing impact of 
age, sex, genetic and disease background).  
 Intensification of data-generation though employment of robotics for analytical assays and sampling 
 Establishment of an AI-based digital twin for each batch capable of catching donor-derived  variability 
 Implementation of an AI-based control of bioreactor operation using multiple targets i.e. optimising 
bioreactor operation in terms of quantity of CAR-Ts and quality as defined through our CQA panel 
 Implementation of an AI powered smart scheduling and logistics for resources and adjacent processes  
AIDPATH     6 
 Holistic IoT infrastructure for AI enabled manufacturing and logistic processes  as well as data storage 
and tacking, which integrates into the hospital environment in a smart and seamless  manner 
 Demonstration of quality and efficacy of CAR-T products manufactured in the AIDPATH pilot 
Impact Objectives 
 Demonstrate that AI based technologies are effective  for resource planning and for automating the 
process of manufacturing advanced medical therapies by fully implementing an AIDPATH system in 
a hospital and delivering CAR -T cell therapies to at least ten patients during the project thereby 
providing the sc ientific, clinical outcome, and cost effectiveness rationale for supporting wider 
adoption of the ‘smart manufacturing’ hospital concept.  
 Build the basis for a deployable platform  in alignment with regulatory requirements  and a 
cybersecurity by design approach so that pilots can be initiated in multiple hospitals towards the end 
of and after the project’s funding period.  
 Transform the stakeholder community developed during the project into a European led innovation 
ecosystem that attracts funding to build upon the outputs of the project thereby driving the concept of 
the ‘smart manufacturing’ hospital forward 
Exploitation and Dissemination Objectives 
 Development of standards, building blocks and guidelines for AI in the Hospital, that allow wide -
spread adoption of AI and AIDPATH technology 
 Leveraging the network of the innovation ecosystem consisting of companies, clinics, associations, 
regulatory bodies and healthcare policy makers to communicate and educate about the AIDPATH 
results, gain visibility, trust and acceptance.
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
AIDPATH aligns excellently with the work programme topic “H2020 -DT-2018-2020: AI for th e smart 
hospital of the future”: 
Call topic themes AIDPATH approach 
Health systems need to undergo 
adaption if they are to 
adequately respond to future 
population health needs. (…). In 
particular, artificial intelligence 
and robotics, have the potential 
to transform health and care 
facilities 
The focus of AIDPATH on AI and robotics to support hospital -based 
manufacturing of advanced medical therapies addresses this challenge 
directly. One of the biggest future population needs is the ability to 
deploy advanced medical therapies for which society has invested 
heavily on a wide scale. The process of deploying many advanced 
medical therapies such as CAR -T cell therapy are complex. The 
complexity is further complicated by the need for the use of GMP 
processes. These factors taken together are exactly the types of processes 
that AI, and robotics make better, more efficient, and more cost 
effective. 
Piloting at scale is needed to 
prove the transformative impact 
of AI. Pilots need to be 
embedded in operational health 
and care settings. 
By the end of the project there will be a fully functional AI automated 
CAR-T manufacturing full y operational in one of the leading CAR -T 
cell therapy clinical centres in Europe. Furthermore, the efforts in 
stakeholder engagement will be focused in identifying and readying 
other hospitals to begin their own pilots based upon the processes, 
software, and know how that is developed. 
Pilots should enable or support 
clinical, diagnosis and 
treatment, etc. carried out with 
clinical outcomes comparable to 
human delivered procedures 
and with comparable results.  
The process of deploying many advanced medica l therapies such as 
CAR-T cell therapy are complex is currently a predominantly human 
delivered procedure. The complexity is further complicated by the need 
for the use of GMP processes. CAR-T therapy in particular is 
particularly relevant because to deliver the therapy to a patient requires 
clinical, diagnostic, care organization, and logistical aspects. AIDPATH 
intends to deliver a platform that will make use of AI to make the process 
of delivering CAR-T cell therapy efficient and scalable. The technology 
will be tested and validated at the clinical site by production of CAR -T 
cells and results will be compared with the state-of-the art process.  
AIDPATH     7 
AI based systems (....) have 
shown considerable promise so 
far, however their effective use 
(…) depends on their successful 
integration (and acceptation) 
AIDPATH places particular emphasis on building a participatory 
stakeholder community that will then be transformed into an innovation 
ecosystem in recognition of the fact that multiple different types of 
stakeholder have to accept and be engaged in attaining the future vision 
of personalized therapies being manufactured and administered at a 
SMART hospital.  In addition, the AIs will be trustworthy by design, 
incorporating aspects such as transparency and accounta bility in 
accordance with the EU guidelines.  
Address any aspect  of health 
facility operations (e.g. 
diagnostics, treatments, 
logistical aspects) 
AIDPTAH will deliver a holistic approach to smart manufacture in the 
hospital. Therefore, multiple AIs will be developed addressing four 
important areas: CAR -T cell production (1) process prediction, (2) 
process control,  (3) manufacturing scheduling and (4) resources 
planning 
Solution performance measured 
against health care metrics 
After deployment of the AIDPATH IoT platform at UKW, it will be 
tested and validated the by performing trial runs on the actual platform. 
Bioprocess results such as yield, duration and doublings will be 
compared to the performance of state of the art processes. The generated 
product will be tested in vitro  and in vivo for growth potential, 
phenotype, qualify, functionality, transfection rates, efficacy and bio 
distribution for benchmarking against manual processes.  
Development in cooperation 
with health and care facility 
partners 
The AIDPATH consortium includes (1) world -class leaders in CAR -T 
therapies, including two clinical sites (UKW, FCRB) providing their 
insights from the hospital infrastructure standpoint and (2) a company 
with extensive background in hospital and healthcare data management 
(ORT). The project will also set up an advisory board and build a 
stakeholder community which includes other hospital sites, healthcare 
policy makers and related associations.  
Consideration of wider 
dimensions (e.g. impact on 
resources, staff)  
The overall target of the project will be to minimise the need for 
specialised operators during CAR -T production. Potential expert 
profiles will be needed to also interact and interface with medical 
doctors (regarding decision making) and nurses (op erational tasks). 
Efficient resource management will allow a high resource availability 
and low waiting times. 
AI-based systems that combine 
digital and physical services  
The project will implement an AI-integrated cyberphysical 
infrastructure that conne cts all devices of the CAR -T cell production 
plant to the AIDPATH software and data solutions in the sense of an 
internet of things. Services provided by the system include physical 
production and testing of the product, intelligent manufacturing control 
and scheduling up to data storage and resource optimization.  
Individualised and integrated 
care solutions 
AIDPATH enables the production of truly personalized therapies 
completely in proximity to the patient integrated into the smart hospital 
of the future, including connection to hospital IT and logistics. AIs will 
allow tailoring of the process towards individual patient history and 
requirements.  
Integration of autonomous AI-
driven smart components 
AIDPATH process control is smart and autonomous in a s ense that it 
operates without human intervention necessary and governs all 
operations in the system (e.g. bioreactor parameter adaption, resource 
rescheduling) through direct integration of the AI decisions. 
Direct and positive impact on 
effectiveness and efficiency in 
the health care context 
AIDPATH will allow provision of CAR -T cell products in a better 
quality, tailored to the patient and produced in shorter time. The 
installation of the smart infrastructure at the hospital site reduces 
transportation times and enables a lean production and resource planning 
for just-in-time logistics. The collection of extensive data sets on process 
and products allows further optimization and extraction of insights on 
CAR-T therapy in the future 
AIDPATH     8 
Integration of health and care 
partners in the design of the 
pilot, the development of 
performance indicators and 
access to the relevant 
operational environment  
A demonstrator pilot will be implemented at the clinical site at partner 
UKW with additional input from Partner FCRB to ensure a technology 
that is deployable across sites. The partner ORTEC is currently engaged 
in supporting hospital resource planning with AI.  Development of the 
technologies will integrate feedback from the projects advisory board 
and stakeholder-centric design principles.  
Demonstrate likely “at scale” 
benefits in efficiency or cost 
reduction 
Cost reduction is crucial for this type of product due to its current pricing 
(>200K/treatment). Our solution will directly impact this area since 
automation through robotics and optimization through the use of AI will 
result in products that will be produced with lower cost. The possibility 
to parallelize production and intelligently schedule processes will ensure 
intelligent utilization of resources. In addition to the integration with the 
hospital organisation through AI will allow for efficient use of the 
overall facility reducing costs associated with facility and resource 
utilization, personnel and operator costs, length of stay and recovery 
time of the patie nt, product quality and rejected batches due to poor 
product quality. Demonstration of cost effectiveness will be one core 
output from the project.  
Effectiveness of any novel 
service models in providing 
economic justification for scale-
up investment 
For smart hospitals to create, deliver and capture value by means of the 
innovative AIDPATH platform, they need to innovate their business 
models. This project will develop a business model that will serve as a 
basis for discussion with industry, investors and  stakeholders and will 
help to shape an action plan for wide-scale technology implementation. 
Development of European 
standards that enable wide 
spread adoption and new market 
creation 
The build-up of the AIDPATH IoT infrastructure will be based on state-
of-the-art standards and approaches in context Industry 4.0. AIDPATH 
will ensure knowledge gained will be cycled back towards the general 
public, by publishing new standards, building blocks and guidelines for 
AI in the smart hospital, thus providing a big  step to wards hospital 
digitalisation. 
Privacy and cybersecurity Due to the sensitivity of patient and medical product data, ensuring 
privacy and cybersecurity is a core element of the AIDPATH 
technology. Both will be incorporated into all AIDPATH compone nts 
from the beginning by employing a security by design approach. 
Moreover, the AIDPATH consortium will engage with targeted 
communities in order to promote dialogue with policy -makers, the 
broader cybersecurity and technology ethics communities. 
Alignment with the European 
Digital Innovation Hub 
AIDPATH will closely align with the DIH Hero, mainly through the 
coordinator IPT who will interlink at the hub both through the regional 
node (Aachen) and on international level (see LoI from DIH in the 
Appendix to Section 4-5 of this proposal). Coordinator IPT intends to 
directly associate with the  DIH Hero, in order to get insight from the 
community and in turn educate on and disseminate project results.
1.3 Concept and methodology 
1.3.1 Concept 
The AIDPATH imperative is to adopt advances from the field of Artificial Intelligence, robotics and CAR -T 
manufacture and for the first time bringing together individual cutting edge solutions into a holistic, AI -
powered cyber physical approach to enable intelligent manufacture of  advanced therapies in the hospital. In 
the following, we will describe the overall AIDPATH infrastructure for smart manufacturing and the 
automated platform itself, which is embedded into the overall framework. 
 
 
AIDPATH     9 
AIDPATH infrastructure in the smart manufacturing hospital  
The concept of AIDPATH (see  Figure 1) consists of an infrastructure installed at the clinical site for the 
automated, data-driven CAR-T production considering all physical assets (e.g. patients, materials, devices and 
specialized staff) and existing IT and logistic systems in the hospital: 
 On the physical level, the automated CAR-T cell production  consists of heterogeneous machines 
and devices, which will be connected via standardized interfaces in the so called integration 
framework. All devices are governed through a service -oriented control software  on top of the 
integration framework, allowing a centralized management and supervision of the process. The control 
software will be supported through an AI -based digital cell twin defining in itial process parameters 
and an AI process control adjusting these parameters during the operation.  
 The manufacturing and resource planning systems optimize the contiguous logistic processes via 
AI solutions adjusted to the AIDPATH context assuring unobstructed, efficient production processes. 
The production scheduling is closely linked to the control software generating schedules based on 
durations and characteristics of the current bio processes. The resource management  considers 
demands of the hospital IT and logistics systems regarding the process-relevant requirements such as 
material supply, staff availability and hospital utilization and aligns them with the production schedule.  
 The LogiqCare Platform will take care of a secure and reliable cloud-based data management in the 
AIDPTH project interacting with the hospital data management  and the AIDPATH components, 
especially the Artificial Intelligence. LogiqCare will store and process historical data for the AI 
training as well as establish a continuous data pipeline for the AI application. Also, LogiqCare will lay 
the foundation for data exchange between different hospital sites in the future. 
 
Automated CAR T cell production
Hospital IT and Logistic Systems
Patient & Resource 
Management
Staff 
Management
Physical HospitalAIDPATH Infrastructure
Super-
vision
Digital cell twin
Hospital Data Management
LogiqCare Platform
Data storage
Data processing
Data Security
Data integration
Control 
Software
Manufacturing and Resource Planning Systems 
Resource 
Management
Production 
Scheduling
Artificial 
Intelligence
Integration 
Framework
Figure 1: AIDPATH infrastructure integrated in the health care environment and connected to all physical assets 
needed for the automated CAR-T cell production including adjacent logic processes 
AIDPATH     10 
Automated CAR-T manufacturing platform 
If we zoom in onto the physical production level, the AIDPATH approach will deploy an automated and robot-
assisted pilot plant for AI controlled manufacture of CAR -T cells. The AIDPATH manufacturi ng platform 
(Figure 2) will consist of 1) a manufacturing module and 2) a robotic quality control module (QC module), 
which are both controlled via the same smart control software: 
 The manufacturing module  integrates and connects state -of-the-art sensors and devices for 
completely closed production of CAR -T cells in a modular manner. This for example includes the 
Facer bioreactor ( Aglaris) and a nucleofection device. The bioreactor thereby comprises of several 
modular cartridges that allow parallelized production of multiple cell batches. The devices are 
autonomously operated by the AIDPATH control software rendering human interacti on only 
necessary for set up and process oversight.   
 The QC module  is a robot -assisted chamber that integrates a liquid handling robot as well as 
automated analytical devices such as a cell counter and flow cytometer. Coordinated through the 
central contr ol software, the QC module processes samples from the manufacturing module fully 
automatically, runs complex assays and feeds back the results into the AI -powered process control. 
Thanks to the robot and intelligent process scheduling, no human intervention is required.  
All data generated on the physical production level are gathered through the control software which ensures 
storage and communication with the AIs and the overarching AIDPATH infrastructure. This way, 
comprehensive data sets are generated to allow process optimization and collection of extensive processing 
records on each cell batch.  
1.3.2 Project positioning 
The recent regulatory approvals of CAR-T therapies and the impressive remission rates in cancer applications 
of between 69 -90% for previou sly untreatable patients have demonstrated the clinical potential of such 
advanced therapies. However, the significantly high cost of the therapies ($300-$450k and above) dictates that 
the future challenges are associated with improving affordability and a ccessibility. However, a major 
translational barrier currently limiting the clinical and commercial translation of these products and their 
accessibility has to do with current manufacturing processes which are inherently inefficient, difficult to scale, 
resource and labour intensive, requires skilled personnel, and necessitates significant human intervention 
which can result in errors, contamination and final product variation. What is more, therapies are patient -
specific, which means that the industry of scale that works for many other biotechnological products is not 
applicable. Current manufacturing processes are mostly still manual, non-supervised containing multiple open 
events limiting robust production of CAR-T products. Production in the clinics is mostly still associated with 
Figure 2: Automated CAR-T manufacturing system to be installed physically in the hospital, consisting of a manufacturing and a QC 
module. Both are governed through a centralized control software that integrates the bioprocessing AIs and communicates with the 
overarching AIDPATH infrastructure. 
AIDPATH     11 
small scale production that is only feasible to treat low numbers of patients. In order to make the therapies 
available for the patients on a wide scale, a disruptive approach to production is urgently needed. 
AIDPATH is critic al in addressing these elementary challenges in providing access to the therapy by 
reimagining the manufacturing system to bring costs down through automation and minimisation of expert 
operators’ time, optimising the use and occupancy of expensive clean r ooms, scale -out through 
decentralization as well as improved consistency and robustness. Thus, AIDPATH will deliver the first 
decentralized, AI-powered manufacturing approach for CAR-T therapy production (and ultimately other cell 
and gene therapies) in the hospital, that is smart, automated and in close proximity to the patient, thus reducing 
lead time and logistical efforts. Moreover, through AI-powered production the speed of production, approval 
will increase while the high risk which is inherent in suc h a personalized context will be quantified and 
mitigated.  
The stated aim of the project is to develop a fully-validated, end-user tested, GMP-ready automated prototype 
installed in the hospital which can generate viral vector-free engineered CAR-T cells from multiple donors in 
parallel. The scope and destination of the project is to demonstrate feasible and economic production of 
efficacious CAR-T cells from more than one patient in a completely automated manner and to validate the 
technology demonstrator deployed at the hospital at scale. The holistic AIDPATH IoT infrastructure will be a 
global exemplar for how decentralised, point-of-care manufacturing approaches can be achieved, intertwining 
the key regulatory considerations necessary for a decentralised manufacturing process to be approved. 
Critical for such an approach to be commercially viable are the development of corresponding operational and 
business models. AIDPATH has a specific and dedicated focus to examining the potential commercialisation, 
reimbursement and cost of goods strategies that can be employed to ensure that point-of-care processing is not 
just clinically viable but also commercially attractive. The approach followed and developed in this proposal 
will allow the use of the ‘digital t win’ as a decisional tool that will enable the comparison of key strategic 
investment and process scenarios, including centralised vs decentralised manufacturing, enabling to drive the 
cost of this value product down, while enabling to manage and mitigate,  inherently high risks entailed in 
personalised manufacturing.  
Translation: The AIDPATH project has a highly translational character, reflected by the composition of the 
partners, of which many are SMEs. In addition, our consortium has close proximity to the regulatory bodies 
through the partners UKW and IZI. This will facilitate a fast and sustainable translation of the project results 
to market and clinic. AIDPATH will elevate existing platforms, technologies and processes from current TRLs 
5-6 through to TRLs >6, which is pivotal to ensure that Europe remains a global leader in this sector, not just 
with respect to innovation but also translation and exploitation. The novel AGL bioreactor is currently is in the 
system prototype stage (TRL 5). By the end of the project, this bioreactor will not only be production -ready, 
but it will have been integrated into the AIDPATH manufacturing system and tested and validated by UKW 
as an end -user (TRL 7). In addition, the final AIDPATH platform will be established as  a pilot unit in the 
hospital by the end of the project.  
1.3.3 Linked Innovation Activities 
Types of 
activities Initiative Type Partner(s) Description/Website 
Align, 
knowledge, and 
data sharing 
imSAVAR EU UKW, IZI Immune therapy toxicology 
including CAR-T models 
Align, knowledge 
and data sharing 
CARAMBA EU UKW First-in-man clinical trial of CAR-T 
therapy in multiple myeloma using 
virus-free gene transfer 
Align and share 
knowledge 
AutoCRAT EU IPT Robotic system for human 
mesenchymal stromal cells 
Align and share 
knowledge 
AUTOSTEM EU IPT Patient specific gene editing for 
CAR-T 
Align and share 
knowledge 
JointPromise EU IPT, 
FORTH 
Tissue engineered implant 
manufacturing 
Align and share 
knowledge 
BioManu II Fraunhofer IPT, 
SZTAKI 
AI in automated stem cell production 
AIDPATH     12 
Align and share 
knowledge 
FoFeBat National IPT Development of an AI-Toolbox to 
optimize battery production 
Align and share 
knowledge 
everPro & ACOP Regional IPT AI application in optics production 
Align and share 
knowledge 
EPIC EU IPT, 
SZTAKI 
AI in different domains in Hungary 
Awareness and 
network 
Future Targeted 
Healthcare 
Manufacture Hub 
National UCL Hub of 35 companies 
Awareness EU-CARAT EU UCL Improve CAR-T constructs 
Awareness REGMEDxB Crossborder 
National 
FORTH Organoid based tissue manufacturing 
 
Align and share 
knowledge 
Mathematical 
Foundations of 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Regional SZTAKI Designing AI methods with 
theoretical guarantees for supervised 
and reinforcement learning 
problems. 
Align and share 
knowledge 
MIRACLE EU IRIS Development of support medical 
decision system for cartilage status 
evaluation 
Align and share 
knowledge 
Openmind EU IRIS On-demand production of entirely 
customized minimally invasive 
medical devices 
Align and share 
knowledge 
DataMine 4.0 EU IRIS Advanced Data Modelling and 
Analysis Applied to next Generation 
Industry 4.0 settings and the Internet 
of Things 
Align and share 
knowledge 
Ecobulk EU IRIS Circular Process for Eco-Designed 
Bulky Products and Internal Car 
Parts 
Align and share 
knowledge 
MIRACLE EU IRIS Development of support medical 
decision system for cartilage status 
evaluation 
Align and share 
knowledge 
Openmind EU IRIS On-demand production of entirely 
customized minimally invasive 
medical devices 
Align and share 
knowledge 
AutoCart Regional AGL Autonomous platform for T-cells 
culture 
Align and share 
knowledge 
Aglaris neotec Regional AGL Develop a fully-automated 
bioreactor for cell therapy, tissue 
engineering, and pharmaceutical 
development 
 
1.3.4 Methodology 
AI Driven Manufacturing 
AIDPATH aims to automate “Value” extraction from multiple sources of data through intelligent algorithm 
design, mathematical modelling and advanced control implementation leading to enhanced monitoring and 
operation of CAR-T cell manufacturing. Fundamental to all activities is the manipulation of the highly varied 
and large volume of data generated in WPs 3 and 4. This will include multiple data sources recorded from 
multiple devices (e.g. bioreactors, analytical devices, patient records…), measured at different frequencies 
(e.g. second, hour and daily, weekly), containing both numerical and textual information (e.g. sensor 
information, patient records and meta -information). The analysis of these data will governed by a Data 
Analysis Methodology 4 developed by UCL enabling data understanding, data preparation, modelling, 
                                                      
4 Goldrick et al. Biotech. J. (2020) 
AIDPATH     13 
evaluation and deployment of control algorithms 
for CAR -T manufacturing operations 5. The 
algorithm selection will combine the applicable of 
proven statistical tools for data dimensionality 
reduction including Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) and Partial Least Square (PLS) and will 
leverage innovative Machine Learning (ML) 
algorithms such as Support Vector Machines, 
Neural Networks, Rule Induction, Genetic 
Algorithms (optimize with hill climbing/gradient 
descent/simulated annealing) and Multi -agent 
systems (for modelling stochastic systems). These 
algorithms will be utilised in WP 3 and 4 enabling 
advanced classification, regression analysis and 
automated decision making. Some preliminary data 
is shown in Figure 3 evaluating the performance of a selection of algorithms to predict the antibody 
concentration from 200 Raman spectroscopy measurements recorded on a micro-bioreactor system (<15 mL). 
This novel sensor technology and advanced modelling approach will play a critical role in the CAR -T HT 
experiments planned in WP 3. The digital twin ( AI-CARTwin) developed in WP 3 will make use of Genetic 
Algorithms (GA) to automatically and efficiently generate a mimic of individual patient CAR -T cells. The 
model parameters of AI-CARTwin will be initialised based on correlations generated from patient clinical 
information (WP 5) and adjusted in real time based on cell performance and growth using on -line bioreactor 
sensors (e.g. DO2, pH, gas flow rates...). These metrics will be further coupled to metabolomics analysis that 
will provide predictive biomarkers for the potency of the CAR-T cell product. For this a robotic protocols will 
enable assay automation and will be employed in WP5 as an at -line quality control that will be linked with a 
metabolome library active at FORTH 6. The development of the digital twin will build upon the significant 
work published in this area by the consortium members outlined in www.industrialpenicillinsimulation.com7,8 
and in the paper describing Multi -Agent Modelling Simulation of In -Vitro T -Cells for Immunologic 
Alternative described in Nettleton et al. (2020). 9 A great emphasis will be given to the trustworthiness of the 
developed AI’ s assuring that they are lawful, ethical and robust and fulfil the requirements of the ethics 
guidelines for trustworthy AI10. 
AI resource management and production scheduling  
One of the challenges of CAR-T cell therapy is the efficient allocation of medical resources over time, where 
the resources include the key personnel, the scarce medical equipment, and materials. This is a kind of resource 
constrained project scheduling problem, where the projects are determined by the patients’ treatments. Each 
project is a network of tasks that represent the main steps of the treatment, which have to share on the medical 
resources. The tasks are temporarily related , i.e. CAR-T harvesting and preconditioning chemotherapy have 
precedence constraints, while the latter can run in parallel with CAR-T manufacturing. There are conditional 
tasks as well: handling of adverse effects is needed only if recovery monitoring requires intervention into the 
therapy (see Figure 4). The deterministic variants o f the problem can be solved optimally by mathematical 
programming techniques, see e.g., Kis, 200511. Unfortunately, our problem is further complicated by the fact 
that the exact duration of the tasks, for example the production of CAR-T cells in sufficient amount and quality, 
cannot be determined in advance, they are uncertain. Creating a rigid resource allocation plan in such situations 
would either involve significant risks of not meeting the schedule or would be too conservative. It is much 
more efficient to manage the resources by taking feedbacks into account.  
                                                      
5 Nettleton Book – Data Mining Commercial Data Mining: Processing, Analysis and Modelling for Predictive Analytics 
Projects, book 
6 Vernardis S et al. Metabolic Engineering 2013 
7 Goldrick S et al. J. Biotech. 2015 
8 Goldrick S et al. Computers & Chem. Eng 2019 
9 Nettleton et al.  (2020) ICAART 2020, Valletta, Malta 
10 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai 
11 Kis, T.: A Branch -And-Cut Algorithm for Scheduling of Projects with Variable Intensity Activities, Mathematical 
Programming, 103, 2005 
Figure 3: Raman spectra ML Prediction Performance 
AIDPATH     14 
This results in a resource allocation policy, which is a dynamic rule that also considers the actual evolution of 
the controlled process.  
 Resource allocation problems in uncertain and changing environments can be efficiently modelled by Markov 
decision processes (MDPs). Reinforcement learning (RL) is a class of AI methods for MDPs which, in contrast 
to classical dynamic programming approaches, can work without a perfect model of the environment, as they 
can iteratively improve their solutions via sequential interactions with the (uncertain, dynamic) system. 
Naturally, in our case, it is not possible to directly apply a trial -and-error style approach in the real hospital; 
nevertheless, such techn iques can be applied in a simulated environment. This leads to efficient resource 
allocation solutions12, which not only scale well and handle uncertainties w.r.t. task durations but are also able 
to cope with changes in the dynamics of the underlying syste m13. There is a wide range of RL methods 
available, such as Q -, TD-learning and policy gradient, depending on the addressed problem. In one of our 
earlier projects, a policy gradient method combined with simulation was applied to optimize the controller of 
an automated stem cell production platform, in order to maximize the expected throughput (mean cell yield 
over a specified horizon). The approach resulted in 30% improvement14. 
 The scheduling of the CAR -T cell production facility has similar characteristic s as that of managing the 
ordinary hospital resources, but its decision horizon is shorter, and its variation in durations stems from the 
uncertainties of the various production steps, such as CAR-T cell expansion. Hence, a deterministic scheduling 
strategy would not work properly, we combine methods of robust scheduling with prediction techniques based 
on AI driven manufacturing of personalized therapies.  
Since resource management and production scheduling are strongly linked, in the course of plan genera tion 
and adaptation, the scheduling of the production facility has to be taken into account. This calls for specific 
aggregation and decomposition techniques well -proven in traditional manufacturing, as described e.g. in 
Váncza et al, 200415 and Kis and Kovács, 201216. 
 We will also develop two distinct simulation models for the planning and scheduling levels: (1) one for the 
medium-term resource management and, (2) another for the short-term CAR-T cell production process. In both 
applications we will use agents for modelling the key resources and the projects. The input of the simulation 
consists of the demand of the projects, the resource availability and supply, the skill sets of the staff and the 
scheduled treatment and production processes including the u ncertainties. The output is the outcome of the 
                                                      
12 Kis, T.: A Branch -And-Cut Algorithm for Scheduling of Projects with Variable Intensity Activities, Mathematical 
Programming, 103, 2005, pp. 515-539 
13 Csáji, B. Cs.; Monostori, L.: Value Function Based Reinforcement Learning in Changing Markovian Environments, 
Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), MIT Press and Microtome Publishing, Vol. 9, 2008 (b), pp. 1679 –1709 
14 Egri, P.; Csáji, B. Cs.; Kis, K. B.; Monostori, L.; Váncza, J.; Ochs, J.; Jung, S.; König, N.; Schmitt, R.; Brecher, C.; 
Pieske, S.; Wein, S.: Bio -Inspired Control  of Automated Stem Cell Production, 13th CIRP Conference on Intelligent 
Computation in Manufacturing Engineering,  Naples, Italy, 2019, in print. 
15 Váncza, J., Kis, T., Kovács, A.: Aggregation - the Key to Integrating Production Planning and Scheduling, An nals of 
the CIRP, 53 (1), 2004, pp. 377-380. 
16 Kis, T.; Kovács, A.: A Cutting Plane Approach for Integrated Planning and Scheduling , Computers & Operati ons 
Research, 39 (2), 2012, pp. 320-327. 
Figure 4: Two decision levels: planning for resource management, and production scheduling and control. 
AIDPATH     15 
processes, which helps evaluate in a risk-free environment how efficiently the resources are used. The possible 
applications are prediction and support of machine learning. We have already used agent-based simulation 
(ABS) in several projects to evaluate the benefit of resource sharing in cooperative production networks 1718. 
We have also successfully applied it in combination with machine learning techniques in the field of stem cell 
production 14. 
IOT infrastructure, cybersecurity and data management  
AIDPATH purpose is to build an end-to-end autonomous manufacture of advanced therapies, with the goal of 
improving availability, accessibility and thus accelerate adoptio n of patient -specific treatments. The novel 
approach of shifting the CAR-T cell manufacturing into the hospital and automating it requires a continuous 
data integration and a standardized involvement of all hardware and software components as well as the A I-
based decision support.  Since these data are considered electronic healthcare records (e.g. donor-derived cells, 
blood type, medical history, test results, etc.) they are qualified to be sensitive in terms of privacy and security 
at least to their owners or the different stakeholders involved.  
The implementation of the IoT infrastructure is based on existing approaches and standards (RAMI 4.0, 
IIRA), which enable a reliable and structured build-up19. A level-based architecture approach is used to define 
the connection between all AIDPATH components and the connection to the hospital environment. The 
centralized control and monitoring of the CAR-T cell production plant will be managed by a control software 
whose decisions are supported by real-time capable AI solutions. With the IPT's extensive knowledge in setting 
up production plants in the life sciences area, which consist of a multitude of heterogeneous machines and 
devices, an efficient, service -oriented connection is achieved by an agent -based approach20,21. An additional 
layer of software will be implemented that manages 
resources (materials, cells, staff etc.) in an ERP -like 
manner and enables their monitoring and tracking over the 
treatment process including hospital supply chains. 
The Inner IT core will be built on the Logiq platform for 
medical use cases, which is GDPR compliant, NEN7510 
certified, secure -by-design and privacy by design. The 
Logiq platform has a basis in a service -oriented cloud 
architecture (SOCA) running on Microsoft Azure hosted  
in the EU. The Logiq Platform has various service 
solutions that could be used in combination: LogiqCare, 
Big Data Portal and Clinical Decision-Making Tools.  
LogiqCare apps are designed to easy assemble a clinical software solution with a variety of apps  in different 
domains. Each app will be used for handling of personalized clinical care data or pseudomized Good 
Manufacturing procedure (GMP) and laboratory data. Clinical care data are structured in the patient -case 
structure with an underlying hierarchy  for the clinical diagnosis and treatment follow -up. The GMP facility 
will be based on pseudomized identification to allow sample identification, with minimal sacrifice for privacy. 
Data will be shared when need to know using role - (RBAC) and attributed -based access control (ABAC). 
Relevant data from this platform will synced anonymously through a one-way function to the Big Data Portal.  
The Big Data Portal has modules for data analytics and data processing. Analytics can be performed with both 
easy to use tools for direct analytical and advanced data tooling (R, Python) for machine learning and other 
artificial intelligence techniques. The Big Data Portal is also designed to exert business logic and coordinate 
batch processing of data. The data scientists will have access to their data sets to develop artificial intelligence 
solutions. The data processing module can orchestrate data processing in LogiqCare apps and/or batches in the 
                                                      
17 Kádár B., Egri P., Pedone, G., Chida T.: Smart, Simulation -Based Resource Sharing in Federated Production 
Networks. Annals of the CIRP - Manufacturing Technology, 67(1), 2018, pp. 503–506 
18 Szaller Á., Egri P., Ká dár B.: Trust-Based Resource Sharing Mechanism in Distributed Manufacturing. International 
Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 33(1), 2020, pp. 1 -21 
19 Weyrich and Ebert, C (2016): Reference Architectures for the Internet of Things. In: IEEE Softw . 33 (1) 
20 Jung et al. (2018): Service-oriented Communication and Control System Architecture for Dynamically Interconnected 
Assembly Systems. In: Thorsten Schüppstuhl, Kirsten Tracht und Jörg Franke (Hg.): Tagungsband des 3. Kongresses 
Montage Handhabung Industrieroboter. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg 
21 Jung et al. (2018): Highly modular and generic control software for adaptive cell processing on automated production 
platforms. In: Procedia CIRP 72 
Figure 5: Logiq Platform 
AIDPATH     16 
Big Data Portal.The Clinical-
decision making tools sections is 
prepared to  productize medical 
device regulation (MDR) -
compliant AI tools, that could be 
used within LogiqCare and/or the 
Big Data Portal. 
For security and privacy issues 
cybersecurity experts specialized 
in connected infrastructures are 
involved in this project and  are 
planning to deploy an end-to-end 
methodology to secure all data 
and any potential sensitive asset 
that could be impacted by cyber -
attacks. The methodology includes a full security risk analysis highlighting the security risks and defining the 
adequate countermeasures and a security architecture approach focusing on security countermeasures by 
design allows data protection at the three stages: data at rest, data in use and data in transit.  Security 
Requirements will consider applicable standards and reg ulations such as EU Cybersecurity Act, GDPR, 
eIDAS, MDR, FDA, ISO 62304, ISO 14971, ISA/IEC 62443, ISO 15408, and Eurosmart IoT SCS. A reliable 
and secure digital environment will be achieved by including all network, service, device and application levels 
allowing to counter cyber -attacks such as local network attacks (e.g. sending bad data to network interface 
inside the gateway, man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks between any equipment and its server.) or at the system 
level against physical (hardware acces s) and logical attacks such as server specific attacks (e.g. cross site 
scripting, SQL injection, brute force attacks, malware, etc…). Robustness and sufficiency validation will be 
gained through security assessment procedures (e.g. testing with automated tools, pen-testing, source code 
review, etc.). 
Virus-free CAR-T manufacturing / Clinical translation and first-in-man clinical use of CAR-T  
Providing the End-user perspective, the hospitals will bring in their research based and clinical CAR T cell 
experience to ensure that the AIDPATH manufacturing platform is based on state of the art technologies and 
fulfils the high quality requirements of adoptive T cell products. Therefore, the AIDPATH consortium 
comprises key experts in CAR technology and cancer imm unotherapy, e.g. UKW has previously developed 
CARs specific for the B cell antigen CD19, the ROR1 tumour antigen that is expressed on solid tumours like 
breast and lung cancer22, FLT3 which can be targeted on Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia  (Jetani et al, DOI: 
10.1038/s41375-018-0009-02018) and the SLAMF7 molecule on multiple myeloma 23 that are now 
successfully used in clinical trials in the US and Europe and have been adopted by biotech and pharmaceutical 
industry for commercial development.  
With the AIDPATH consortium, we are developing a highly innovative platform that connects AI with hospital 
needs to create the smart hospital of the future. We are including truly cutting -edge technology into this 
approach: a variety of new targeting molecules with exquisite specificity and reduced immunogenicity, a novel 
modular multifunctional CAR design for enhanced safety and efficacy, and our revolutionary Sleeping Beauty 
(SB) virus-free gene-transfer strategy from minicircles24 or SB transposase protein (Querques et al, 2019; DOI: 
10.1038/s41587-019-0291-z). All technologies are protected by submitted/granted patents to provide a basis 
for successful subsequent marketing of the AIDPATH platforms as a GMP compliable CAR T cell 
manufacturing platform.  
The stellar methodologies in AIDPATH: 
i) Enhanced Sleeping Beauty transposition for high-level CAR gene-transfer into safe genomic loci: 
Sleeping Beauty transposition in CAR-T cell engineering has long been explored, but was complicated by very 
low gene-transfer rates and s ubstantial toxicity when SB transposase and CAR transposon were introduced 
into T cells as large circular DNA plasmids. We have solved both problems through the use of minimal DNA 
                                                      
22 Hudecek et al. 2010, 2013 
23 Gogishvili et al, 2017, Miskey et al, 2019 
24 Monjezi et al. 2016 
Figure 6: Cybersecurity by design 
AIDPATH     17 
expression cassettes called minicircles (MCs) instead of plasmids and could show that transfection of MC- (or 
mRNA-) encoded SB100X transposase and MC -encoded CAR transposon results in very high gene -transfer 
rates at low levels of toxicity ( Figure 7). Recently, we have developed a highly efficient approach by using 
soluble SB-protein for transfection, which provides additional safety to the process 25. Importantly, CAR -T 
cells engineered with this new strategy are superior to CAR -T cells transduced with lentiviral (LV) vectors 
due to lower genotoxicity and a highly safe genomic integration profile. MCs and SB protein can be produced 
either in-house or through commercial vendors, are easier to handle than LV (MCs are classified S1; LV is 
classified S2), and significantly reduce the time, effort and cost of generating CAR -T cells compa red to 
conventional CAR-T products that require much more expensive viral gene-transfer vectors – which is a major 
milestone accomplished for the development of CAR therapy. Furthermore, we are now able to combine 
different gene modification strategies, e.g. SB-based transposition and CRISPR based techniques in a complete 
virus free, one-step protocol.  
ii) GMP-manufacturing of CAR-T cells using virus-free Sleeping Beauty gene-transfer 
We have established the manufacturing process for CAR-T cells using our novel Sleeping Beauty-based gene-
transfer strategy under GMP-conditions (i.e. to produce clinical-grade CAR-T cells), and recently gained the 
                                                      
25 Querques et at, 2019 
Figure 7: Virus-free Sleeping Beauty CAR gene-transfer. (A) Schematic of SB100X transposase mRNA and SLA MF7 CAR minicircle 
(MC) DNA as transposon donor vector, prepared from parental conventional plasmids through in vitro transcription (mRNA) and site-
specific intramolecular recombination (MC). SLAMF7 CAR MCs contain exclusively the transgene and its promotor, but no bacterial 
origin of replication and antibiotic resistance genes. (B) Stable Sleeping Beauty CAR gene -transfer using CARAMBA’s proprietary 
technology with SB100X mRNA and CAR minicircle (mRNA-MC) compared to the conventional approach with DNA plas mids (P-P). 
FACS plots show CAR -modified (based on EGFRt expression) CD8+ T cells on day 14 after SB -modification. (C) Higher yield of 
CAR-modified CD8+ T cells with mRNA -MC approach compared to the conventional plasmid -plasmid approach due to high gene -
transfer rate and lower toxicity. (D) Comparison of SB transposon and lentivirus genomic insertions after CAR gene-transfer in human 
T cells. Fold enrichment of SB and LV insertion sites over the random expected frequency are plotted and show a close -to random 
integration profile for SB (left) and a significantly higher rate of insertions into genomic safe harbours for SB compared to LV (right). 
AIDPATH     18 
1st manufacturing license for SB-generated CAR T cells in the EU as part of the CARAMBA project. Multiple 
CAR-T manufacturing runs with T cells from healthy donors and patients have been performed successfully. 
These optimized processes will serve as a background to create the fully automated AIDPATH based 
manufacturing process. SOPs for the manufacturing process, as well as all assays for quality control and release 
testing are established, and can be adapted to AIDPATH. 
iii) Target epitope selection and CAR design to derive a unique CAR with optimal anti-tumour function: 
We have demonstrated in previous work that the choice of epitope on the targeted surface molecule and specific 
CAR design critically affect tumour recognition and CAR -T cell function (Hudecek et al. 2013 & 2015). 
Further, additional advanced functionalities will be incorporated into the CAR design wh ich allow selection, 
detection, expansion and deletion of CAR T cells. By equipping our CARs with an EGFRt marker we are 
adding an additional layer of safety to our CAR T cell products. This EGFRt safety switch can be triggered 
with anti-EGFR antibodies to  deplete CAR-T cells in case of toxicity or after a therapeutic window once 
tumour clearance has been obtained26. 
iv) Defined CD8+ killer and CD4+ helper T cell composition to enhance safety and efficacy: 
We have shown that formulating CAR -T cell products w ith defined proportions of CD8+ killer and CD4+ 
helper T cells is advantageous to the use of undefined bulk T cell populations27 due to several reasons. First, it 
is possible to use lower total doses of CAR -T cells to achieve therapeutic efficacy because CD 8+ and CD4+ 
CAR-T cells work synergistically. Second, CAR -T cell products with defined composition ensure consistent 
pharmacokinetic between patients (time to and level of CAR-T cell engraftment, peak proliferation) which is 
the basis for predicting and eventually preventing side effects such as cytokine release syndrome. Further, we 
have demonstrated that the addition of specific cytokines during cell culture (e.g. IL -7/IL- 15) can polarize 
CAR-T cells toward stronger anti -tumour function and persistence 28. We will apply both concepts into the 
automated manufacturing process by AIDPATH. 
v) Phenotypical and functional evaluation of CAR T cell products 
At the end-user site, we have cutting edge technologies available for phenotypic characterization and functional 
validation of the CAR T cells produced in the AIDPATH approach. This incorporates in depth analysis in 
vitro, e.g. real time measurement of target cell lysis (xCELLigence), multiplex analysis of cytokines, RNA -
sequencing approaches to thoroughly determ ine the fitness (NanoString technology), activation - and 
exhaustion state in a multiplex assay format (CyTOF) as well as clonality of the final product. High-resolution 
microscopy (dSTORM) is available to perform in depth -analysis of surface expression of highly interesting 
proteins, e.g. the amount and distribution of single CAR molecules on the T cell surface. Additionally, we have 
all tools available to perform integration site analysis and copy number determination, which is frequently 
requested by regulatory authorities. Using the closely located animal facility and highly trained staff, we are 
able to engage state of the art in vivo studies using recently published xenograft models addressing the safety 
and efficacy of the generated CAR T cell product29 
1.3.5 Sex and Gender 
The AIDPATH approach delivers an integrated, intelligent and holistic platform technology that will enable 
enhanced production for CAR-T therapeutic products in particular, but also with prospect of expediting other 
personalized cell therapy products. Thus, ATs will become available faster and safer for a broad spectrum of 
patients, regardless of sex and gender. Nonetheless, this element will be actively integrated in the experimental 
and modelling design of the project.  
At the current stat e of science, there is little known about the influence of gender on the manufacturing 
capability, e.g. whether gender is linked to shorter or longer expansion times. To date, there has been no 
variation according to sex in the efficacy of CAR -T therapies noted. Thus, we do not anticipate any 
implications on the manufacture or application of the ART products. Nevertheless, the gender of all samples 
with human origin as well as of all pre -clinical models will be recorded to allow for analysis of any 
(unexpected) influence it may have. The data regarding sex, gender and where available also other patient data 
(age, health, ethnicity, etc.) in combination with the associated results from the production processes will serve 
as a valuable dataset and allows us to assess distribution of slow and fast expanders in different subpopulations. 
                                                      
26 Wang et al. 2011, Paszkiewicz et al. 2016 
27 Sommermeyer & Hudecek et al. 2016 
28 Cieri et al. 2013; Casucci et al. 2013 
29 Mestermann et al, 2019, Norelli et al, 2018 
AIDPATH     19 
In order to avoid generation of gender -specific biases, we will make sure that the cell samples are balanced. 
Should there be any gender-specific requirements or characteristics of the manufacturing process, the AI will 
be capable of detection and adjustment of the process towards providing optimal conditions. In any case, by 
applying enhanced and adaptive expansion protocols and patient -tailored media, we will be able to adapt 
processes specifically to the patient’s need, whether due to gender or other variations in the population.
1.4 Ambition 
1.4.1 Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) and progress beyond SOTA 
Novel bioreactor to enable the simultaneous T cell expansion of multiple patients in parallel  
Current SOTA: The manufacturing process for an autologous CAR -T process begins with the collection of 
peripheral blood from the patient.  This process requires the patient to have their blood continuously circulated 
through a device in order to isolate the T lymphocytes (T Cells), a process known as apheresis . The blood 
minus the relevant cell type is then returned to the patient. Many systems exist to isolate T Cells from peripheral 
blood, including the Fresenius Kabi LOVO® Cell Processing System,  the Terumo COBE2991 and Elutra 
Separation systems, the Miltenyi CliniMACS system, and the Biosafe Sepax system. However, the cost and 
time for T cell isolation using such systems is significant, and they require trained and experienced operators. 
There is  also inter -machine variability that impacts the starting material. Moreover, only the Miltenyi 
CliniMACS enables the activation of the T cells isolated from the blood. This usually requires a separate 
procedure and additional equipment.  
 The scalable and  consistent production of autologous T cells suitable for clinical administration is a major 
manufacturing challenge.  Many pre-clinical and clinical processes currently rely on sterile cell culture bags 
which lack support for process control, automation a nd homogeneity. This approach is also not suitable for 
treating large patient numbers due to the requirement for manual manipulation of the bag. Other issues 
include unpredictable cell yield due to the generation of gas and mass transfer gradients within t he culture 
bags.  
Bioreactor platforms such as the WaveTM systems offer an attractive alternative because they include embedded 
sensors for process monitoring and control and can be automated. Similarly, the Miltenyi Prodigy system has 
the benefit of combining multiple processing steps (e.g. cell selection, activation and expansion) in one device. 
However, the scalability of such systems is limited  when producing autologous therapies for larger patient 
populations. The Prodigy is limited by its ‘one-patient-at-a-time’ approach: the expansion of T cells can take 
10 – 21 days, and therefore during this period, the system cannot be used to produce cells for any other patient. 
To produce cells for 10 patients in parallel, a gene therapy development company, or a hospital administering 
cell therapies, would need to purchase a minimum of 10 separate devices. This greatly increases the cost and 
requires significant lab space.  
Progress beyond the state of the art: A novel cell expansion system will be developed by partner AGL and 
specifically designed for CAR-T manufacture thereby achieving high density, controlled, automated expansion 
of multiple CAR-T cells in the same bioreactor platform, with xeno-free media. 
Success metrics: Demonstration of the ability to prepare at least two CAR-T preparations in parallel 
Novel modular, GMP-ready, AI enhanced automated manufacturing platform  
Current SOTA: Although platforms exist that enable combination of multiple cell processing steps (such as 
the Miltenyi Prodigy), there is no platform currently available that allows for the integration of multiple stand-
alone devices within a closed, flexible, automated platform. This is important for true flexibility, because each 
cell and gene therapy development and production process will be different, requiring different technologies, 
approaches and ultimately different products. The closest state -of-the-art technologies include Tokyo 
Electron’s “Smart Cell Processing Technologies” 30 and Sartorius’ CompacT SelectT robotic liquid handlers; 
these are solely research apparatus, are not scalable, and cannot be adapted to new or additional technologies. 
The partner IPT is one of the leading experts in developing robot -aided laboratory automation systems, such 
as the StemCellFactory, the StemC ellDiscovery or the Autostem platform, which are representative for a 
number of robotic platforms that have been built both in Europe and worldwide in recent years31.  
                                                      
30https://ct.catapult.org.uk/news-media/regulatory-news/cell-therapy-catapult-working-tokyo-electron-smart-cell-
processing 
31 Daniszewski et al (2017): Automated Cell Culture Systems and Their Applications to Human Pluripotent Stem Cell 
Studies. In: SLAS technology, DOI: 10.1177/2472630317712220. 
AIDPATH     20 
Progress beyond the State of the Art: Modular, flexible automated GMP-Ready CAR-T production platform 
that is made more efficient and through AI enhancement of the manufacturing process and resource planning.  
Success metrics: 30% gain in efficiency, implementation of fully operating system that is capable of treating 
40 or more patients  per y ear, orthogonal log for quality controls enabling regulatory compliance and 
continuous verification. 
AI enhanced data platform for precision medicine  
Current SOTA: Precision medicine is an idea that has garnered sometimes intense interest. The concept is 
that by conducting a ‘deeper’ characterization of a patient or a tumour the therapeutic regimen can be tailored 
to be more specific and more likely to be successful in a given patient. The impetus for precision medicine is 
the simple fact that most clinical measurement and classification schemes tend to lump patients together into 
broad categories. This means that within any given disease category there is a substantial degree of clinical 
and biological variability. As therapeutics, such as CAR -T therapy, t arget sophisticated biological domains 
such as the immune system it is more likely that a given therapy will be more or less effective in treating 
smaller subsets of patients. Typical precision medicine approaches involve the molecular profiling of patient  
or tumour to identify specific molecular receptors or pathways and then tailor therapy accordingly. Autologous 
engineered cell therapies add an extra dimension because the process of manufacturing therapies from a 
patient’s own blood means that the patient characteristics and manufacturing processes can affect the efficacy 
and safety of a therapy. This is why the production of cell therapies requires the conduct of analytical 
measurements to predict the safety and efficacy of a given batch of cells. The IM I project T 2EVOLVE, a 
project coordinated by the partner UKW, is examining ways to improve and standardize that analytical process. 
Yet the data generated from the analyses is not typically organized and analysed to learn and improve the 
clinical decision making around engineered cell therapies.  
Progress beyond the state of the art: Deploying a platform that uses AI to organize and make use of the 
potential large network of sites administering cell therapies to analyse data at scale to create a learning system 
of continual improvement while expanding knowledge thereby fuelling new therapeutic research.  
Success metrics : establishment of a platform that combines manufacturing data with individual patient 
characterization, and outcome data, achieving agreement of at least five other hospitals to provide data to the 
data platform. 
Smart ‘manufacturing’ hospitals 
Current SOTA: The Smart hospital is defined as “a hospital that relies on optimised and automated processes 
built on an ICT environment of interconnect ed assets, particularly based on the internet of thing (IoT), to 
improve existing patient care procedures and introduce new capabilities.” Most Smart hospital concepts centre 
upon patient flow, improved diagnostics and surgical capability, enhanced patient safety, cyber resilience and 
trustworthiness.32 The manufacturing of autologous engineered cell therapy is a complex process that is highly 
amendable to the ICT and automation process, yet this activity remains, particularly in Europe something that 
is only performed in specialised centres with dedicated facilities and teams.  
Progress beyond the state of the art:  Applying the concept of a smart hospital to the manufacturing of 
engineered cell therapies – the smart ‘manufacturing’ hospital allowing them to scale specialised procedures 
Success metrics: Generation of a multi -stakeholder community with at least 50 organisations  interest in the 
smart manufacturing concept, production of a set of guidelines, procedures and software. 
Improved patient outcomes and health care / Improved socioeconomic impact of CAR-T therapy 
Current SOTA: At present, there is a high rate of initial responses with CAR-T therapy in cancer patients that 
have failed conventional treatment with chemoradiotherapy; in many patients (approx.  50% in acute 
leukaemia), these responses are durable, still a significant proportion of patients ultimately relapses – and the 
reasons for this include attributes of cell product (suboptimal fitness/exhaustion) and tumour (enhanced 
resistance/antigen loss escape). At the same time, CAR -T therapy in responding patients is accompanied by 
significant side effects, including cytokine release syndrome (CRS) that can – in most patients – be managed 
clinically but increase the use of health care infrastructure and overall treatment cost.  
Progress beyond the state of the art: AIDPATH will address these challenges and use AI to identify patient 
and cell product biomarkers to optimally tune manufacturing and clinical use to augment the rate of durable 
                                                      
32 Smart Hospitals Security and Resilience for Smart Health Service and Infrastructures  
November 2016, European Union Agency for Network and Information Security www.enisa.europa.eu  
AIDPATH     21 
responses whil e at the same time reducing the incidence of severe CRS. This effort will lead to reduced 
hospitalizations and emergency room consultations, thereby reducing cost and improving socioeconomic 
impact.  
Success metrics: Reducing treatment failure due to imperfect CAR-T product characteristics by at least 50%; 
reducing the incidence of severe CRS by at least 50% with CAR-T in haematology indications.  
1.4.2 Innovation Potential 
AIDPATH will utilize state -of-the-art AI technologies in order to (1) predict and improve continuous 
manufacturing process outcomes based on the highly variable patient input cell material and (2) integrate the 
system into the physical and IT infrastructure of the hospital by governing various discrete tasks such as 
logistics, scheduling and ca pacity planning. Thus, AIDPATH for the first time will combine available key 
innovations from different industries to pilot a holistic approach for smart, patient-specific, safe and effective 
therapy manufacturing in the hospital.  
Innovation potential is defined by three innovation characteristics: novelty, technical feasibility, and market 
demand. Below is a table that describes the innovation potential of a ‘smart manufacturing hospital’ rated by 
their innovation characteristics.  
 
The following innovations will be provided by AIDPATH: 
 
Smart manufacturing hospital 
Innovation 
characteristics 
Rating Rationale 
Novelty Very 
High 
To our knowledge there are currently no ‘smart manufacturing hospitals’ that for AI 
driven manufacturing of CAR-T cells. There are parts of the manufacturing process 
that are automated but only on a limited scale and not in conjunction with the concept 
of smart hospitals  
Technical 
feasibility 
Very 
High 
All the elements of manufacturing are well established as well as the elements o f 
automation, and AI. 
Market 
demand 
Very 
High 
CAR-T cell therapies are well established and a rapidly growing field. One of the 
biggest problems from the point of view of the hospitals is setting up the necessary 
GMP processes. From the point of view of a  contract manufacturing centre the 
biggest problem is being able to scale up operations. The AIDPATH system solve 
both of these problems  
 
The smart manufacturing hospital is comprised of a number of component innovations:  
Innovation Novelty Feasibility Demand 
Modular bioreactor for cartridge-based, parallelized 
production  
high feasible high 
Robotic and modular manufacturing system high feasible high 
AI digital CAR-T twin  for manufacturing high very feasible high 
AI for intelligent bioprocess control  very high feasible very high 
AI models for resource planning high Very feasible high 
End-to-End AI pipeline integrating automated machine 
learning 
high very feasible very high 
Compilation of extensive CAR-T data sets very high feasible very high 
Holistic IoT infrastructure for hospital-based therapy 
production  
very high very feasible medium 
Manufacturing data platform for precision medicine high very feasible high 
High Quality personalized CAR-T products medium very feasible very high 
 
AIDPATH     22 
2 Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
AIDPATH will enhance the emergence of European -led AI based pilots for the smart hospital of the 
future enabled by open system platforms by producing and then demonstrating the effectiveness AI driven 
automated modular system to manufacture personalised CAR -T cell therapy. This will be achieved by 
implementing a pilot system within the hospital at partner UKW and then using the system to manufacture and 
deliver CAR-T cell therapies in a clinical setting. The AIDPATH solution will fundamentall y be A I-based, 
embedding AI and machine learning approaches across all aspects of the system, including: 
1. A big-data approach to characterise the cellular starting material  by extract key and specific data 
with respect to age, gender, pre-existing conditions for donor and patient datasets to ensure the optimal 
bioprocess and manufacturing strategy is employed to yield a high -quality, efficacious therapy. By 
understanding the impact of key patient factors and variables in the starting material through a big-data 
approach, it will be possible to establish the appropriate process settings from the outset, including 
selection of cell growth medium and other control parameters. This will be complemented and validated 
by a high-throughput experimental approach which will be used to accelerate the development of using 
these different culture media, process conditions, different donor starting material and will be used to 
establish the basis for the AI tools.   
2. Modelling solutions and real time analytics including mass spectrometry data will create an intelligent 
control solution ready to facilitate AI deployment within the bio -manufacturing sector, particularly for 
patient-specific cell therapies where each product batch is for an individual patient. This solution would 
allow adjustments to be made in real-time to maximize the yield, and the “AI-ready” nature of the system 
would enable AI to be applied in the future to determine optimal batch conditions based on patient 
information (e.g. age, height, weight, previous treatment regime). 
3. The Digital Twin  (DT) will capture not only the biochemical, medical and engineering background 
knowledge about the cell production system an its environment but will also provide passages between 
the real and virtual (i.e., modelled) worlds of manufacturing. The DT will be updated repeatedly by using 
incoming flows of data to reflect real production and its broader environment, whereas it will be used in 
designing the structure as well as in scheduling, monitoring and controlling the behaviour of production 
system. The challenge for AI is to find the right and efficient representations and methods to support this 
bi-directional exchange of data, information and knowledge. We are going to facilitate the standardized 
industrial take up of DT so that its full potential can be exploited by using the appropriate combination 
of intelligent faculties such as sensing, interpretation, representation, planning and decision making, 
scheduling, execution control, simulation and forecasting, learning, and visualization. Furthermore, non-
representable biochemical, medical and engineering knowledge, experience and intuition can also 
produce very successful insights and heuristic solutions, thus human involve be integral in our approach. 
It will be also a guarantee to high-level conformance, transparency, explanatory power, and confidence 
of models used in all levels of decision making 
4. Establish machine-learning algorithms for automated process models to facilitate a data -driven 
approach to optimisation and autonomous live process control . This will be complemented with 
experimental studies that will adopt a risk-based approach to identify the complex relationships between 
parameter controls/inputs and process outcomes to optimise the manufacturing process. This will involve 
systematic ranking of key variables after which a full factorial design of experiment study will be 
undertaken to investigate the impact on the model parameters. Such an approach is necessary to address 
the complexity associated with patient-specific therapies, as there is recognition within the AT field that 
outcomes will vary based on input variation (patient cells and reagents) in a manner that is highly 
dependent on process operation. 
5. AI solutions for production scheduling : Production scheduling will facilitate accurate planning of 
patients’ therapies and cost effective exploitation of the pilot which  will be enabled by an efficient 
relation of AI prediction and robust or stochastic scheduling techniques. The AI prediction will be based 
on the process model developed under point 2 and will be optimized during the process based on real -
life events. 
6. Automated clinical resource management : Clinical resource management will be centred on the 
patient. Beyond managing the essential equipment an d materials, staff management is also of key 
AIDPATH     23 
importance. When implementing CAR-T cell therapy, unit and staff preparation will include all members 
of the multidisciplinary team including nursing, haematology staff and residents, neurology, emergency 
department and ICU. The problem will be modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and advanced 
Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods, such as policy gradient, will be used to learn an efficient resource 
management policy that is able to cope with the uncertainties and disturbances arising during the process. 
The solution will exploit the power of the Digital Twin (DT) developed within the project. 
The UKW pilot will serve as a  demonstration of the effectiveness of AI based technologies in a range of 
healthcare tasks. The AIDPATH platform will integrate smart robotics, machine learning and autonomous 
systems to develop a comprehensive solution embedded into an operational healthcare setting, delivering an 
integrated digital and physical service for the hospital. The system will incorporate Artificial Intelligence 
into several different areas of the hospital workflow. Firstly, through process prediction for the CAR -T cell 
production, by successfully modelling the complex stochastic environment represented by the bior eactor. 
Secondly, the incorporating smart sensors, which not only capture monitoring data, but can also perform 
sophisticated processing on it (e.g. Raman Spectroscope) to control the process in real time. Thirdly, Artificial 
Intelligence algorithms will be used in production scheduling and resource management, incorporating smart 
algorithms, which are able to manage and prioritize complex requirements and dependencies, such as the 
patient diagnostics and prognostics.  
The AIDPATH platform will not be limited to the manufacture CAR-T cell therapies. It will be designed to be 
flexible in terms of the raw cell source it accepts and the potential operations (purification, isolation, gene 
augmentation/editing, expansion, testing, characterisation, monitoring and  much more) that it can carry out. 
Any technology that can be modularised can be included in the platform. Different forms of bioreactors can 
be supported including emerging breakthroughs in gene engineering, or new forms of sensor technology. The 
platform will be an open platform system agnostic to type of technology or device providers. AIDPATH will 
utilize open software and standardized interfaces where feasible to avoid barriers that could arise from 
licensing or the use of proprietary systems. Where in terfaces are established, protocols will be standardized, 
documented and published to allow future technology providers to easily integrate into the system. At the same 
time, we will ensure that the stored data and communications are secure by design and that privacy is ensured.  
Data from the effort to produce and implement the pilot will be used to demonstrate cost-effectiveness through 
cost modelling that integrates both perspectives from the clinical side through the multiple clinical partners as 
well a s the industrial perspective provided by the contract manufacturing organization Hitachi Chemical 
Solutions (HCTAS), which provide fundamental insight into the industrial cell therapy production landscape. 
The aim is to show that ‘smart manufacturing’ hospitals will not only reduce manufacturing and logistics costs; 
they will also increase patient access to advanced therapies. The process of achieving the pilot will also build 
up knowledge that is both technical and practical in terms of resolving the issue s that arise from deploying 
such a system. This knowledge will be combined with the different stakeholder perspectives derived from 
members of the AIDPATH stakeholder community, which will include multiple types of stakeholders (see 
stakeholder impact map below), to produce a societal guide for the implementation of AI driven automated 
advanced therapy manufacturing.  
Results of the pilot and the guide will form an effective basis for developing deployable applications of the 
‘smart manufacturing’ hospital concept. The deployment of the AIDPATH outputs will be fostered through 
the launch of an innovation ecosystem that is evolved out of the stakeholder community. The intent is that the 
innovation ecosystem serves as a catalyst for the further development of the concepts and assets of AIDPATH. 
The goal will be that at the close of the funding period of the project a number of hospitals (at least ten) are 
preparing to run smart ‘manufacturing’ hospital pilots . The innovation ecosystem will also serve as a multi -
stakeholder collaboration network that will endeavour to reach a high leveraging effect on other sources of 
funding, in particular regional and national funding. This will happen through engagement of stakeholders 
in explicit efforts to work together to develop new projects that can serve as overarching structures that connect 
together separate regional and national funding efforts. For example, additional funding is likely to be made 
available by the German Ministry for Research and Education (BMBF). In f act, in a recent press release, the 
Federal Minister Karliczek announced to massively invest into an activation program to fund “Autonomy in 
the growth market of health” and “Investment in education and research infrastructures” among other33. These 
are calls with potentially excellent synergies with AIDPATH. In addition, with two Fraunhofer Institutes in 
the consortium, additional monetary resources can be secured through application for Fraunhofer funding 
programmes. Future Targeted Healthcare Manufacturin g Hub which focuses on personalised therapy 
                                                      
33 https://www.bmbf.de/de/karliczek-jetzt-massiv-in-bildung-forschung-und-innovation-investieren-11671.html 
AIDPATH     24 
production and is integrating novel digital tools. Dr Rafiq and Dr Goldrick (UCL) are Co-Investigators of the 
Future Targeted Healthcare Manufacturing Hub and can leverage funding from the Hub given the alignment  
and complementarity of objectives. Similarly, there is funding available through organisations such as 
MedCity and the AT Network, which provide funds for translational activity and support key activity such as 
testing and feasibility studies. In addition, the personalised medicine fund from the Greek General Secretariat 
for Research and Technology could be harnessed towards directions related to personalised medicine 
manufacturing strategies. At the same time, given the transformative nature of AIDPATH, t his is something 
that the consortium can benefit from and ensure that AIDPATH utilises actively leverages funding from such 
sources. For example, AIDPATH will strongly liaise with the DIH Hero, who provide additional funding 
opportunities through their own calls for proposals. At the end of the project, technologies such as the robotic 
platform or AI based bio manufacturing control will be in a good position to apply for additional funding 
through this and other DIH in order to exploit and roll out the technologies. 
2.1.1 Stakeholder Community 
The intent of AIDPATH is to build a robust participatory stakeholder community that will help to contribute 
to trust and acceptance building in the AI technology. This community will be a key resource of input for 
the development of the AIDPATH platform and it will form the basis of the innovation ecosystem which is 
meant to help achieve a critical mass of stakeholder collaboration that will drive the concept of the smart 
manufacturing hospital forward. It is therefore of vital importance that the stakeholders perceive the value of 
the impact AIDPATH will achieve to fulfil their own needs. The stakeholder impact map, depicted above, 
shows the different stakeholder types in relation to the objectives and outputs of AIDPATH and  the different 
impacts relevant to them. AIDPATH will interact with a number of different stakeholders through established 
organisations which many of the consortium members have connections. 
 
 
Stakeholders Organizations 
Technology providers  Alliance for Regenerative Medicine (ARM) 
 UK EPSRC Future Targeted Healthcare Manufacturing Hub 
Hospitals  International hospital networks, i.e. HOPE  
Figure 8: Stakeholder impact map 
AIDPATH     25 
 VUD (Verband der Universitätsklinika Deutschlands) 
Researchers  International & European Society for Cell and Gene Therapy (ISCT / 
ESCGT) 
 European Haematology Association (EHA) 
 European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) 
Patients  European Cancer Patient Coalition (ECPC) 
 European Patient’s Forum 
Clinicians  AIDPATH clinical partners 
 European Haematology Association (EHA) 
 European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) 
Regulators  European Medicines Agency, EMA (EU)  
 Paul Ehrlich Institute, PEI (GER) 
 MHRA (UK), AIFA (ITA), AEMPS (ESP), FDA (U.S.) 
Investors  VC Investors (e.g. Syncona, Bain Capital, Angels in MedCity, HBM, 4Bio) 
 Corporate Investors (Novartis Venture Fund, BIVF, JNJ Innovations) 
Policy makers  European Haematology Association (EHA) 
 European Cancer Patient Coalition (ECPC) 
2.1.2 Economic impact 
Engineered T cell therapies like CAR-T carry unprecedented medical value (considering that a single-dose cell 
product can replace several years of repetitive chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation in patients with 
acute leukaemia – the value is in excess of 2 Mio €). The cost of CAR -T therapy is dictated by the complex 
manufacturing, logistics, in -patient administration and foremost – the dependence of conventional CAR -T 
manufacturing on viral gene-transfer vectors as the major bottleneck in the supply chain. AIDPATH will focus 
on virus -free g ene-transfer and point -of-care manufacturing to alleviate most of the complexity and cost 
associated with CAR-T therapy and create a sustainable way of using this treatment across all EU member 
states.   
The market prize for CAR -T is approx. 300.000 € for CD19 CAR-T to treat acute leukaemia/lymphoma in 
Germany, and this prize varies between EU member states depending on agreements that have been made with 
the commercial vendors and the national health care systems. According the European Society of Bone Marrow 
Transplant (EBMT) registry34 there were 418 patients treated with CAR-T therapies in Europe in 2019. When 
you consider that in Europe there were 209.898 new cases of either Leukaemia or Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma35 
approximately 0.1% are being treated with CAR-T cell therapy. Given the effectiveness of the therapy it would 
not be unreasonable that in the short term future this percentage would rise to 1% or even 5%. At a cost of 
320K per patient treating 1% of the patients would cost 1.28bn euros and 6.4bn if 5% were treated. A modest 
10% decreased in cost gained from the AIDPATH platform would result in a 128 or 640m euro savings each 
year. This also highlights that at the current cost levels patient access to CAR -T therapies is likely to be very 
limited. Therefore, the cost savings that can result from an AI driven automated system could have a substantial 
economic impact. Technology providers who can help deliver that cost savings either in isolation or as a 
component in a comprehensive platform as envisioned in this project would be able to gain market share.  
In addition to CAR -T therapies, today, hundreds of companies and research groups are exploring other 
advanced cell therapies for cancer, notably Tumour-Infiltrating Lymphocytes (TILs) for solid tumours and 
T-Cell Receptors (TCRs) for squamous cell cancers. The global market for these therapies, which are ideal 
applications of AIDPATH, will be in the tens to hundreds of thousands. As costs and prices fall, and cell 
therapies are adopted as first-line treatments, this will grow into the millions.  
Meeting the needs of these growing populations of patients with autologous therapies will be very challenging. 
AIDPATH, with its ability to produce an autologous treatment for several patients at once , by running  
multiple expansion modules, isolation modules or gene delivery modules in parallel, offers a realistic solution 
to this challenge in the short to medium term. Moreover, given its inherent flexibility and equipment 
interoperability, the platform can also be used in the future for allogeneic therapies.   
                                                      
34 https://www.ebmt.org/ebmt/news/growing-community-car-t-cells-activities-europe 
35 https://gco.iarc.fr/today/data/factsheets/populations/908-europe-fact-sheets.pdf 
AIDPATH     26 
2.1.3 Key impacts and metrics 
Key Impacts Metrics 
Emergence of European-led AI based 
pilots for the smart hospital of the 
future, enabled by open system 
platforms 
Successful comprehensive CAR-T cell production pilot and 
identification of at least ten hospital prepared to run pilots. 
Demonstration of effectiveness, in 
use, of AI based technologies, such 
as smart robots, in a range of 
healthcare tasks 
Implementation of an AI powered pilot in the hospital (UKW), 
validation of both logistic and bioprocess use cases, at least three 
validation runs with equal or exceeding cell number and quality 
as in the manual state of the art 
Engagement of healthcare policy 
makers, investors, stakeholders and 
through the pilot 
Assembly of an advisory board, at least four meetings with the 
advisory board, innovation ecosystem with at least fifteen 
members from diverse stakeholder groups 
Effective basis for developing 
deployable applications 
Generation of a guide that incorporates supporting data, technical 
and clinical know-how, as well as the societal perspective for 
implementing a SMART manufacturing hospital 
Reaching a high leveraging effect on 
other sources of funding, in particular 
regional and national funding 
Application for at least three synergetic projects and acquisition 
of at least one additionally funded projects synergetic to 
AIDPATH 
Contributing to trust and acceptance 
building in the AI technology among 
all stakeholders (including patients, 
their formal and informal caregivers, 
decision makers, etc.) 
Assembly of an advisory board with at least four meetings in total, 
publication of a societal guide, At least six publications in 
(scientific) journals and participation in at least four conference 
presentations with outreach to stakeholders 
Growth of ‘smart manufacturing’ 
hospital pilots 
Successful comprehensive pilot, identification of at least ten 
hospital prepared to run pilots 
Reduced cost of autologous CAR-T 
therapy 
Realization of at least a factor of four reduction in costs for 
autologous CAR-T cell manufacturing 
Surpassing the cell expansion 
bottleneck 
Demonstration of the ability to process at least two donor-specific 
CAR-T products at the same time in parallel using the AIDPATH 
system 
Increased access to CAR-T cell 
therapies 
At least 1.000 patients receiving autologous CAR-T 
manufacturing using at least some elements of the AIDPATH 
system within five years of the end of the funding period.  
 
2.1.4 Barriers, obstacles and framework conditions  
Healthcare and public acceptance for hospital-based therapeutic manufacture: Advanced therapies, such 
as CAR-T, are traditionally manufactured by pharmaceutical organisations who have a significant track record, 
capability and expertise in manufacturing therapeutics. However, long before pharmaceutical companies took 
control of CAR-T, hospital and clinical centres of excellence made these treatments. Centres like the University 
of Pennsylvania, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, UCL and University of Wurzburg, and others 
figured out how to engineer CAR -T cells and ran the initial trials to test them. Drug companies were later 
involved mainly as a means to scale up production. However, there are significant benefits to enabling hospitals 
to manufacture CAR-T therapies, specifically the fact that hospitals can deliver the CAR-T therapies quicker 
because they do not need to ship cells to and from a drug company plant. This is a critical issue, because most 
patients currently treated with CAR -T have not responded to other treatment s and their health is seriously 
compromised; some patients die between the time stem cells are removed from them and the time they are 
supposed to come back to the hospital for re-infusion.  
Privacy Requirements: AIDPATH is expected to handle Personal Iden tifiable Information (PII) and 
Electronic Healthcare Records (EHR) of patients, users, employees and third-party entities.  The General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) requires to protect such data  and therefore specific security functional 
AIDPATH     27 
requirements must be taken into consideration by design. This aspect must be considered carefully to find a 
balance between the business functional needs and the privacy regulations. 
Cost of CAR -Ts: the high cost of CAR -T therapies remains a major obstacle to their wid espread use, 
particularly as first-line or second-line therapies (both Kymriah and Yescarta are approved for third-line only 
at this time). However, a major benefit of AIDPATH will be a radical reduction in the development and 
production costs of CAR -Ts an d other cell therapies. Thus, we are confident that this obstacle actually 
represents an opportunity. This is evidenced from experience in making CAR -T in leading medical centres 
show that locally engineered CAR-T cells can be made for less than half of what they are currently priced by 
pharmaceutical companies. 
Regulatory approval: AIDPATH proposes an important change in the development, production and delivery 
of advanced therapies – the location of the entire process (‘vein to vein’) at a large hospital. This contrasts with 
more centralised production strategies used by Novartis and Gilead, where patient blood is frozen, shipped to 
a central location (or one of a network of locations), and the resulting therapy then shipped back to the patient. 
Regulatory approval for this ‘local’ approach will be essential, and we anticipate extensive interactions with 
the relevant regulatory authorities including PEI, MHRA, HPRA, EMA and the US FDA. We have extensive 
regulatory experience within the team, as well as a plan for engagement (see WP 10). While our decentralized 
model is different, we believe it is also better – it removes several points of failure (transport, handling and 
logistics remain important challenges when working with fragile biologics), as well as r educing both time -
scale and costs of production. The closed, modular nature of the AIDPATH manufacturing platform means 
that there is no requirement for highly -trained scientist operators . Note that because all processes are 
automated, monitored and documented, this will increase consistency and cell quality, and provide much more 
process documentation. All these improvements will help with regulatory approval. 
Lack of standards: There are currently no universally-accepted technical standards for modular cell therapy 
production platforms. The most relevant standards (or best practice models) are in the robotic domain, with 
open platforms such as FiWare and UniversAAL and in the device connection area OPC -UA and SiLa. Our 
software will support interfaces to those modules, but the platform is not directly relevant enough that it makes 
sense to implement our software on it directly.  In order to be flexible towards any kind of technology, the 
software utilized by IPT is capable of integrating devices with different standards and interfaces via software 
agents independently from communication protocols. In addition, we will strongly encourage usage of existing 
and development of new open standards, especially in the area where AI is utilized in the hospital. These  
standards will include existing initiatives from the AI perspective as well as domain oriented standards from 
hospital and medical care. 
Financing the roll -out: It is to be expected that additional development, refinement, testing and 
accreditation/validation work will be needed, to take project end-result and make it into a product that can be 
installed into a hospital laboratory setting. However, if the approach and technologies are successful it is 
envisaged that a consortia of public/private enterprises and commercial organisations will be keen to develop 
this further. Importantly, the AIDPATH manufacturing platform will be developed with the regulatory 
framework in mind and developments will be informed by the relevant regulations through expertise fro m 
consortium partners and engagement with PEI, MHRA, EMA and US FDA. A specific deliverable in WP10 
is the preparation and organisation of a scientific advice meeting with the EMA and US FDA in the early and 
latter stages of the project. Multiple partners in the AIDPATH consortium have significant experience of 
designing and running clinical trials, therapy development, clinical translation and gaining regulatory approval 
(e.g. partners WUR, UCL, HCATS), as such, the platform will be developed with the regu latory process in 
mind.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
a) Dissemination and Exploitation  
Dissemination outputs: The establishment of localized, hospital-based automated manufacture and delivery 
of CAR-T therapies will require novel AI-based tools and technologies, and will position European hospitals 
as exemplars for smart hospitals of the future. This will provide lower-cost CAR-T therapies for patients and 
this approach and outcome will be of great interest to a broad spectrum of audiences, from healthcare providers 
to patients, researchers to clinicians. Subject always to appropriate intellectual property management, we will 
communicate the aims, approach, technologies and results of AIDPATH to these audiences. The message, and 
the optimum communication channel, will vary from one target audience to another. The target audiences, 
AIDPATH     28 
and how we plan to reach them, are summarised here; the relevant activities of the project are also described 
in WP10. In order to achieve a continuous and comprehensive dissemination through the project we going to 
publish at least four dissemination items (articles for conferences and journals, industry-focussed publication, 
white paper, etc.) per year in average and participate in at least two event for dissemination and exploitation 
per year in average. 
 
Audience Channels Key Messages 
Cell therapy researchers; 
cancer researchers; 
biomedical engineers 
Papers, 
conferences, web, 
networking 
Availability of excellent new technologies for 
producing cell therapies; innovative AI powered 
decentralized manufacturing infrastructure  available 
for testing validating further new technology 
inventions; cell therapy research material of 
unprecedented quality; avoidance of preparation 
variation and multiple points of failure; facilitation of 
replication and validation of research results; new 
research opportunities; value of AIDPATH beyond 
CAR-T.  
AI, Digital Technologies 
and Data Security 
Communities, Digital 
Innovation Hubs 
Papers, 
conferences, open-
source code, 
networking, web 
Advances in robot-aided cell therapy manufacture and 
digital twins to capture the biochemical, medical and 
engineering background knowledge about the cell 
production system and its environment, and also 
provide passages between the real and virtual (i.e., 
modelled) worlds of manufacturing.  
 
Researchers in automation 
and advanced 
manufacturing 
papers, 
conferences, web, 
networking; 
Information about modular cell therapy manufacturing 
platform, with high configurability and flexibility, as 
well as support for new technologies as they emerge. 
Potential for replication and re-use. 
Technology and vendor 
companies 
publications, 
meetings, 
conferences, 
personal and 
professional 
networks 
Excellent opportunity to test and validate new 
technologies in a controlled close-to-market 
environment; invitation to develop technology fit for 
implementation into AIDPATH for a future-oriented, 
sustainable platform; availability of an environment 
that links their technology seamlessly to others. 
Clinicians publications, 
conferences, web, 
patient groups, 
media 
Prospect of lower cost CAR-T and other cell therapies; 
enabling of use of cell therapies earlier in the treatment 
cycle; strong possibility of translation of exciting 
research results to the clinic; building confidence in 
high-value, safe and effective cell products. 
Patients and patient 
groups 
briefings, 
publications, 
conferences, 
websites, 
networking, media 
prospect of clinical availability of CAR-Ts at much 
lower cost, potentially for a wider range of cancers; 
reduction of major obstacle to routine use of cell 
therapies; reducing the risk of manufacturing failure 
Policy and regulators publications, 
briefings, media, 
patient groups 
A key obstacle to wider use of cell therapies 
(particularly CAR-Ts) has been overcome; cell therapy 
costs will fall; prospect of greater demand for cell and 
gene therapies – policy may need to adjust; encourage 
the dialogue on regulation of cell manufacturing, as it 
is disrupted by advanced technologies, facilitate 
regulatory approval for new products due to 
standardized manufacturing. 
AIDPATH     29 
Other cell therapy and 
advanced therapy projects 
personal networks, 
web, publications; 
Scope for synergy, open publication of processes, 
technologies, training materials, engage in discussions 
and exchange learnings in this specific field, etc. 
Projects in 
complementary domains 
(automation, bioreactors, 
advanced manufacturing, 
pharmaceuticals, sensors) 
publications in 
relevant domains 
and across 
domains, 
conferences, web, 
networking 
Important research developments in these domains; 
exemplars of multi-disciplinary collaboration; 
demonstrate potential to integrate novel technology 
into platform 
Healthcare funders publications, 
media, briefings, 
web 
Prospect of reduced cost of cell therapies, especially 
CAR-Ts; prospect of increased demand for cell 
therapies; prospect of being able to serve larger 
populations of patients 
Media media staff, press 
releases, web 
Wider access to CAR-Ts and other cell therapies, at 
lower cost, now a realistic prospect 
Future industrial partners, 
including contract 
manufacturing 
organisations (CMOs) and 
therapy development 
companies 
meetings, media, 
web, publications 
Commercial opportunity; novel business models 
 
2.2.1 Preliminary business model for sustainability 
The preliminary business model for sustaining th e outputs of AIDPATH will be 
that of an innovation ecosystem. An innovation ecosystem is defined as:  
“…the evolving set of actors, activities, and artefacts, and the institutions and 
relations, including complementary and substitute relations that are important for 
the innovation performance of an actor or population of actors.”36 
This definition is depicted graphically in the figure the right. One of the best 
examples of an innovation ecosystem is Apple. Apple provides the smartphones, 
computers, podcasting, streaming, and cloud storage and invites others to innovate 
such as content providers within that ecosystem. It is both collaborative and 
competitive. One of the most important aspect of an innovation ecosystem is the 
underlying network of actors. An innovation ecosystem can also be viewed as a collection of layers made up 
of different innovation systems.  
The innovation ecosystem developed out of AIDPATH will consist of seven innovation system. Each layer is 
described in the table below in terms of the relevant actors (stakeholders), activities and artefacts.  
 
Actors (stakeholders) Activities Artefacts 
Technology providers  Implementing technology and systems 
 Collaborating on delivery 
 Developing project funding  
 AIDPATH system 
 Standards 
 Guide 
 Data 
Researchers  Collaborative analysis of data from the 
AIDPATH system 
 Developing project funding 
 Dataset 
Clinicians & patients  Educational activities on cell therapies in 
alignment with T2EVOLVE 
 Developing local funding to implement 
pilot AIDPATH systems 
 Educational materials 
 Promotional materials 
                                                      
36 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2019.102098  
 

AIDPATH     30 
Investors  Pitch and match for investment in 
technology developers 
 Business models 
 Cost effectiveness analysis 
Hospital  Pilot system implementations  Guide 
 AIDPATH System 
Policy makers  Defining policy to enable ‘smart 
manufacturing hospitals’ 
 Policy briefs 
 Data on outcomes 
Regulators  Defining regulations  Standards 
 Data 
 Guide 
 
The foundation of the AIDPATH Innovation Ecosystem will be the stakeholder community that is developed 
during the project. This community will b e developed as a participatory and self -directed community. The 
individual stakeholders will be encouraged to participate in the activities listed above. To foster community 
building members will be allowed to propose new efforts in line with the activitie s defined above. This 
stakeholder community will serve as the test bed for business model development. They will form the source 
of initial interviewees for interview -based business model element testing. Business model testing will take 
place both for individual assets and for the concept of the innovation ecosystem. There are multiple possible 
revenue streams for the innovation ecosystem including: membership fees, technology marketplace, access to 
system data, standards development, conferences/education sessions, local and international project funding, 
charities, public-private partnerships, and SME development advice.  
A business model development process will also be carried out for each of the individual assets produced in 
during the project. This wi ll form part of an asset sustainability and exploitation plan which will detail how 
each asset will be maintained after the project funding period ends and how it will be made accessible and/or 
form the basis for exploitation. 
The broad competitive strateg y for the platform will be a combined cost leadership (through DtC) - 
differentiation approach (currently, there are no commercially available integrated platforms capable of 
precision, automated manufacturing of functional cell therapy products). In terms of the AIDPATH platform’s 
value proposition towards potential customers, two options must be considered. Each option, while related, 
targets a distinct business domain and could follow a separate route for exploitation (Figure 9). 
For example, the custom ers for a precision, automated manufacturing platform (e.g. a small cell therapy 
product company) are different from the ‘customers’ for the cell product implant (patients, healthcare providers 
and payers of health care services) or the AI pipeline (person alised medicine companies for other 
Figure 9: Innovation Ecosystem Business Model 
AIDPATH     31 
manufacturing settings and indications). Given the novelty and complexity of the field, business model 
development will have to deliver a framework that is flexible enough to capitalize on the unique mix of 
innovative features provided by the AIDPATH platform, irrespective of the specific cell therapy product and 
therapeutic indication being addressed.  
AIDPATH will produce a series of commercialisable products. This reflects the multiple disciplines involved 
in the proje ct and the modular nature of our technology, which makes the re -use of our results in other 
applications and environments very attractive. Each of these apparatus can be sold separately, or as part of an 
end-to-end pipeline. 
a) AGL, in collaboration with other partners, will optimize its novel bioreactor during the project, to manage 
multiple patient samples at once, each using its own selected chemically -defined xeno -free medium 
(FUJI), while being monitored with AGL’s and UCL’s new non -intrusive sensor and I PT’s process 
management software. The original (novel) work will include modularization of the bio-reactor, software 
and hardware interfaces and validation, enhanced non-invasive monitoring using novel Raman and other 
bio-sensors (see below). This builds on AGL’s existing Facer-1 product line.  
b) AGL and UCL will develop new sensors for use within the pipeline. The sensors will utilize Raman 
spectroscopy to non-invasively measure concentrations of relevant substances (oxygen, cells, lactate, etc.) 
within cell-isolation bags, bioreactor cartridges, etc. Rights in the new sensors will be held by AGL, on 
whose existing research they will be built. UCLB, the innovation arm of UCL, expects to support the 
commercialisation and market launch of these new devices 
c) FORTH will implement an in-house micro-bioreactor to develop potential novel biomarkers with 
metabolomics that will be linked to cell quality and potency. This system allows multiplexing of multiple 
process conditions allowing high throughput experimentation that is required for the screening of multiple 
donors. In addition, to enable automation regarding assay preparation together with IPT will automate 
sample preparation for extraction of metabolites from the CAR-T cell prior and after transfection. Finally, 
bioinformatics analysis will be used to link measurable metabolomics data sets to existing libraries within 
FORTH. These data will be validated also for the AGL system at larger scale and integrated with the data-
library built by FORTH and UCL and will be available for SZTAKI for algorithm training and validation. 
d) FUJI will work with UCL to define three variations of its existing Xeno-free cell culture medium line 
(‘PRIME-XV’), each of which is optimized for specific patient sub -populations and will be made  such 
that the medium is fully chemically-defined. This will benefit from the large -scale metabolomics 
experimental studies undertaken by FORTH and the process modelling from UCL, for patient 
stratification. The benefit for AIDPATH will be reduced variatio n in the production, and time -scale, of 
expanded T-Cell populations.  
e) UKW will embed and host the physical automated AIDPATH manufacturing platform to enhance its 
development and commercialization of a series of CAR -T therapeutic programs. UKW has successfully 
launched the first clinical trial with virus -free Sleeping Beauty -engineered CAR -T in Europe  
(CARAMBA H2020 Project) and has a rich pipeline of additional CAR-T products with novel target 
antigens and indications in haematology and oncology (e.g. ROR1 CAR-T to treat lymphoma, breast 
and lung cancer; FLT3 CAR -T to treat acute myeloid leukaemia, etc.) that will serve as exemplary 
applications on the AIDPATH platform. UKW’s biotech spin-out T-CURX is prepared to adopt these 
innovative CAR -T products for d evelopment to market once Phase I/IIa clinical development has 
provided a positive clinical signal and therapeutic index. IRIS will be responsible for implementing the 
AI process setup and monitoring/control (smart sensor) for the bioreactor. IRIS expects this will potentiate 
its existing PATBox system and a more general version will be applicable to different industrial processes, 
such as in the pharmaceutical and chemical/plastic recycling sectors. The integration of AI in industrial 
processes and decisio n support is a key future area and represent a pivotal goal for the Industry4.0 
initiatives, environment of special interest for IRIS. 
f) RAL will adapt its cybersecurity assurance framework to the medical industry. It will also extend its 
security by design and certification software platform to address the healthcare security requirements, 
evaluation criteria, standards and regulations, this will bring a great added value to the healthcare and 
smart manufacturing industry helping it fighting targeted cybersecurity attacks. 
g) SZTAKI will develop a solution which can model personalized patient therapies. The solution will be 
able to handle general risks and uncertainties involved. SZTAKI will use its knowledge in the 
AIDPATH     32 
development of solutions for resource constrai ned project management, production scheduling, and 
machine learning applications.  
h) ORTEC will be responsible for the further developments of the Logiq Platform allowing AI solutions 
and their integration and productization. Various parties will customize t heir data models in a user -
friendly environment to model their data as desired with support of ORTEC. This system will log data 
and support intelligent data processing for clinical care and Good Manufacturing Practices (i.e. LogiqCare 
and LogiqScience) with data availability at a need-to-know basis. ORTEC will integrate specialized data 
models to the generic model (with anonymous data) with authorization control will use the combination 
of role - and attribute -based access (RBAC, ABAC). The platform will als o be used to facilitate 
productization of clinical-decision support tools in an MDR-compliant manner. 
Collectively these outputs form the AIDPATH manufacturing platform itself  – the modules, robot and 
software that enable the efficient and flexible combination of diverse technologies to achieve the specific aim 
of CAR-T cell production (but which can be readily re -configured for other products). The platform will be 
the result of collaborative work, led by IPT but involving each of the other technology partners in the creation 
of their respective modules. All elements of the platform (the design documentation, the process control 
software, the specification for sensors, robots and hardware) will be published by IPT, to encourage project 
partners and third parties to replicate the manufacturing platform. The physical platform developed during the 
project will be established at University of Würzburg, as a basis for a new product line based on AIDPATH.  
Target Markets for AIDPATH IoT Infrastructure 
The target m arkets for the AIDPATH manufacturing platform are include: (1) Clinical Centres of 
Excellence/large hospitals, (2) commercial Contract Manufacturing Organisations (CMOs) and (3) cell therapy 
product development companies 
Direct target for the AIDPTAH technologies will be hospitals and treatment centres. Our expectation is that 
an AIDPATH manufacturing platform will be established in a laboratory setting (similar to a pathology 
laboratory), and used to generate cell therapies for one-to-several patients at a time. Each module will be linked 
to the same software and monitoring platform, but inputs, outputs, reagents and supplies for each module may 
be added or removed, via sterile bags, by human operatives. In addition, these hospital sites could be interlinked 
in the future, establishing a learning network that allows to optimize processes and AIs further based on the 
data that is generated from batch to batch over time.  
For CMOs, we anticipate that the platform could be adapted to centralized manufacture of allogenic products, 
including a robotic handling of inputs and outputs with 24/7 operation, and many patients’ therapies being 
produced in parallel. Full software and monitoring will be active, and human involvement will be minimal. It 
is envisaged that CM Os would be a significant beneficiary of such a platform as the AIDPATH enables 
extensive flexibility and would allow for interchangeable modules and technologies.  
For cell therapy product development companies preferring to develop manufacturing capacity in house, 
we anticipate that they could license or buy the platform adapted to either a centralised or decentralised setting 
with robotic handling and manufacture of therapies for clinical administration, either as part of a clinical trial 
study, or indeed, for full manufacture. Similar to CMOs, the human involvement would be minimal and the 
exact nature and setup of the modules would differ based on the company’s therapeutic application and 
manufacturing requirements. The intention would be to target those companies using existing SOTA systems 
(such as the Miltenyi Prodigy) and demonstrating the significant added value and benefits of moving to the 
AIDPATH system. 
For both markets, training and support will be important added-value services. We shall build on UCL’s MBI® 
CPD modular programme to train scientists, engineers, clinicians, regulators and hospital staff in the 
AIDPATH manufacturing platform. The training will highlight the benefits of the platform and equip them 
with the necessary skills and methods to take full advantage of the AIDPATH project outputs. 
New business models are emerging, that may offer additional possibilities to innovators within the cell therapy 
domain. One configuration relevant to AIDPATH is that of the Collaborative Enterprise  Network (CEN): a 
group of organizations, each a separate legal entity, united by at least one common (business) goal, who 
coordinate their activities through collaborative agreements according to agreed business practices. The CEN 
governing body, composed  of members from each participant, takes strategic decisions concerning which 
manufacturing technologies to adopt (e.g. for production, QC, communications, inbound and outbound 
logistics). While remaining able to function independently, each member contrib utes a specific area of 
expertise to the overall manufacture and supply chain and is able to capitalize on business opportunities that 
AIDPATH     33 
might not have been available if acting alone. The setup of CENs is one of the activities envisioned for the 
innovation ecosystem.  
Legal entities: ownership of most of the intellectual property which will emerge from AIDPATH is quite 
clear, because the project builds on innovative foundations which partners contribute to the overall objective, 
as described above. Thus, AIDPATH will enable the project partners to develop new product lines, improve 
existing products, and explore integration in the platform, with the confidence that there will be no subsequent 
intellectual property difficulties. In the event that two partners are both substantially behind some new IP, case 
by case agreements will be agreed when the new technology has been developed and evaluated.  
Sales and distribution: for partners’ specific technologies, we anticipate that existing sales and distribution 
networks will continue to be used, but that AIDPATH will lead to stronger competitive position in the relevant 
sectors. For the integrated platform, we anticipate a roll-out programme (outlined above) that relies on organic 
growth and high-profile ‘reference sites’.  
b) Communication activities 
AIDPATH will engage in extensive and appropriate communication activities both during and after project 
completion. To achieve this, clear messaging needs to be in place to ensure key message are communicated 
and have maxim um impact. This will be achieved by ensuring all messaging is tailored to appropriate 
audiences (see below). Furthermore, a range of communication activities have been identified to ensure that 
there is broad acceptance of the system across the healthcare sector and amongst the general public. 
Tailoring the channel and the message to audience is critical if the project is to communicate effectively. 
Patients and organisations need to know what we are doing, and what this may mean for them, so that they 
can engage with their healthcare providers and encourage them to consider wider use of cell therapies. For 
many patients, they rely on their organisations to keep them informed of scientific progress.  Clinicians need 
to know that major obstacles (cost, risk, consistency) to clinical translation of promising research has been 
overcome, and that cell and gene therapies may become more routine and mainstream. Media are primarily 
interested in newsworthy events, such as the start of the project, major publications , the impact on patients, 
new industrial spin -outs, etc., but more coverage can be secured by making the message ready -to-print and 
easy for the media to use. Researchers take peer-reviewed publications most seriously, and these are the most 
important channel for the research community. The website provides all audiences with somewhere to go to 
‘find out more’ and to get in touch with the team. Finally, our communication activities are an important 
support to securing new investment for further exploitation  of the project results; such relationships will of 
course rely on meetings and direct contact, but good publications and high profile will certainly help.  
Thus, our communication activities and resources (WP1) will include: 
- A comprehensive online dissemination suite (website, Facebook page, Twitter account, YouTube 
account, ResearchGate). The website will be the main resource, and will have sections with media-ready 
materials and press-releases, downloadable project assets, publications and scientific pap ers (researcher 
area) and material for patients, organisations and the general public. 
- Animations and videos that illustrate the science and technology involved in the project, to help to ‘bring 
the science to life’ and to reach new audiences. We will design these in collaboration with representatives 
of our target audiences, notably patients and clinicians.  
- Outreach to other projects  in cell therapy, in automation, in sensors, and other related domains. 
Automation and cell culture projects involving IPT, such as AutoCRAT, JointPromise and 
StemCellFactory are of course very relevant. Other projects funded under this call will be a particular 
target, because we expect that they may generate new technologies that could potentially be modularised 
in the future, thus adding value to both projects. 
- Outreach to industry and patient organisations, by attending meetings, inviting them to our plenaries 
and symposia/workshops in each country, authoring articles for their websites and publications, etc. As 
established experts, and leading technology companies we already enjoy substantial personal networks 
into these communities, which we will leverage.  
- Interaction with the DIH Hero e.g. via both participating as well as hosting conferences, meetings and 
other events with the goal to inform, educate and exchange knowledge between digital health care and 
robotics experts, thus ensuring visibility of the developed technologies and wide reach of the project 
results (see letter of Intent in the Appendix of Section 04-05 of this proposal) 
AIDPATH     34 
Publication: Important new knowledge is expected from AIDPATH. This includes new technology 
development, new business models, decision tools and health economic analyses. As noted above, we intend 
to publish our AI concepts, platform software and technology outputs openly, in order to encourage the growth 
of the ecosystem. New intellectual property that belongs to a single partner (e.g. enhancements to existing 
Background) will of course be protected as appropriate, using patents and other methods. When such protection 
is in place, we will publish as much as possible, using open-access journals or paying for open-access in high-
impact journals.  
Beyond the academic/research publication milieu, the new knowledge will be made available outside th e 
project through meetings and various media supports (publications in scientific journals, or general public 
newspapers, Internet, etc.). Furthermore, to further spread excellence and disseminate acquired knowledge the 
consortium plans to organise public workshops in the third year and again in the  final year of the project. 
These events, to which industry and academic R&D teams will be invited, will serve to gather inputs and 
external perspectives, as well as promoting our worn work. Major breakthroughs will be made public through 
press releases and newsletters. Project newsletters will also be available for download on the public website of 
the project, to allow the general public to access the information. 
Communication Venues 
The venues in which the con sortium has a strong record of publication, and/or which are targets for results 
from AIDPATH, include the following 
Journals 
 Nature Biotechnology 
 Science Translational Medicine 
 Biotechnology & 
Bioengineering 
 British Journal of Cancer 
 Gene Therapy – Nature 
 SLAS Discovery/Technology  
 European Journal of 
Operational Research 
 Nature Biomedical 
Engineering 
 Blood 
 Biochemical Engineering 
Journal 
 Cancer Gene Therapy 
 IEEE Robotics and 
Automation 
 BioProcessing International  
 Biosensors and 
Bioelectronics;  
 Sensors and Actuators  
 Cancer  
 IEEE Sensors Journal 
 Biotechnology Advances 
 Cell & Gene Therapy Insights 
 Value in Health 
Conferences 
 ECI Scale up & Manufacturing 
of Cell-based Therapies VI 
(2019) 
 European Society for Animal 
Cell Technology (ESACT)  
 European Society for 
Biochemical Engineering 
Sciences (ESBES) 
 British Society for Gene and 
Cell Therapy 
 SelectBio Advances in Lab 
Automation & Robotics 
 Society for Laboratory 
Automation and Screening 
(SLAS) Conferences 
Industry Groups 
 IEEE Sensors Conference 
2020 
 EuroNanoMed 
 Termis-EU (and World) 
 International Society for 
Cellular Therapy (ISCT) 
 Tissue and Cell Engineering 
Society (TCES) Conference 
 Cell Therapy Manufacturing 
& Gene Therapy Congress 
2019 
 World Advanced Therapies & 
Regenerative Medicine 
Congress 
 International Conference on 
Smart Manufacturing 
Technologies (ICSMT) 
 World Advanced Therapy 
Congress 
 American Society of 
Haematology 
 International Conference on 
Significant Advances in 
Biomedical Engineering 
 The European Laboratory 
Research & Innovation 
Group (ELRIG) 
 The International Society for 
Health Economics and 
Outcomes Research (ISPOR) 
 BioPhorum Operations Group 
 BioIndustry Association 
 British Standards Institution 
 ISCT Communication 
Committee 
 Centre for Commercialization 
of Regenerative Medicine  
 IChemE Biochemical Eng. 
SIG 
 BioProcess International 
 Alliance for Regenerative 
Medicine 
 ASEBIO Spanish Bioindustry 
Association 
 Phacilitate Automation SIG 
 Parenteral Drug Association 
 BIO Deutschland 
 Cell and Gene Therapy 
Catapult 
 DIH Hero 
AIDPATH     35
2.3 Data Management, Publication and Open Access 
AIDPATH has a strong emphasis on exploitation and commercialisation, as outlined above. The consortium 
includes large industry, SMEs and research centres, which have a strategic focus in this area; as a result, the 
new data and foreground knowledge, which the project generates, will be carefully managed and protected.  
However, we of course respect the broader interests of the scientific community, and appreciate the direct 
value that having other research teams review, replicate and validate our work will bring. As soon as is feasible 
within our intellectual property constraints, we are committed to placing our research data on an open access 
research data repository, as outlined below, with full supporting metadata and process/protocol data. This will 
enable other research teams to replicate our in vivo validation work, to explore how our CAR-Ts can be used 
in clinical applications, and to address complementary research questions such as using our platform to produce 
different types of cell therapies. This new knowledge will benefit both this consortium and the cancer and cell 
therapy communities, as well as patients, families, clinicians and healthcare providers.  
Scientific publications: The generation of scientific publications is a key performance indicator for academic 
partners and remains a priority for the project, subject to intellectual property restrictions and our publication 
management model. We aim to make all our publications ‘gold open access’ and will commit funds from our 
‘other’ (dissemination/exploitation) budget lines to pay any associated fees from the journals, which publish 
our work. Our experience of this process to date has been positive, with costs low enough to be acceptable in 
the context of the overall project budget.  
Data availability : we are committed to make our design documentation, software, process description, 
experimental and validation data available in an open -access repository with the minimum delay. However, 
we must also respect our commitment to the ma nagement and protection of foreground knowledge and 
intellectual property; the precise details of what we will make available, and when, will emerge only during 
the project and after we have published our results. Thus, validation data will be made available only after the 
project ends. Naturally, commercially-sensitive information will not be published or made freely available.  
Data Repository Curation and Preservation : The data will be deposited at the open access research data 
repository. We will carefully identify and select a suitable repository with servers in Europe and which ensures 
long-term storage and availability. Options include utilization of (1) databases in cooperation with the  
intergovernmental organisation ELIXIR, which is a distributed infrastructure for life-sciences information, (2) 
data repositories from Fraunhofer Fordatis, which is an institutional research data repository providing Open 
Access for further re -use, or (3), ‘UCL Discovery’ which has a long -term strategic mandate to preserve, 
curate, manage access to, and add value to research results and data created by teams where UCL plays a key 
role. The costs of this curation and preservation are paid by UCL on an ongoing basis, as part of it strategic 
library costs. We will take every care that the data which we make available is complete and correct, subject 
to data protection legislation.  It is in our interests to enable others to validate our work, as noted above.  
 
3 Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables 
The AIDP ATH project is structured in three major strands  of development activates – (1) Artificial 
Intelligence, (2) bioprocess automation and (3) IoT infrastructure. All three strands converge in final 
implementation and validation. All strands are informed by and subsequently feed into the business planning, 
dissemination, regulation and project activities of the project. 
 
 
Figure 10: AIDPATH project strands: three concurrent technology strands converging in on-site implementation and validation 
Artificial Intelligence strand
WP2, WP3, WP4
Bioprocess automation strand
WP5
IoT infrastructure strand
WP6
Implementation and validation strand
WP7

AIDPATH     36 
Artificial Intelligence strand 
The Artificial Intelligence (AI) strand realizes the application of efficient AI solutions in the health care 
environment including definition, data preparation, AI training, development and validation. 
1. Use Case Definition: To develop use case specific AI approaches a concrete idea, vision and measureable 
goals have to be defined and documented. Therefore, use case requirements need to be collected in strong 
collaboration with domain experts. 
2. AI data structuring a nd preparation : Based on the use case description a work shop gathering and 
structuring all the available data will be conducted. After the data quality assessment and the data sampling, 
the most relevant data with the needed data quality is assigned to the different use cases. The data will be 
prepared and pre-processed in an automated manner in order to minimize processing time and to generate 
suitable data sets. 
3. AI Development: Due to the broad application of AI in the AIDPATH infrastructure different AI solutions 
are developed focusing on the following areas: 
i) An AI-powered digital cell twin  will mimic growth and media consumption rates for patient -
individual CAR-T cell cultures allowing the prediction and optimization of process parameters  
ii) A reactive online process control  of the CAR -T production plant will enable adaptive feeding 
strategies as well as a Rama-spectroscopy-based bioreactor control. 
iii) Production scheduling will be developed with the goal to use AI to predict production capacities 
and patient therapies. Production scheduling will focus the accurate planning of patients’ therapies 
and a cost effective exploitation of the bio reactor. 
iv) In the resource management, the patient is the focus. Therefore essential equipment, materials and 
staff will be managed using AI. AI supports here to reduce complexity and the effort of human 
support needed without compromising transparency and traceability. 
4. AI evaluation and benchmarking: The last step is to evaluate and benchmark the AI approaches developed 
before. Therefore, a concept has to be developed, which enables the evaluation of the different AI use 
cases and approaches regarding performance, fulfilled requirements and reached prediction targets. With 
this concept, the AI approaches are evaluated. To receive a more general impression of the AI approaches 
a use case independent benchmark has to be developed which is able to benchmark the AI approached and 
identify optimization potentials. 
IoT infrastructure strand 
The IoT infrastructure strand will develop and implement an overall framework that ensures connectivity, data 
exchange and security between all interacting entities in the context of Internet of Things (IoT).  
1. IoT infrastructure definition: An IoT architecture will define all hardware and software components and 
their functional connections to each other as well as the data storage and integration.  
2. Preparation of regulatory complaint development procedures:  Before the defined infrastructure is 
developed and implemented, all relevant regulations (e. g. GAMP, GDPR) are determined and applied to 
the use cases. The business security and privacy requirements are taken into account in order to identify 
and handle sensitive personal data. 
3. Deployment of data -driven manufacturing and resource planning systems : All processes linked to the 
CAR-T cell production plant will be governed by AI-supported software components assuring an efficient 
process control, manufacturing scheduling and resource management deployed directly in the IoT 
infrastructure. Processed data will be centralised handled by the LogiqCare software enabling a continuous 
data integration throughout the whole project and in the completed production plant. 
Implementation of the IoT infrastructure:  The different data, software and AI components of the IoT 
infrastructure will be connected for testing in order to assure the functionality for the on-site pilot validation. 
Bioprocess and automation strand 
Concurrently to the other strands, the modular AIDPATH manufacturing platform is realized in one bu ndle 
with the corresponding automated process protocols. This includes: 
1. Protocol and bioprocess definition: Standard operating procedures (SOPs) and information on existing 
protocols for manufacture are gathered and one process for automation is consolidat ed. On this basis, 
requirements for automated system and AI development are derived and fields of action are identified. 
AIDPATH     37 
2. Automated system development: On the basis of the protocol and requirements definition, the automated 
platform consisting of a manufact uring module integrating the Facer bioreactor and a QC module are 
constructed and built in the shop floor ready for installation.   
3. Process analytics: Analytics play a key role in the entire process because they provide the data on which 
basis the AI can make process decisions. Therefore, suitable process analytical technology including online 
sensors and at-line / end-point assays are prepared for integration into the automated workflow.  
4. Automated and AI powered protocols: Based on the protocols compiled in the first step, the process is 
transferred to a fully closed and automated process that is deployable on the automated platform. This 
includes both manufacturing protocols and analytic assays. The protocols have to ensure that they integrate 
the output of the bioprocess control AI from the AI strand. 
Implementation and validation strand 
In this strand, outputs from AI, IoT infrastructure and bioprocess strand are concurring and all developments 
are integrated and deployed on-site in the hospital. This strand includes: 
1. On-site pilot installation and integration into the hospital : Once the individual strands (AI, process and 
infrastructure) have been completed and integrated to one cyber-physical system, the system will undergo 
a technology transfer and is implemented on site at the hospital (UKW). 
2. Technology validation: Following up to the system installation, the AIDPATH approach fully tested and 
validated by the end-users for the production of personalized CAR-T cells in the hospital (see WP7), with 
a focus on preparing and executing a training plan for manufacturing operations and quality operations 
personnel to enable the successful execution of the manufacturing process under GMP conditions in 
addition to preparing a manufacturing documentation and vali dation reports in preparation for GMP 
manufacture (see WP10). 
Concurrent support activities  
Throughout the project, horizontal ‘support’ activities occur to ensure that the project results are on point and 
in alignment with legal, regulatory and stakehold er requirements. These tasks include ethics, stakeholder 
engagement, health economic evaluation, business modelling, regulatory affairs monitoring, communication 
and dissemination, exploitation planning and project management.  
 
3.1.1 PERT chart 

AIDPATH     38 
3.1.2 GANTT chart 
 
3.1.3 Table 3.1a List of Work Packages 
WP 
No. Work Package Title Lead 
No. Lead PMs Start 
M 
End 
M 
1 Project and innovation management 1a IPT 42.25 1 48 
2 AI Development Framework for Smart Hospitals 1a IPT 93 1 45 
3 AI driven manufacturing of personalized 
therapies 2 UCL 248 1 42 
4 Production scheduling and resource 
management AI 4 SZTAKI 117.7 1 42 
5 Automated Pilot for CAR-T production 1a IPT 143 1 36 
6 Data security, IoT infrastructure and data 
management 13 ORT 116 1 48 
7 On-site pilot implementation and validation 5 UKW 136.6 25 48 
8  Ethics 1a IPT 35 1 48 
9 Stakeholder engagement, regulatory and clinical 
readiness 5 UKW 43.2 1 48 
10 Communication, Dissemination and preparation 
for wide scale implementation 1a IPT 54 1 48 
 Total 1028.75  
 
  
24 36 48120
WP10
WP9
WP2
WP3
WP4
WP5
WP6
WP7
WP8
WP1
10.3
1.21.1
2.42.32.22.1
3.43.33.23.1
4.54.44.34.24.1
5.55.45.35.1
6.36.26.1
7.47.37.27.1
8.38.28.1
9.59.49.39.1
3.5
5.2
10.1 10.2
M1 M2 M3
M4
M5
9.2
AIDPATH     39 
3.1.4 WP 1 
WP No. 1 WP title Project and innovation management 
Lead beneficiary IPT Start month 1 End month 48 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 30  2 1   2 1  1 1  2.25 2 
Objective 
This work packages oversees and manages the entire project, for 1) project definition and progress control, 2) 
collection and monitoring of IP, 3) ensuring smooth project implementation through monitoring and proactive 
handling of risks and issues and 4) establishing an efficient and effective process for regular to the commission 
Description of work 
Task 1.1 Project Management and Coordination (IPT) 
The coordinator will manage and closely monitor project schedule and progress of all WPs to ensure that all 
tasks and major milestones are delivered on time. At the beginning, a project charter will be drafted that 
summarizes scope, key objectives as wells as roles and responsibilities of the participants and ide ntifies key 
stakeholders to ensure mutual understanding of all partners. A project plan will be laid out e.g. in MS project 
that captures timelines and dependencies between tasks and partners. The project plan, progress and 
interfacing tasks will be reviewed regularly at least during the biannual consortium meetings and as necessary 
in online meetings. A long-term perspective, seeking to maximise impact and project value, will be applied at 
all times. Major milestones will be tightly adhered to.  
Task 1.2 Patent research and screening (IPT, ALL) 
Relevant areas for the technologies to be utilized and developed within the project will be identified. Related 
patents, IP and protected know -how in the field will be searched and gathered. The resulting IPR scan fi le 
will be made available for the consortium partners to raise awareness on IP protection and patents.   
Task 1.3 Data management (IPT, ALL) 
AIDPATH data will be aggregated, managed and utilised as described in the innovation work packages, 
during the project. In collaboration with all partners in AIDPATH the used research data during and after the 
project will be defined in a Data Management Plan (DMP). The plan will be reviewed annually and updated, 
as required. In order to make this data findable, access ible, interoperable and re -usable (FAIR) it will be 
determined which data will be collected, processed or generated. The related data sources and types will be 
listed. A high emphasis will be given to the integration and storage of AI training and application data in order 
to gain an efficient AI handling during and after the project. Also, it will be clarified how the data of the 
project solutions will be curated and preserved. This is described in detail in section 3.2. 
Task 1.4 Management of risks, issues and knowledge gained (IPT, ALL) 
Intellectual property (IP) of the partners, issues and knowledge gained will be identified and gathered on a 
regular basis. Therefore, A review of risks, issues and knowledge will be permanent items on the agenda of 
each plenary meeting. The risks in this proposal will form the foundation for the risk register. The periodic 
risk review will seek to identify any new or emerging risks and how to mitigate them and upgrade or 
downgrade existing. In addition, other issues, learn ing and new knowledge gained is queried annually and 
collected in a joint database. It will be identified whether any items are also to IP protection or dissemination 
and treated accordingly. All activities and outcomes will be assessed for potential IP at all plenary meetings; 
any innovations or inventions that emerge between meetings will be fast-tracked to the IP sub-committee (see 
Innovation Management section in this proposal). The IP-assessment will direct each new piece of knowledge 
to either publication or protection (e.g. via patent), and will also clearly establish ownership (or kick -start a 
joint-ownership discussion). All IP management will build on the consortium agreement.  
Task 1.5: Reporting to the European Commission (IPT, ALL) 
AIDPATH     40 
In addition t o the deliverables, periodic (18 -month) reports and a final Report will be delivered to the 
Commission. These will be accompanied by Financial Statements, which will be validated in collaboration 
with all partners, prior to submission.  
Deliverables Date (M) 
D1.1. Project Charter and IPR scan file  3 
D1.2. Data management plan 6 
 
3.1.5 WP 2 
WP No. 2 WP title AI Development Framework for Smart Hospitals 
Lead beneficiary IPT Start month 1 End month 45 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 28  3  19 12    1 20   10 
Objective 
Assurance of an efficient collaborated preparation, conduction and result presentation of the AI development 
including: 1) structured datasets 2) development strategy 3) deployment plan and 4) guidelines & building 
blocks for AI in smart hospitals. 
Description of work 
Task 2.1 Data structuring and domain knowledge exchange for AI development (IPT, UCL, SZTAKI, 
IRIS, UKW, FCRB, ORTEC) 
This task focusses on structuring, integrating and preparing the data for the later training and testing of the AI 
models in WP3 and WP4. The focus lies on the activities that are necessary for all considered AI use cases. It 
includes data acquisition and classification of all available data for AI development in liaison with domain 
experts (based on 3.1 and 4.1). The data basis is assigned to the AI applications from WP 3 and WP 4 and 
commonalities and overlaps are identified. Data s tructuring and preparation (Selection of relevant data, 
elimination of redundant data, assessment of data quality, and presentation of data structure in a transparent 
manner) is done subsequently. Also, a list of requirements for IoT infrastructure is gene rated. Evaluation of 
candidate software applications (statistical and data mining workbenches and libraries) based on data 
processing requirements, types of data and modelling will be done. Furthermore, the kn owledge transfer 
between production experts and experts for bio processes, data scientist and engineers to generate a common 
knowledge basement (based on 3.1 and 4.1) is done. 
Task 2.2 AI concept, interaction and development strategy (SZTAKI, IRIS, IPT, UCL) 
In this task a technical concept will be dev eloped, how the AI applications can be realized based on data 
structure, boundary conditions, use -cases (Task 3.1, 4.1) including model transparency, model complexity, 
expected training times. For that a comparison of properties and objectives of the AI ap plications and 
derivation of interaction opportunities and synergy effects (where is a collaboration essential, which AI 
application requires input from another AI application) will be done. This includes the interlinkage of the Cell 
Growth Model (Digital Twin) developed in WP3 as an input for WP4. Central aspect will lie on the decision 
what programming frameworks and libraries will be used by focussing on open source systems. To scale the 
development a concept how to integrate Automated Machine Learning ( AutoML: Automating steps within 
data integration, preparation, modelling and deployment) will be developed.  
Task 2.3 Definition of an End -to-End AI pipeline including deployment plan ( IRIS, SZTAKI, IPT, 
UCL, ORTEC) 
To align the implementation of the developed AI systems from WP3 and 4 this task aims at defining an End-
to-End AI pipeline with a deployment plan. This includes the definition of data sources for the application 
phase. The retraining strategies and corresponding data streams are defined. Furthe rmore, the AI systems 
AIDPATH     41 
interfaces and communication for deployment in the IoT infrastructure are defined. The deployment plan 
includes a concept for productionizing the model, e.g. serializing the model into HDF5/pkl or to implement it 
in c++/Java. 
Task 2.4. Guidelines and building blocks for AI in the smart hospital of the future (IPT, UCL, SZTAKI, 
IRIS, UKW, FCRB) 
Based on the results especially from WP 2, 3 and 4 building blocks for AI in the smart hospital of the future 
will be developed. This includes c omparison and evaluation of the AI models, their performances and 
transferability within hospitals. Furthermore, the identification of transferability to other domains and 
elaboration of building blocks will take place – as well as the identification of challenges in AI development 
in smart hospital context and derivation of guidelines. 
Deliverables Date (M) 
D2.1. Integrated data structure for AI development 6 
D2.2. AI concept, interaction and development strategy 12 
D2.3. Defined End-to-End AI pipeline including deployment plan 33 
D2.4. Guidelines and building blocks for AI in the smart hospital of the future 45 
 
3.1.6 WP 3 
WP No. 3 WP title AI driven manufacturing of personalized therapies 
Lead beneficiary UCL Start month 1 End month 42 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 3  75 73  12 25 16  15 29    
Objective 
Develop an AI -driven manufacturing solution for the improved produ ction of personalized therapies, 
including (1) AI System and Bioprocess Definition, (2) AI -driven bioprocess setup /optimisation through 
high-throughput (HT) metabolomics and analytics, (3) intelligent, adaptive, AI -based bioprocess control 
strategy for CA R-T cell (4) creation and implementation of an AI CAR -T digital twin and (5) validation, 
testing and evaluation of AI bio manufacturing platform. 
Description of work 
Task 3.1 AI System and Bioprocess Definition (FORTH, UCL, AGL, FUJI, UKW, FCRB, IRIS) 
Task 3.1.1 System Design and AI Use Case Description (IRIS, FORTH, UCL, AGL, FUJI, UKW, FCRB)   
This task will define the AI use case, including the characteristics of the final AI-driven process, AI elements 
for each process step, interaction and informatio n exchange in terms of data streams, and specific task and 
goal of each AI element. This will be linked to tasks in WP2, specifically Task 2.2 which will establish the 
basis for the interaction of the AI applications. 
Task 3.1.2 Definition of Bioprocess Metrics & Analytical Technologies (FORTH, UCL, FUJI, AGL, UKW, 
FCRB, IRIS):  
This task will review the current process, literature, studies, and available data to establish metrics for defining 
a successful process (quality markers, throughput, cell numbers, efficiencies, etc.), identify factors influencing 
process outcomes (risks, sensitivities) and compile all data sources including analytical data to better inform 
the process. This will include definition of a panel of Optimization Objectives that should b e ranked in 
importance, and Key Performance Indicators / Metrics. Additionally, this task will deliver a set of standardized 
protocols and instructions that define the analytical technologies and their quantitative range implemented in 
this project. The technologies in the toolbox will provide the necessary data for intelligent process control in 
AIDPATH     42 
the final automated process and at the same time define a standardized approach, where further targeted 
complementary data sets are generated to enhance and enrich  the existing data sets. Typical analytical 
technologies including online/at-line sensors will be employed, such as pH, dO2, glucose, lactate and biomass, 
in addition to an intelligent Raman -spectroscopy based soft sensor. Automated at -line flow cytometric  
analysis will also be established linking with WP5. 
Task 3.2 HT data generation for bioprocess optimisation and development of AI data -driven models 
(FORTH, UCL, FUJI, FCRB, AGL, UKW, IRIS):  
This task will focus on high-precision screening of critical parameters related to this process. These analyses 
will be carried out on diseased and healthy donor samples as well as on a series of customised and tailored 
culture media developed by FUJI. This work will enhance knowledge and provide novel data sets to drive the 
bioprocess mapping and optimisation in a HT and donor-tailored manner. Cell populations will be produced 
based on starting material from existing biobanks from the respective partners. Studies by FORTH will include 
targeted metabolomics to investig ate metabolites related to specific pathways based on the physiological 
integrated -omic analyses and other information acquired from the cultures (through sensors in task 3.3.2). 
Metabolomics will be used for large -scale metabolic profiling revealing over all metabolic shifts that are 
beneficial to various steps of the CAR -T cell culture growth and identifying the “detrimental” and optimal 
windows of operation. Metabolite profiling will mainly use GC -MS and reversed phase LC -MS to profile 
polar and non-polar excreted metabolites (using in-house libraries and bioinformatics) and will be coupled to 
further omics technologies. Additional HT studies by UCL to evaluate and optimise process control and feed 
addition modifications with respect to cell yield, CAR-T cell expansion, viability and T-cell subpopulations. 
This will involve (1) donor variability studies to identify and characterise the extent of heterogeneous donor 
material variation, (2) the evaluation and selection of different chemically-defined media depending on patient 
starting material, and an analysis of the electroporation settings. This will involve the implementation of HT 
bioreactor systems to generate sufficient data with experiments governed by Design of Experiment (DoE) 
methodologies enriching the available historical data to generate statistically significant cause and effect 
relationships between bioreactor operation, off-line analytics and clinical patient information. 
Task 3.3 AI CAR-T Digital Twin 
Task 3.3.1 Optimum configuration/setup of CAR-T Digital twin and adaptive bioprocess with AI techniques 
(UCL, IRIS, FORTH):  
This task will develop a highly sophisticated AI CAR -T Digital twin ( AI-CARTwin) combining innovative 
mechanistic modelling with advanced real-time data analytics.  HT-data and available historical data curated 
in Task 3.2 will be used to develop the structure of the mechanistic model by extending previously published 
mathematical cell culture models. Multiple model structures will be evaluated through an iterative procedure 
governed by the fundamental principles of natural selection and reproduction using a Genetic Algorithm (GA). 
This will enable the creation of an optimised model of low complexity that accurately predicts the given output 
from inputs using the available data. AI-CARTwin model parameters will automatically update (gradient based 
parameter optimisation) throughout the manufacturing process based on availability of high-frequency time-
series measurements (temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen…) and lower frequency  off-line measurements 
(glucose, lactate, viable cell density...). The model will include statistical relationships (Task 3.2) between 
patient clinical information and cellular growth kinetics enabling AI-CARTwin to better predict the growth and 
media cons umption requirements of a patient’s individual cells. Different simulations/scenarios will be 
assembled and run, whose objective is to find the optimum configuration. It could act as a “what -if” tool: 
given a set of inputs, what would be the outcome, and t he inverse, for a desired output what combination of 
inputs would be necessary to produce it. This can also use a “bootstrap” case based reasoning approach which 
will compare outcomes of previous similar historical runs and adjust the process accordingly to meet described 
outcomes. AI-CARTwin will integrate with the resource scheduling and management AI solver in WP -4 
providing near real -time information on the CAR -T manufacturing status to clinicians enabling better 
management of patient treatments.  
Task 3.3.2 Implementation of the AI model for advanced and adaptive bioprocess control/monitoring with AI 
techniques (IRIS, UCL, FORTH):  
This task will combine the knowledge gained from the HT experiments in Task 3.2 with AI-CARTwin to 
develop advanced control applications minimising patient-to-patient variability of CAR-T cell expansions. A 
fully integrated system will be developed combining all on -line process data, off -line analytics and all 
AIDPATH     43 
recorded information related to gas and feed additions of the cell culture with the AI-CARTwin. The AI-CARTwin 
will implement a hybrid -based control strategy combining both statistical and data -driven models with 
mechanistically derived equations enabling robust on-line predictions of key process performance indicators 
such as viable cell densities or key nutrient concentrations. AI-CARTwin aims to increases the cell productivity 
and improve therapeutic efficacy of these CAR -T cells. This process will validated for a wide number of 
CAR-T cell patient samples enabling tailored feeding-strategies for individual patients. The soft (intelligent) 
sensors will be integrated with the AI model software to provide real -time data acquisition for incremental 
learning, case-based reasoning and control.  This will form the basis of a de cision support system, once the 
data is accumulated, and will be bootstrapped with already available historical data.  
Task 3.4 Validation, testing and performance evaluation for AI driven manufacturing of advanced 
therapies (IRIS, UCL, FORTH):  
The AI bio process control will be assessed by Monte Carlo using % error as an output target (inverse 
prediction) for a given input configuration, and on the output precision in the case of forward prediction. Task 
3.3 and 3.4 assessment will be based on a DoE for different empirical scenarios, for example, normal, extreme 
minimum and extreme maximum. Further optimization (iterative process): Active learning will take 
advantage of human domain expert to provide the correct solution to the model when the prediction is incorrect 
and incorporating this information into the model by retraining. In the case of the smart sensor, it can be 
reprogrammed or calibrated based on performance with respect to a baseline or off -line analytics. The 
proposed bioreactor control strategy  will be integrated with the automated CAR -T manufacturing platform 
outlined in WP-5. 
Deliverables Date (M) 
D3.1. Use Case Description for precision AI manufacturing including review of 
influencing factors optimization objectives  9 
D3.2. Pre-processed data sets for precision manufacturing AI training 18 
D3.3. Prototype of AI-CAR Twin suitable for bed-side hospital operation 21 
D3.4. AI CAR-T Digital twin for advanced and adaptive bioprocess control strategies 
trained on optimised bioprocess datasets 33 
D3.5. Performance report on implemented cell culture and bioprocess AI 39 
3.1.7 WP 4 
WP No. 4 WP title Production scheduling and resource management AI 
Lead beneficiary SZTAKI Start month 1 End month 42 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 26 2.7 2  70 6    1    10 
Objective 
Development of a manufacturing and resource scheduling AI solver including 1) a comprehensive use -case 
description 2) the simulated production environment 3) structured datasets and standardized interfaces and 4) 
assessment and validation 
Description of work 
In WP4 the two AI solver for 1) resource management and scheduling and 2) Manufacturing scheduling will 
be developed. With 1) the key resources of the autonomous CAR-T cell process will be managed in order to 
assure their availability and to avoid waiting times. The closely-linked AI solver 2) will schedule the different 
orders (patient-specific cells) on the production plant in order to assure adequate lead times and utilization. 
Task 4.1: Description of the manufacturing and resource scheduling use -case (IPT, SZTAKI, UKW, 
FCRB, IZI, HCATS) 
AIDPATH     44 
This task describes the use case scenarios for the manufacturing and resource scheduling in close collaboration 
with experts from clinical, automation and bioprocess side. Domain -specific workshops will determine the 
requirements and conditions for the conceptual design of the two AI solver. With the CAR -T cell treatment 
protocols and further expert knowledge, the process steps are analysed including bottlenecks, potential parallel 
processing and identification of the key resources (e.g. materials, cells) and their effect on the process. The 
contiguous logistic processe s of the hospital environment will be analysed in order to display the material 
flows and further boundary conditions (e.g. special staff, hospital beds). With the gained insights and a 
research of existing AI models and algorithms the two AI solver are de fined including the optimization 
objectives, properties and benchmarks. 
Task 4.2: Data aggregation, data extension by simulation and data pre -processing ( IPT, SZTAKI, 
ORTEC) 
All the data for resource management, production scheduling and control will be ob tained from the data 
sources to be developed in WP2. Likewise, the key decisions, concerning the timing of the patients’ therapies, 
the usage of various resources will be stored in the database provided by WP2. In addition, datasets for testing 
will be generated to test the solvers in the simulation environment in Task 4.6. 
Task 4.3: Building of a comprehensive simulation model for the production environment and the supply 
chains (SZTAKI, ORTEC) 
For the representation and better understanding of the product ion environment as well as the validation and 
data extension, a simulation model is created on basis of task 4.1 that shows the interrelationships of the 
various components and illustrates the effects of parameter variations. In 1) the simulation focus lies on key 
resources including material availability and supply, staff availability  and resource requirements of the 
scheduled treatments. The simulation model of 2) depicts the machines and devices of the production plant 
under consideration of volatile process times and machine availability. Especially the modelling of 2) needs 
to be conducted in close collaboration with WP3 in order to meet the requirements of the bioreactor. The 
simulation software is selected according to determined criteria, a good candidate could be Anylogic, which 
has proven capabilities in bio-process applications. 
 Task 4.4: Development of a manufacturing and resource scheduling AI solver (SZTAKI, IPT) 
This task consists of two subtasks. In both subtasks, the main steps will be: (1) interfacing with data sources 
in WP2, (2) development of the solver, (3) fine tuning of the solver and (4) module tests using the test data 
pre-processed in Task 4.2. 
Task 4.4.1: Resource scheduling and management AI solver 
The main input for resource management comes from the hospital in the form of patient data specifying the 
treatment protocols and a rough timing, along with the availability of the main resources (beds, staff, CAR-T 
cell production capacity). To cope with the uncertainties in almost all steps of the treatments to which 
resources have to be allocated, the solver will be based on a Markov Decision Process supported by 
Reinforcement Learning. The solver will integrate also the schedules determined by the scheduler developed 
in Task 4.4.2. The result will be a feedback control policy which can handle uncertainties smoothly.  
Task 4.4.2: Development of a manufacturing scheduling AI solver 
The main input to production scheduling and control comes from resource management. The scheduler will 
determine a time slot for manufacturing the CAR-T cells for each patient. Since manufacturing lead time are 
uncertain, techniques for robust scheduling will be combined with prediction techniques  based 
on AI driven manufacturing of personalized therapies (WP3). The resulting solver will optimize the chosen 
objectives, such as idle time, or production delays. 
Task 4.5: Assessment, simulation -based validation and deployment preparation of the AI solver 
(SZTAKI, IPT) 
Based on the results of Tasks 4.1-4.4, the manufacturing and resource scheduling AI solver will be validated 
with the simulation model. The optimization objectives and benchmarks, identified in Task 4.1, will be used 
to assess the performance of the system using unseen test data and the knowledge of te chnological experts. 
Based on the final performance assessment by using measures such as F1 -score, precision and recall, the AI 
solver can be optimized. This optimization can comprise a hybrid modelling approach, in which the results of 
the physical model is used for training the AI solver. For the deployment of the AI solver to the final 
environment, a proper explanation of the results and the models’ behaviour is needed to make it 
understandable for technological experts. Furthermore, an adaptive strategy  is carried out to ensure the 
AIDPATH     45 
applicability of the AI solvers in case of model degradation. Finally, continuous improvement process will be 
developed in order to keep track on the model performance. In order to optimize and guarantee the reliability 
of the results obtained, a systematic feedback loop iteration will be implemented.  
Deliverables Date (M) 
D4.1. Use Case Description for production scheduling and resource management including view 
of material flow, dependencies and optimization objectives 9 
D4.2. Pre-processed data sets for production scheduling and resource management AI training 18 
D4.3. Comprehensive simulation model of the production environment and resource management 26 
D4.4. AI production scheduling and resource management model 33 
D4.5. Performance report on implemented production scheduling and resource management AI 39 
 
3.1.8 WP 5 
WP No. 5 WP title Automated Pilot for CAR-T production 
Lead beneficiary IPT Start month 1 End month 36 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 36 9 23 7  12 55   1     
Objective 
Construction of an automated, robot -assisted platform including 1) a manufacturing and a process analytic s 
module, 2) a comprehensive control software governing production control and communication between 
devices, AI and the user, 3) an enhanced cartridge -based bioreactor device for autonomous CAR -T cell 
expansion and 4) CAR-T manufacturing and analytics protocols for fully automated, smart production 
Description of work 
Description of work 
WP5 is dedicated to the design and build-up of the automated, modular CAR-T cell production system. This 
WP will closely interlink with WP 9 to ensure that regulatory requirements (e.g. GMP, GAMP) as well as the 
stakeholder perspective is taken into consideration. The end of the build -up at IPT will be the start of WP7, 
when in which the production plant is shipped to UKW for system integration and validation. 
Task 5.1: CAR-T Manufacturing protocol assessment and requirement definition ( IPT, AGL, UKW, 
FCRB, IZI, ALL)  
IPT and AGL will gather all relevant information on manufacturing by screening existing standard operation 
procedures (SOPs), conducting expert interviews and on-site visits at partners UKW, FCRB, IZI, UCL and/or 
FORTH in order to assess the processes, protocols and hardware to be incorporated into the AIDPATH 
system. This task is accompanied by a partner workshop in which critical process steps, variables, fe atures 
and requirements for both the bioreactor as well as the overall system are defined. IZI will consult the 
requirement definition progress in the context of GMP compliance. Additional requirements and suggestions 
from regulatory and stakeholder standp oint obtained from WP 9 will be taken into consideration. The 
information will be harmonized and translated into an overall process map including the material flow. In 
addition, user requirement specifications (URS) for the Automated system hardware and so ftware will be 
prepared to be signed by the partners. Based on these documents, IPT will develop a production plant design 
including the two different modules for 1) autonomous bio production and 2) robot -assisted, end-to-end at-
line process analytics. This includes a definition of dimensions, layout and functionality. For each module, a 
comprehensive automation concept and a 3D model is developed. Thereby IPT will closely collaborate with 
AGL to ensure that the bioreactor seamlessly integrates into the system. In parallel, a market research is done 
to select the hardware for the AIDPATH CAR -T cell production plant. Any necessity for in -house 
AIDPATH     46 
development and customisations by the project team results from the gap between technical requirements and 
existing solutions and will be defined and prepared.  
Task 5.2 Adaptation of automated cartridge -based CAR -T bioreactor module ( AGL, UKW, UCL, 
FORTH, IPT)  
One unit of the Facer bioreactor will be manufactured together with a new cartridge which will incorporate 
the process defined in task 5.1. The unit is formed by three modules (the storage module, the smart module 
and the culture module) and will have the capacity to process one cell batch -one patient- at a time. The Facer 
2.0 is already a very flexible prototype  that allows for internal modifications. Therefore, it can used to 
incorporate new hardware that enhances the sensing potential of the equipment. The resulting unit will be 
further used to test the potential of the Facer to work as cell expansion module go verned by the AI process 
model in WP3. Subsequently, AGL will modify the Facer 2.0 to integrate the new hardware and sampling 
options (according to the requirements defined in Task 5.1) to be able to run the AI process control model . 
Therefore, the AGL eng ineering team will study how to integrate the new hardware components into the 
current smart culture modules of the platform. After integration, new components will be tested and calibrated 
within the platform. Also, software will need to be adapted by creating new routines for the new components 
(reading, calibration and data processing routines). The monitoring of critical parameters will also be included 
in the platform interface. Additionally, AGL software will be modified to receive the feedback from t he 
AIDPATH control software and actuate accordingly.  
In order to develop a tailored single-use cartridge, design modifications will be required in the circuitry of the 
cartridge in order to incorporate new components required in the single -use unit, as we ll as the sampling 
solutions for continuous off-line analysis. At this point a new design will be defined and prototypes produced 
by 3D printing. Constant feedback from the consortium members during the design iteration process will be 
requested to ensure that the cartridge truly takes into account all the requirements for the final project aim.  
For additional sensors integrated to the Facer, the sensing characteristics of the biosensors will be analysed, 
such as average sensitivity, linearity, response ti me, decay rate, drift rate, and limit of detection. Therefore, 
for each sensor spot the maximum reading frequency will be stablished, based on sensor lifetime and assumed 
culture periods. The metabolite readings will be compared to off-line analysis in terms of linearity, precision 
and accuracy. Also, a sterilization study will be conducted, when required. 
Task 5.3: Development and build-up of the automated production plant (IPT, IZI, ALL)  
This task starts with procurement of devices once the hardware selection in Task 5.1 is completed (e.g. robot, 
flow cytometer, nucleofection device, controlled rate freezer, etc.). Following the concept development, the 
bespoke solutions (e.g. prototype for automated drawing of samples) according to the list defined in task 5.1, 
as well as necessary modifications of the devices are developed (e.g. adding axes and motors to facilitate 
automated operation). For each module, a frame is built, which carries the respective devices, electrical and 
pneumatic components. In additi on to the hardware implemented, the devices will be integrated into the 
manufacturing control software following a service oriented architecture approach. The control software, 
which IPT is already using successfully for production control of automated bio  production systems (e.g. in 
StemCellFactory, Autostem, etc.), will be adapted to the requirements determined in Task 5.1. A standardized 
interface for communication between the control software and the individual devices will be created. 
Standardized interfaces to contiguous IT systems (e.g. manufacturing planning system, database management 
system) will be implemented for efficient data integration. In order to realize intelligent manufacturing 
control, interfaces are developed that allow a direct integra tion of the AI models developed in WP 3 and 4. 
This ensures that the decisions and parameters suggestions proposed by AI are executed at the process level. 
The user interface of the control software will be extended by a dashboard that displays process par ameters, 
comprehensible information from the CAR -T digital twin as well as AI based processing decisions and 
process predictions transparently. The automated production system including both modules and process 
software will be installed and tested prior to shipping with an agreed test protocol with the end-users in order 
to ensure functional and sterile system operation (see WP 7). 
Task 5.4 Automation of CAR-T manufacturing and analytic protocols (UKW, IPT, IZI FORTH, UCL) 
In parallel to the development of  the automated system, all manufacturing and analytical protocols will be 
updated, transferred and optimized to be compatible with manufacturing in the fully automated AIDPATH 
platform. Manual GMP-compliant SOPs for the production of CAR-T at clinical scale are available at UKW, 
which will be revised and adopted in order to fit the fully automated manufacturing process. Whenever 
possible, handling steps (e.g. pipetting, liquid handling) will be reduced to facilitate the automated process. 
The whole process will be transferred to a closed, automated setting by UKW that limits manual handling to 
AIDPATH     47 
an absolutely required minimum of human intervention.  In addition, protocols for at -line process analytics 
will be automated. Therefore partners UKW, UCL and FORTH will optimize the manual QC protocols ready 
for automation. IPT will then transfer the protocols onto the AIDPATH system and implement liquid handling 
processes on the pipetting robot. Protocols for QC include processing of samples for metabolomics (FORTH), 
surface expression of phenotypic markers (UCL) as well as indicators for activation and exhaustion and 
transduction efficacy (UKW). Thereby the assays to be performed regularly on the AIDPATH system at-line 
will include flow  cytometry for evaluation of T -cell product quality, cell counts and viability. In addition, 
samples will be prepared automatically ready for offline analyses such as mass spectroscopy and functional 
evaluation. All off-line assays will be adapted to assess CAR-T samples harvested and processed directly from 
the manufacturing platform. Partner IZI will thereby accompany the process transfer and optimization to 
ensure that procedures are in accordance with GMP 
Deliverables Date (M) 
D5.1. CAR-T Manufacturing SOPs, Production Sequence Diagram and Material Flow Mapping, 
URS for Automated Production System  6 
D5.2. Design of automated production System incl. Hardware, Software and Interface Definitions  18 
D5.3. Automated bioreactor device and standardized cartridges for autonomous CAR -T 
manufacture  27 
D5.4. Automated modular CAR-T production pilot 34 
D5.5. Optimized SOPs for automated CAR-T manufacturing and analytics 36 
 
3.1.9 WP 6 
WP No. 6 WP title Data security, IoT infrastructure and data management 
Lead beneficiary ORTEC Start month 1 End month 48 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 36  1  1 6     1 20  51 
Objective 
Provision and management of the entire IoT  infrastructure in AIDPATH including 1) data security and risk 
assessment, 2) comprehensive data integration for AI development and the digital cell twin 3) software 
solutions for manufacturing and resource scheduling and 4) secure and standardized connect ion of all AI 
models, software and hardware components. 
Description of work 
Task 6.1: Cybersecurity by design including project risk analysis, business and data security ( RAL, 
ORTEC) This task aims to identify and give value to the most sensitive data and activities of the project. 
This analysis will focus, among other things, on various criteria such as confidentiality and privacy of the data 
to be protected and the availability of the most sensitive services and will be based on security standards such 
as ISA/IEC 62443, and Eurosmart IoT SCS. A comprehensive risk analysis  will ensure that the IoT 
infrastructure will be implemented in a secure manner while ensuring the privacy of the data that will be 
manipulated as well as the processes. This will include business line security goals, validation of the proposed 
IoT architecture, identification of threats and attack scenarios, and provision of a security and privacy risk 
cartography. The infrastructure of LogiqCare / LogiqScience, Big Data Portal and clini cal decision making 
tools (ISO 27001 and NEN7510 conform)  are reviewed, together with the to be developed external 
communications.  Finally, a list of AIDPATH-related security & privacy requirements will be provided to be 
used by all partners during the i ntegration, development and validation phase of the IoT infrastructure and 
CAR-T cell production pilot in order to ensure an implementation of cybersecurity by design. 
AIDPATH     48 
Task 6.2: Development of an architecture for the IoT infrastructure including interface and 
communication definition ( IPT, ORTEC, UKW) At the beginning of the project the IoT infrastructure 
(consisting of all software and hardware components inside and outside the AIDPATH solution) is determined 
in a workshop and its components are put into r elation. For standardized communication and integration of 
all resources and human beings, an IoT architecture for the planning and control of the bioprocess and the 
adjacent logistic processes is required.  For this purpose, requirements and system conditions are determined 
in close coordination with AI and bioprocess experts. The IoT architecture is subdivided into data and software 
architecture and is developed on the basis of approved industry 4.0 approaches (e.g. RAMI, IIRA). Taking 
into account the data security regulations, the data architecture determines where the data is stored and how 
its access is regulated. The software architecture presents the necessary software components (control 
software, software agents, AI models, data base systems …) and their functional relationships and interfaces. 
Based on the IoT architecture, the interfaces of the components and their standardized communication (e.g. 
OPC-UA) are defined. 
Task 6.3: Implementation of a data storage framework and AI data preparation pip eline (ORTEC, 
IPT, UCL, SZTAKI, IRIS) 
Based on the data structure (task 2.1) and the AI data sets and models (task 3.2 and 4.2) the data storage 
framework and the integration of the AI data will be implemented. The Logiq Platform (provided by ORTEC) 
will be maintained and expanded in this task. For the different use cases from WP3 and 4 so called LogiqCare 
Apps will be developed with support of the domain experts. Each application will sync to the local data, either 
by direct automated or manual recording and/or by data-exchange with a local application and store them in 
a cloud-based system. The integrative use of data of these apps will be shared using attribute based or role 
based access control rules (ABAC/RBAC) as defined by the domain users, taking GDP R into account. Data 
models will be either directly integrated using user -friendly interface, or synced from a local application.  
Essential project data will be synced anonymously into the Big Data Portal  for analytical purposes. 
Supporting both application-specific and integrative AI applications, Big Data tools for data analytics will be 
realized in cooperation with AI experts and domain owners to enable the AI data preparation pipeline. The 
Logiq Platform will be designed in such a way that a data exchan ge through different clinical sites can be 
achieved in order to realize a wide scale implementation of the AIDPATH system after the project. 
Task 6.4: Adjustment and validation of the manufacturing control and resource planning software 
(IPT, ORTEC) 
In this task the operation software modules for control and planning will be adapted to the interface and 
security requirements of the IoT architecture (6.1, 6.2) and the use-case conditions compiled in task 4.1 . A 
resource planning software (e.g. a solution by ORTEC) will be selected based on the needed functions from 
WP4 (e.g. capacity planning, resource scheduling) and will be adapted to the scope of AIDPATH. The 
resource planning software needs to interact closely with the manufacturing control software, deve loped in 
task 5.3. Therefore, the two software modules will be connected in a simulation environment to validate their 
functionality. 
Task 6.5: Implementation of the AI -integrated IoT infrastructure and acceptance testing ( ORTEC, 
IPT) 
In task 6.6 the different components of the IoT architecture, defined in task 6.2, will be put together and their 
functionality will be tested. Therefore, the AI solutions of WP 3 and 4 will be connected to the manufacturing 
control and resource planning software (task 6.5). F or the AI integration the end -to-end AI pipeline will be 
connected through the defined interfaces and an intelligent planning and control as well as the digital cell twin 
will be realized. The overall functionality of data integration, operational control and planning tasks and AI 
decision support will be tested, before the pilot build-up in WP7. 
Deliverables Date (M) 
D6.1. Report on system architecture and interface definition 12 
D6.2. Validated manufacturing control and resource planning software, Data storage framework 
and data preparation pipeline for AI 34 
D6.3. Documentation of AI -integrated AIDPATH IoT infrastructure and their software 
components 45 
 
 
AIDPATH     49 
3.1.10 WP 7 
WP No. 7 WP title On-site pilot implementation and validation 
Lead beneficiary UKW Start month 25 End month 48 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 21 22.6 2   48 10   1  6 16 10 
Objective 
Implementation of the AID PATH manufacturing platform in the hospital. This includes 1) preparation of 
supplementary documentation such as operations manuals and technical documentation, 2) physical 
implementation of the AI supported AIDPATH IoT infrastructure from WP 6 and the aut omated 
manufacturing system from WP 5, 3) testing and validation of the system including a full manufacturing run 
under GMP conditions and preparation of testing reports, 4) economic evaluation of the AIDPATH system as 
built and implemented. 
Description of work 
WP7 focuses on technology transfer and implementation of the AIDPATH autonomous manufacturing 
system at the clinical site in a pilot scale suitable for efficacious and safe therapy production. This WP will 
cover technology transfer of the automated  system into the hospital and validate the system, bioprocess and 
bioprocess control as well as the final end product in in vitro and in vivo studies. 
Task 7.1 CE Marking, operations manual, training and testing protocols (IPT, UKW) 
This task prepares oper ation manuals for the AIDPATH automated system, as well as the preparation of 
technical files and preparatory documents required for CE marking. All formal verification and validation 
testing for the system will be carried out, as well as formal testing as required by regulatory Notified Bodies 
to allow the device be CE marked. There will be two parts of functional testing for the AIDPATH 
manufacturing platform. The first part will concentrate on the technical functionality of all components, while 
the seco nd set of tests will be performed after reception at UKW (site acceptance tests). Therefore, test 
protocols will be developed and a process FMEA will be carried out to minimize the risks of failure. This will 
involve IPT working liaising with task 7.2 and WP 9 and partners IZI and UKW to define testing protocols 
and create documentation templates, which ensure that all functions defined in the URS document and the 
major risks identified in the FMEA are tested for. The second part of the functional testing protocols focuses 
on manufacturing functionality, including maintenance of product critical quality attributes. Protocols will be 
developed for testing performance of the system under GMP conditions. In addition, IPT will prepare a 
training on the platform to enable the personnel at UKW to operate the facility and provide remote support 
during the validation runs to be conducted.  
Task 7.2 Preparation of a GMP documentation package (IZI, UKW, IPT) 
Prior to the full biological validation run, GMP documentation supporting the transfer of the optimised process 
will be prepared. This includes a validation master plan (VMP) and drafts for appropriate documentation for 
the automated manufacturing platform i.e., Installation, Operational and Performance Qualification (IQ, OQ 
and PQ) in addition to draft SOPs, Batch Manufacturing Records, Quality Control Records and operations 
training qualification. Although the system is entirely automated, it is critical that all data is captured and 
recorded and where interventions (either manual or automated) are performed or instructed by operators these 
much be captured accordingly. The Batch Manufacturing Records and the overall manufacturing protocols, 
in which key manufacturing instructions are described, shall be created to allow full traceability and 
compliance according to GMP. Aseptic Process Simulation runs will be performed and documented to 
demonstrate process capability for maintaining a sterile product throughout the manufacturing process.   
Task 7.3 Technology transf er and installation of the platform at the hospital site and site acceptance 
testing (IPT, AGL, UKW, RAL, ORTEC) 
AIDPATH     50 
This task begins with the completion of successful acceptance testing including demonstration of functionality 
and sterile operation at IPT at the end of task 5.3 according to the protocols defined in task 7.1. Subsequently, 
the AIDPATH manufacturing platform will be disassembled and shipped to UKW, where it is reassembled 
and set up in the hospital. In parallel, the different parts of the IoT in frastructure developed and adjusted in 
WP 6 will be rolled out in the hospital environment and connected to the hospital IT on site and the production 
pilot. A special emphasis will be given to the integration of the AI models form WP3 and WP4 ensuring a 
reliable and secure connection to the hospital environment. After the successful installation of the pilot at 
UKW, the functionality and integration of the platform will be tested according to the protocols defined in 
Task 7.1 to confirm appropriate technical functionality. In addition, equipment and ancillary materials will be 
physically laid out and tested in accordance with the new layout and test results are documented in the site 
acceptance testing report.  
Task 7.4 CAR -T manufacturing test runs on the autonomous manufacturing system and 
characterization of the AIDPATH CAR-T cell product (UKW, IPT) 
After the technical functionality is proven, the first biological processes will be performed within the platform 
by UKW using the automated manufacturing protocols developed in Task 5.4. Test runs will initially involve 
using healthy donor cells. The tests will start with simple cell cultivation experiments to prove sterility and 
functionality of components before moving onto a fully completed biological run f or production of CAR-T 
cells.  In vitro characterization will be performed during optimization and for the final product and will contain 
analyses of growth potential, surface phenotype, quality and functionality of AIDPATH CAR -T cells. Cell 
expansion and phenotype will be monitored on-line by cell-counting, life-death staining with PI/Annexin-V, 
and flow cytometry for phenotypic markers including CD4, CD8, CD45RA, CD45RO, CD25, CD27, CD28, 
CD69, CCR7, CD62L, and PD -1. Transfection rates will also be measur ed by flow cytometry. For selected 
cell products, we will perform additional off -line analytics, including mass cytometry (CyTOF) to measure 
up to 42 phenotypic markers simultaneously. T cell receptor repertoires will be assessed by TCR spectratyping 
to ensure that AIDPATH CAR-T cells retain a wide TCR spectrum. Additionally, we will analyse the genomic 
insertion site profile and copy number of the CAR gene per genome by ddPCR and deep sequencing. To 
evaluate AIDPATH CAR T cells’ effector functions, we will  test the generated CAR -T cell lines for 
recognition of suitable primary target cells and cell lines by measuring: a) cytolytic activity by luminescence-
based cytotoxicity assay, b) production of IL -2, TNF -α and IFN -γ by multiplex cytokine assay, and c) 
proliferation and induction of activation-induced cell death by CFSE and PI/Annexin -V staining. The assay 
procedures will be validated with existing CAR-T cell products prior to testing AIDPATH CAR-T cells. 
To characterize AIDPATH CAR-T in vivo, efficacy and biodistribution will be evaluated using established in 
vivo models. We will use NSG mice engrafted with either primary cells or target expressing cell lines. Dose 
titrations will be performed to evaluate efficacy and safety of AIDPATH produced CAR T cells in comparison 
to CAR T cells generated with viral or non-viral non-automated methods. We will analyse velocity and depth 
of tumour regression, CAR-T cell migration, distribution, persistence, and animal survival. For subgroups of 
mice, we will harvest blood, spleen and bone marrow to measure T cell infiltration, phenotype (e.g. activation 
and exhaustion markers) and tumour clearance. The biodistribution of CAR -T and tumour cells will be 
sequentially analysed by state -of-the-art bioluminescence detection that allows  live-imaging of cell 
populations at high resolution and in anatomical context. Therefore, T cells and tumour cells will be tracked 
periodically over the whole duration of the experiment for each individual mouse. We will also monitor co -
localisation of tumour cells and CAR -T cells in the bloodstream and organs as well as the emergence of 
extramedullary tumour lesions and the co -localisation of CAR -T cells at these sites. By use of sensitive 
quantification software, tumour and CAR -T cells will be q uantified to draw conclusions about the efficacy, 
expansion, and survival of AIDPATH CAR-T cells under experimental in vivo conditions.  
Task 7.5 Cost of goods analysis and economic evaluation of the AIDPATH system (PAN, UKW, AGL, 
IPT, FCRB, IZI, UCL, HCATS) 
In order to fully analyse and quantify the value for money of the platform, in this task an economic evaluation 
will be conducted comparing the innovative AIDPATH platform to the current standard of producing cells. 
For this purpose, a health economic model will be built that can integrate data from various sources to analyse 
the costs and effects of the new platform compared to the external production of cells. The costs of the patient 
treatment, including the costs for the cell production, will be anal ysed, as well as the impact on treatment 
outcomes (e.g. by ensuring a smooth logistical and timely process, by starting treatment sooner). The analysis 
AIDPATH     51 
will account for potential cost-savings in the treatment, as well as the possibility to scale up the production so 
that patients can receive treatment for whom this previously was not accessible due to the shortage of cell 
products. Outcomes of the analysis can include the incremental cost -effectiveness ratio (ICER) of costs per 
quality-adjusted life year an d the difference in costs of treatment. Sensitivity analyses will be performed to 
identify the key parameters that drive the analysis´ results. Moreover, analysis will be conducted to identify 
the results of several what if-scenarios. The results of the economic evaluation will support the implementation 
of the system in the hospital by providing information on its costs, potential cost-savings, and information on 
patients for whom previously no cell products were available but become available with the new system. 
Deliverables Date (M) 
D7.1. Integrated system training and operations manual 36 
D7.2. GMP documentation package (VMP, IQ, OQ and PQ documents, manufacturing batch 
records) 44 
D7.3. Cost effectiveness analysis of the AIDPATH system 46 
D7.4. Documentation on Site Acceptance Testing (SAT) and manufacturing results and functional 
analysis of the CAR-T product  47 
 
3.1.11 WP 8 
WP No. 8 WP title Ethics 
Lead beneficiary IPT Start month 1 End month 48 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 12  1   3    1  18   
Objective  
(1) Establish a process for independent ethical review of the project. (2) Assure that the consortium operates 
under the principles of responsible research and innovation . (3) Define and monitor the implementation of 
measures to protect privacy and data security 
Description of work  
Task 8.1 Establishment of an independent ethics board  (IPT, ALL) 
An Ethics Board (EB) will be established, with the mission to assure ethical conduct of the project in terms 
of informed consent, data protection and privacy, and research integrity. The board will consist of 3 internal 
and 3 external members. This will include members with knowledge of the issues surrounding data privacy 
and security, use of AI, and informed consent for treatment. The external members will decide upon issues 
that relate to consortium partner misconduct. A process for anonymous reporting of issues to the  external 
Ethics board members will be established. 
Task 8.2 Review of project research and innovations in context of ethical considerations (IPT, ALL) 
A Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) charter will be developed by the EB that will be signed by 
all consortium members. This charter will be built around four principles as defined by the FP 7 project 
RRI tools: (1) Being responsible: honesty, fairness, objectivity, reliability, accountability, and openness ; 
(2) A transdisciplinary and multi -sectorial approach: allowing for confrontation and collaboration of 
heterogeneous scientific cultures; (3): Engaging all stakeholders; (4) Assessing the impact of the project: 
ethical, societal, environment impact. The RRI charter and Ethics issues risks will be re viewed with 
consortium members on an annual based at the occasion of the annual meeting 
Task 8.3 Development of a privacy framework to support GDPR compliance and actors training (RAL)  
AIDPATH     52 
Within AIDPATH, personal data will be gathered and manipulated in diff erent countries for this project. 
This task will ensure the compliance of these data according to the General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR). The work will be performed through a risk assessment based on a questionnaire in order to identify 
measures that should be put in place in the context of the AIDPATH project. For instance, categories that 
will be covered by the GDPR assessment are data security protection, data audit, activity logs and real time 
detection. Following the outcome of previous actions,  the different actors working on the integration, 
implementation and validation will be educated in the roadmap and trained in order to raise awareness 
according to the specific risks of the AIDPATH project. This will allow to ensure that all actors are taking 
into account the security and the privacy by design. 
To understand the privacy risks apparent in AIDPATH a Data Privacy Impact Assessment (DPIA) will be 
executed. The DPIA will enable the identification of privacy risks and the measures to mitigate these risks. 
Then, a framework for embedding Privacy and Security by Default and by Design throughout the entire 
project duration will be developed. The framework will be based upon current standards in information 
security (management) as well as risk manag ement/assessment (e.g., based on ISO/IEC 27018:2019 and 
ISO/IEC 29100:2011), and will be augmented by current agreed approaches on privacy by design and by 
default, as promoted a.o. by ENISA and GDPR. 
Task 8.4 Structuring legal agreements for the use and transfer of data and samples (IPT, ALL) 
Legal agreements around data and sample handling will be reviewed both by the Ethics Board and a legal 
expert. A template agreement will be produced and included in the consortium agreement that complies 
with GDPR requirements. Deviations from this template will be reviewed and a legal review triggered when 
appropriate. Whenever consortium members seek to use existing data or samples from other initiatives this 
work package will assist the consortium members in assessing that the proper consents have been obtained 
to allow for the transfer of data or documents. A provision will be made for subcontracting legal support 
for reviewing plans and documents as well as providing advice to the Ethics Board and the project 
Coordinator. 
Deliverables  Deliverables  
D8.1. GDPR compliant privacy framework 6 
D8.2. Responsible research and innovation charter 9 
D8.3. Report on Ethics issues 45 
 
3.1.12 WP 9 
WP No. 9 WP title Stakeholder engagement, regulatory and clinical 
readiness 
Lead beneficiary UKW Start month 1 End month 48 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 12 2.7 2   6    1   10.5 9 
Objective 
(1) Ensure that necessary regulatory requirements and considerations regarding GDPR, data security and 
privacy are taken into consideration in the development and implementation of AI, IT infrastructure and 
AIDPATH manufacturing platform. (2)Ensure that the preclinical research package for AIDPATH is designed 
in accordance with the EU standards (3) Submit a scientific-advice request to the EMA for the development 
path of AIDPATH 
Description of work 
WP9 focuses on the regulations and clinical readiness of the AIDP ATH manufacturing platform and of the 
cell products generated from the system. As both the use of AI and genetically modified T cells is a highly 
AIDPATH     53 
sensitive topic in society, this WP is designed to ensure that stakeholders such as a patients and hospitals are 
involved from the beginning to facilitate trust and acceptance of the newly developed platform. Additionally, 
as such therapeutic products carry unforeseen risks and often experience setbacks during both preclinical and 
clinical testing, this WP will make sure that AIDPATH addresses all relevant regulatory guidelines. 
Task 9.1 Establishment of an advisory board and development of standing communication channels 
with associations and the stakeholder community (IPT, UKW, UCL, FCRB, PAN, ORT, HCATS, ALL) 
To ensure that the AIDPATH project contributes to trust and acceptance building in the AI technology among 
stakeholders, Task 9.2 will develop and engage with an advisory board and establish a strategy to engage with 
stakeholders. The advisory board will be a primary mechanism for engagement with stakeholders and will 
comprise of key representatives from the clinical, commercial, patient groups, policy and academic sectors. 
Specifically, this will include Professor Bruce Levine, President of the International Society for Cell and Gene 
Therapy (ISCT) the leading global community for advanced therapies, Dr Vijay Chiruvolu, VP Manufacturing 
of Kite Pharma who have an approved CAR -T product is a multi -stakeholder project, (3) a representative 
from within the AI community as well as (4)  from the European Haematology Association (EHA), the leading 
European Society which serves medical professionals and promotes excellence in patient care, research, and 
education in haematology, (5) Professor Alejandro Madrigal, Scientific Director of Anthony Nolan, a leading 
charity that works in the areas of leukaemia, representing patients’ needs and interest and (6) a representative 
from the Digital Innovation Hub DIH Hero. The strategic aim of the advisory board is to provide independent 
input, feedback and strategic direction to the AIDPATH team and project. This critical composition of key 
stakeholders ensures that the advisory board can provide an array of perspectives and will ensure that key 
challenges and emerging opportunit ies for AIDPATH are captured. The consortium will review the 
membership and remit of the advisory board regularly to ensure the primary aims and objectives of the 
advisory board are met.  
In addition, alliances with the wider stakeholder community will be established, leveraging networks and 
connections of the individual partners. This will include academic societies and national/international 
networks. The partners, with expertise in different areas, will ensure that the primary objectives and outcomes 
of AIDPATH are communicated and disseminated to their respective networks and wider communities.  
Task 9.2 : Trust and acceptance building regarding novel AI based technologies and integration of 
stakeholder perspective (PAN, UKW, IPT, ALL) 
For the future implementation of the AIDPATH platform in treatment centres it is essential that stakeholder’s 
incl. patients, clinicians, and hospitals accept and trust the innovative AI -based manufacturing platform. As 
AI applications still are relatively new, users and providers are hesitant to trust and accept this new technology 
without restrictions. Also, stakeholders will have questions on how data security is ensured. Therefore, a fter 
the advisory board has been put together in task 9.2, the stakeholder will be invited by the consortium for first 
workshop. In this workshop, stakeholder are introduced to the AIDPATH vision and concept. To build trust 
and acceptance regarding this new AIDPATH AI-based platform, the expectations and questions of relevant 
stakeholders will be identified to, in the next step, address these within the project and inform the various 
stakeholders how AIDPATH meets these. During the project a stakeholder community will be developed. 
This will be a self-directed, participatory community to ensure that the community has the potential to grow 
to achieve the critical mass necessary to have the intended impact to move the concepts of a ‘smart 
manufacturing hospital’ into wide scale implementation. Initially stakeholder participation will take the form 
of consultation and advice. Interviews will be conducted with several stakeholders (incl. patients and patient 
organisations, caregivers, clinicians, hospitals, insurers) to identify the factors that influence the acceptance 
and trust of stakeholders regar ding the AI -based cell manufacturing platform. Expectations and requests 
concerning design and usability of the AIDPATH system will be collected in the stakeholder interviews.  
Based on the gathered information, stakeholder -centric design principles for th e AIDPATH technology are 
defined, that ensure the technology is catered to their needs and expectations.  The identified issues and gaps 
on a broader societal level as well at the technical level will be used to formulate a broader participatory 
community invited members to contribute to the work being done by the AIDPATH consortium, or to propose 
other new initiatives in line with the goals outlined in the Societal Guide to Implementation of Smart 
Manufacturing Hospitals. Towards the end of the project when the pilot platform is implemented in Wurzburg, 
the advisory board and where applicable other key representatives of the stakeholders (such as patient 
associations) will be approached again to inform them on how the factors that influence their trust and 
AIDPATH     54 
acceptance in the technology were addressed. The stakeholder community will then also be transformed into 
an innovation ecosystem as described above in section 2.2.1. 
Task 9.3: Establish a regulatory roadmap to ensure that regulatory aspects are taken into consideration 
when establishing the AIDPATH manufacturing platform (UKW, IZI, ALL) 
A regulatory roadmap for the AIDPATH manufacturing system and the final cell product, including quality 
management and assurance systems, will be established. This will inc lude several activities ranging from 
manufacturing environment, defining drug substance and product, starting material retrieval and control, 
in‑process controls up to manufacturing process related subjects, testing and release and required 
documentation and registration procedures. In detail, for ensuring compliance to GMP-guided manufacturing 
within an automated closed system, such as AIDPATH, a combinatorial approach led by European Union’s 
Annex 11 (EUDRALEX Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the Eur opean Union, Volume 4, Good 
Manufacturing Practice, Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary Use) and complemented by FDA’s 
Part 11 (21 CFR Part 11) regulation will be provided. Thus, ensuring compliance regarding efficient validation 
of computerized automated systems, including operations and controls for closed systems as well as electronic 
signatures and data/patient safety. In addition, we will implement an extensive guideline package to ensure 
full GMP compliance in the AIDPATH manufacturing model.  
We will also consider GAMP 5 (Good automated manufacturing practice) guideline for manufacturers and 
users of automated systems in the pharmaceutical industry, adapted to ATMP manufacturing. Particularly, we 
will rely to the International Society for Phar maceutical Engineering`s (ISPE) guide “ The Good Automated 
Manufacturing Practice (GAMP) Guide for Validation of Automated Systems in Pharmaceutical 
Manufacture” (Version 5) describing a set of principles and procedures that help ensuring required quality 
standards. Herein, we aim to stick to one of the core principles of GAMP that is quality cannot be tested into 
a batch of product but must be built into each stage of the manufacturing process. Consequently, all aspects 
of production; beginning from the raw  materials, facility and equipment until the training, qualification and 
hygiene of staff will be implemented. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) will be implemented for all 
processes within the entire AIDPATH manufacturing platform that may affect the q uality of the finished 
product. Nevertheless, it has to be pointed out that, in contrast to previous mentioned EMA and FDA 
guidelines having legal bindings, the ISPE GAMP guides have no legal bindings. However, they represent 
the current “gold standard” fo r validation of computer-assisted systems within the pharmaceutical industry, 
thus enabling to support our regulatory framework regarding GMP compliance of the implemented AIDPATH 
manufacturing model.  
By ensuring that the AIDPATH manufacturing platform complies with the minimum standard that a medicine 
manufacturer must meet in their production processes, this would potentially aid in both regulatory and 
industry acceptance of the platform when moving into clinical testing. 
Task 9.4 : Scientific -advice requ est to the EMA and preclinical research package for AIDPATH in 
accordance with the EU standards (UKW, IZI) 
Appling for a scientific advice with the EMA seeks to ensure that the development program for AIDPATH 
will meet the evidence needs of the regulatory bodies to move forward into clinical testing scenarios. 
Therefore, we will implement scientific advice procedures with the EMA`s Innovation task force (ITF) aiming 
to guide the regulatory process at an early stage in product and process development. This i ncludes liaison 
with EMA on the technologies developed in the different strands of AIDPATH (cell technology, platform 
concept and layout, preparation and input during validation). Herein, EMAs Innovation Task Force provides 
an optimal platform for early dialogue on scientific, regulatory and legal requirements. The advice meetings 
will also be essential to establish contact with the EMA to address any issues that may require further 
clarification. We will also consider ITF briefing meetings that are intended to be much earlier than when one 
would normally seek scientific advice, thus covering early regulatory, technical and scientific issues during 
initial stages of the development path in AIDPATH. This task represents provision of support for ITF briefing 
meetings and scientific advice meetings, including preparing, planning and participating in these meetings. 
This task will ensure providing adequate regulatory guidance for the implemented AIDPATH preclinical 
validation package in compliance with EMAs scientific guidelines on non-clinical development of medicinal 
products. We will establish a framework of regulatory requirements regarding non-clinical needs for ATMPs 
AIDPATH     55 
in close collaboration with WP7 (task 7.4) (responsible for practical realization of preclinical in-vitro and in-
vivo studies). This will include primary pharmacodynamics (PD) providing data on in vitro  studies for 
characterization of the AIDPATH cell product regarding yield, growth potential, surface phenotype and in 
vitro quality profile of the  cells. The data set will be complemented by pharmacokinetics/ biodistribution 
studies providing additional data to support PD and evaluating preclinical in -vivo safety aspects. Herein, in 
collaboration with WP7 (task 7. 4), an in vivo animal model (NSG mou se model) reflecting the intended 
clinical background will be established and evaluated by a set of distinct parameters such as velocity and 
depth of tumour regression, CAR-T cell migration, distribution, persistence and animal survival. 
Deliverables Date (M) 
D9.1. Stakeholder community integration and communication plan 9 
D9.2. Regulatory roadmap in compliance with EMAs scientific guidelines 15 
D9.3. Stakeholder centric design principles ensuring trust and acceptance 18 
D9.4. Scientific advice Meeting with EMA’s Innovation task force 30 
D9.5. Societal Guide for implementing Smart Manufacturing Hospitals  39 
 
3.1.13 WP 10 
WP No. 10 WP title Communication, Dissemination and preparation for 
wide scale implementation 
Lead beneficiary IPT Start month 1 End month 48 
Participant number 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of participant 
IPT 
IZI 
UCL 
FORTH 
SZTAKI 
UKW 
AGL 
FUJI 
HCATS 
FCRB 
IRIS 
RAL 
PAN 
ORT 
PM per participant 9  1 2 2 3 4 1  1 3 2 16 10 
Objective 
The aim of this work package is to (1) gener ate wide visibility of the objectives, concepts and results of 
AIDPATH, (2) derive a viable business model and (3) make all preparations allow a seamless transition 
towards technology scale up/out after end of the project 
Description of work 
Task 10.1 Communication and dissemination infrastructure (IPT, ALL) 
This task will set up internal and external communication channels in order to ensure continuous and efficient 
exchange between the project partners, stakeholders and the public: 
Internal communication: The coordinator and the Project Executive Group (PEG) will monitor progress of 
the WPs closely. In order to ensure a constant flow of information between the partners, regular meetings in 
person and online will be held. The project will start with an initiation (‘kick-off’) meeting. Plenary meetings 
will be held twice yearly thereafter where some of them will take place in conjunction with technical 
workshops. Plenary meetings act as self-assessments and internal reviews, as well as reporting and planning 
opportunities. Every WP will present a progress report and short-term future plans at each meeting. Upcoming 
deliverables and milestones will be reviewed. A review of project risks, opportunities, new intellectual 
property and an assessment of any new de velopments in advanced therapy and related sectors will be 
permanent agenda items. In addition to meetings in person, regular online meetings will be held (e.g. monthly) 
for the partners to give updates on the progress and to facilitate communication between the WPs.  The tools 
and technologies required for collaboration and data sharing will be put in place and maintained throughout. 
A shared documents service will be used for collaborative authoring. Email, skype and telephone will be used 
in between face-to-face meetings. Project knowledge will be managed and retained throughout the duration 
of the project, so that material generated by one partner is available to all, old versions of documents remain 
available, relevant research data is shared and easily  accessed and emailed discussions are archived and 
AIDPATH     56 
retrievable. This will facilitate reporting and help to deal with any changes in personnel or consortium, 
increasing the robustness of the project as a whole.  
External communication and dissemination: An infrastructure will be installed ensuring that the project has a 
strong visibility and dissemination activities will generate a wide outreach. Therefore, a project website will 
be set up at www.aidpath -project.eu (or a similar do -main name). The website wi ll include a description of 
the project and partners, news and events page, a media area, links to related projects, and contact details for 
the project. Overall, web material will be aimed at the general public, with additional specific pages for 
specialist audiences (clinicians, industry partners, other projects, potential collaborators. Twitter, YouTube, 
LinkedIn and Facebook accounts will be set up and managed by IPT. The different partners will distribute 
information within their communities. This incl udes for example the e ngagement in the Digital Innovation 
Hub DIH Hero for exploitation of robotic and digital solutions in the case for IPT. 
Task 10.2. Dissemination campaign plans (IPT, ALL) 
A dissemination campaign plan will be prepared by IPT to ensure  a continuous flow of information on the 
AIDPATH project. The plan will include contents, timings and target audience for dissemination of project 
activities, results and milestones reached. Therefore, IPT will update the website regularly throughout the 
project life-time, with all partners contributing content. In order to ensure that it reflects the current project 
status, the website will be reviewed at every plenary meeting. The dissemination will be done through the 
channels defined above (website, soc ial media, communication with stakeholder community, scientific 
presentations, publications, representation at conferences, tradeshows and fairs, active engagement with DIH 
Hero and other associations (ISCT, etc.). In collaboration with all project partners, IPT will develop a project 
brochure, poster and other awareness materials for circulation by the consortium at conferences and other 
public events. The materials will also be made available as downloads from the project website. At the end of 
the project, IPT will report on the results dissemination campaign plan. 
Task 10.3: Business plan development utilizing a modelling tool (PAN, UKW, FCRB, HCATS, ALL) 
For smart hospitals to create, deliver and capture value by means of the innovative AIDPATH platform, they 
need to innovate their business models. A business model describes the rationale of how an organisation 
creates, delivers and captures value 37. This task will develop a business plan modelling tool that provides 
insights into the business model, fina ncial analysis, external environment, and a risk analysis for hospitals 
interested to transform their current business model into a future oriented business model by means of the 
AIDPATH platform. To describe the business model use will be made of the Busi ness Model Generation 
Framework37. This framework consists of nine building blocks: 1. Customer Segments; 2. Value Propositions; 
3. Channels; 4. Customer Relationships; 5. Revenue Streams; 6. Key Resources; 7. K ey Activities; 8. Key 
Partnerships; and 9. Cost Structure. Inputs for the financial analysis will be derived from task 11.1: economic 
evaluation. As business models are designed and executed in specific environments, additional data will be 
collected about four areas: 1. Market forces; 2. Industry forces; 3. Key trends; 4. Macroeconomic forces. 
Combined with a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) analysis, the Business Model 
Canvas enables a more focused assessment and evaluation of an organisation’s business model and its building 
blocks. This type of analysis provides a solid basis for decision making and innovation of an organisation’s 
innovative business model. Data will be collected from various sources, incl. white and grey literatur e, 
interviews with key opinion leaders and stakeholders (incl. customers and partners), and the economic 
evaluation (task 7.4). This task will report on a viable business model that will serve as a basis for discussion 
with industry, investors and stakehol ders and will help to shape an action plan for wide -scale technology 
implementation.  
Task 10.4 Industrial engagement and commercialisation (IPT, UCL, WUR, AGL, FORTH, ALL) 
A key dissemination activity for the AIDPATH project is to engage with hospitals, t reatment sites and 
potential other customers as well as funding agencies and investors to ensure uptake and implementation of 
project findings. Based on the business model defined in Task 10.3, a sustainability plan will be developed to 
ensure project results will be further developed, exploited and marketed. This will include the exploitation of 
individual innovations that are part of the AIDPATH system as well taking next steps for the wide scale 
implementation for the overall AIDPATH system:  
                                                      
37 Ostenwalder et al. 2020 
AIDPATH     57 
As is expected from a project which will deliver multiple innovations and advances in the field, each partner 
with new intellectual property will develop plans for the further exploitation of project results. Partners with 
sole IP ownership (e.g. FISI’s media formulations, AGL’s bioreactor system, ORT’s software platform) will 
fold this work into their existing business plans and product development plans. Partners who share some IP 
will discuss and agree how such shared IP is to be further developed. Possible strateg ies include one partner 
licencing the IP of others, or a new company being established with shared equity, or the breaking -up of the 
IP into solely-held units.  
The AIDPATH system is designed to address key bottlenecks in manufacture for hospitals and therefore will 
be relevant to both to clinical sites as well as companies that are developing therapies, acquiring and licensing 
new manufacturing plants. In order to market the system as a whole and prepare for ‘wide -scale’ 
implementation, engagement with pot ential joint venture partners and investors will be sought. This can 
include the formation of strategic alliances and the development of public private partnerships. Across Europe, 
clinical sites and treatment centres active in the CAR -T therapy field will  be addressed to raise interest in 
joining forces for preparation of implementation of the AIDPATH technology across multiple sites. In 
addition, the consortium will seek engagement with funding agencies on regional, national and international 
level to leverage effect on additional funding.   
These activities will be stimulated through an Exploitation Workshop at M36, in which technologies and 
target groups are identified. This will require input from all consortium members to ensure a significant 
geographical and network reach and liaison with the advisory board from the innovation ecosystem set up in 
Task 9.2. Investors, companies and other institutions that are relevant for licencing and commercialization of 
the technology will be invited to an innovation day, in order to “pitch and match” for investment in technology 
developers.  
Deliverables Date (M) 
D10.1. Concept dissemination campaign plan 8 
D10.2. Results dissemination campaign plan 36 
D10.3. Business model, sustainability plan and engagement with investors and funding 
associations 44 
  
3.1.14 List of Deliverables 
Del 
# Deliverable name  WP# Lead 
name Type Diss’n 
level Date 
1.1. Project Charter and IPR scan file  1 IPT R CO 3 
1.2. Data management plan 1 IPT R CO 6 
2.1. Integrated data structure for AI development 2 IPT OTHER CO 6 
5.1. 
CAR-T Manufacturing SOPs, Production Sequence 
Diagram and Material Flow Mapping, URS for 
Automated Production System  
5 IPT R CO 6 
8.1. GDPR compliant privacy framework 8 RAL R CO 6 
10.1. Concept dissemination campaign plan 10 IPT R CO 8 
3.1. 
Use Case Description for precision AI 
manufacturing including review of influencing 
factors optimization objectives  
3 IRIS R CO 9 
4.1. 
Use Case Description for production scheduling and 
resource management including view of material 
flow, dependencies and optimization objectives 
4 IPT R CO 9 
8.2. Responsible research and innovation charter 8 IPT R CO 9 
9.1. Stakeholder community integration and 
communication plan 9 IPT R CO 9 
2.2. AI concept, interaction and development strategy 2 SZTAKI R CO 12 
6.1. Report on system architecture and interface 
definition 6 IPT R CO 12 
AIDPATH     58 
9.2. Regulatory roadmap in compliance with EMAs 
scientific guidelines 9 UKW R CO 15 
3.2. Pre-processed data sets for precision manufacturing 
AI training 3 FORTH OTHER CO 18 
4.2. Pre-processed data sets for production scheduling 
and resource management AI training 4 IPT OTHER CO 18 
5.2. Design of automated production System incl. 
Hardware, Software and Interface Definitions  5 IPT R CO 18 
9.3. Stakeholder centric design principles ensuring trust 
and acceptance 9 PAN R PU 18 
3.3. Prototype of AI-CAR Twin suitable for bed-side 
hospital operation 3 UCL DEM CO 21 
4.3. Comprehensive simulation model of the production 
environment and resource management 4 SZTAKI OTHER CO 26 
5.3. Automated bioreactor device and standardized 
cartridges for autonomous CAR-T manufacture  5 AGL DEM CO 27 
9.4. Scientific advice Meeting with EMA’s Innovation 
task force 9 UKW R CO 30 
2.3. Defined End-to-End AI pipeline including 
deployment plan 2 IRIS R CO 33 
3.4. 
AI CAR-T Digital twin for advanced and adaptive 
bioprocess control strategies trained on optimised 
bioprocess datasets 
3 UCL DEM CO 33 
4.4. AI production scheduling and resource management 
model 4 SZTAKI DEM CO 33 
5.4. Automated modular CAR-T production pilot 5 IPT DEM CO 34 
6.2. 
Validated manufacturing control and resource 
planning software, Data storage framework and data 
preparation pipeline for AI 
6 ORT OTHER CO 34 
10.2. Results dissemination campaign plan 10 IPT R PU 36 
5.5. Optimized SOPs for automated CAR-T 
manufacturing and analytics 5 UKW R CO 36 
7.1. Integrated system training and operations manual 7 IPT R CO 36 
3.5. Performance report on implemented cell culture and 
bioprocess AI 3 IRIS R CO 39 
4.5. Performance report on implemented production 
scheduling and resource management AI 4 SZTAKI R CO 39 
9.5. Societal Guide for implementing Smart 
Manufacturing Hospitals  9 PAN R PU 39 
10.3. Business model, sustainability plan and engagement 
with investors and funding associations 10 IPT R CO 44 
7.2. GMP documentation package (VMP, IQ, OQ and 
PQ documents, manufacturing batch records) 7 IZI R CO 44 
2.4. Guidelines and building blocks for AI in the smart 
hospital of the future 2 IPT R PU 45 
6.3. Documentation of AI-integrated AIDPATH IoT 
infrastructure and their software components 6 IPT R CO 45 
8.3. Report on Ethics issues 8 IPT R CO 45 
7.3. Cost effectiveness analysis of the AIDPATH system 7 PAN R CO 46 
7.4. 
Documentation on Site Acceptance Testing (SAT) 
and manufacturing results and functional analysis of 
the CAR-T product  
7 UKW R CO 47 
 
AIDPATH     59
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures 
3.2.1 Management Objectives 
The management structure for AIDPATH has been developed to ensure that the consortium fulfils its aims 
effectively and efficiently, in line with the EU Call Text and the following objectives: 
⮊ Deliver an inclusive consortium that brings together domain experts, companies and other stakeholders,  
⮊ Support an excellent innovation programme that extends the state of the art in multiple dimensions; 
⮊ Facilitate the work, and the collaboration and communication, of all the work packages.  
⮊ Maximise the impact of the project during and after the project lifetime; 
⮊ Deliver the contractual obligations of the project to the EU, by continuously monitoring progress, 
facilitating regular internal communication and fostering a shared understanding of roles and 
responsibilities. 
3.2.2 Organisational Structure 
Project coordinator 
The AIDPATH project is led the Fraunhofer IPT, part of the Fraunhofer organization and leading experts in 
production technology . Their r ole includes strategic leadership, overall scientific vision, day -to-day 
orchestration of the various WPs, administration, reporting and periodic liaison with the EU. IPT has a great 
deal of experience in multi -partner and EU projects, including the successful AutoCRAT and JointPromise 
projects, on which this application builds. The coordinator can count on a strong team of actively interacting 
partners from leading institutions (see ‘Consortium as a whole’ and section 4 of this proposal).  
Overall, the role of the coordinator  is to ensure that the project is progressing smoothly, that partners are 
communicating and collaborating effectively, that the contract and associated ann exes are being complied 
with, and that all steps are being taken to maximise the project impact for research and industry.  
The coordinator will coordinate preparation and submission of periodic reports and a final report, including 
financial reporting, as required by the Description of Action.  
Project Executive Group (PEG) 
The project coordinator chairs a small Project Executive Group (PEG), consisting of the coordinator, Prof. 
Dr.med. Michael Hudecek from University Clinics Würzburg (UKW), Dr. Qasim Rafi q from University 
College London (UCL) as well as Ortec (ORT)  from the industrial side . This PEG provides day to day 
leadership and direction for the project, and ensures that the major innovation challenges are addressed in a 
coherent and integrated manne r that takes into account both the Artificial Intelligence and the advanced -
therapy viewpoints. The PEG provides vision and strategic orientation of the project, strategically liaising with 
the advisory board and the stakeholder community. 
 
 
Figure 11: Overview of the organisational structure of the AIDPATH project 
WP3
WP2
 WP4
 WP5
 WP6
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSON
IPT
IPT
SZTAKI
UKW
RAL
AGL FUJI
PANFORTH
UCL
IRIS
ACADEMIC
INDUSTRIAL 
PROJECT EXECUTIVE GROUP
WP10
WP9
WP8
WP7
UCL SZTAKI IPT ORT UKW IPT UKW IPT
PROJECT 
BOARD
ETHICAL 
COMMITTEES
REGULATORSHCATS
FCRB
ORT
WP1
IPT
IZI
ADVISORY 
BOARD
AIDPATH     60 
Project Board 
Overall strategic and long-term oversight of the project will be the responsibility of the Project Board, which 
consists of one representative of each beneficiary (partner) and is chaired by the coordinator. This board will 
ensure, from a strategic perspective, that the project is proceeding according to plan and that the research being 
carried out meets the project objectives. The PEG, in collaboration with  the work package leaders, will 
implement decisions taken by the Project Board.  
The Project Board will meet every six months at the plenary meetings; it has the following main tasks: 
1. To monitor work progress  and suggest necessary redistribution of work pl an and budget in case of 
unforeseen events that can affect the outcome of the success of the project, such as new opportunities, 
new ideas or unexpected failures of planned tasks; 
2. To supervise the progress and assess the quality  of the work, to follow up r esults and support any 
corrective measures accordingly, in order to attain the expected impact; 
3. To solve any emerging problems, including conflict management, without delay; 
4. To take any necessary action, if any partner fails to come with the expected deliv erables, and thereby 
to ensure a successful completion of the project; 
5. To handle intellectual property issues; 
6. To manage and respond to risk. 
3.2.3 Work-packages 
AIDPATH is structured as a collection of work -packages (WPs), each of which contributes to the overa ll 
achievement of the project aims. Each WP has a nominated leader, and a team consisting of all beneficiaries 
that contribute to the WP.  
Role of the WP leaders : WP Leaders are responsible for ensuring that the WP team reaches the objectives 
and milestones of the WP and produces timely deliverables of a high standard. The other beneficiaries involved 
in the WP (the WP team members) report to the WP leader in the context of this particular WP. Each WP 
interacts with the other WPs in their work, combining to deliver the project as a whole. 
Process: At the project start, WP leaders will clearly establish the responsibilities of each member of the WP 
team. Throughout the project, the WP leader will report progress to the PEG and the Project Board. Where 
any issues or delays arise, the WP leader will work with the rest of the Project Board to resolve them in a 
timely manner. WP leaders may convene meetings of their WP team (additional to the plenary meetings) as 
needed. WP leaders will also present WP results at plenary meetings and provide any required material for 
periodic reviews.  
3.2.4 Appropriateness of this Structure for AIDPATH 
AIDPATH combines multiple complementary skills and disciplines, into a holistic AIDPATH IoT 
infrastructure, which combines several innovative technologies to meet the needs of smart manufacturing 
hospitals. Bringing these perspectives and skill -sets together, and keeping them in focus at all times, is the 
underlying reason for the creation of the PEG, as a strategic management group. Thus,  while the PEG is an 
additional layer of management, over and above the usual H2020 ‘project board’, it acts more as a three -part 
coordinator, with in-depth skills across all the domains where management is required.  
The Project Board structure is a ‘standard’ Horizon 2020 approach to multi-partner projects, with which the 
team is very familiar, and which we have used effectively across several other projects. Many of the team have 
worked together in the past, and share the trust and confidence in one another’s performance that is important 
in a project as ambitious as AIDPATH. The WP leadership model enables very clear and familiar lines of 
responsibility and reporting, so that all partners are aware of what is expected of them, what resources they 
can call upon, and how they relate to other WPs and the PEG. 
3.2.5 Project Management Procedures 
Plenary meetings 
An initial kick-off meeting and workshop will be held to launch the project. All project board members will 
attend this meeting. The agenda will include pr esentations from all WP leaders, with a specific focus on the 
activities planned for the first six months of the project for WPs starting in M1. The plenary meeting will be 
followed by a knowledge -transfer workshop that builds the basis for the AI Use Case  Definition, process 
definition and requirements analysis. These will be followed by irregular workshops with confined partner 
constellations in order to detail out use cases and specifications required for the different work packages. The 
AIDPATH     61 
WP leaders are responsible for ensuring that the results of each workshop are shared with the consortium and 
coordinated with the other WPs.  
Thereafter, consortium-wide plenary meetings will be held every six months. All partners will be represented 
at every plenary. The  aim of the meetings will be to present, discuss and analyse research results, plan for 
upcoming activities and track progress against the project plan (milestones and deliverables). Additional 
technology workshops will be held throughout the first 18 mont hs with larger and smaller subgroups of the 
consortium, to bring together all early-stage modules, under the leadership of the IPT engineering team. 
Plenary Agenda: The project executive group (PEG)  will set the plenary meeting agendas, in consultation 
with the wider Project Board. A number of items will be permanently on the agenda: WP updates, risks, issues 
and knowledge gained, market updates, project management and budgeting. 
Minutes: The coordinator will circulate minutes of the meetings, including any action items, to the consortium. 
The minutes will be used to document progress and capture any key decisions, discussions and agreements 
reached. 
Other meetings 
WP leaders may choose to convene meetings at the WP level, as required. They may elect to hold  meetings 
with other WP teams in order to organise collaborative activities. The majority of such meetings will occur via 
tele- or video-conferencing. Minutes will be taken for all meetings and circulated to the WP team, as well as 
the Coordinator.  
Communication tools 
Clear and effective communications are essential to the success of any multi -partner research project. A 
number of communication tools used extensively by the consortium during preparation of the AIDPATH 
proposal will be employed for regular communication during the project: 
● Tele- and web conferences will be facilitated using a suitable technology such as Microsoft Teams; 
● A project wide mailing list  and a list of key contacts  will be established and maintained by the  
coordinator; 
● Documents wil l be shared within the consortium using a secure document sharing solution such as 
Fraunhofer OwnCloud; 
● Scheduling will be facilitated using Fraunhofer-based Tool Foodle. 
Consortium agreement 
A consortium agreement (CA) based on the DESCA 2020 model (http://www.desca-2020.eu/) will be drafted 
and signed by all beneficiaries before the project starts. The CA will govern a range of consortium interactions, 
including decision-making, conflict resolution and financial processes. All Intellectual Property issues, e.g. 
ownership and access rights, will be regulated in the CA. Given the significant number of cutting -edge 
companies involved in AIDPATH, and the high likelihood of further development and product breakthroughs, 
the CA will be carefully drafted and can be expected to provide a good deal of detail around ownership and 
access to IP. 
Conflict resolution 
The consortium is fully committed and aligned to the objectives of AIDPATH and 
to taking Smart Hospitals to the next level. All partners are excited to take part, and 
many expect to benefit by developing know -how and IP that will increase their 
commercial competitiveness and market share.  
Many of the participants have worked together in the past, and are confident of 
fruitful and harmonious collaboration in  this new project. Furthermore, the details 
of the research programme and procedures for interacting with each other will have 
been clearly defined before the project start in Annex I ( Description of Action) of 
the Grant Agreement and the CA, respectively.  In this context, conflict is not 
anticipated and the consortium will strive for consensus in decision -making. 
However, a conflict resolution process will be put in place should the need arise. 
The concerned parties will inform the coordinator of the conflict. The coordinator 
and PEG will engage in discussions with the concerned parties to ascertain if a 
mutually agreed resolution can be reached. If this is not possible the matter will be 
referred to the Project Board, who will discuss the matter in plenary session. This discussion may be held at a 
regular board meeting or at a special session, depending on the urgency of the matter, as decided by the 

AIDPATH     62 
coordinator. If the board is not able to reach a satisfactory resolution, the issue will be referred to exte rnal 
arbitration, as detailed in the CA. 
Progress monitoring 
The PEG will track progress of the project versus the project plan, as laid out in the Description of Action. A 
project calendar, including milestone and deliverable dates, will be generated at the project start and maintained 
over the project lifetime. Each partner will submit a progress and budget summary report (1 -2 pages) to the 
PEG every 6 months. A summary of these reports will be shared with the consortium. These reports are 
staggered with the plenary meetings, to provide a project management ‘heartbeat’ every three months.  
Contractual deliverables will be submitted to the PEG a month in advance of the due date, to allow for quality 
assurance and to ensure that all deliverables are submitted on time. 
Quality assurance 
All deliverables will be prepared using a common template. Each deliverable will be reviewed by a partner not 
involved in its preparation in order to ensure that high quality deliverables are submitted to the Commission. 
The PEG will also carry out a final review before submission. 
3.2.6 Table 3.2a List of Milestones 
MS # Milestone name WPs Date  Means of verification 
1 AI Use Cases Defined 3,4 9 Use Case Description Documents 
2 Complete Data Sets for AI Training 
available  
3,4 18 Complete data sets uploaded to a shared 
platform 
3 AIs trained, validated and ready for 
deployment 
2,3,4 33 Deployable program and reports on AI 
and validation 
4 Cyber physical manufacturing 
infrastructure incl. Automated 
protocols completed and ready for 
deployment 
5,6 36 Physical modules built, deployable 
software programs available and 
documentation on functional testing 
5 Installation and validation of the cyber 
physical infrastructure at the clinical 
site complete 
7 48 CAR-T manufacturing runs compl eted, 
and results of product validation 
available 
 
3.2.7 Innovation Management 
Advanced therapy development and production are among the most dynamic and 
rapidly-innovating of all industry sectors over the last several years. The 
AIDPATH project is primarily c oncerned with applying and integrating 
technologies from new companies, and breakthroughs from leading scientific 
teams, to the real-world challenge of producing advanced therapies for large patient 
populations.  
We confidently expect that AIDPATH will lea d to important product and 
technology innovations for several partners, and that these innovations will feed 
into new and improved products. Similarly, we anticipate important publications, 
new IP and potential spin -out and licensing opportunities for the academic and 
research partners, including IPT, UCL and others. Managing this innovation 
effectively, to protect its value while maximising its scientific and societal benefit, 
will be an important project management task, led by IPT’s innovation team.  
The innovation management process will build on the Consortium Agreement, which will list the key 
background that each beneficiary brings to the project, and that states any up -front agreement about IP 
ownership. As far as possible, we will allocate ownership of each piece of new IP to a single beneficiary ; 
this beneficiary will typically be the one that brings the most related background IP to the project, and who 
will typically lead the work that generates the new Results (‘foreground’ in FP7 terms). This greatly simplifies 
its subsequent exploitation and translation into real-world impact.  
Most new IP is expected to lead to patents and protection first, followed by scientific publication and open 
access to experimental and supporting open data wherever possible. Much of the new knowledge generated 

AIDPATH     63 
by the project will relate to the products and IP of the partners; scientific and media publication will also serve 
as ‘sales’ or ‘promotion’ information, as discussed below under Dissemination and Communication. 
Identifying and managing innovation: IP will be reviewed as a standard agenda item at plenary meeting s. 
However, as soon as a new invention is noted, an Invention Discovery Form (IDF) will be completed by the 
scientist(s) involved. Copies of lab notebooks a nd supporting data will be made, so that the inventorship is 
clearly defined. Nature and ownership of the new IP will be formally recognised at the next plenary meeting.  
Where jointly-discovered Results IP emerges as a result of collaborative work, the Co nsortium Agreement 
will be used as the basis for case-by-case agreements on ownership. The CA also states the processes for claims 
of co-ownership, in case a beneficiary believes it has contributed to some IP, and that this should be recognised. 
The relevant partners will work together with a third partner (nominated by the PEG) to agree a joint ownership 
agreement, including agreement on access, licensing to third parties, publication, etc.   
Publications Management 
AIDPATH will generate numerous scientifi c publications, including early papers (system design, AI and 
bioprocess concepts, methods, systematic reviews) and later results publications, in areas across smart 
hospitals, artificial intelligence, advanced therapy manufacture, decentralized therapy production, automation 
and advanced manufacturing and more. The correct management of this process is critical, if the team is to 
maximise innovation and publish the best possible work in high-impact venues.  
A publication plan will be agreed at the kick -off meeting, and then further developed at the M6 and M12 
plenaries, to identify which partner(s) will lead the work on which papers, on which topics. In general, many 
papers will focus on the work of a single work-package, with the WP leader acting as lead author, and all other 
partners being co-authors, subject to the ICMJE/Vancouver conventions. The PEG will note the publication 
plans of each partner and will track progress against these. Other opportunities for publications (e.g. workshops 
and conferences) will be taken, where they do not jeopardise ‘big’ publications. All publication decisions will 
be subject to IP protection; no publication will jeopardise or take away legitimate commercial aspirations. 
One year from project end, we will review progress o n all publications, and focus on writing up results and 
submitting papers during the final year.  
Data Management  
AIDPATH will generate extensive data, which is a key requirement for AI training, process control and quality 
assurance activity, and a strict requirement for audit trail and quality data and in-vitro and in-vivo studies for 
validation and testing purposes. The generation, collection and storage of data will be recorded, reviewed and 
updated regularly throughout the project to ensure data i s FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable and re -
usable). The DMP will include what data the project will generate, whether and how it will be made accessible 
for verification and re -use, and how it will be curated and preserved. As laid out in section 2 .3 Data 
Management, Publication and Open Access , we will ensure that to generate scientific publications, data 
availability and preservation. Extensive data will be collected and generated throughout the AI work packages 
(WP2 – 4), which are used for AI training and application. The in-vivo and in-vitro validation work (WP7) will 
generate information about experiments and their results, which confirm the quality of the platform end -
product and which may feed back into the platform for iterative refinement. All data storage and sharing will 
be in accordance with GDPR and anonymized as far as possible.  
Open data: we are committed to making our results and our research available to other researchers to enable 
replication and further use of our work (subject to  commercial intellectual property constraints). By sharing 
our data as openly as possible, we intend to make it feasible for others to verify the quality of our work and 
results, and thus to drive demand for the products and services offered by consortium members into the future.  
Data sharing will be achieved by placing our aggregated and anonymised research data on the open -access 
data repository chosen at the beginning of the project, such as ELIXIR, Fordatis institutional research data 
repository of the  Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft or the UCL Research Data Storage (URDS) service. These data 
repositories ensure curation and long-term preservation and thus long-term availability.  
Future Planning 
The AIDPATH project has been conceived with a very future-facing perspective. From day one, our plans and 
activities will reflect our aim to have AIDPATH systems adopted at wide-scale in large hospitals across Europe 
and beyond, to intelligently and consistently produce new therapies (some not even invented yet). The project 
as proposed is a stepping -stone towards creating smart hospitals of the future which act as treatment and 
therapy production hubs. With AIDPATH, we will lay the foundation towards this future not only by 
AIDPATH     64 
prototyping and demonstrating a holistic, sm art manufacturing IoT infrastructure in the hospital, but also by 
preparing exchange channels (both on data and communication side) to allow exchange of knowledge and 
expertise between the hospital sites. We anticipate that his technology will generate a fertile breeding ground 
in which future AIs, technological developments and other advanced therapy production processes can be 
seamlessly integrated, thus further increasing product quality, benefits for the patient and decreasing costs of 
personalized treatments.  
As this dynamic innovation and commercial area evolves during the project, we will adapt and respond to it. 
Full-day innovation-review workshops will be held at M18, 36 and 48, immediately preceding the plenary 
meeting. These workshops will review  changes in the state of the art (scientific and commercial) and reflect 
on whether this evolution requires any change in AIDPATH, or in its future or business planning. Strategic 
alliances and joint forces will be sought with other clinical partners and across the stakeholder community. In 
order to provide a starting point for further funding, licencing and sponsoring through funding agencies, large 
companies and investors, we will hold an innovation da where technologies developed in AIDPATH can be 
presented and pitched to interested parties in the above mentioned group.  
Each partner (both academic and commercial) has its own perspectives on how this project will lead to 
exploitation and progress (see WP10 and section 2.4 Exploitation for details). Howeve r, we also share a 
common view that further shared R&D and further projects are likely to offer more stepping-stones along our 
shared research agenda. This reflects the collaboration of some of the partners already in projects such as 
AutoCRAT and Jointpromise, which have directly informed and enriched the plans for AIDPATH.   
3.2.8 Risks 
The AIDPATH project is exposed to typical risks for multi -disciplinary project that combines hardware 
(modules, bioreactors and sensors), software (to control the hardware), Artificial Intelligence and cutting-edge 
bio-technology. These include technical compatibility issues, software interoperation and maintenance, the 
development or evolution of innovative technologies, and the need for a shared understanding, across specialist 
fields, of the capabilities and constraints inherent in each discipline.  
However, the consortium has the required expertise and experience, with strong track records in the specific 
areas required. Automation/manufacturing and advanced therapies are both represented in the PEG; the overall 
project board holds a uniquely strong mix of real-world expertise, brand-new technologies and breakthroughs, 
and scientific excellence.  
The following table explores the most relevant risks  and how as a team we have mit igated against them 
(and/or, if they arise, how we will overcome the problems they represent). 
Table 3.2b: Critical Risks for implementation 
Description of risk Likeli-hood 
Involved 
WPs Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Delay within the work 
packages, in achieving 
milestones, or partners 
remiss in the execution 
of assigned obligations 
Medium All Critical paths of dependencies among actions have been 
identified. Ensure to keep the schedule by regular checks on 
cost-performance schedule, supported by bi-monthly 
progress meetings. Regular phone conferences and updates 
via email. In serious cases, coordinator will accord one 
month for corrective action and if no sufficient 
improvement has been made, backup work force will be 
allocated and work redistributed. 
Conflict regarding IP 
ownership  
 
Medium All The Consortium Agreement will explicitly name the 
beneficiaries who have ‘first call’ on IP in specific areas. 
These will reflect the background IP brought to the project 
by each beneficiary. Where conflicts arise, conflict 
resolution process will be followed as is outlined above  
Lack of data availability 
to build data driven AI 
models 
Medium 2, 3 (i) Use publicly available data repositories, (ii) simulate data 
Problems with data 
quality (erroneous 
values, missing data etc.) 
Medium 2, 3, 4 Fix problems by requesting new data and/or revising data 
processing. 
AIDPATH     65 
Insufficient data 
coverage 
Medium 2, 3, 4 (i)Request more data, (ii) reduce the scope, (iii) engage with 
stakeholders to generate data 
Development of the use 
cases are delayed 
Medium 3,4 The progress of the use cases will be continuously 
monitored in order to recognise any discrepancies and 
deviations from the original plans.  
Missing interfaces of 
devices 
Low 5 Market research to identify best device solutions, 
engagement with device vendors, Integration via software 
agents possible even for heterogeneous interfaces 
Lack of automatability of 
devices 
Medium 5 Market research to identify best device solutions, 
engagement with device vendors, IPT can also prototype 
additional devices / functionalities and amend technology 
Unexpected process 
complexity 
Low 5 Consortium consists of multiple process experts (e.g. UKW, 
UCL, IZI). Process definition at the very beginning, 
conducting of workshops and expert interviews to address 
this early on, reducing complexity in the process as a 
demonstration process 
Deployment of AI 
solutions fails or delays 
Low 6,7 Including deployment strategy and productionizing tests in 
the development of the AI solutions. Continuous 
deployment tests over the course of WP 2,3 and 4. 
Sustainability of AI 
solutions is not given 
(e.g. new data cannot be 
successfully included) 
Low 6,7 Including retraining strategy and data flows into the AI 
development. Varying data formats and values during test 
phase to emulate upcoming changes and variances. 
Unexpected changes to 
cybersecurity & privacy 
standards and regulations 
Low 8, 9, 10 Creation of non-official liaison with the relevant EU 
standards and regulations, designate a project officer to 
follow closely these organisations and report to the group. 
Incompatibility of AI 
with IT-infrastructure in 
the hospital 
Medium 9 Early communication between AI-Partners and IT-
department at UKW 
Dissemination fails to 
engage audiences  
 
Medium 10 We have extensive experience in scientific dissemination 
and communication. The value of our results to our target 
audiences is potentially revolutionary – lack of interest is 
not to be expected
3.3 Consortium as a whole 
3.3.1 Consortium 
The AIDPATH consortium has bee n assembled to 
meet the specific requirements of the project. These 
objectives need an outstanding team, with a broad 
mix of quite specific skills. In order to deliver a 
project of this broad scope and substantial size, 
leaders from several disciplines nee d to work 
together effectively. The AIDPATH consortium 
consists of fourteen partners from six different 
countries involving research institutes, SME’s and 
CMO’s making it a consortium with broad 
knowledge and expertise perfectly aligned with 
another. With an extensive involvement of SME’s 
(RAL, IRIS, PAN, AGL) the AIDPATH projects 
gives these companies the opportunity for an 
advancement of their products and an engagement 
manifold community. This consortium will built on and encourage further integration and leadership of women 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
and
Data Science
Business Planning and 
Clinical Translation
Hospital and Health 
Care Environment
Advanced 
Therapy 
Manufacturing 
and 
Automation
IRIS SZTAKI
FUJI
AGL
FORTH
IPT
UCL
HCATS
UKW
IZI
PAN
FCRB
ORT
RAL
Figure 12: Consortium Venn diagramm 
AIDPATH     66 
towards achieving equal gender balance . For example, Dr. Katrin Mestermann from UKW and Jelena Ochs 
from IPT will take over leading roles in the project and WPs on a strategic and day-to-day basis.  
Our vision to bring an AI -driven autonomous CAR-T cell production into the hospital environment under 
compliance of all regulations can only be fulfilled by a consortium having a deep knowledge and experience 
in (1) AI and data science, (2) bio processing and automation, (3) hospital and healthcare environment and (4) 
business and clinical translation.  
 
Here we demonstrate how the AIDPATH consortium meets its requirements: 
 
⮊ Leadership in Artificial Intelligence and data science 
With IPT, SZTAKI, IRIS and UCL the AIDPATH cons ortium has an ex cellent group of AI partners, which 
are all experts in their specific fields. The SME IRIS will take advantage of their expertise in the application 
of AI algorithms for digitalized tailored solutions applied to different sectors and will deliver ML algorithms 
for bioreactor process prediction and control, data analysis and the optimization of the AI pipeline.  UCL 
complements this expertise with specific knowledge of the use of AI technology for cell production processes. 
As the leader of the ‘Centre of Exc ellence in Production Informatics and Control’ SZTAKI provides the 
necessary knowledge of the application of AI technologies for manufacturing and resources processes. 
⮊ Leadership in cellular cancer immunotherapy with CAR-T 
With UKW and UCL, AIDPATH brings together the two leading institutions in cellular cancer 
immunotherapy in Europe. UKW has a more than decade -long track record in bringing innovative T -cell 
based cancer immunotherapy into first -in-man clinical trials (e.g. the T -cell engaging bispecific a ntibody 
Blinatumomab was clinically developed from Phase I through Phase under the leadership of UKW PIs: At 
present UKW has the most active translational CAR-T program in Europe (based on 2019 publication impact 
points) and is visible world -wide for its i nnovations in virus -free gene -transfer (Sleeping Beauty, e.g. 
Querques et al. Nature Biotech 2019); target identification and validation (SLAMF7, Gogishvili et al. Blood 
2017; FLT3, Jetani et al. Leukemia 2018; ROR1, Stüber et al. JITC 2020) and CAR-T technologies (Remote 
control, Mestermann et al. Science Translational Medicine 2019). UCL currently has the largest IIT CAR-T 
clinical trial program in Europe with innovative CAR -T products to treat B -cell leukaemia and lymphoma 
(CD19), T-cell lymphoma (TCRbchain) and paediatric neuroblastoma (GD2).   
⮊ Advanced therapy manufacturing and automation 
IPT is the leading organisation in Europe, perhaps worldwide in this field. They have specific hands -on 
experience of building automated stem cell production platforms , via their StemCellFactory, 
JOINTPROMISE and AutoCRAT projects. UCL has a proven and extensive track-record in the manufacture 
and clinical development of ATMPs as evidenced by the fact that over 70% of all clinical trials in the UK 
involving the use of A TMPs takes place at UCL. UCL is considered a world -leader with respect to 
bioprocessing and bio manufacture and leads large UK and EU consortia in these areas. The senior staff of 
IZI and its research and cooperation partners have a high level of expertise in GMP, especially regulatory 
consulting, prepares preclinical and clinical development. Also, IZI has a GMP Process Development Unit 
responsible for transferring manufacturing processes from the lab into a clinical setting. FORTH is the 
leading research institute in Greece and is a leader in metabolomics and also stem cell engineering and bio 
manufacturing holding expertise in both national and EU consortia in the field. The consortium also consists 
of excellent commercial companies in this area (HCATS, FUJI, AGL). This means that they tend to have a 
product or technology already on the market (or close to market); this level of technological maturity is 
important, if integration and automation is to be realistic in the timeframe of the AIDPATH project. 
⮊ Comprehensive knowledge in hospital and health care environment 
For AIDPATH to be successful, it needs to be accepted by the end -site users, i.e. hospitals. In order to 
guarantee compatibility with the hospital’s requirements and for AIDPATH to meet clin ical needs, UKW, 
FCRB and ORT are partners in the project. UKW is internationally recognized as a “Centre of Excellence 
in Stem cell Transplantation and Cell Therapy”, and is therefore a hotspot of clinical translation. UKW has 
both access to patient, patient data and material as well as the knowledge and infrastructure for preclinical 
in vitro and in vivo analyses of the final product.  FCRB is leading different research projects with focus on 
cell immunotherapies and has a large experience in immunotherapy , included clinical trials and research 
projects and thus can provide insights health care and treatment considerations. ORT applies its IT and data 
management solutions already successfully in the hospital context making it to an important partner for the 
implementation of the AIDPATH infrastructure into the hospital. 
AIDPATH     67 
⮊ Business planning and clinical translation 
Avoiding a ‘solution that nobody wants’ is essential. The project must generate outputs that are acceptable 
to healthcare providers and funders, and  that will transition successfully to a clinical environment. While 
cost is a major factor here, issues such as regulatory approval and certification of the technology and of its 
outputs are also critical success factors . PAN has extensive expertise in bus iness modelling and economic 
evaluation of healthcare innovations from early onset until market access in various EU countries/ markets.  
⮊ Regulatory expertise in clinical and cybersecurity issues 
UKW are very expert in ATMP regulation and clinical approval s, in GMP manufacturing, in technology 
certification and in the translation of research into the clinic. UCL have also built up substantial track record 
in the regulatory aspects of advanced therapies in the course of their ongoing research activities.  With RAL 
the consortium has an expert in the field of cybersecurity addressing business privacy and security issues 
through comprehensive risk analysis and cybersecurity by design during the project.  With regard to cyber 
security, IZI can rely on appropriate very high level working in -house IT personnel and on specialized 
Fraunhofer Institutes within the Fraunhofer Society with which numerous joint projects are being worked on. 
⮊  Coordination and Management  
AIDPATH is a complex project, with several quite different disciplines from engineering and science, business 
and regulatory affairs, all playing critical roles. The Project Executive Group (PEG) has all the skills and 
resources needed to combine multiple disciplines and perspectives, to effectively orchestr ate the project and 
to deliver its aims. The PEG members have managed many excellent R&D projects at national and EU levels.  
⮊  Marketing, communications and outreach 
IPT, UKW and UCL all have significant professional communications teams, the resources of which will be at 
the disposal of AIDPATH for outreach and dissemination.  
The table below summarises the skills which the partners bring to the project.  
 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Automation and 
advanced 
production  
Cybersecurity 
Data science and 
management  
Cell production 
technology  
Regulatory issues 
Stakeholder 
engagement 
Communication & 
Dissemination  
Commercialisatio
n  
Management & 
Administration 
IPT           
IZI           
UCL           
FORTH           
SZTAKI           
UKW           
AGL           
FUJI           
HCATS           
FCRB           
IRIS           
RAL           
PAN           
ORT           
Table 1: Skills Matrix - the skills and experience needed to deliver the project is fully available within the consortium 
3.3.2 Industrial / Commercial commitment 
The AIDPATH project is rich in commercial partners and technology companies. All of these companies, from 
SMEs such as AGL and IRIS to large multi -nationals such as HCATS and ORT, ar e excited about the AI -
driven, autonomous CAR-T cell production, the opportunities that it presents, and the value of overcoming 
key challenges to large-scale, lower-cost availability and dissemination. For all of these companies, AIDPATH 
AIDPATH     68 
represents an opp ortunity to enrich their own skillset and product development by collaboration with top 
research teams and with other industrial leaders. Each industrial partner will demonstrate the effectiveness and 
value of its own offering, but also gain access to a market for in-clinic advanced therapy production, which we 
anticipate will appeal to hundreds or thousands of hospitals across Europe and beyond, as well as to CMOs 
and research groups. The following table summarises the industrial partners and the benefit that will accrue to 
them from AIDPATH; these benefits underpin and explain their commitment to the project. 
 
Company Benefit 
AGL Extension of existing Facer bioreactor technology to CAR-Ts. Integration of standalone technology 
into modular platform opens r outes to new markets and the clinic. Access to major technology 
companies for new strategic relationships. 
FUJI New technologies for personalisation and optimisation of FUJI existing xeno-free media products. 
Substantial added value to existing products. Access to new markets (clinical domain)  
HCATS Novel manufacturing platform for improved quality CAR -T product. Opportunity to massively 
increase current production of CAR-T, and access to new clinical markets.  
IRIS Bioreactor process setup, simulation and control (smart sensors) including the use of AI algorithms, 
techniques, and associated data processing and decision support. 
RAL A tailored set of cybersecurity and privacy by design requirements and evaluation criteria tailored 
to the Healthcare Smart Manufacturing industry  
PAN Extension of its Health Technology Assessment services to AI as new technology. 
ORT Supporting clinical and manufacturing data registration system with logged data and intelligent 
data processing tool (LogiqCare/Science). In tegration of data for generic modelling. An MDR -
compliant sustainable platform for clinical-decision support tools. Building a relevance platform to 
engage the user community for future developments. 
 Overall, the benefits to the companies  come in two com ponents: (a) in the immediate term, they get the 
opportunity to combine their own products with those from other leaders in the field, and to enhance their own 
product lines and competitiveness; (b) in the medium term, they are embedded in an excellent clinical platform 
which can made advanced therapies available to many more patients, at much lower cost, in many more 
hospitals and other production environments. 
3.3.3 Other countries and international organisations 
Hitachi Chemical Advanced Therapeutics Solutions  (or “HCATS”, formerly known as PCT) is a global 
contract development manufacturing organization (CDMO) with headquarters in New Jersey, USA, with 
extensive expertise in the area of CAR -T manufacturing. HCATS has been an external cell therapy 
optimization, development and manufacturing partner for more than 21 years. With this background, they have 
been working from the beginning with the first developers of CAR-T technologies and their clients now include 
a number of the key players in the industry. Their T cell-specific experience and expertise includes both cell 
therapy manufacturing, and technical understanding of their customer’s products. With a portfolio of client 
programs that span pre-clinical to commercial, HCATS can provide insights on industrial T cell manufacture 
beyond a single process or product as most other companies in CAR -T manufacture today could. Therefore, 
they provide an invaluable contribution to the AIDPATH project, where they will be able to share insights on 
manufacturing, logistical and cost aspects of CAR-T manufacture, thus complementing the clinical view. As 
a multinational company, they will be able to provide a truly global manufacturing perspective with operations 
also in EU and Japan. HCATS will be contributing on their own c osts, and thus will not be claiming any 
contribution from the European commission. 
Consequently, within this project, there are no countries that are requesting EU funding  and based in a 
country or international organization that is not automatically eligible for funding.
3.4 Resources to be committed 
3.4.1 Table 3.4a: Number of required person months 
# Short 
name WP 1  WP 2  WP 3 WP 4 WP 5 WP 6 WP 7 WP 8 WP 9 WP 10 PM per 
partner 
1a IPT 30 28 3 26 36 36 21 12 12 9 213 
1b IZI       2.7 9   22.6   2.7   37 
AIDPATH     69 
2 UCL 2 3 75 2 23 1 2 1 2 1 112 
3 FORTH 1   73   7         2 83 
4 SZTAKI   19   70   1       2 92 
5 UKW 0 12 12 6 12 6 48 3 6 3 108 
6 AGL 2   25   55   10     4 96 
7 FUJI 1   16             1 18 
8 HCATS                     0 
9 FCRB 1 1 15 1 1   1 1 1 1 23 
10 IRIS 1 20 29     1       3 54 
11 RAL           20 6 18  2 46 
12 PAN 2.25           16   10.5 16 44.75 
13 ORT 2 10   10   51 10   9 10 102 
Total PM 42.25 93 248 117.7 143 116 136.6 35 43.2 54 1028.75 
 
3.4.2 Table 3.4b: Other Direct Costs 
01/ FHG Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  64.040 Travel to consortium meetings (2 per year), additional workshops, 
conferences and fairs 
Equipment  565.000 Licences for ERP program, Automated manufacturing equipment including 
flow cytometer, cell counter, robot, analytic d evices, transportation system, 
bioshaker, nucleofection device, cell separation device, controlled rate 
freezing device, clean room cabinet, cooled storages, PCs, PLC-PC 
Other goods 
and services 
175.000 Consumables and lab material, Frame, PLC terminals, electrical cabinet, 
cladding, sensors, grippers, motors, pumps, pneumatics, axes and 
components for individual automated solutions, Costs for shipping of the 
modules, licences (windows, inventor, plc), open access publications, 
catering, conference and fai r fees, CE certification support, audit, 
dissemination material, costs for travel of the persons on the advisory board, 
rental of AI cluster computing power 
Total 804.040  
  
02/ UCL Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  53.332 Travel and Subsistence costs for 2 investigators and 4 researchers to attend 8 
plenary meetings and 1x national and 1x international conference per year 
over project duration 
Equipment  110.244 Analytical sensors and cell expansion systems 
Other goods 
and services 
125.436 Laboratory consumables (plasticware, reagents, antibodies, media, FBS, 
single-use bioreactors), Cost of core research facilities (ACBE pilot plant, 
Flow Cytometry Core Facility), Audit costs, catering costs) 
Total 289.012  
  
03/ FORTH Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  20.000 Travel costs for PhD student, postdocs and PIs to attend conferences and 
AIDPATH project meetings. Also this covers registration expenses for 
conferences and symposia. 
Equipment  85.000 (i) A liquid handling robotic  device for automating the metabolomics 
protocols and assay preparation, (ii) a mini-bioreactor system 
AIDPATH     70 
Other goods 
and services 
170.000 Laboratory consumables for cell culture, plasticware, culture media , growth 
factors, GC -Mass Spec consumables, bioreac tor spare parts, software 
licenses for modelling , costs for auditing and for open access publications 
and for catering expenses for team members 
Total 275.000  
  
05/ UKW Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  40.000 To consortium meetings, meetings with regulators, patient advocates and 
policy makers. 
Equipment  200.000 Equipment for automated CAR-T manufacturing and AI implementation incl. 
IT hardware. 
Other goods 
and services 
210.000 Consumables and reagents for CAR -T manufacturing runs, func tional 
validation experiments, sudit 
Total 450.000  
  
06/ AGL Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  5.000 Travels for meeting with the partners and for installing the Platform 
Other goods and 
services 
433.000 Gases, Media for cell culturing, Sensors, materials needed for assembling 
the system, Audit, Facer Case Manufacturing, Cartridge Injection 
moulding 
Total 438.000  
  
07/ FUJI Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  8.000 Travel to plenary meetings and technical WP meetings @ UCL and IPT. 
Other goods and 
services 
74.870 Reagents consumables, test kits and ingredients for cell culture media. 
Total 82.870  
  
08/ HCATS Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  -  
Equipment  -  
Other goods and 
services 
-  
Total -  
  
09/ FCRB Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  8.000 1 meeting per year per 2 people 
Equipment  82.000 Electroporator 
Other goods and 
services 
10.000 Reagents, Publications 
Total 100.000  
  
10/ IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
 
Travel  21.000 Considering KO meeting, review meetings, General Assemblies 
Other goods and 
services 
29.000 Licensing of software and cloud computing services, GPU for fast data 
processing, Cost of publications, dissemination costs for conferences and 
events 
Total 50.000