3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ............................................................................................................................... 65 
3.3.1 Consortium ................................................................................................................................................. 65 
3.3.2 Industrial / Commercial commitment.......................................................................................................... 67 
3.3.3 Other countries and international organisations ........................................................................................ 68
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED ........................................................................................................................ 68 
3.4.1 Table 3.4a: Number of required person months ......................................................................................... 68 
3.4.2 Table 3.4b: Other Direct Costs ................................................................................................................... 69 
 
AIDPATH     3 
1 Excellence 
Personalized cell & gene therapies are transformative novel treatments , but at the same time introdu ce 
unprecedented challenges in manufacture and clinical use. The most clinically advanced embodiment of these 
advanced therapies are CAR-T cells. In this cell therapy, immune cells (T lymphocytes) are engineered to 
express a synthetic chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) and are thereby redirected to seek and destroy cancerous 
cells in the patient’s body. CAR-T cell therapy is indeed a transformative new treatment in haematology with 
clinical proof -of-concept in patients with acute leukaemia, lymphoma (lymph nod e cancer) and multiple 
myeloma (bone marrow cancer)2. A conceptual appeal of this treatment is that the patients’ own immune cells 
are redirected – providing a personalized treatment - and that a single infusion of CAR-T cells can be sufficient 
to eliminate the cancerous cells and to establish immunological memory that protects the patient from tumour 
relapse (‘living drug paradigm’). CAR-T cell therapy in acute leukaemia and lymphoma is now an approved 
treatment that is highly demanded by patients and caregivers, and in the focus of attention of bio entrepreneurs, 
policy makers and regulators. Intriguingly, the success of CAR -T cell therapy as a role model for gene -
engineered cellular immunotherapy in haematology and oncology, has spurred the development of  this 
treatment for novel applications in infectious diseases (targeting viral infections and fungal infections), chronic 
and autoimmune diseases.   
The challenge with engineered T -cell therapies is that they require a sophisticated process of manufacturin g 
(i.e. sourcing, gene-engineering and expanding the cell product) and clinically use (i.e. preparing the patient, 
administering the cell product, monitoring the patient). Small alterations in either manufacturing and/or clinical 
use typically trigger a ro und of regulatory re -review and approval because they can change the safety and 
efficacy of the manufactured cells. This poses an enormous challenges for the hospitals that find themselves 
in the epicentre of this CAR-T & cell therapy revolution: with their specialized health care infrastructure and 
highly trained health care providers they are the prime centres of choice for administration of the  novel 
treatments. Accordingly they are suddenly responsible for the complex tasks and logistics while still bei ng 
                                                      
2 Nature. 2017 May 24; 545(7655): 423–431. doi:10.1038/nature22395. 
AIDPATH (Artificial Intelligence-driven, Decentralized Production for Advanced Therapies in the 
Hospital) is a high -energy EU consortium, dedic ated to enable and to augment the next -generation of 
personalized medicine with gene -engineered immune cells at EU hospitals through the use of AI 
technology. The exemplary embodiment of gene -engineered immune cells in AIDPATH will be T cells 
modified to express a synthetic chimeric antigen receptor (CAR -T) that are already a revolutionary novel 
treatment in hematology and oncology, and will also be useful fo r treating infections and autoimmune 
diseases. Conventional CAR-T therapy is complicated by complex logistics and supply from centralized 
manufacturing facilities, and inflexible manufacturing and clinical use schemes that disregard patient and 
cell product characteristics, thereby limiting patient access and therapeutic outcome. 
AIDPATH will apply top-notch AI technology to integrate patient-specific data and biomarkers in CAR-T 
therapy, and apply flexible manufacturing schemes to obtain CAR-T cell products with optimal fitness and 
anti-tumor potency. AI technology will also be applied in pre - and in -process control s to optimize 
scheduling and resource planning to reduce cost and hospital resource utilization and to augment patient 
access. AIDPATH will establish a role model that integrates the hospital environment in a smart manner, 
incorporating also aspects of logistics, capacity planning, data management and cybersecurity  by design. 
The project is designed to enable the smart ‘bedside’ provision of personalized treatments directly at the 
‘point-of-care’, and to accomplish end-to-end automation of hospital -based CAR-T manufacture. A key 
deliverable in AIDPATH will be an integrated software and hardware package that allows rapid 
dissemination of the ‘smart CAR-T manufacturing and clinical use’ concept to hospitals throughout EU 
member states.  
AIDPATH brings together a world -class consortium, consisting of key opinion leaders in science and   
translational medicine, innovative biotech SMEs  and commercial par tners, patient advocates, policy 
makers and regulatory experts. The consortium members are well -positioned to engage into a productive 
dialogue with regulators and patients to ensure acceptance and rapid implementation, adoption by EU 
hospitals and industry. A strategic aim in AIDPATH is to contribute to the sustainability and well-being of 
the EU health care systems, to place the EU at the fore-front (ahead of the US and Asia) of the global CAR-
T movement and to ensure that EU citizens will continue to have access to excellent health care.  
AIDPATH     4 
subject to enormous pressure to operate efficiently and economically. A ‘smart hospital of the future’ offering 
engineered T-cell therapy to their patients has to provide a sophisticated infrastructure, internal operations 
scheme and highly-trained dedicated staff that is proficient both in the manufacture and clinical use of these 
novel treatments . Only this way, clinical sites can  ensure patient safety, positive clinical outcomes, and 
compliance with the socioeconomic demands of EU health care systems.  
A critical and vulnerable component for a ‘smart hospital of the future’ in cellular immunotherapy is the ability 
to carry out the GMP (good manufacturing practice) process. In conventional approaches, manufacturing is 
done manually with the assistance o f some automation platforms. There is also the fact that variability from 
patient to the patient means that the optimal manufacturing procedures can vary from batch to .  Unlike 
centralised manufacturing there is no economy of scale and there are multiple i ndividualised manufacturing 
efforts happening in parallel3. The difficulties in decentralized engineered T-cell manufacturing has led to the 
consideration of ‘off-the-shelf’ allogeneic third party cell products and cell lines that can be administered to 
any patient. However, these allogeneic approaches carry a significant risk of graft versus host disease where 
the foreign immune cells attack non -malignant cells. The patient's immune system may also recognize the 
therapeutic cells as foreign which may lead to product rejection and limited therapeutic efficacy. Product 
rejection in the allogeneic setting may be mitigated by the use immune system suppressing medications – 
which is however undesired as this would compromise the patient’s immunocompetence and increase the rate 
of infections.  
Artificial intelligence (AI), combined with process automation technology, has the potential to increase the 
efficiency and the quality of engineered cell therapy to a point the equals or excels what can be achieved with 
centralized manufacturing. AI approaches also have the potential to substantially increase the personalization 
of therapies through deep learning and the use of digital twinning concepts. This changes the role of hospitals: 
instead of just receiving and admin istrating drugs, they assume an active role in the manufacturing of 
therapeutics. Smart hospitals of the future will evolve into decentralized but interconnected hubs that offer 
development, manufacture and administration of personalized advanced therapies such as CAR-T cells from a 
single source.AIDPATH introduces a trustworthy, AI powered approach that allows automated and intelligent 
production of the therapy in the hospital and bolstering the capacity of centralized manufacturing while 
ensuring manufacture is reproducible, safe and economically viable.  This project paves the way towards a 
future where engineered cell therapies are not limited by the challenges and inefficiencies of a complicated 
manufacturing process. 
Vision for the smart hospital of the future 
It is April 2027 and Stephanie, a young soccer player develops a nose bleed during a match. The ball or any 
other player has not hit her. The coach and her parents rush to her side when they see that it is not letting 
up. Her parents have noticed that she has been more fatigued and complaining of feeling cold all the time. 
Later that night in the Emergency Room, her parents are startled when not just the nurse enters the room. A 
whole group enters, including a kindly doctor. The blood test shows th at their daughter has leukaemia. A 
day later, once their confusion and fear have transformed into a firm resolve to overcome this leukaemia, 
they are back in the hospital clinic. 
Further evaluation shows that the young girl has acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. They listen intently as the 
doctor explains to them what her diagnosis means. The concerned look on the faces of her parents eases a 
bit when they hear that there is an effective therapy consisting Stephanie’s own immune cells (T cells) 
engineered to ex press a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) that recognizes a surface molecule on the 
leukaemia cells and destroys them. A nurse draws more of her blood.  That blood sample is packed in ice 
and taken down the hall to the AIDPATH system. The blood samples are attached to a machine which takes 
them up, and the technician enters in the patient's name which pulls up her medical record which the 
technician checks to make sure that all the relevant data fields are complete. Unbeknown to the patient, a 
complex AI analysis and logistical manufacturing chain is set into operation, just a couple of stories below 
her. The artificial intelligence that examined the patient and cell characteristics suggests a process sequence 
that is tailored precisely to the patients profile to provide the much desired CAR-T cell therapy. At the same 
time, all material and resources needed to produce the CAR -T cell batch is requested from central storage 
and allocated for by an intelligent software program. A trained person equips the machinery, which checks 
that everything is in place and correctly inserted. The process is triggered, T cells are extracted, and the 
                                                      
3 Wang Molecular Therapy — Oncolytics (2016) 3, 16015; doi:10.1038/mto.2016.15 
AIDPATH     5 
process of modifying using a viral -vector free process starts. Then, the CAR -T cells are expanded in a 
bioreactor equipped with sen sors that performs completely autonomously - even samples are taken and 
analysed automatically in a small robotic chamber. The results are fed back into an intelligent system 
control, which makes sure that the cells are manufactured fast and efficiently, and are provided in the highest 
quality. The only thing that the trained personnel has to do is to stand by, supervise the suggestions of the 
AI displayed through the system software and to monitor the process performance online. Finally, the 
modified set of CAR-T cells is produced and then undergoes a set of standard analytical testing which have 
been developed and promoted by the Innovative Medicine Initiative (IMI) projects imSAVAR and 
T2EVOLVE. Fourteen days after the blood was drawn, the automated syste m produces a CAR -T cell 
therapy product that is ready to be infused. The system also notifies the treating haematologist that the young 
girl has an elevated risk for cytokine release syndrome. Here therapy is administered in the ICU with close 
monitoring and appropriate treatment ready in the case she develops CRS. She does not and she has a 
complete response to the therapy. Her response and her data, clinical and manufacturing, are recorded and 
placed in a database.  
The treating haematologist presents Stephanie’s data along with a whole series of other data from this and 
other hospitals as part of the AIDPATH stakeholder community meeting. In addition to results, hospital 
administrators are presenting how the AIDPATH system has been implemented in their ho spital and is 
saving costs. Most exciting are the presentations about new types of therapies and new indications for CAR-
T cell therapy where the attendees brainstorm on how the AIDPATH system needs to be adapted to broaden 
out the success seen in haematology to other areas of medicine.
1.1 Objectives 
The overall AIDPATH objectives are to: 
1. Define and develop an automated robotic, modular manufacturing platform for hospital -based 
production of multiple batches in parallel of engineered T -cell therapies that is (i) adaptable (ii) 
incorporates extensive fully automated at-line analytics and (iii) allows for GMP compliant production 
that is efficient and reliable; 
2. Produce a set of artificial intelligence solutions capable of supporting the manufacturing process, as  
well as the resource and product management using the concept of ‘digital twins’ so that engineered 
cell therapies for cancer treatment are optimized and personalised for patient characteristics increasing 
therefore efficiency of hospital operations and ensuring viability.  
3. Establish a data architecture to support the AI  solutions and a continual learning and optimization  
process of automated engineered cell therapy manufacturing providing an end-to-end capability