3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ....................................................................................................................................................... 68
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED ................................................................................................................................................. 69 
 
1 EXCELLENCE
1.1 Main challenges and motivation 
Solar Heat for Industrial Processes (SHIP)  is becoming increasingly relevant as one of the ways to meet the high 
thermal energy demand required for industry. This involves a double benefit: first ly, by using a ren ewable energy 
source, fossil fuel consumption is reduced and therefore the emission of pollution and greenhouse gases  into the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 2 
atmosphere; secondly, heat for industrial processes becomes a new market niche for solar technology , which can lead 
to a decrease in the cost of solar collectors through economies of scale  in manufacturing and learning-curve advances 
in deployment. 
 
According to a recent study by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) of the U.S1., “the European Union 
(EU) has been a leader in the use, development, deployment, and tracking of SHIP plants in the last decade.” However, 
to date this has largely been limited to heat loads below 150 ºC. The next step in widescale adoption of process solar 
heating across the EU is to develop technologies and methodologies for reliable solar process heating above 150 ºC 
which will enlarge the exploitation possibilities. 
 
There are 111 operating SHIP systems in Europe, according to the SHIP-plant database of IEA Task 49 2, and only 17 
of them works at temperatures above 150 ºC, in only 6 EU countries. Additionally, there are no SHIP plants identified 
in Romania or Greece that are capable of supplying heat at temperatures above 150 º C. (KPI 1: up to 24h thermal 
energy production at 175 ºC (MAND) and 230 ºC (AMTP) . Thus, it is important to point out that the installations in 
this proposal are targeted at these countries to meet the requirement of the call of focussing in those EU countries where 
SHIP systems currently have very limited or no application. The selected industries cover SPIRE and non-SPIRE ones. 
 
It is important to note that not all the collectors are valid for the target temperature of the call: above 150 ºC. According 
to Fig. 1.1, this temperature can be obtained by means of parabolic trough or linear Fresnel collectors3. 
  
Fig. 1.1 Framework for ASTEP: typical industrial sectors for SHIP integration (SPIRE and NON SPIRE)
1.2 How ASTEP addresses the main challenges 
The comparably higher capital expenditure, lack of compact thermal storage and absence of suitable incentives has 
resulted in a considerable gap between the utilization potential and presently installed capacity of Solar Heat Industrial 
Process (SHIP)4 systems. The ASTEP project tackles these barriers by improving the feasibility of the solar thermal 
systems thanks to two features. The proposed system, namely SunDial is based on the Linear Fresnel Reflector (LFR) 
technology, which is considered as the most promising one for reducing the CAPEX. However, the system has a rotary 
structure instead of a linear one. Therefore, the first feature is the  modularity of the Sun Dial, which can make the 
system more easily installed in the industry, as well as contribut ing to the cost reduction. The second feature is the 
possibility of introducing a two-axis tracking system without a large increase in the cost, which allows a performance 
improvement that should lead to higher operating temperatures or to increase the feasibility in regions with high 
latitude, characteristic in most of the E U countries. KPI 2: n ew technological frontier for Romania : 220 ºC at hi gh 
latitude 
 
Thus, SunDial is designed to meet all the characteristics that are required for SHIP collectors5, and which are also 
demanded in the specific challenge of this call: 
 
1 https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy16osti/64709.pdf 
2 http://ship-plants.info/ 
3 MJ Montes et al. SolarPaces 2018 
4 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.04.079 
5 http://task49.iea-shc.org/data/sites/1/publications/Task%2049%20Deliverable%20A1.3_20160504.pdf 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 3 
• Modularity: easy/fast collector installation , repair/replacement and disassembly procedures as well as the 
potential for hydraulic field layouts with low costs for connecting parts and low pressure drop. (KPIs 1,2) 
• Robustness and safety: reliable and safe operation under the conditions of an industrial environment. 
• Operation and maintenance requirements: the operation and maintenance procedures must be accessible to 
end-user technical personnel without special training in solar technologies . (KPI 3: Fixed mirrors limiting 
maintenance and operation requirements in MAND). 
• Integration into existing processes: compatibility with pre-existing (hydraulic) circuits, by the use of common 
and standard components or Heat Transfer Fluids (HTFs). (KPI 4: No changes in industrial processes due to 
the solar thermal contribution). 
 
As it was commented above, the solar concept presented can even provide process heat to industries located at different 
latitudes, which is an additional advantage over conventional LFR systems. For that reason, two End Users located in 
two European countries at different latitudes will be studied: Romania and Greece. ASTEP also seek for minimum 
changes in actual industr ial processes (KPI 4), so a compact (to preserve modularity as much as possible) thermal 
storage system is integrated, based on phase change materials (PCM). 
 
A latent thermal energy storage system will be installed, in order to accommodate the delay between solar energy 
supply and heat demand. Different phase change materials (PCM) will be considered for the temperature levels of the 
End Users requirements. The development of a storage system based on hybrid active-passive heat transfer techniques 
will be developed in the frame of ASTEP project.  This enables its manageability in relatively small sizes, as required 
by industrial sites.  
These systems must be integrated in a global control system, which includes not only the collector and the storage, but 
also heat exchanger and absorption chillers in the case of refrigeration requirements.  
 
Finally, another characteristic of the solar collector that is proposed is that it can be adapted to different industrial 
processes demanding heat at different temperatures. The process temperatures for different industrial sectors can be: 
low (T < 100  ºC), medium (100 ºC < T < 2 50 ºC) or high temperature (250  ºC < T < 400  ºC). The typical industrial 
processes where solar heat is in use are: water heating; drying processes; preheating processes; steam heating process; 
pasteurization and sterilization process; washing processes6 7. 
 
For the temperature required in the call (above 150 ºC), only medium-high temperature processes are valid. In this 
project, two applications have been selected: 
• Pasteurization process in a food industry in Greece (37.93 N) with a temperature demand of 170 ºC. (the provision 
of solar-driven chilling, typically requiring a heat source of at ~140 ºC) will also be included at this site). 
• Preheating process in a fabricated metal industry in Romania (latitude 47.1 N), with a temperature demand above 
220 ºC. 
 
The proposed solar concept will be adapted to the different processes  of the two industries , at different temperatures 
and located at different latitudes. This is one of the main advantages of ASTEP: its versatility to provide heat at very 
different conditions and thermal loads even within the same industry, thanks to reliable solar heat production and a 
suitable management of the energy thanks to the thermal storage system.  
 
In addition, the modularity of the proposed concentrator may lead to a fast application of the concepts to different  
industries and different sizes. Multiple concentrator modules can be installed in parallel with a common storage within 
an integrated ASTEP system. This will aid to the standardization of the system, which will be done during the project 
in order to allow ease of replication. 
 
In Table 1.1, it is summarized the relation of the proposal to the challenges as addressed by the topic LC-SC3-RES-7-
2019 Solar Energy in Industrial Processes, as part of ‘Secure, clean and efficient energy’ work programme. 
 
Table 1.1. Scope and challenges and ASTEP proposals to tackle them 
Scope/challenges ASTEP proposals 
The potential of applying solar 
energy for industrial purposes is 
still largely untapped. 
At present, there are 111 installations in Europe [2] running with solar heat sources than can 
be taken as a base, although only 17 operating at temperatures higher than 150 ºC. The 
consortium created is composed by partners with expertise in installations of solar energy 
for power generation and complemented by others with a large experience in industrial 
 
6 Energy Conversion and Management 195 (2019) 885–908 Global advancement of solar thermal energy technologies for industrial process heat 
and its future prospects: A review 
7 Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 82 (2018) 2270–2286. Solar process heat in industrial systems – A global review Shahjadi Hisan 
Farjanaa, Nazmul Hudaa,⁎, M.A. Parvez Mahmuda, R. Saidurb 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 4 
processes, particularly in heating and cooling operations. ASTEP ai ms to introduce solar 
thermal energy in two industries and countries, one of them at high latitude. (KPI 1,2) 
Using solar energy to provide the 
heat or cooling necessary to 
industrial processes that need high 
reliability and high-quality heat and 
cooling and continuous operation 
requires innovative advances in 
solar energy technology. 
The innovative solar technology concept proposed consisting in the SunDial, despite being 
based on Fresnel technology, substantially improves the current designs what permits the 
obtention of a more reliable and safe operation at lower capital and maintenance costs under 
the conditions of an industrial environment. It can be adapted to the different processes, at 
different temperatures and located at different latitudes. The integration of this design with 
an optimised thermal storage for the specific application will allow an adequate continuity 
of the energy production.  ASTEP will incorporate other solutions such as a centralised 
control and flexible operation of the system; improvements in the prediction of solar energy 
generation; enhancements of the operational tools and practices and technologies supporting 
demand response. (KPI 1,2 3)  
Also, industrial processes might 
need to be adapted to the use of the 
solar resource. Industrial actors 
expect solutions with limited 
installation, maintenance and 
operation requirements and which 
are easy to operate 
In ASTEP there are not changes required for the industrial processes thanks to the reliable 
energy production at the required temperature together with the corresponding energy 
storage system. (KPI 4) 
The proposed system will be compatible with pre -existing (hydraulic) circuits, using 
common and standard components and Heat Transfer Fluids (HTFs). The modularity of the 
design permits an easy and fast installation and repair/replacement of the different parts and 
ease of disassembly. The compactness of the new design permits the installation with 
reduced space requirements. The operation and maintenance procedures will be accessible 
to end-user technical personnel without special training in solar technologies. 
Support will be given to solutions 
that cover by means of solar 
thermal energy the highest possible 
share of the heating and/or cooling 
demand of one or more industrial 
processes. In the case of heating, 
the process temperature shall be 
above 150 °C. 
The developed solar concept is going to be installed at two industrial sites with heat and 
cooling demands. In the case of the cooling demand, absorption chiller technology will be 
used to cover this demand.  
One of the novelties of this projec t is the implementation of a collector design with the 
possibility of incorporating a two-axis system to track the sun. This factor and the use of a 
compact energy storage system will increment the coverage of the demand, and it will 
permit to use of solar energy at temperatures above 150 ºC, at latitudes where current 
designs are not able to supply such heat. KPI 5: Up to 135 kWh of thermal production per 
day in each case study. 25 MWh of yearly thermal production in each case study 
Start at TRL3, achieve TRL4-5  See table 4, for the advancements to get to a TRL5. 
EC contribution of € 3-5M  The total amount is 4.999.360.00 €
1.3 Strategic implementation of Objectives 
Our proposal will answer the call and program objectives using the following specific objectives, linked to their 
respective WPs and performance indicators, later used as milestones (MS). The objectives are the following ones , 
shown in Table 1.2: 
 
The main objective of ASTEP project is to successfully demonstrate the viability of a pplying solar 
thermal energy to partially cover heating and heating and cooling demands on two different relevant 
industrial demo sites located on two different climate regions  (Iasi in Romania an d Corinth in Greece)  
and to further develop the implementation of solar thermal energy in industrial processes up to 400ºC. 
 
Table 1.2: ASTEP’s objectives 
FIRST OBJECTIVE: To establish the requirements for SHIP Applications and developing the 
main technological developments: SunDial Technology and Thermal Energy Storage devices. 
Sub-Objective 1: Requirements for ASTEP & Concept Design (WP2) 
The main objectives of this Work Package are to obtain thermal demand profiles of the SPIRE and other 
industrial sectors and identify the key performance indicators of the System . Then, specifically obtain the 
thermal demand profiles developed for End-users in the project. Finally, to investigate integration strategies 
and design a lab rig capable of meeting the demonstration objectives keeping in mind the economic & 
commercial objectives. 
Performance Indicator: At M9 (MS3) Final Concept Design Report (D2.5) 
Sub-Objective 2: Application of the SunDial Technology to the ASTEP Concept (WP3) 
This objective requires a series of tasks. Initially, the partners will optically design and optimise the SunDial 
Fresnel collectors for each of the two End -user’s applications and latitudes. Then, these receivers will be 
thermally-hydraulically designed and optimised to accomplish the thermal requirements of the industry 
processes. In parallel with the c ollector design, an analysis of the daily and yearly operation of the system s 
will be performed. The initial thermo-mechanical analysis of the receiver and heat exchangers will be linked 
to the thermal stores  (WP4). Besides the collectors, the partners wil l design the control strategies and the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 5 
selection of sensors and actuators for the collectors. Finally, a detailed design of the SunDial Fresnel collectors 
will be developed for both End-Users. 
Performance Indicator: At M21 (MS4) Report including Drawings and Systems mechanical design that 
meet the thermal and mechanical requirements for AMTP and MAND (D3.1, D3.2, D3.3, D3.4, D3.5, D3.6). 
Sub-Objective 3: Application of Thermal Energy Storage to the ASTEP Concept (WP4) 
This objective requires the d esign of a hybrid Thermal Energy Storage (TES) system, considering three 
subsystems:  
a) PCM selected for two end -user’s requirements; b) shell-side inserts; and c) active hydraulic circuit and 
regulation. The s election of an optimal geometry  for the inserts and multi -tube system, by means of 
modelling and simulation of the unsteady heat transfer phenomena during charging and discharging of heat 
energy in the storage system will be critical for the correct design of the system. Additionally, this objective 
will require a selection of metal alloy -based materials for the inserts and assess investment casting and 
assembly procedures. 
Finally, we will perform an overall analysis of the thermal storage systems and their integration with the solar 
collectors. 
Performance Indicator: At M21 (MS5), Report detailing the thermal-hydraulic design and manufacturing 
techniques (metallic inserts for PCM) of the TES (D4.2, D4.3, D4.4, D4.5). 
Sub-Objective 4: Combined ASTEP Specification Design (WP5) 
• This objective aims the design, develop and simulate the integration of the ASTEP system for Level 1 and 
Level 2 user case scenarios, with the aim to design and model the behaviour of the combined thermodynamic 
cycle which will provide inlet and outlet conditions for each selected system component to provide reference 
base model. The process requires a definition and a numerical validation of the individual components of the 
innovative ASTEP system (WP3, 4) and the development of  an integrated model to facilitate the system 
design (WP5). Besides the previous definition and validation, we need to s tudy the critical design pathway 
with respect to the sizing and connectivity of the individual components and evaluate the design space against 
the conceptual demand profiles developed in WP2. We will produce tailored designs for the integration of the 
ASTEP system to satisfy the thermal demands of the End-User Industrial sites highlighted in WP2. Later, we 
will validate and optimise the numerical models under a simulated environment. Finally, we will develop the 
control strategies for management of the integrated ASTEP system in real time. 
Performance Indicator: At M21, (MS6) Detailed design and integration of the innovative ASTEP system  
(D5.2 and D5.3) 
SECOND OBJECTIVE : To d emonstrate ASTEP technology at Lab Scale and at two relevant 
Industrial Sites (Upscaling of the technology to TRL5 and possibly beyond). 
Sub-Objective 5: Construction, Testing and Validation of ASTEP Concept at Lab Scale (WP6) 
This objective will be to build and install the concepts of the three main sub-systems of ASTEP concept: a) 
solar field, b) thermal storage and c) integrated concept system . We will t est the three sub -systems under 
constrains stated by AMTP and MAND for different solar inputs. Finally, we will integrate the sub-systems, 
including data from WP3, WP4, and WP5,  in a global model for revaluation to advance from TRL3 to TRL 
4. 
Performance Indicator: At M30 (MS7) Development, construction and test of the ASTEP concepts and 
their control systems, including demos and report detailing the test results (D6.1.1, D6.1.2, D6.2, D6.3, D6.4, 
D6.5). 
Sub-Objective 6: ASTEP Concept at Industrial Sites (WP7) 
The objective of testing the ASTEP concept at real operational conditions at the End -Users facilities will 
require the installation, commissioning, testing, and monitoring of the LabScale units at the industrial sites (2 
units) in Iasi (Romania) for AMTP and Corinth (Greece) for MAND. F inally, we will validate the data 
obtained in the lab-trials based upon measurements made at the industrial sites. We will disseminate the non-
confidential data from the two Case Studies in a Report. 
Performance Indicator: At M32 (MS8) Report detailing installation and commissioning activities  (D7.2). 
At M44 (MS9) Report describing monitoring and validation between lab-scale data, site data and performance 
predictions, with discussion of discrepancies (D7.3 and D7.4).  
THIRD OBJECTIVE: To assess the sustainability of ASTEP. The benefits of ASTEP technology cover 
environmental, political and economic aspects. The development of more resource efficient and 
environmentally friendly technology improves the quality of life in a sustainable way. The 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 6 
Sustainability Assessment developed will verify the substantially lowering of the environmental, health 
& safety impact. 
Sub-Objective 7: Sustainability Assessment (WP8) 
The objective is to assess the sustainability of the ASTEP at the current proposal and forecast the 
sustainability of the LabScale scale-ups for commercial applications. We will quantify and evaluate the effects 
on the environment caused by the manufacturing and us e of the target heating/cooling modular system in 
industrial processes  ensuring that the environmental performance and related impacts of the various 
components are taken into account throughout the project. Also, we will determine the CAPEX and OPEX at 
the different stages of the project and to guarantee cost -effectiveness and competitiveness of the target 
modular system and forecast these attributes for commercial version of the LabScale, including EoL scenarios 
as part of sustainability assessments . Additionally, we will identify and assess social aspects and overcome 
any possible related issues with the development of the target heating/cooling modular system. Finally, we 
will achieve a wide social acceptance by including all relevant stakeholders on the study and showing the 
advantages of implementing the target heating/cooling modular system in industrial processes. 
Performance Indicators: At M46 (MS10) Sustainability Assessment, evaluation of LCA, Social LCA, LCC, 
and Exergy (D8.1, D8.2, D8.3, D8.4, D8.5) 
FORTH OBJECTIVE : To create  significant visibility of ASTEP results widening the potential of 
applying solar thermal energy in industrial processes at different levels, transferring the technology 
generated through ASTEP project  and contributing to the replication of ASTEP innovation capacities 
into different markets/countries. 
Sub-Objective 8: Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation (WP9) 
Besides the technical aspects of the proposal, an important part of the H2020 program is to communicate, 
disseminate the technical and scientific aspects to all types of stakeholders in society not only professionals 
but also policy makers and regulators. Additionally, we will develop an exploitation plan to obtain a Return 
of Investment (ROI) for both current partners and the European Union (EU)  in term of income, hired 
personnel, etc. For the development of the previous tasks, we will disseminate the outputs of research activities 
from researchers, to industry/SMEs and policy/regulators, and ensure academic, industry and other relevant 
publications and to be present at conferences and other relevant activities as appropriate. For this 
dissemination purpose, we will c reate the Solar Energy Helix (virtual technology cluster/community hosted 
by the Crowdhelix Platform (CHX is a  member of the consortium) to accelerate the dissemination and 
exploitation plans and support in achieving ASTEP’s project and post project impact objectives across Europe 
and Internationally. Finally, we will develop an Exploitation Strategy to ensure the protection of strategically 
important Intellectual Property, and a robust business plan to ensure post project im pact and sustainability 
beyond the lifetime of the project (ROI) for both partners and EU. 
Performance Indicator: At M9 (MS2) the Solar Energy Helix. At M46 (MS1 1) Presentation to Project 
Office and workshop to potential SHIP industries.
1.4 Concept and methodology 
1.4.1 1.4.1 Concept 
ASTEP project includes several innovative technologies that address the scope of the call, namely a low -cost 
concentrator able to achieve temperatures well above 150 ºC and a hybrid storage system specifically designed for the 
requirements of the case studies. These technologies are integrated in the ASTEP system in order to give flexibility to 
the end users in a centrally controlled operation. 
 
SunDial: A new concentrator concept for solar heat for industrial processes.  
Solar concentrators for industrial processes should be simpler than those designed for power generation, as heat transfer 
fluid rates are normally lower, and the maintenance of the concentrator cannot require too much cost. Solar 
concentrators for solar heat for industrial processes generally include non -imaging concentrators (for relatively low 
temperatures), linear Fresnel collectors and parabolic trough. The two latter are able to achieve temperatures well above 
150 ºC, but they are systems adapted from power generation with high maintenance cost. In this project, an innovative 
solar technology concept is proposed: the S unDial. This concept has the main objective of limiting installation, 
maintenance and operation requirements, as demanded in the specific challenge of this call. It is the result of four 
Spanish patents  ES2578804B2, ES1138715U, ES2537607B2 and ES2713799A1, and two international patents 
WO/2016/166388A1 and WO/2016/166390A1, which belong to UPM and UNED. 
 
The SunDial is a Rotary Fresnel Collector (RFC) that consists of a horizontal platform that rotates a round a vertical 
axis, with a linear concentrator installed on the platform. The solar field consists of mirrors of circular cross section 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 7 
parallel to the receiver line which are used as concentrator. As explained later, these mirrors are obtained from fla t 
mirror which are bent on site, simplifying the installation. Two designs of the SunDial device are considered. 
 
In the first one, the working condition for this Fresnel system is that the sun must be in the symmetry plane of the 
concentrator, i.e. the system must rotate in the azimuth angle along the day. In th is design, the mirrors are fixed to the 
structure (KPI 3). This feature, together with the small curvature of the mirrors, allows the installation of flat mirrors 
slightly curved during the mounting process by a simple clamp. The compactness of the system and the fixed mirrors 
will lead to a low-cost solution with a high focussing accuracy. 
 
In the second one, Sundial consists of several rows of rotating mirrors (instead of fixed ones). Mirrors and receiver are 
installed onto the rotating platform that turn around a vertical axis to maintain the sun within the collector transversal 
plane. At the same time, mirrors will rotate around their longitudinal axis in order to reflect onto the receiver as the sun 
altitude varies. Thus, the system follows the Sun using a two -axis tracking system, i.e. the platform rotates with the 
sun’s azimuthal angle and the tilting angle of the mirrors change following the solar altitude. This solutio n shares the 
advantages of the previous one regarding the cost reduction, simplicity and compactness. The additional tracking 
system (tilt of the mirrors) introduces some complexity –and the corresponding cost - but must lead to very high 
performance that allows the use of Fresnel technology at altitudes that conventional technologies cannot operate  (KPI 
2). 
 
The accuracy required for the sun tracking when rotating around the vertical axis is obtained with commercial wheels 
for scaffoldings and other industrial applications. A suitably resistant round track is needed to that end. In order to 
avoid the horizontal displacement of the rotary Fresnel, two alternatives are possible: 
• The use of a central axial bearing, which stands part of the platform weight and avoids its displacement.  
• The use of a set of wheels with vertical axis around the platform, as depicted in Fig. 1.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.2 Conceptual basic design of a small-scale RFC 
 
As it was commented above, t he cost reduction potential of this concept is increased by a new methodology to bend 
mirrors, which has been introduced by Spanish patent ES2596294B2, from U PM and UNED. This methodology for 
the use of thin fla t mirrors, which are very cheap compared to the mirrors used in parabolic trough collectors 
(manufactured with the permanent curvature required for the application). On the contrary, following this methodology 
standard flat mirrors are bent with a special but simple device that can be adjusted to obtain the curved mirrors with a 
circular cross-section and a specific radius of curvature. 
 
A way to apply a bending moment at each beam end is depicted in Fig. 1.3. Two rods at each side, one above and 
another below the glass of the mirror, are rotated until reaching the slope predicted by the former analysis. Both rods 
are pushed by a radial arm turning around a pivot. Once the mirror has got its shape, the pusher is kept fixed. 
  
Fig. 1.3: Cross-section of a bent mirror by torques applied to both lateral sides (left) and upper view of the bent mirror 
(right) 
 
Fig. 1.4 shows a different embodiment for applying the same bending moments. In this case the rotating levers are not 
placed at the tips of a mirror, but on the sides. The rotating pivot is in the rear face of the mirror, and the lever acts on 
the upper rod. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 8 
 
 
Fig. 1.4: Cross-section of a bent mirror by torques applied to both lateral sides with lateral levers (left) and upper view of 
the bent mirror (right) 
 
This new concept for bending mirrors has been proved at laboratory scale. A 3 m long 1 m wide strip has been 
manufactured from 3 mm flat mirrors.  A pair of levers has been installed every 50 cm and the bending moment has 
been adjusted by means of a pair of threaded rods, one of them counter threaded. 
 
A simple test has been carried out at UPM in order to proof t his 
concept. The sun has been concentrated onto a vertical wall at a 
distance of around 8 m, similar to the distance found in a linear 
Fresnel collector. In order to prove that the concept is adequate for 
linear concentrators, the last rotating levers wher e not adjusted. The 
shape of the reflected sunlight can be observed in Fig. 1.5. 
 
One can observe that the first 2 m of mirrors concentrate the sunlight 
onto a narrow line. However, this line is slightly blurred in the 50 cm 
between two consecutive rotating levers. In order to reduce this effect 
a higher number of rotating lever pairs should be used. One can also 
observe that the last meter is not concentrated onto a narrow line. 
This is due to the fact that the last rotating levers had not been 
adjusted. T herefore, it can be concluded that this bending 
methodology is adequate for the SunDial system and, thus, ordinary 
thin flat mirrors can be used.  
 
Fig. 1.5. Sun concentration on a 
vertical wall from bending mirrors, 
proof of concept by UPM 
 
Finally, SunDial concept must include a way to remove heat from  the rotating platform in order to be used by the 
industrial process. This can be done by means of a rotating joint, as described in patent ES 2504916B2, or even by a 
rotating heat exchanger, as described in patent ES2437267A1.  
Overall, it can be said the current TRL level is TRL3: first laboratory tests have been completed, see Fig. 5, although 
measurements for a laboratory prototype scale have not been obtained yet. This project expects to bring the technology 
to a TRL 5, including the construction of a lab prototype and installation and application at the end-user.  
 
Thermal Storage 
A hybrid thermal energy storage system, consisting of the combination of passive and active heat transfer enhancement 
techniques, is to be developed with the aim of accumulating the excess of solar thermal energy during peak production 
hours, and to deliver it through the end user’s demand under controlled power conditions. 
 
The passive design comprises the application of the honeycomb structures which are located in a shell enclosure and 
have the form of multi tubes with integrated elements enhancing the heat transfer. The heat transfer fluid (HTF) flows 
through the inside tubes, and the PCM is stored at the shell side, filling the structure created by the honeycomb. 
 
The innovative active design makes possible the control of the stored thermal energy durin g charging and released 
during discharging. An uneven design of the honeycomb structure allows to establish sectors with different relations 
between heat transfer area and PCM locally stored, namely surface -to-volume ratios. The possibility of the flow 
distribution system to control the mass flow of HTF, by means of a sectorized regulation of the hydraulic resistance, 
allows for adjusting the thermal power of the LTES system during both charging and discharging cycles. 
 
It is planned to design and execute two energy storage units: one will be based on PCM characterized by a lower 
melting point, above 150 °C, and for this unit, as is shown in Table 1.3, rather multi-component mixture of salts is 
preferred as a PCM material. Selection of  molar ratio of mixtures allows to tailor its melting range, which at eutectic 
composition reaches minimal value. The most promising material, with high latent heat, is salt-salt mixture of NaNO3-
LiNO3. The second PCM is foreseen for higher working temperatures above 230 °C and can be based on single or multi 
component PCM. According to the fact that both PCM materials are characterized by a relatively low thermal 
conductivity, the metal inserts from the  Al-Si alloys will be applied, in order to increase the heat transfer. Mutual 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 9 
interaction, usually corrosion or dissolution, between metal and salts must be limited. Preliminary examinations 
confirmed no reaction of NaNO3 and KNO3 with aluminium alloy or steel. 
Table 1.3. Thermophysical properties of inorganic Phase Change Materials [891011] 
Material Melting temp [°C] Latent heat [kJ/kg] Thermal conductivity [W/mK] 
NaNO3 295-315 172-182 0.51 
KNO3 330-333 266 0.42 
NaOH 293-318 159-165 0.66 
LiNO3 253-254 360-363 0.51 
NaNO3-KNO3 218-224 100-106 0.9-1.0 (0.46 eutectic) 
NaNO3-LiNO3 194-199 190-230 (265) 0.84 
NaOH-NaNO3 247 237  
LiOH-NaOH 185-215 290  
 
Another key factor limiting the application of some forms of metallic inserts is the issue of their fatigue failure during 
the cyclic phase transitions of the PCM materials. When the metallic inserts are subjected to both changing stresses 
and elastic stra ins, the metal parts (metallic foams ) deform severely after a high number of loading cycles. This 
drawback will be eliminated by the application of specific design of metal inserts, based on the honeycomb structure, 
ensuring high stiffness, good fatigue resistance and significantly prolonged lifetime. 
 
Integrated ASTEP System Concept 
Solar thermal is fundamental for meeting forthcoming thermal needs while decarbonising the industrial sector. Its 
deployment has experienced a powerful expansion during the past years mainly due to a strong cost reduction and 
supportive policies. Neverthel ess, the intrinsic variability of solar energy raises new challenges for operators and 
regulators of thermal systems and the feasibility of this technology is also strongly influenced on the economics of 
energy/fuels markets. 
One of the decisive aspects fo r an optimal integration of a SHIP system is its flexibility, which enables it to maintain 
continuous service against rapid and large swings in supply or demand. In order to balance the implicit intermittent 
nature of solar energy and guarantee that heat supply remains within process specifications  (temperature, pressure, 
flow rates) a bespoke integration of modular components will be accomplished for each application, allowing for an 
optimized energy delivery to the industrial process. 
The integration requ ires technical solutions 
such as centralised control and flexible 
operation of the system; improvements to solar 
energy generation predictions; enhancement 
of operational tools and practices; and 
development of technologies supporting 
demand response.  (See Fig. 1.6) 
 
Thermal energy storage allows the mitigation 
of the effects of intermittent renewable 
resources on the networks and actual hydraulic 
circuits.  
 
Fig. 1.6: Schematic of the Integrated ASTEP System Concept 
 
ASTEP  will validate the integration of these concepts in two industrial case studies demonstrating the viability of the 
proposed solutions for different industries located at different latitudes, which will enable the use of the developed 
technology in EU countries where concentrating solar systems h ave very limited or no application. Validation will 
be carried out installing a single module of 17 kWth (peak) in each industry, able to produce from 50 kWh per day in 
winter to 135 kWh per day in summer (KPI 5). This performance should lead to a solar contribution of 25 MWh yearly, 
 
8 Takahiro Nomura, Noriyuki Okinaka, Tomohiro Akiyama:Technology of Latent Heat Storage for High Temperature Application: A Review. 
ISIJ International, 2010 50(9):1229-1239 
9 X. Xiao, P. Zhang, M. Li: Thermal characterization of nitrates and nitrates/expanded graphite mixture phase change materials for solar energy 
storage, Energy Conversion and Management, 2013, 73, 86-94 
10 Pingang Zhang, Xin Xiao, Zhiwei Ma: A review of the composite phase change materials: Fabrication, characterization, mathematical modeling 
and application to performance enhancement, Applied Energy, 2016,165,472-510 
11 Belén Muñoz-Sánchez, Iñigo Iparraguirre -Torres: Encapsulated High Temperature PCM as Active Filler Material in a Thermocline -based 
Thermal Storage System, 2015, Energy Procedia 69, 2015, 937–946 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 10 
avoiding 5.7 t of CO2 to the atmosphere (KPI 6), saving 2 t of NG (KPI 7) and 5 kg of NOx (compared to uncontrolled 
burners) (KPI 8), in each industry . The module size (8 m diameter) is  selected to use the most common standard 
components in the solar industry (evacuated and coated tubes) and thin mirrors with a width and length small enough 
to be manufactured in conventional furnaces in glass industry. 
• Case Study 1: MANDREKAS (MAND). 
The company MANDREKAS is a family owned dairy located in Corinth (latitude is 37.93 N), i.e. it is located 
close to the sun Belt, where solar concentrating systems can be installed at a lower price. They produce all types 
of yogurt, yogurt-based dressings (tzatziki sauce) and milk desserts (rice pudding, custard cream and chocolate). 
In their process they need both the generation of steam at 8 bar (175 ºC), to pasteurize milk, and cooling for storing 
their products at temperatures around 5 ºC.  
The concentrato r developed for this case study must be designed so that capital and maint enance costs are 
minimized. In order to do so, a symmetric concentrator is proposed, so that the vertical rotation axis belongs to the 
symmetry plane. The working condition for this Fresnel system is that the sun must be in the symmetry plane of 
the concentrator, i.e. the system must rotate in the azimuth angle along the day. Therefore, the platform must be 
placed over some sets of wheels that are guided in a circular movement. 
Mirrors are fixed in a planar platform that rotates tracking the sun in the azimuth angle. T he tilt of every mirror 
that is defined in the reference position (when the receiver and the Sun define the virtual symmetry plane of the 
system). By minimizing the moving parts, the maintenance and operation is also very simple, achieving a highly 
reliable system. 
This system always leads to a null incident transversal angle which implies absence of shading or blocking losses 
and, more importantly, it implies that mirrors do not require an individual tracking system each. The mirrors are 
continuously in the same relative position from the receiver, placed in the general focal line, which is in the middle 
of the narrow bundle of focal lines of each individual mirror. As a result, the system becomes very stiff and simple. 
In fact, it is always the same system , where the only object changing along the day is the Sun. The focusing 
geometry is therefore invariant, and the system can be featured as a function of the zenithal angle of the Sun 
measured in the alignment plane, i.e. the symmetry plane. 
Although the incident transversal angle is zero, the incidence longitudinal angle becomes very important when the 
sun altitude is low, i.e. during the morning and afternoon. In order to reduce the cosine factor effect, which reduces 
the energy impinging onto the concentrator, tilting the Fresnel field installed on the RFC towards the Sun becomes 
highly advisable. It must be noted, nevertheless, that the platform size does not have strict limitations, but the tilting 
angle: if the platform diameter is too large, the height  in the furthest can make the system too expensive. A trade -
off between radiation capture increase and system complexity must be worked out to define the optimal tilting. 
The incident longitudinal angle affects not only to the cosine factor, but also to end losses. This is why the concept 
includes a set of transversal mirrors, as specified in Spanish patent ES2449167B2. A transversal mirror system can 
be fixed in a position perpendicular to the primary mirrors, reducing end losses. However, in order to avoi d high 
wind loads they can be assembled as vertical strips which rotate around a vertical axis, so that they are left parallel 
to the wind direction when its speed overtakes a given threshold.  
As previously said, this very low -cost concentrator implies and important variation of the cosine factor along the 
day. Therefore, the storage system becomes especially relevant to meet heat demand requirements. On the other 
hand, these requirements are relatively modest because only the cooling demand is 24/7, where as the steam 
generation must be met only during the day. With the industrial process temperature being 175  ºC, most efforts 
will be done to develop the storage system based on salt-salt mixture of NaNO3-LiNO3, which has been identified 
as the most promising mixture in this temperature range.  
In order to meet cooling requirements, a commercial absorption chiller will be used. This system must be able to 
work with a heat supply at the same conditions than the industrial process (175 ºC), so that a completely integrated 
system is developed. KPIs 5 to 8. 
• Case Study 2: ArcelorMittal. (AMTP) 
ArcelorMittal is the world’s leading steel and mining company . In particular, AM Iasi, which belongs to Europe 
Division ArcelorMittal Tubular Products (AMTP), is engaged with the manufacturing of welded steel tub es for 
many diverse applications . This industry is located at Iasi, latitude 47.1 N. O ne of the key finishing for the AM 
Iasi’s products is the so -called colour coating, consisting on a thin layer of (epoxy, water -based, thermoplastic, 
etc.) coloured protective/decorative material covering the whole tube external surface. In order to apply this colour 
coating tubes, they need to be pre-heated to a temperature of 220 ºC.  
When the solar concentrator is to be installed in relatively high latitude locations, as it is the case of this case study, 
a slightly more complex system must be used. In this case, the working condition for this Fresnel system is that the 
sun must be in the transversal plane of the concentrator, i.e. the system must rotate in the azimuth a ngle along the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 11 
day so that the longitudinal component of the im pinging sun radiation is null. Therefore, the platform must be 
placed over some sets of wheels that are guided in a circular movement. 
Due to the fact that the sun altitude varies along the day  and the year, mirrors must be installed on to longitudinal 
rotating axis, so that their transversal tilt is adapted to the sun altitude. This implies a higher cost compared to the 
one-axe tracking system, but it eliminates both cosine and end losses. As a result, the impinging thermal power 
variation will only be due to shading losses, which are less important than cosine and end losses when the sun 
altitude is very low. In addition, it eliminates the need for a platform fixed longitudinal tilt and transversal mirrors, 
which imply a cost reduction. 
Storage system requirements are less demanding with the two-axis concentrator, as the impinging power variation 
is lower thanks to the nearly constant cosine factor. However, industrial process temperatures are hi gher, which 
might lead to a more complex storage system where corrosion or dilution must be regarded. KPIs 5 to 8 
 
Positioning of the project 
The main activities of the ASTEP project will bring the technology from the first laboratory test completed ( TRL 3) 
to a large-scale prototype tested in intended environments (TRL 5). 
The basis of the technology has been developed and tested at laboratory scale separately for some of the  partners and 
considering other applications like power generation or building heating. One of the main challenges of the projects is 
the integration and adaption of these technologies for supplying heating and cooling to the process industry. 
Table 1.4 shows how the technology involved in this project will jump from a TRL3 to a TRL5. 
 
Table 1.4. TRL advancements as result of the ASTEP activities 
ASTEP 
outcome 
TRL 
advancement 
Comment 
SunDial 3→5 SunDial concept was developed by UPM and UNED. First laboratory tests of specific 
parts of the system  have been completed, although measurements for a laboratory 
prototype scale have not been obtained yet. This project expects to bring the 
technology to a TRL 5 b y the construction of two lab prototypes at two different 
industrial sites and demonstrating its validity by data acquisition for one year of 
operation. 
Thermal 
storage 
3→5 Preliminary designs of the high surface -to-volume ratio TES system have already 
been accomplished by PWR. Two Lab -Scale storage systems will be designed and 
build at UPCT and tested under laboratory conditions. Finally, the validation of the 
performance of the TES system integrated in the overall SHIP installation will be 
demonstrated over a one-year testing in two different industrial facilities. 
Integrated 
ASTEP 
System 
Concept 
 
3→5 New modular and flexible integration design of the ASTEP process will be explored 
and developed to suit the end user thermal demand bringing the individual 
technologies together will be built and tested as lab prototypes and validating the 
functionality at two different industrial sites via data acquisition under one year of 
operation. 
 
National and international research and innovation activities linked to ASTEP 
The ASTEP partners are or have been involved in some other national and international projects, whose knowledge 
can contribute to tackle some of the ambitious challenges planned for this project. 
A selection of these projects can be seen in Table 1.5. 
 
Table 1.5. National and international research and innovation activities linked to ASTEP 
Project (Funding program, 
reference), description 
Involved 
partners  
Input opportunity for ASTEP 
Concentrated Solar Power for 
Electricity Generation.  Futuro Solar 
(ES02-0095). 
UPM and 
UNED 
Optical and thermal characterization of Fresnel Collectors using 
adapted tools. 
Solar concentrating thermal power in 
the transport sector and the int 
heat/electricity production 
(ACES2030). P2018/EMT-4319. 
UPM and 
UNED 
Development of Fresnel technology applied to process heat. 
ACCUSOL ELAC2015/T06-0523 UPCT and 
PWR 
Metallurgical manufacturing, building and testing of innovative solar-
driven TES designs. 
TRIGEN (Innovate UK 132401) EXE Modular system design production of heating, cooling and electricity 
using ejector -boosted absorption heat pump confirm the technical 
feasibility of a tri-generation system, based on an integrated 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 12 
system of solar linear collector and a hybrid absorption heat pump, in 
the range of 50-100 kW for decentralized 
applications of energy production. 
ALTES (Active Latent Thermal 
Energy Storage) (PGC2018-100864-B-
C21) 
UPCT ALTES implies the use of active techniques as a feasible solution to 
multiply the energy transfer rate in storage devices using PCM 
materials. 
 
1.4.2 1.3.2 Methodology 
The methodology involves cooperation and fluent communication among the different partners working in their 
specialisation field. It goes from industrial partners needs to technological developers and comes back to the industrial 
partners with the integrated system developed for the involved end users. 
 
The methodology starts from the collected innovation potentials and the initial research of the different partners to 
develop a new concept to cover the heating and/or cooling demand of the end -users, which will be disseminated, 
exploited and communicated (Fig. 7). 
 
Fig. 7: ASTEP methodology 
 
The development of the ASTEP integrated concept will follow the next steps: 
1. Development of thermal demand profiles for the two end-users. 
2. Dimensioning of the SunDial for both processes, involving the following tasks: 
o Optical characterisation: Montecarlo Raytracing method. 
o Thermal characterisation: Aided by In-house codes and CFD tools. 
o Mechanical and structural assessment, using analytical and Finite Element Method (FEM) approaches. 
3. Dimensioning of the TES for both processes, defining the optimal honeycomb arrangement, aided by CFD tools. 
4. A dynamic model of the ASTEP system will be developed in the project by integrating the different component 
sub-models under a simulation environment. Furthermore, optimization algorithms and Thermal Demand Side 
Response (TDSR) principles will be established to achieve the most optimal configuration of energy generation 
and storage based on user case profiles. Also, a statistical assessment will be used to design the integrated system 
with targets for either Thermal Loss of Load Probability (TLOLP, %), or Solar Thermal Penetration (STP, %) in 
the case of a system with auxiliary heat. 
5. Construction and test of the solar collectors and TES in order to analyse these systems at a Lab Scale (WP6). 
6. Models revision from the test data and detailed design of the final systems to be installed at industrial sites.  
7. Transport and local construction of the auxiliary system and elements dedicated to integrating the system into the 
process. This process will be supervised by technological partners, as the quality control an accuracy for this step 
is critical for the success of the project. 
8. The whole process will be repeated over (at least) 2 iterative sequential testing cycles  to ensure that potential 
improvements will be taken into consideration in the re-design of the system after the first testing cycle. 
 
Gender analysis 
Nowadays, there still is an important gender gap in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM), which 
is a social global problem. Gender equality is a value to warrant democracy, quality and development.  In the case of 
ASTEP project, all the partners are committed to promote gender balance at a ll levels, and to follow the H2020 
recommendations for gender equality.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 13 
Particularly important, it is the unbalanced representation of women in all the decision-making bodies, which is typical 
for SET (Science, Engineering, Technology) fields all around the world.  
 
ASTEP project is aligned with this idea and has included three women within its Executive Board, with important 
roles: Monica Osorio (EXE) as Exploitation Manager, Ruth Herrero-Martín (UPCT) as IPR and Dissemination 
Manager, and Kimberly Cornfield (CHX) as Communication Manager . This is a sign of the commitment of the 
project with these ideas. 
 
Another weakness of the gender equality is the cultural climate and stereotypes tending to underrate the importance of 
gender issues. 
 
ASTEP project partners will actively promote equal opportunities between men and women and, as far as possible , 
gender balance will be sought at all levels of personnel assignment. Also, ASTEP activities will be guided by the 
conclusions and recommendations of some EU CORDIS projects launched with the objective of analysing this gender 
gap, such as the project Gender Equality in Engineering through Communication and Commitment (GEECCO). During 
ASTEP execution, we will follow the Directive 2002/73/EC on the imp lementation of equal treatment for men and 
women as guideline, e.g. for access to employment, vocational training and promotion and working conditions.
1.5 Ambition 
ASTEP has several innovative components which will contribute to the progress of the current state of the art and turn 
the Europe into a leading player in the renewable energy market, in line with the objectives of the EC Communication 
"Renewable Energy: a major player in the European energy market", the SET-Plan and the expected objectives of the 
announced Commission's 2013 Communication on energy technology policy. 
 
1.5.1 Carrying the technology beyond the state-of-art 
ASTEP introduces four innovation lines. They are presented below starting by the description of the current state -of-
the-art and then introducing the contributions introduced by ASTEP. Namely they are: (1) SunDial; (2) Thermal 
Storage System; (3) Integrated ASTEP concept; and (4) Case Studies. 
• INNOVATION LINE 1: SunDial 
The use of solar thermal energy in industry and tertiary sector is currently insignificant, even though this application 
has a huge technical and commercial potential, about 30% of the overall energy demand in the partner countr ies 
originates in the industrial sector, mainly as heat at temperature levels below  250 °C. In several specific industry 
sectors, such as food and beverages, transport equipment, machinery, textiles, the share of heat demand at low and 
medium temperatures (below 250 °C) is around 60%. Tapping into this potential would provide a significant solar 
contribution to industrial energy requirements. 
The main focus in this project will be on activities which support the decrease of cost, increases the modularity of 
systems and which supports the increase of the thermal sup ply. Also, the improvement of electronic controllers 
will be a focal point. 
A key guideline towards commercial competitiveness of SHIP is to reduce the mechanical and thermal complexity 
of the solar field configuration and to reduce the specific or unitary costs of the elements required for absorb ing 
the concentrated solar flux as thermal energy of a working fluid in the receiver. An imp ortant hint in this quest is 
not to oversize the system. This is particularly applicable to the concentration factor achieved in the receiver, which 
must not exceed too much the threshold value for getting a given final temperature in the thermal fluid.  
The Rotary Fresnel Collector meets the above requirements. This new configuration is based on circular-cylindrical 
mirrors, which can easily be made from planar ordinary mirror by applying a bending technique that is also very 
simple and very cheap. The ful l system is fixed on a planar platform that rotates around a vertical axis as the sun 
moves, in such a way that the receiver line, which is in the vertical plane of symmetry of the mirror field, keeps 
always a perfect alignment with the sun. 
Fresnel collectors had a late development compared to the other technologies: even though a few papers and patents 
on Fresnel lens, enhanced flat collectors and compound systems were published in the mid-1970s, there is no well-
known published work until the second half  of the 1980s, when oil prices reached minimum values. After energy 
crises, interest in CSP technologies was diluted, and therefore, neither Fresnel prototypes nor commercial plants 
were built during this period, researchers being less active in this domain. 
Nowadays, Fresnel technology seems to have a great potential to reduce the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE) in 
CSP. This is due to the fact that lineal Fresnel collectors have obvious economic advantages when compared to 
other technologies: (1) Only one receiver is used for the whole array of mirrors, and it is fixed. As a result, no 
rotating joints or flexible hoses are required, and therefore no environment or health issues due to hot oil leakages 
must be prevented. In addition, thanks to this configura tion the tracked structure is lighter and thus the rotating 
mechanism is simpler. (2) There is no need for glass -metal welds, which often cause receiver ruptures due to 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 14 
dilatation coefficient differences. Therefore, the receiver is more robust. (3) Mirrors  are less expensive and easier 
to clean thanks to their low curvature.  Although most of the comparative studies between Parabolic Troughs and 
Fresnel are focused in electricity production (not relevant in ASTEP), there is another application for which Fresnel 
collectors are particularly attractive, which is to generate thermal energy for industrial processes, in the temperature 
range 150 ºC-400 ºC. 
For industrial applications, the Rotary Fresnel Collector is even more attractive, as the investment cost is r educed 
regards to a conventional Fresnel, and the operation and maintenance is simple and reliable. 
• INNOVATION LINE 2: Thermal storage 
On the other hand, most current scientific and technological reports describing future scenarios of the European 
energy landscape agree that energy storage will be the one of the main tools to support the energy transition. The 
application of phase change materials (PCM) for solar thermal energy storage is a promising technology for solving 
the time delay between thermal energy production and consumption. Importantly, latent PCM has multiple times 
storage capacity compared to sensible heat materials, rangin g from 50 to 150 kWh/t with efficiency between 75 
and 90%.  
Despite these advantages, the integration of latent thermal energy storage (LTES) systems in solar thermal facilities 
still lacks some technological features that prevent their technical and econo mic feasibility: typical heat transfer 
configurations for high temperature latent thermal energy storage comprise the use of shell and tube arrangements, 
owing to its robust construction geometry. Conversely, the limited surface-to-volume ratio yields very low charging 
and discharging velocities, which results in low heat transfer effectiveness of this type of LTES design. 
Additionally, this configuration does not allow the separation of capacity and power. 
As pointed out by EASE EERA, the development of active heat exchange systems with a controllable heat transfer 
power is of paramount importance for the broad implementation in the market of the LTES technology. 
The use of honeycomb inserts, as energy storage concept for this proposal, is intended for incr easing the surface-
to-volume ratio in the storage system. At the same time, the mechanical integrity of the honeycomb, compared to 
other inserts like metallic foams, will ensure the null impact of the thermal cycling on the long -term effectiveness 
of the system. 
The hybrid nature of the thermal storage system to be implemented accounts for an active control of the power 
release, based on the regulation of the mass flow distribution across the multi-tube arrangement. This is of special 
interest for designing a LTES system with separated thermal capacity and power. 
Application of metallic 3D Al -Si based structures is one of the most promising solutions for the enhancement of 
the heat transfer from the solar cells into the PCM materials in the proposed heat acc umulators. It is important to 
emphasize that sophisticated solutions or new materials for improving the heat transfer are limited in their industrial 
application due to economic issues. Therefore, any optimization procedure that could lead to desirable res ults in 
terms of the multidirectional heat transfer would be highly appreciated for their reliable performance. Manufactured 
structures immersed in a working PCM medium are suitable to improve the heat transfer, efficiency and the overall 
performance of the heat accumulators. They can be applied in a form of compact units conducting the heat energy 
due to their high heat transfer surface area per unit volume and the relatively large value of heat conduction. 
Modeled geometry and dimensions of metal inserts in terms of thermal performance will be produced and 
experimentally validated. 
• INNOVATION LINE 3: Integrated ASTEP System Concept 
The proposal adopts an integrated approach  that involves modular and flexible design integration process 
involving Sundial, thermal storage, heat pump and overall control strategy for a final ASTEP model. Conventional 
technologies currently used in Industries for the Thermal demand use fossil fuel as the primary source of energy, 
despite their high energy conversion factors they emit significant amount of CO2 and pollutants to the environment. 
The major advantage of ASTEP system is its primary source of energy is solar power, which is sustainable and 
renewable. Existing solar energy-based technologies used in industries for thermal demand (heating and or cooling) 
perform in a varying proportion depending on the daytime and season, thus impose high requirements of  solar 
energy as a main source. 
On the other hand, solar thermal technologies are oriented towards the production of heat and or cold at small and 
intermediate scales and are usually complemented by using a backup boiler, which makes the system more costly, 
complex and difficult to maintain. 
The new ASTEP integration process address the foreseen problem and progress beyond state-of-the-art Innovation 
potential.  
Specific tailored designs and control strategies addressing to individual user demand profiles, location data, max 
and min thermal demand, operational times. 
Modular and flexible integration model fo r different user case scenarios (Level 1 & 2) covering various industry 
applications – ease of upscaling to higher capacity. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 15 
Compactness in design, all the equipment’s can be located outdoors, on the building roof or on a free lot, thus 
sparring valuable plant or industry floor. 
The flexibility and integration level of the technology allows its amortization in lower periods than conventional 
solar heating/cooling technologies. 
• INNOVATION LINE 4: Case Studies 
All the previous Innovation streams are applied to the fourth Line, the Case Studies: 
The main and direct innovation in the Case Studies, i.e., the two selected industries, relies on the integration of 
solar energy into the industrial process. In both cases, Greek dairy industry (MAND) and Romanian steel industry 
(AMTP), the current energy demand is covered with non -renewable energy sources. ASTEP will introduce into 
them reliable solar heat. 
In the case of MAND, the conventional solar system to be integrated would be a parabolic trough collectors’ solar 
field or a conventional LFR systems. 
Compared to them, ASTEM is low demanding in terms of space requirements (no necessarily linear) and a more 
robust system with fixed mirrors avoiding lots of moving parts. Thus, as an additional innovation,  the expected 
advance is a more reliable operation and reduction of cost. 
In the case of AMTP, placed at high latitude, currently there are not systems able to supply reliable solar thermal 
power at temperatures around 230 ºC at a reasonable cost. 
Thanks to its compact rotary platform, ASTEP allows the introduction of a second tracking system, changing the 
tilt of the mirrors, to improve the performance of the system. The expected advance is to achieve temperatures that 
other systems cannot reach at the specific latitude and reasonable cost. 
Furthermore, thanks to the thermal storage system and a suitable energy management, ASTEP avoids any 
adaptation of the actual industrial processes. 
 
1.5.2 Innovation potential 
The comparably higher capital expenditure, lack of  compact thermal storage and absence of suitable incentives has 
resulted in a considerable breach between the utilization potential and presently installed capacity of  SHIP systems. 
Only 17 SHIP plants are installed in Europe working above 150 ºC (see Table 1.6). 
 
Table 1.6. Installed SHIP plants in European countries 
Name Country 
Inst. 
thermal 
power 
(kWth)  
Collector 
technology 
Thermal 
storage Application 
T. solar 
loop 
(max), ºC 
Solar Process Heat for 
Car Paintshop Germany 66 
LFR (LF-
11)   -  drying of paint coat in automobile industry 180 
Solar cooling for 
stainless steel pipe 
industry Germany 272 
LFR (LF-
11) 
short-term 
water 
storage 
Solar cooling for stainless steel pipe 
industry 200 
Solar refrigeration in the 
food industry Germany 49 
LFR (LF-
11) other Refrigeration of cold storage room 200 
Bergamo Italy 74 
LFR (LF-
11)   -  Refrigeration  195 
Laundry Sardinia Italy 1300 LFR  
no solar 
energy 
storage laundry 
steam@12 
bar 
(180°C) 
Nuova Sarda Industria 
Casearia Italy 470 LFR 
no solar 
energy 
storage 
Steam at 200 °C and 12 bar, directly fed 
into steam system of cheese production 
without storage (Manufacture of dairy 
products) 200 
SILAMPOS, S.A. Portugal 67 PTC 
no solar 
energy 
storage Process Wash and Drying finished product  180 
KEMET Electronics 
Portugal, S.A. Portugal 104 
other or 
various  other Electrolyte preparation 180 
Papes Safor S.L. Spain 134 PTC 
no solar 
energy 
storage 
Preheating, boiler(Processing and 
preserving of fruit and vegetables) 250 
Pincasa Spain 26 
other or 
various    -  
Heat oven (Manufacture of fabricated metal 
products, except machinery and equipment) 190 
University of Sevilla Spain 198 
LFR (LF-
11)  -  Refrigeration 165 
Colas Geneva Switzerland 49.9 
other or 
various   - heat asphaltic bitumen storages 215 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 16 
Colas Yverdon-les-Bains Switzerland 96 
other other Maintainging bitument into 
temperature>160°C and for building needs 
(Space heat + DHW) 300 
Lesa Dairy Switzerland 67 PTC 
no solar 
energy 
storage milk processing  - 
Cremo, S.A. Switzerland 330 PTC 
no solar 
energy 
storage Milk processing, coffee cream production 170 
Emmi Dairy 
Saignelégier Switzerland 360 PTC 
short-term 
water 
storage Steam for different dairy processes 180 
In blue they are highlighted steel dedicated-industries/In pink they are highlighted dairy dedicated-industries. 
 
As can be seen in the table above: 
• The number of installations is very low, only a  
• few of the them have storage systems and. 
• the used collector is conventional.  
 
The ASTEP project will tackle the barriers by improving the feasibility of the solar thermal systems thanks to an 
improved collector design, the implementation of a thermal storage system and the adapted integration of all the 
systems. 
 
Solar collector innovation . As commented before, the SunDial is a novel concept that introduces important 
innovations over the current state -of-the-art of Linear Fresnel Reflector technology  (KPIs 2 -4). As it has a rotary 
structure, its design is modular, feature that provide flexibility and easy adaptation to the land or the space available in 
the specific industry. The use of flat mirrors curved during the mounting process contributes to the cost reduction. 
Finally, the possibility of incorporat ing a second axis tracking system without a large increase of the cost allows a 
performance improvement that should lead to either higher operating temperatures or larger operation or, most 
important, to increase the feasibility in regions with high latitude, characteristic in most of the EU countries (KPI 2). 
All the commented features are protected and published in the patents ES2578804B2, ES1138715U (WO2016166390), 
ES2537607B2 (WO2016166388) and ES2713799A1. In these documents, the corresponding patent search was done 
to demonstrate the novelty of the proposed systems. For example, WO2005124245, WO2002097341, WO2007109901 
and WO2009121174 present rotary systems to concentrate solar energy, although they are different from the Sundial. 
Besides, the patents  ES2370567, ES2232232A1, ES2299109T3 and ES2419529 present conventional procedures to 
curve mirrors by means of fixing the glass to a structure, but the solution used in SunDial is different. 
 
Thermal Storage innovation. The hybrid thermal storage systems implemented will highly contribute to the target of 
maximizing the share of covering the maximum heating and or cooling demand  (KPI 1). Regarding the energy storage 
market, it will see rapid expansion in the next years and decades: the global market is forecast to grow to at least $250 
billion by 2040. With this massive growth comes a unique opportunity for the European energy storage industry to 
ramp up the production of technologies and provision of associated services in Europe and abroad. In do ing so, the 
energy storage industry could contribute to re -industrialising Europe, contributing to long -term growth for European 
citizens while supporting the EU’s ambition to make Europe the world number one in renewables. 
 
Integration innovation. ASTEP project will implement specific tailored designs and control strategies addressing to 
individual user demand profiles, location data, max and min thermal demand, operational times.  The introduction of 
thermal storage for SHIP plants and its operation at hig h latitudes with a thermal demand at temperatures above 150 
ºC is a target for the introduction of innovative solutions in integration.  
 
Simulation innovation. In addition, ASTEP will use Finite Element Analysis (FEA) and Computational Fluid Dynamics 
(CFD) to provide structural, thermal and fluid analysis to optimise the solar collector and the STE system which is also 
an innovation into SHIP systems. 
 
2 IMPACT 
The proposal itself and the innovative characteristics of the ASTEP solution will have some impacts, not only to the 
expected points planned on LC-SC3-RES-7 but also for the competitiveness and for the society.
2.1 Expected impacts  
ASTEP will contribute to the expected impact of LC-SC3-RES-7-2019 as detailed in this subsection. 
 
2.1.1 Expected impact as exposed for LC-SC3-RES-7-2019 
ASTEP will contribute to the expected impact of LC-SC3-RES-7-2019 as detailed in this subsection. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 17 
An increased decarbonisation of the industrial sector. Due to the long investment cycles in industry, the next phase 
of decarbonisation will  include  thinking  about  how  industry  can  further  contribute  to  reducing  CO 2 emissions. 
According to the IEA, direct industrial CO2 emissions rose 0.3% to reach 8.5 GtCO2 in 2017 (24% of global emissions). 
ASTEP is aligned with the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS), contributing to achieve the emission 
decline to 8.3 GtCO2 by 2030 – despite expected industrial production growth. 
  
Environmental benefits stem from the capacity to reduce harmful emissions. Depending on the location, according to 
the IEA-SHC a 1.4 MWth (2000 m²) system could generate the equivalent of 1.1 MWhth /year, a saving of around 175 
Mt of CO2.  The substitution of the fossil fuel used as heat sources by the ASTEP system will contribute, in the 
future, to the reduction of the CO2 emissions. 
KPI: 6: Avoiding 5.7 t of CO2 yearly in each case study. 
 
A reduced dependency on fossil fuels and a reduction of emission of air pollutants are expected. The heat demand 
plays a major role for the industrial energy demand as it accounts for 75 % of its useful energy consumption. This heat 
is needed in several industry sectors at low and medium temperatures, which is the major requirement for the utilization 
of solar thermal energy. 
 
In European countries 75 TWh per year represents the potential of solar heat for industrial processes.  This 
would represent approximately a 4% of the industrial heat demand. On a global scale the potential of solar thermal 
heat for industrial processes can be estimated on 1,556 TWh of process heat for industry in 2050. 
 
A large share of the heat demand belo w 100°C can be met with Solar Heat for Industrial Processes ( SHIP) systems 
using improved and adopted current technologies, if suitable integration of the solar heating system can be identified. 
With ASTEP´s R&I and technological development, more and more  medium temperature applications, up to 
400°C, will also become feasible. According to a study (Ecoheatcool 2006), around 57% of the total industrial heat 
demand is required at temperatures below 400°C and 30% at temperatures below 100°C. ASTEP carries the  
technology beyond the state-of-art by integrating SunDial and latent thermal energy storage.  
KPI 7: saving 2 t of natural gas, yearly, in each case study. 
KPI 8; avoiding 5 kg of NOx (compared to uncontrolled burners), yearly, in each case study 
 
Create significant visibility to the potential of applying solar thermal energy in industrial processes . 
ASTEP aims to contribute to extend the use of thermal solar energy to industrial processes implementing 
innovative, reliable and advanced technologies to assu re a reliable solution needed for continuous operating 
process. ASTEP also aims to support additional projects beyond the demonstrators providing insights for the project’s 
development and to further create opportunities for the replication of the demonstrators. 
 
ASTEP aims at successfully demonstrate the employ of solar energy for industrial purposes resulting in improved 
solutions compared to the currently available.  This is system will be implanted in two different climate regions : 
Corinth in Greece, which is located at a latitude where the use of solar energy is more widespread, and also it 
is planned to be installed at Iasi in Romania, located at latitudes where its use is less common. This aspect will 
also contribute to increment the visibility in EU countries where such systems currently have very limited or 
no application. 
 
The successful completion of ASTEP will allow providing guidelines for planning, installation and operation of 
thermal solar systems in industrial companies, quantifying the performance of the innovative technology 
implemented considering several technical and economic parameters. This multi-criteria evaluation enables an 
overall view on the innovative technology proposed regarding different sustainability criteria.  
KPI 9: dissemination deliverables of project results targeted to different stakeholders and countries.  
 
Contribute to the development of relevant Best Available Techniques Reference Document (BREF) under the 
Industrial Emissions Directive.  A life cycle assessment (LCA) will be performed in line with the rules of the 
International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) and in line with international standards. These multi -criteria 
assessments on several sustainability criteria allow to judge over alternative solutions developed in the framework of 
this project and provide support to identify the  best solution for further technical development towards demonstration 
in follow -up projects within industry. The development of more resource efficient and environmentally friendly 
technology improves the quality of life in a sustainable way. The LCA will  verify the substantially lowering of the 
environmental, health & safety impact. 
 
KPI 10: WP8 incorporates five (5) relevant deliverables (D8.1-8.5) regarding sustainable assessment.  
In this sense, the results of these analysis will contribute to the development of BREF guides to exchange information 
among the industrial sectors and  the European Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Bureau (IPCC/EIPPCB). 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 18 
 
2.1.2 Empowering the European solar thermal related and energy storage industry (including SMEs) 
Although Europe is making good progress towards its 2020 targets for solar electricity, the heating and cooling sector 
risks missing the indicative target for 2020 by 19.5%. If this trend is to be reversed, t hen several challenges will have 
to be overcome, including extending the market into new segments, such as industrial. Solar Heat for Industrial 
Processes (SHIP) is a promising market for solar thermal applications. According to the European Solar Thermal 
Industrial Federation, currently over 190 operating solar thermal systems for process heat are reported worldwide, with 
a total capacity of over 111 MWth (159 000 m²). In the Solar Heating and Cooling Technology Roadmap is mentioned 
that most of these syst ems are pilot plants with a relatively small size. However, there is great potential for market 
developments based on innovations, as 28% of the overall energy demand in the EU28 countries originates in the 
industrial sector and most of this heat demand is  in the temperature range below 250°C. The estimated thermal solar 
sector turnover in Europe is 1.9€ billion and the number of jobs of the sector is around 23700. 
 
Regarding energy costs, and potential savings, there are three main aspects to consider that  have a bigger impact on 
the comparable costs of the energy produced by a solar thermal system. These are the initial cost of the system, the 
lifetime of the system and the system performance. These factors depend on the location (affecting climate, insulation, 
taxes, cost of living, etc.) and quality of the system (affecting performance, lifetime and cost). This can vary 
significantly from country to country. Therefore, average investment costs for solar thermal systems can vary greatly 
from country to country and between different systems. According to the IEA ( Fig. 2.1), for large systems in Europe, 
the investment costs can go from 350 to 1040 USD/kWth (315 to 936 EUR/kWth). In terms of energy costs, it can 
range from 20 to 70 USD/ MWhth (18 to 63 EUR/MWh th) in Southern United States and between 40 and 150 
USD/MWhth  (36 and 135 EUR/MWhth) in Europe. 
 
 
Figure 2.1: Costs of solar heating and cooling 
 
ASTEP system will have an important impact in cost reduction allowing its worldwide applicability and making 
it feasible for different climatic conditions and for a wide range of process temperatures up to 400 °C. 
 
A specific task will be to identify the main priorities for future research, as well as a series of applications (pilot and 
demonstration projects) that can build upon ASTEP results. This will lead to a sustainable, long-term framework, thus 
enabling a more competitive market for solar energy technologies. In line with the objectives of the work programme 
ASTEP will contribute t o meeting the overarching objective of the EU research policy to develop an open and 
competitive European Research Area (ERA), which is a core element in the research and innovation agenda of the 
Commission, as defined in the Innovation Union flagship. 
The European science community and economy will benefit greatly from ASTEP results. The outcome will help 
address the needs of EU science policy in solar energy use and meet the key challenge faced by concentrated solar 
power. The impact of the project activity will be immediate in both academia and industry by providing the best solution 
for the use of concentrated solar energy. This should help scientists and engineers in designing concentrated solar 
power plants in a way to reduce their cost and improve performance. European consumers will also benefit from clean 
energy and environment. 
 
ASTEP project through the integration of innovative technology developments represents a competitive 
advantage for empowering the European solar thermal related industry (including SMEs) with respect to Asian 
competitors.  
KPI 1,2: two representative industrial demo-site from different climate conditions and different industrial sectors will 
be operating throughout the project, providing the most valuable know-how on market extension to industrial sector. 
 
2.1.3 Environmental, social and other impacts 
EU Policies. In October 2014, EU Member States agreed on ambitious EU -wide climate and energy targets for 2030: 
a 40% cut in greenhouse gas emissions compared to 1990 levels; at least a 27% share of renewable energy consumption; 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 19 
and at least 27% energy savings compared with the business -as-usual scenario. The Paris Agreement, which was 
approved at the Conferences of the Parties (COP21) in December 2015 and became legally binding in November 2016 
following its ratification, requires the EU to further strengthen its 2030 energy and climate framework through 
legislative action. It also steers the entire global community on a path to decarbonisation, which will increase the global 
need for low-carbon energy generation and therefore also for low-carbon balancing and flexibility means.   
To implement the goals of the Energy Union and to advance the energy transition, the EU issued the “Clean Energy 
for all Europeans” package in November  2016. This includes several key pieces of legislation: the important 
amendments to the Third Energy Package known as Energy Market Design; the Accelerating Clean Energy Innovation 
communication; the new Renewable Energy Directive; the Directive on the EU Emissions Trading System; and the 
Directive on Energy Efficiency. ASTEP will contribute to lower environmental impact, contributing to facing 
energy challenges. (KPIs 6-7) 
 
Environmental attitude and social awareness. ASTEP, also contributes to an overall improvement of environmental 
attitude by raising awareness of the great potential of introducing an integrated, reliable and economical feasible 
solution to cover by means of solar thermal energy the highest possible share of the heating and/or cooling demand of 
representative industrial processes. Within this visibility potential, EU countries where the penetration of this 
technologies is very limited will be addressed. 
KPIs 9-10: dissemination deliverables of project results targeted to different stakeholders and countries. 
 
Political, social and economic benefits.  They are associated with the potential savings in energy costs and the 
possibility of improving energy security by reducing energy imports, while creating local j obs related to the 
manufacturing, commercialization, installation and maintenance of solar thermal systems. 
ASTEP will also contribute to employment from jobs created in system design, equipment manufacturing, 
operation and maintenance. Advantageously, man y of these jobs cannot be delocalized such as operation and 
maintenance. 
 
2.1.4 Barriers and obstacles 
 
PEST (Political, Economic, Social and Technological) analysis has been chosen to identify the key external factors  
that can affect ASTEP project. 
 
Table 2.1 PET analysis if the ASTEP project 
 
 
Based on the previous PEST analysis (Table 2.1) and in order  to promote a new technology or more generally a capital 
investment with regards to this new technology and without significant track records, a relevant eco nomic advantage 
needs to be demonstrated. This is a usual requirement to balance the risks of being the “Innovator”. The consortium 
will address this need demonstrating the incorporated innovative technologies of ASTEP under real industrial 
environments. A techno-economic analysis for ASTEP End-users will be based on the estimated yearly thermal energy 
production [MWh], computing the capital expenditures (CAPEX) and operating expenses (OPEX) and the economic 
indicators such as plant lifetime. 
KPI 9: Within Sustainability Assessment (WP8), these parameters will be assessed.
2.2 Measures to maximize impact 
2.2.1 Dissemination and exploitation of results 
A comprehensive communication and dissemination package is key to increase the project's impacts. The consortium 
will follow a comprehensive strategy, using different means of dissemination including the organization of several 
workshops, webinars, a comprehensive set of project deliverables, oral and poster presentations at different events, the 
project’s website and e-newstletters etc. In order to maximize the impact of ASTEP, target oriented activities will be 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 20 
conducted to disseminate the research and innovation results to the widest possible audience (general public, research 
community, targeted market, industry and governmental stakeholders…).   
Dissemination is a critical task in any research project. Any effort and resources invested will be useless, unless the 
benefits of the project can reach the European society who funded this initiative. Besides, an effective dissemination 
plan contributes to weakening the barriers that prevent the achievement of the targeted impact. In order to plan an 
effective strategy for dissemination, EU’s five-stage model indications will be followed: 
 
Stage 1: To make a clear selection of objectives of dissemination.  
 
The main dissemination objectives and goals are as follows:  
• To raise awareness on the target audiences, and particularly the relevant stakeholders, policy makers, potentia l 
users and market segments, about the objectives of the project, its results, its benefits, use and applicability. 
• To get the necessary feedback to investigate the needs of the market and create new needs.  
• To seek the support of the general public, end-users, organizations, authorities, lobbyists and policy makers.  
• To achieve collaborations with other stakeholders in the technical, commercial and corporative fields with the aim 
to share resources, create synergies and exchange information and knowledge.  
• To identify end-user organizations willing to validate the final project outcomes.  
• To support the exploitation by finding potential customers.  
• To promote and create market opportunities that might result in sales.  
• To promote agreements with commercial partners.  
• To promote agreements with investors.  
• To prepare the ground for product launching. 
These objectives will be reached through a strategy based in the identification and mobilization of all potential 
stakeholders, from scientific community to policy makers via the end-users of the technological solution developed in 
this project. 
 
Stage 2: To identify the results of dissemination and its suitability for the selected audience.  
The message to be disseminated will be strongly dependent on the moment of the project lifetime when the 
dissemination action occurs. Timing is critical for effective dissemination to coordinate dissemination with the progress 
of the project, IPR protection and exploitation. Planning considers not only timing but an adequate correlation between 
the dissemination channel, the message and the targeted audience. In this sense, three dissemination levels have been 
defined:  
• Level 1- Raise awareness within stakeholders about the project and its objectives. Actions on this level will be 
carried out at the beginning of the project.  
• Level 2 - Promote the results of the project. These actions will take place from the second half of the Year 2 to the 
end of the project.  
• Level 3 - Prepare the ground for exploitation of the project results. These dissemination actions will serve to support 
activities in Task 9.4 “Exploitation Strategy” and will occur during all the lifetime of the project.  
Appropriate targeted audience and channels will be selected  in function of these objectives and levels in order to 
maximize the impact of the actions. 
 
Stage 3: To communicate stakeholders their responsibilities on dissemination.  
Each beneficiary shall ensure that the foreground of which it has ownership is disseminated as swiftly as possible. 
Dissemination activities shall be compatible with the protection of intellectual property rights, confidentiality 
obligations and the legitimate interests of the owner(s) of the foreground. Conditions and procedure for dissemination 
will be reflected in the Grant Agreement signed by all the consortium members prior to the beginning of the project. 
To be developed in Task 9.1 “Communication Strategy”. 
 
Stage 4: To Identify appropriate channels for dissemination.  
Due to the high innovation degree of the ASTEP project the protection of IPR is of paramount importance to this 
project. As such, the consortium members recognize that any dissemination  will only be carried out after the IPR 
generated by the project has been protected by means of patents or other appropriate vehicles. However, it is also 
recognized that successful dissemination is crucial to ensure successful exploitation of the project results, requiring 
therefore a solid planning of all the activities carried by each partner. These plans will be addressed throughout the 
entire project duration. The dissemination activities planned in ASTEP project aim at bringing and pushing the results 
directly to the ASTEP targeted stakeholders, end users and wider scientific community. A detailed dissemination plan 
will be drawn at the pertinent working tasks. Some activities for an effective dissemination are already planned to 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 21 
include publications, press releases and the active participation in conferences, workshops, platforms and fairs (Table 
2.1). To be developed in Task 9.2 “Dissemination Strategy”. 
 
Stage 5: To monitor and evaluate the effects of the activity.  
Effective dissemination requires careful management of the expectations of the audience and this, in turn demands 
permanent monitoring of project progress and of the impact of the dissemination actions in order to validate its success 
or, in case targets are not achieved, to implement corrective actions. A dissemination and communication plan will be 
delivered in M6 and updated in M24 and M48. 
All of the dissemination and communication activities will be directed for the following recipients: academic society 
majoring in the field of solar thermal energy, representatives of industry stakeholders, regional and national authorities 
and interested citizens of the regions involved as well as students on every step of education. The outcome of the 
proposed actions is believed to create a significant footprint in the awareness of the above listed societies about how 
the solar thermal energy storage will affect the overall effectiveness and quality of research and industrial processes. 
Among different outreach events and dissemination activities the following can be surely distinguished: publications, 
organization of cascade workshops or webinars for the  Academia and Industry , opening of expert’s  lectures and 
workshops for students and citizen s, as well as extension of the teaching program  in some of the consortium’s 
institutions. Publications are planned to be published only in peer-reviewed journals with high Impact Factor. Teaching 
program of some of the incorporated partners will be broadened in the project’s area on the base of the gained advanced 
and enriching knowledge. In order to maximize the range of the influence effecting from the project’s rea lization the 
variety of training will be offered by the p roject participant organizations. The main goal of such cascade trainings is 
to ensure that the project’s realization will support not only the participating scientists, but also their departments and 
universities and the national or international national industry representatives. For that purpose, the full offer of free of 
charge trainings, webinars, lectures and workshops connected with the solar thermal energy will be claimed on the 
project’s website. If interested the companies, even if not involved in ASTEP, could get in touch with the project 
members and order such services. In case of the appearance of any industry originated problems also the consulting 
services may be offered to companies. This approach aims at maximizing of the project’s visibility and influence on 
relevant communities. It should also benefit with the number of grant proposals submitted in the future as potential 
collaborators might be gained. Communication activities will be moreover focused on: publishing of the e-newsletters 
of the project (2 issues per year) and e stablishing and keeping up -to-date the informational website of the project. In 
order to reach the widest possible audience also the social media will be covered by e.g. Twitter or Facebook account 
related to the project which will be established and managed. Every activity undertaken throughout the project will be 
firmed by the name of the project and project funding details.  
All the partners will contribute to create visibility regarding the potential of employing solar thermal energy in 
industrial processes. In order to achieve this target, dissemination actions will be carried out at different levels: 
• Scientific level (attending scientific conferences and publishing articles on indexed journals). An open access 
dissemination strategy will be followed according to the EU rules. Gold open access will be chosen as main open 
access route. 
• General public dissemination: information from the partners will be regularly gathered in order to create materials 
easy to understand and attractive for society. These will be released through the website, by press releases, sharing 
videos, or in local and national events in which the partners can participate/organize. 
• Industry oriented dissemination activities will be carried out by attending the most relevant trade fairs in the sector 
and developing suitable materials/presentations and organizing several cascade trainings or workshops. Targeted 
meetings involving the managing teams of national and multinational companies relevant in the field, 
manufacturers and possible fi nal users are foreseen  in order to present the benefits of ASTEP to key users. 
Furthermore, a targeted Workshop will be organized in one of the demo sites to present the research and innovations 
actions generated through ASTEP and show the potential of applying solar thermal energy in industrial processes. 
The event will target all possible beneficiaries of the project - from private companies, to local authorities, to public 
institutions, investors and NGOs. This workshop will be also focused on widening t he use of applying ASTEP 
technologies in those EU countries where such systems currently have very limited or no application. Specific 
materials will be developed to distribute to public authorities form different EU countries. Also, the inclusion 
within the workshops of policy and decision makers and relevant stakeholders is targeted to contribute to the future 
development of relevant EU policies such as BREFs under the Industrial Emissions Directive. 
• A final workshop will be held in order to ensure the gr eatest level of impact, a milestone event ( MS16) will be 
organized to present the project final results and to ensure rising awareness of the viability of applying the solar 
thermal solutions in industry demonstrated by ASTEP. This event will be also targe ted to a wide public (local 
stakeholders, industry, local authorities and interested citizens) 
• Dissemination network- SOLAR ENERGY HELIX 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 22 
• The following tables (Tables 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4) provides a list of the main dissemination activities per partner in 
ASTEP. Moreover, each partner will be involved in the preparation and distribution of e -newsletters and 
organization of on demand cascade trainings, workshops or webinars promoting the re sults of the project. The 
description of communication activities can be found on section B 
Table 2.2: Dissemination activities. 
Partner Dissemination Activities 
UNED 
Publications: UNED: Attendance and p ublication presentations of two contributions in three SolarPACES 
conferences (yearly, resulting six contributions). Publication of, at least, three papers in international journals with 
high quality and impact (Applied Energy/Energy conversion & management/Solar Energy International Journal of 
Energy Research/Applied thermal engineering). The contributions will be published in gold open -access. First 
contributions will focus on the description and the design of the systems. Last ones will focus on the operation and 
optimisation. Also, UNED will collaborate in the contributions related to the final designs for each study case and 
the testing results. 
Workshops: UPM/UNED: Organisation of one workshop or open seminary aimed to share the advances with the 
technical/scientific community. 
ADSC  
Corporate Website: ADSC’s website will be used for project dissemination and general information about SHIP 
applications. 
Social Networks: Dissemination activities will be focused in the usage of electronic mass media tools such as 
LinkedIn to disseminate the results among peers. 
Publications: ADSC’s personnel will collaborate with UNED’s and UPM researchers in their respective 
publication presentation in the SolarPACES conferences . Additionally, ADSC’s personnel will collaborate with 
UPCT’s and PWR’s personnel in their publications. 
Conferences: ADSC inteds to present its work at the Heat Exchanger Action Group (HEXAG) led by the Scientific 
manager of the proposal, Dr. Reay. 
Platforms: ADSC’s will have a very active in the communication and dissemination activities in the Crowdhelix 
platform as the CEO of ADSC is member of the Advisory Board of this pan-European and International Open 
Innovation Network 
VERT 
Corporative Website: VERT’s website will be used for project dissemination and general information, updates, 
latest developments and about the environmental savings and benefits achieved by ASTEP technology. 
Social Networks: VERT’s social networks will be used to disseminate general information, updates and the latest 
developments to their network of contacts. 
Publications: At least one publication in the environmental engineering or renewable energy field is expected. 
Suggested scientific journals: a) the international journal of life cycle assessment b) Renewable Energy, an 
International Journal c) Journal of Cleaner Production. 
Platforms: VERT will disseminate project benefits, results and updates in the regular/yearly events and working 
groups of the following platforms: a) F rench LCA network b) Life Cycle Initiative from United Nations c) Ibero 
American Life Cycle Network. 
UPCT 
Publications: Publication in highly ranked journals under Open-Access conditions will also be a major objective 
to disseminate the results of the consortium. 
Conferences: The results that will be generated from the design and experimental characterization of the hybrid 
TES system will be presented in the main conferences in the area: in particular, the Eurotherm Seminar “Advances 
in Thermal Energy Storage” is one of the most world-wide recognized forums for dissemination on thermal energy 
storage. Likewise, the international conference SolarPACES will also be a forum for dissemination of the 
innovative results. Specialized scientific results will also be presented in world -wide recognized conferences 
organized by ICHMT. 
DRA 
Website: Include information at www.drassociates.co.uk 
Publications: DRA, in conjunction with other partners, would expect to publish several papers in appropriate 
journals e.g. Applied Thermal Engineering (Elsevier) Solar Energy Engineering (Elsevier) Heat Transfer 
Engineering (Taylor and Francis). This will allow us to disseminate project results to the scientific community. 
Conferences: DRA would expect to be in a position to report results after month 24 of the project and would 
present these at relevant international conferences including International Conference 
on Renewable Energy Research and Applications and International Conference on Renewable Energy and national 
events e.g. All Energy (Glasgow), UK National Heat Transfer Conference, HEXAG. This will allow further 
dissemination to the scientific community, and also to industrial and policy-making stakeholders. 
Website and Social Network: Reports on the progress of the project and non-confidential results will be published 
on the DRA and HEXAG websites, with additional exposure achieved via social media outlets (i.e. twitter, 
researchgate and linked in). This will allow dissemination  to the general public. The project video will also be 
released via social channels, including youtube, allowing dissemination to a wider audience. 
EBOS Conferences and Workshops:  H2020 events organised for the ‘Secure, Clean and Efficient Energy’ Work 
programme, SPIRE cPPP open events, International conference on Renewable energy sources & energy efficiency 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 23 
(organised annually by University of Cyprus), International Conference on Climate Change and Solar Energy 
(organised by Cyprus institute), Workshops to be organised in Cyprus as part of WP7. 
EXE 
Business Promotion: EXE has wide network base both regionally/local and internationally with process based 
industry partners and relevant stakeholders for disseminating ASTEP technology which will be useful in spreading 
the stakeholder community.  
Website and Social Network: EXE pledges to disseminate along with consortium partners in contributing to the 
content through project website, newsletters, social media workshops and seminars. Exergy alongside also uses its 
channels in promoting the project results taking advantage of  its website and social media presence, industry 
contact base, companies in relevant sectors and most importantly using SPIRE community in outlying symbiosis 
of similar projects.  
Workshops: EXE will also be actively participating in the project workshops hosted as part of the dissemination 
activities and collaborating where necessary with the partners for ASTEP awareness. 
BUL 
Publications: All outcomes from this project will be disseminated widely by publication in relevant international 
journals with high impact factors. It is envisioned that at least four peer - review papers in collaboration with the 
other partners to be published (funds for open access are requested).  
Conferences and Workshops: The outcomes from this project will be also disseminated through the participation 
of the relevant conferences (funds for attending the conferences are requested).One -day event/ workshop will be 
organised for the representatives from the industry, research, government primary industry and environmental 
protection agencies from the UK and EU, at BUL where the dissemination of the outcomes will be presented and 
plans for future extensions will be discussed (funds for the event are requested).  
The achievements of this project will be regularly presented and discussed with academics, researchers and visitors 
at research seminars hosted by the Centre for Sustainable Energy and Resources Use in Food Chains (CSEF), 
which is one of the energy centres funded by RCUK. 
Website: The PI from BUL will create a webpage under the main website of CSEF at BUL to promote and 
distribute research outcomes and applications arising from this project.  
Open Days: Together with the webpage, the open days in Brunel provide further opportunitie s to inform the 
general public about the innovative research conducted in the area of solar energy in industrial processes. The PI 
will organise poster exhibition to raise public awareness of sustainability and energy saving. The postgraduate 
students and academic/researchers (internal and external) from BUL. will contribute to the exhibition.  
The new research activities as well as expand the network of collaboration and pursue further work in this area. 
There are also many University open days at BUL in w hich the PI will be involved in presentations on research 
and teaching activities. 
CHX 
Solar Energy Helix/ Crowdhelix Platform:  The Crowdhelix network has more than 400+ member 
organisations from 42 countries, including all EU Member State countries, with 2,500+ (and growing) 
active users on its platform, where the Solar Energy Helix will be host. CHX share results, upcoming 
events/activities across the platform, 
Website and S ocial Media:  CHX’s Monthly Newsletter, Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook and Instagram 
accounts will be leverages to share important ASTEP results and events to the Solar Energy Helix members, 
and wider CHX Network. 
Events: CHX will organise 4 Helix Events, targeted to industry end-users and investors to connect and promote 
the outputs/results and uptake after the end of the project, these will be arranged to link to other events in the 
project, and in collaboration with other funded projects in this space. 
RELA 
Website: A website uniquely dedicated to the ASTEP project will be designed and launched acting as central 
source for project information, description, objectives, updates, latest developments as well as links to relevant 
pages, dissemination activities and other events valuable to the ASTEP project and its stakeholders.  
Publications: At least 2 publications in the field of energy, physics and/or material science. Suggested scientific 
journals with the impact factor between brackets are: Energy and Environmental Sc ience (IF: 25.42), Advanced 
Energy Materials (IF: 10.04), Journal of Power Sources (IF: 4.675), and Advanced Materials (IF: 18.96)  
Conferences: Participation in international conferences such as Materials Challenges in Alternative & Renewable 
Energy (MCAR E), the European Materials Research Society (EMRS) and Technologies and Materials for 
Renewable Energy, Environment and Sustainability.   
Workshops: Organization of at least 2 workshops with the support of RELA. The first one will take place at M30 
and will aim to discuss the commercial exploitation of the individual materials and technologies developed in the 
project. The second one will be organized at M40 to discuss the commercial exploitation of the ASTEP concept to 
cover the whole value chain and gain professional feedbacks for a successful further commercialization.  
Platforms and Clusters: Active participation in the European platforms including EMIRI, EuMAT, OpenAIRE, 
Horizon the EU Research and Innovation Magazine, research*eu results magazine, research*eu focus, etc. Posting 
main information of ASTEP project and consortium, workshops announcements, disseminating main project 
results and participating in the relevant working groups will be the main activities regarding platforms and clusters.  
UPM 
Publications: UPM: Attendance and paper presentations of two contributions in three SolarPACES conferences 
(yearly, resulting six contributions). Publication of, at least, three papers in international journals with high quality 
and impact (Applied Energy/Energy convers ion & management/Solar Energy International Journal of Energy 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 24 
Research/Applied thermal engineering). The contributions will be published in gold open -access. Contributions 
will focus on the designs for each study case and the testing results. Also, UPM wil l collaborate in contributions 
related to the design, optimisation and operation of the systems.  
Workshop: UPM/UNED: Organisation of one workshop or open seminary aimed to share the advances with the 
technical/scientific community 
AMTP 
Internal Workshop: Dissemination will be linked to the exploitation plan, once the project is coming to its end, 
and depending on its results, it will be widely announced within AMTP division for any plant to analyse the 
potential use of the technology within their premises. Currently, AMTP has about 3.000 employees in its division. 
Additionally, obtained results could be shared with the rest of ArcelorMittal to analyse other possibilities of 
benefiting from the results. There is a regular bulleting where this kind of news are included. In this case, it can be 
considered that the information could reach any ArcelorMittal’s employee (209.000 in total). Dissemination of 
results outside company is not planned. 
CRES 
Publications: CRES will gather the results fr om the Dairy industry (MAND) and will prepare a detailed report 
with the analysis of the outcomes to be shared within the project. Several papers will be published in peer-reviewed 
journals with high impact factor promoting the results of the project. Nevertheless, all of the results to be revealed 
publicly will be selected in conjunction with MAND. 
Conferences: Dissemination actions for CRES will consist mainly of participation in highly recognized scientific 
events (conferences, trade fairs, workshops etc.). 
Workshops: External workshops to other Greek energy intensive industries which take advantage of the 
favourable location for SHIP.  
PWR 
Publications and Conferences:  For dissemination activities the main goal is to achieve the high impact and 
transferability at the international level. The scientific findings will be published at the high ranked scientific 
journals and in the engineering journals in the area of thermal technology. 
Conferences: Presented to the scientific community on national a nd international conferences (i.e. Grand 
Renewable Energy International Conference, International Conference on Heat Transfer and applications, 
International Conference on Energy and Heat Transfer Engineering, International Conference on Heat Transfer 
and Thermal Engineering). There will be created the links with the manufacturer of the storage units and the 
companies active in the area of thermal technology in order to present and transfer the elaborated technology. 
IRIS 
Conferences: Dissemination activities within ASTEP project for IRIS will be focused on attending events related 
to process systems engineering (e.g. ESCAPE, ICPSE) to show the results obtained in the design of the process 
control strategies for both the SunDial technology and the energy storage. 
SUN 
Publications: At least 3 publications on top journals in the area of solar energy such as Solar Energy, Renewable 
Energy and Thermal Science and Engineering Progress will be produced by the activity in the ASTEP project, 
possibly in collaboration with other partners. All papers will be published according to the open-access policies of 
Horizon 2020. 
Conferences and Workshops: The major results will be presented at well -known serial Conferences and 
Workshop to increase the result impac t. The expected conference attendance includes AIGE/IIETA Conference 
2021 and Eurotherm Conference 2022. At least a Workshop will be planned to present the results of ASEP. 
Science Exhibition: SUN will attend at Borsa della Ricerca 2021 and 2022 to present the ASTEP project and the 
principal results. Borsa della Ricersa is an annual science exhibition in Italy and usually attracts hundreds visitors 
including academic and industrial researchers, delegates of well -known Industrial and Investor companies.  
Furthermore, SUN will present the project to FUTURO REMOTO 2021 and 2022 which is an event that takes 
place in Naples each year. This was the first event in Europe for the dissemination of both scientific and 
technological culture and it has as a target the co mmon public and in particular students from primary and 
secondary schools. 
MAND 
Business Promotion: The ASTEP project could be disseminated in the various ways, a few being the following: 
• Promotion and showcasing in local companies. MAND company has a 70-year presence in the community 
of Corinth and extended Attica region, where a few of the largest companies in Greece are based. 
• Promotion at various events of the SEV -Hellenic Enterprises of Greece the largest business network of 
Greek companies. 
 
Table 2.3: Partner participation in dissemination activities. 
Partner Type 
Dissemination activity 
Publications 
Fairs Conferences 
 
Platforms 
 
Workshops Press 
release Scientific 
articles 
Trade 
magazines 
UNED ACA X   X  X  
ADSC SME X    X X  
VERT SME X    X   
UPCT ACA X  X X X X X 
DRA SME X X  X X X  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 25 
EBOS SME   X X  X X 
EXE SME X X X X  X  
BUL ACA X   X  X  
CHX SME   X X X X  
RELA SME  X X X X X X 
UPM ACA X   X  X  
AMTP IND      X  
CRES RTO X   X  X  
PWR ACA X X X X  X  
IRIS SME    X    
SUN ACA X   X  X  
MAND IND   X X  X  
 
Table 2.4: Dissemination Activities Impact Estimation 
ACTIVITY INDICATOR M1-12 M13-24 M25-36 M37-48 
Website Number of accesses 1000 
 
2000 3000 4000 
Scientific 
publications  
Annual number of peer-reviewed articles 
in journals 
3 5 5 10 
Conferences and 
Events  
Conference proceedings and posters 
accepted at conferences.  
2 2 4 4 
Conferences and 
Events  
Number of  Special Sessions co -
organized with international conferences 
 1  1 
Workshop Number of attendees    100 
Social Media 
Profile 
Number of followers in social network 50 50 50 50 
E-newsletter Number of released issues 2 2 2 2 
E-newsletter Number of new subscribers to newsletter 10 10 10 10 
Patent 
applications 
Number of submitted patent applications    1 
Cascade Trainings 
/Workshops/Webi
nars 
Number of organized events 2 2 2 2 
Trade fairs Participation in international trade fairs 1 1 1 1 
 
Exploitation plan  
The overall objective of the exploitation activities is to guide the project and support partners exploitation aspirations 
with a viable exploitation strategy on  a global scale. An initial assessment of the project’s exploitation options has 
been made and includes an Outline of project’s exploitable results and individual business plans as can be seen in the 
next section.  Exploitation issues will be brought to the attention of all partners from very early in the project, to ensure 
that findings regarding market and commercialization that come up when studying exploitation options can still be fed 
into the R&D part of the project. The consortium already appoints exploitation manager, Mrs. Mónica Osorio (EXE), 
who will be responsible for coordinating these actions. The Exploitation Plan will be prepared considering the real 
benefits of the project, with the aim to achieve target TRLs.  The consortium partners will work with the exploitation 
manager in the description of project results and the commercial applic ations and ownership of the results will be 
adequately identified, listed and recorded. Exploitation plan will be essentially supported with an initial market analysis 
and development of the future business model. The analysis methodology will be based on the categorization of every 
result and value chain analysis, depending whether they can be commercialized or not, and if they must be protected 
according to the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) management policy.  
 
As part of the exploitation activities several different reports and studies will be completed. These include exploitation 
plan and IPR roadmap. The first version of the exploitation plan will be prepared during the 1st year of the project and 
it will be updated in every 6 months  and will be delivered as part of the M24 and M48 . The project aims at obtaining 
of TRL 5, which stands the technology validated in relevant environments (2 case studies at end-user’s sites). 
Nevertheless, the final version of the Exploitation Plan will be ready and put into action setting the guideline for future 
exploitation beyond the scope of the project as  a preliminary market take -up strategy and long term stability of the 
proposed solutions will be considered and elaborated by the means of ASTEP. Such approach will allow outcomes of 
the project to be fully exploited and prepared for the commercialization process. The routes to exploitation will be done 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 26 
by several approaches including, further internal research, collaborative research and licensing. Specific exploitation 
interest of all partners of ASTEP consortium is summarised in Table 2.5.  
 
Table 2.5: Individual Exploitation plan. 
Exploitation plan 
UNED 
Project results: UNED will obtain valuable data from the validation of the developed models under real operation at 
industrial environment. It will gain knowhow related to construction and testing of the concept. The patented technology 
will be implemented in real industries. 
Product/ process/ service: Medium temperature collector 
Identified market: Industries with processes requiring thermal power around 200 ºC 
Competitive advantages:  Installation and maintenance costs. 
ADSC 
Project results: Market all the knowledge generated by our company in this project, specially the areas of solar capture 
and thermal storage.  
Product/ process/ service: This knowledge will generate potential consulting projects to European companies in the solar 
sector outside this consortium, or it will be included as references in other European financed R&D projects in similar 
calls. 
Identified market: The distribution channel will be by our contacts in the European market, initially in the Iberian market, 
then the distribution channel will be amplified through our European contacts. 
Competitive advantages: Widening the area of consulting projects -Widening the potential costumers. Currently, ADSC 
has over 130 customers in Spain, Portugal, France, Abu Dubai and a wide contact list of over 6000 contacts Switzerland, 
USA, among Europe and Southern America. 
VERT 
Project results: ASTEP will expand VERT specialized consultancy services in the fields of sustainability assessments, 
including LCA and S-LCA. 
Product/ process/ service: LCA and S -LCA knowledge about using solar energy to provide the heat and cooling for 
industrial processes. 
Identified market: Users: Renewable energy companies. Industrial heating and cooling providers. 
Sectors: food and beverage, industry, machinery, equipment production, transport and textiles. 
Competitive advantages: Extended network of clients and the number of specialized consultancy contracts are expected 
to increase based on the project. VERT growth will be driven by increases in contracts, extension of network of contact 
and clients, thanks to upgrading the quality and expertise of the offered services within the project. 
UPCT 
Project results: Develop a hybrid thermal energy storage system. 
Product/ process/ service: The hybrid thermal energy storage system that will be developed in the framework of the 
ASTEP project aims at solving one of current drawbacks of this type of systems: their inability to provide stable and 
controllable discharging power. The hybrid concept of TES system, based on the combination of honeycomb-type passive 
heat exchanger and an active system for flow control, is expected to generate an international patent. 
Identified market: This hybrid system could also be converted into an industrial design, that can be exploited jointly 
with other partners. In this regard, UPCT  strongly supports the start -up of business by their Faculty, and the team of 
ASTEP could rely on their entrepreneurship office (www.emprendedores.upct.es) to this aim.  
Competitive advantages: Develop a new concept of thermal energy storage.  
DRA 
Project results: Our results will demonstrate the feasibility of using solar energy in industrial processes. 
Product/ process/ service: DRA is active in projects advising government agencies and industrial clients on process 
improvements. 
Identified market: The experience and data produced through the ASTEP project will provide validation to potential 
users of solar energy particularly in metals processing and the food industry. 
Competitive advantages: Widening the area of consulting projects 
-Widening the potential costumer base.. 
EBOS 
Project results: ICT-based intelligent front -end dashboards and data analytics functions for monitoring of industrial 
systems. 
Product/ process/ service: EBOS preliminary vision for exploitation is to advance knowledge and reinforce 
understanding of industrial technologies, thus extending the company’s R&D activities and extending the capabilities and 
functionalities of intelligent front-end dashboards and data analytics functions which will be developed as part of ASTEP. 
EBOS also intends to apply the results in the compan y’s product portfolio for developing new secure innovative 
applications and solutions and expanding the company’s customer base. 
Identified market:  Routes for exploitation which will be explored will include: 1) Further internal research 2) 
Collaborative Research at national and EU level 3) Marketing activities (conferences, exhibitions, etc.).  
EBOS will aim at establishing a long -term collaboration with the academic and industrial partners in and beyond the 
project. 
Competitive advantages: EBOS will contribute to the development of the joint IP exploitation plan in collaboration 
with the other project partners so as to. a) promote the results of ASTEP, in particular those to which EBOS contributed 
as ICT partner (b) Strengthen EBOS competitive position of software developer and integrator, by pursuing new 
cooperation opportunities, and extending its ability to generate new research funding from external sources. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 27 
EXE 
Project results: Integrated thermal system model designs;  
Model for design and simulation of the ASTEP system. 
Product/ process/ service: No product but a service is expected to be developed from ASTEP for Exergy  
Route to Explore: Through user community, publications, consultancy and training activities, exergy assessments. 
Identified market: Sectors of application: Industrial applications, renewable combined heat and power technologies 
Target end-users: solar driven combined heat and power systems developers, RE system designers. Chemical/food/process 
industries that have heating/cooling demands, RE based thermal systems developers. 
Target end-users: Industries with heating/cooling demands (commercial use), power plants, solar technology producers, 
food processing industry and others where heat is stored. 
Competitive advantages: Holistic energy efficiency assessment of solar heating/cooling technologies 
Exp beyond project: Access additional funding’s local and regional (ERDF, IUK etc) and participation in the ASTEP 
independent business unit. 
BUL 
Project results: Knowledge of concept design and integration strategies of solar thermal systems within industrial sites. 
Product/ process/ service: Applying the knowledge gained within the project  to provide consultancy and training to 
potential industrial end-users 
Identified market: -Industry -Students from industrial companies. 
Competitive advantages:  Strengthen the relationship with the new partners from the EU that could benefit from 
additional joint research and development projects and focused knowledge transfer. Extending the efforts of the academic 
team to other resource and energy efficiency and  opportunities within the industry . Enhance new research and 
development programs that exploit funding opportunities from national and international funding bodies such as DEFRA, 
TSB, EPSRC and EU funds. Raise the profile of the University through publicat ions (academic and trade press) and 
conferences/workshops to enhance funding opportunities through additional knowledge exchange, consultancy and 
training. Provide teaching material for relevant MSc programs in the College and projects for MSc students. 
CHX Project results: CHX will support consortium partners in reaching end users 
 
RELA 
Project results: ICT-based intelligent front-end dashboards and data analytics functions for analysing the outcomes, and 
provide a comprehensive report detailing the system efficiencies  development to improve the product portfolio and 
manufacturing capability 
Product/process/service: Relational SA will conduct product sales by leveraging existing commercial network, - Further 
Development of the outcomes of the project using its internal investment. Furthermore, Relational will directly sell the 
new products through its Bus leveraging their existing commercial networks.  
Identified market: Industry 
Competitive advantages: Validated models, Tested technology 
UPM 
Project results: UPM will gain new skills in the operation and the energy management of the Sundial at the end-user’s 
environment. Also, it will gain knowledge regarding the mechanical design and implementation of the concept. The 
patented technology will be implemented in real industries. 
Product: Medium temperature solar concentrator 
Identified market: Industries with processes requiring thermal power around 200 C 
Competitive advantages: Installation and maintenance costs 
AMTP 
Project results: Having the technology/ equipment developed in the ASTEP Project for providing our new powder color 
coating line with the heat needed for the pre-heating of the tubes. 
Product/ process/ service: Developing other potential uses of the technology. 
Identified market: On top of that, the potential application of the technology would not be limited to AM Iasi. We have 
other plants within our division (ArcelorMittal Tubular Products) that could also benefit of the results of ASTEP Project. 
We are thinki ng of other plants also having color coating lines (so, same or very similar application) and also of pre -
heating of tubes prior to cold-drawing process (in AM Karvina) where there is a need of temperature of about 100oC. 
Competitive advantages: Using the technology developed on other multi-purpose industrial process-steps, such 
as drying the tubes in our water-based color coating line where the heat input needed is quite lower, or even for 
plant (central) heating during certain seasons of the year. 
CRES Project results: Interest on similar project to similar agrofood industries in collaboration with other consortium members. 
Product/process/service: Services to the Greek energy intensive industries. 
Identified market: any industry which is energy intensive and interested to reduce their energy costs. 
Competitive advantages: Validated models, Tested technologies in the Greek solar conditions 
PWR 
Project results: The key outcome of the studies conducted by PWR in the framework of the ASTEP project is the 
elaboration of manufacturing technology of complex spatial metallic structures that can be used as the heat exchangers 
for the heat transfer enhancement in solar thermal storage units.   
Product/ process/ service: Based on the scientific fu ndament established in this project, new products for the energy 
efficiency market could be developed and commercialized. 
Identified market: Sectors of application: Industrial applications of heat storage technologies with the use of renewable 
energy sources or waste heat 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 28 
Target end-users: Industries with heat storage demands (commercial use), solar technology producers 
Competitive advantages:  Manufacturing innovative Al alloys enhanced structures for heat exchangers (heat storage). 
Their design will assure the resistivity against the phenomenon of the thermal fatigue connected with the change of the 
coefficients of thermal expansion during the changes of PCM thermal expansion from the solid state into liquid state 
during charging and from the liquid state into solid state during discharging of the storage unit. 
IRIS 
Project results: The main outcome from ASTEP project for IRIS will be the new knowledge obtained in the design and 
implementation of control systems for energy systems. 
Product/ process/ service: It can be exploited through engineering services and/or keep it as internal know-how.  
Identified market: R&D departments and RTOs focused on energy developments would be the main possible customer 
segments to be taken into consideration. In order to reach them, IRIS would use its extent network in innovation and the 
participation in European networking events. 
Competitive advantages: IRIS involvement in the design, construction and validation of the control system for the 
ASTEP solution is fully aligned with our working line related to the development of innovative monitoring devices, 
instrumentation and control strategies for processes.  
At the same time, IRIS is open to explore any collaboration framework with ASTEP partners in terms of specific 
opportunities for process control outcomes, as well as regarding the start-up of ASTEP independent business unit. 
SUN 
Project results: Providing the best solution for the use of concentrated solar energy reducing their cost and improving 
performance. 
Product/ process/ service: Procedure for designing concentrated solar power plants that best meet energy profiles of the 
industrial users. 
Identified market: Industry 
Competitive advantages: The project will provide excellent networking opportunities to carry out collaborations in future 
research activities such as thermal storage and heat transfer enhancement. 
MAND 
Project results: Through the ASTEP project, MAND is expecting to explore new sustainable ways to support its vision 
and business. 
Product/ process/ service: The installation could act as a demonstration/pilot unit to broadcast the benefits of the 
technology in various industries of Greece or other EU companies. MAND is willing to assist in the promotion of the 
ASTEP project and technology, and offer its expertise gained through the completion of the project.    
Identified market: Stakeholders of different sectors (from Industry to public authorities) 
Competitive advantages: The innovative proposed solution assists perfectly the company to reach its goals of sou rcing 
20% of energy consumed by renewable sources. Specifically, the technology will support the needs of the company in 
steam and cooling power needed to produce and preserve its dairy products. 
 
Dissemination & Exploitation Accelerator: Solar Energy Helix 
The Solar Energy Helix will be created by P9 Crowdhelix (CHX) who will bring together a community of 150+ cross-
disciplinary and cross-sector stakeholders/actors across Europe and internationally, with attention to the Mediterranean 
and MPC countries. The focus will be on bringi ng together stakeholders from solar thermal energy and clean energy 
SMEs/industry organisations, and industry organisation with processes that require high reliability and high quality 
heat and cooling and continues operations, as well research organisations/researchers, associations and networks in 
solar thermal energy, that are interested in and are developing solar and thermal energy technologies, decarbonising 
the industrial sector, reducing dependency on fossil fuels and reducing emission of air pollutants.   
CHX is pan-European and International Open Innovation Network that connects and enables research organisations, 
SMEs and industry to collaborate, innovate and grow, and has a particular focus on developing collaborations and 
clusters around Horizon  2020 funding opportunities and accelerating the economic, environment and social impact 
from these collaborations. The network has more than 400+ member organisations from 42 countries, including all EU 
Member State countries, who have collectively won an  estimated + 4 billion in funding from Horizon 2020. The 
network is set-up around thematic areas/clusters (called “Helixes”), e.g. Energy Helix, Climate Helix, Manufacturing 
Helix,  Materials Helix and Digital Helix etc., and is supported by a technology p latform 
(https://www.crowdhelix.com/) where these virtual communities are hosted; please see the Helixes in Fig. 2.2 below.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 29 
 
Figure 2.2 CHX Helixes (virtual communities) 
For the ASTEP project, CHX will establish the Solar Energy Helix, and link it with the existing Energy Helix, Climate 
Helix, Manufacturing Helix, Materials Helix and the Digital Helix. The Solar Energy Helix will be set-up and delivered 
in close collaboration with P2 ADSC (Coordinator), P5 DRA P7 EBOS, P8 EXERGY, P12 AMTP and 13 CRES, 
in order to support the consortium in accelerating and achieving its impact objectives, especially its exploitation 
strategy through engagement with industry end users, invest ors to ensure uptake of results following the end of the 
project, with focus on countries with limited or no application across the Mediterranean.  
The Helix will be centred on the ASTEP consortium and when it commences all  ASTEP partners will be given full 
access to the CHX network and platform free, for the duration of the project. Once the project has ended, everyone 
signed up will be able to retain their accounts for free (as external organisations), to ensure a self-sustaining community 
and continued collaboration among the partners, stakeholders and projects. It will then bring in interested organisations 
/ individuals from within its current membership base of 400+ organisations across 42 countries, first reaching out to 
members part of aligned Helixes (e.g. Energy Helix, Climate Helix, Manufacturing Helix, Materials and Digital Helix) 
ensuring engagement across the related Helixes, as well as across disciplines and sectors, including clean energy, 
renewable energy/solar thermal energy, and chemical engineering. It will reach out to stakeholders not yet members of 
the network to join the Helix (i.e. researcher organisations, industry/SMEs and associations, networks and clusters) 
across Europe and that are identified by the par tners through the stakeholder mapping activities. All external 
organisations and consortia that are invited or that contact ASTEP to join the Solar Energy Helix will be given 
immediate access to the Solar Energy Helix on the Crowdhelix platform and are not  required to become a full paying 
member of the CHX network. The Helix will also connect with other organisations and networks in the related fields 
across Europe (e.g. SPIRE cPPP, etc). It will link in/cluster with previously and other funded EU, as well other 
funded projects under this call, national and international projects in solar thermal energy , in particular for 
industrial processes, as well as decarbonisation of industry, reduced dependency on fossil fuels and reduced emission 
of air pollutants, to facilitate clustering of funded projects and maximize the EU investment driving the results to market 
uptake. To cluster with other funded projects, the Helix will first connect with the projects in which consortium 
members are leading/partnering. With  the Crowdhelix members having collectively won +4 billion of Horizon 2020 
funding, CHX will then reach out within the its network to connect other funded projects in the related areas that are 
lead and partnered by network members and connect them to the Solar Energy Helix , and in parallel connect with 
specific projects identified by the European Commission’s ASTEP Project Officer, including the other projects funded 
under this call. 
 
In practice, on the Crowdhelix Platform organisations and individuals cr eate profiles highlighting their expertise and 
knowledge, and post opportunities for collaboration. Please see Fig. 2.3 which is an example of a recent post and 
interaction from the Crowdhelix Platform. In the case of Helixes established around a Horizon 2020 projects, post will 
also disseminate project results and communicate upcoming project activities/events. On the adve nt of ever more 
powerful technologies in the area of machine learning, natural language processing, and artificial intelligence, an 
opportunity has arisen to augment the Crowdhelix Platform with a new software “recommender engine”. This system 
will dynamic ally suggest prospective collaborators for each opportunity posted, drawing its data from information 
provided by users of the platform, as well as information users have chosen to import from other relevant profiles. This 
system will also learn as it prog resses, to ensure that matches improve over time, all the while providing a direct 
incentive for Crowdhelix users to provide relevant and up-to-date information about their expertise and interests.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 30 
      
Figure 2.3 Example of Academic and Industry Engagement on the Crowdhelix Platform 
 
The Solar Energy Helix and CHX’s “recommender engine” technology will not only facilitate faster dissemination of 
results to key stakeholders, but will also drive new forms of international, cross -disciplinary and cross -sectoral 
partnerships and open innovation activity in this area. The Helix will be set -up as a self-sustaining community hosted 
by CHX beyond the lifetime of the project, thereby promoting existing and creating new long-lasting impacts from the 
ASTEP project and supporting reach to the EU countries where such systems currently have very limited or no 
application according to SHIP. When the ASTEP project ends, the Solar Energy Helix will continue to be hosted on 
Crowdhelix’s platform, so that engagement continues (and grows) between all the stakeholders that have been brought 
into the network and this Helix, after the end of the project, and everyone signed during the project up will be able to 
retain their accounts for free (as external organisations), as well as have the option for their organisations to join as full 
members on the network.  The exiting helixes (20) are all strategically led by a  Research or Technology Organization 
member (RTO) of the network (e.g. Cardiff University leads the Energy Helix, University of Bergen leads the Climate 
Helix, Fraunhofer IWU leads the Manufacturing Helix, LEITAT Technology Centre leads the Materials Helix , and 
UCL leads the Digital Helix). As the strategy for the post project impact/exploitation is developed, the CHX Helix 
Manager will identify a RTO member, e.g. UPM, from the Helix that would be interested in strategically leading this 
Helix after the end of the project. This Helix and activities around this are support by the Crowdhelix team. 
 
In addition to the Crowdhelix Platform, CHX will organise 4 Helix Events, targeted to industry end-users and investors 
to connect and promote the outputs/results and uptake after the end of the project. The CHX Helix Manager will work 
support the Communication and Dissemination Activities so that CHX can plan how and what will be disseminated to 
the Solar Energy Helix Members through the Crowdhelix Platform, Events and CHX’s Newsletter, Twitter, LinkedIn, 
Facebook and Instagram accounts. 
 
Outline Business plan  
The commercialization of technologies developed during the ASTEP project will be executed through a detailed 
technology transfer and business plan carried out by the individual partners as well as joint undertakings and spin-offs 
in case of cross -cutting technologies. The project ensures the success of the European -based industry by creating a 
value chain and engaging with the potential stakeholders and eventual technology adopters. Greatcell Solar, as a 
consortium partner and end user, will conduct activities after the project towards final design and development of th e 
PSC pilot line, design verification, design validation and pilot line testing, whereas Flexbrick opens up the channels 
for engaging customers and creating sales leads for commercial sales at a later -stage. Below in Fig 2.4 is a business 
model canvas to highlight the approach to commercialization of ASTEP technology. 
 
The Business Plan will be a living document and will be updated and evolved throughout the project development. The 
business and exploitation plan will integrate several different commerciali sation phases including local, national, 
European and international level. Once the technology development phase is completed, the commercialisation will 
start at local level through interacting with local authorities and relevant department during the demonstration activities. 
Through the implementation of a well -developed dissemination and exploitation plan commercialisation period will 
continue at national, European and international levels. Partners such as UNED, UPM, VERT, DRA, ADSC, EXE will 
play a ke y role in developing international business relations with relevant parties and maximising the potential 
contribution of the solutions to the economic and technological growth. Briefly, in order to allow a smooth exploitation 
of  
ASTEP innovation after the completion of the project, the following items will be developed as part of exploitation 
activities: 
• Business Models: Business plans will be based upon a succinct business model encapsulating for each key result 
taken forward; the value proposition, the configuration of the value creation, and the revenue model. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 31 
• Risk Assessment: Risk profiles (business, market, technical, managerial and financial) will be appraised, in order 
to identify the principal uncertainties associated with the envisaged launch and t heir potential consequences. Risk 
response planning will include both mitigation strategies for negative impacts (risks) and enhancement strategies 
for positive impacts (opportunities). 
• Business Plans:  For each business model a 20-page business plan that tells a good and convincing story along the 
lines of the following key elements will be prepared: on the value creation, customers, management of 
resources/finances and engagement with stakeholders (as the Table 2.6) 
 
 
 
Figure 2.4: ASTEP Business Canvas Model 
Table 2.6: Business plan. 
Partner: All the key technological partners will create and spin-off 
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: 
At the end of the project the product would reach TRL5. As exposed before, the technological challenges 
tackled (KPI 2), the implementation of STE (KPI 1) and other issues related to operation and installation 
(KPIs 3 -4) will make this solution an attractive alternative to reduce CO 2 emissions (KPI 6) and 
dependency of fossil fuels (KPIs 7-8) for the EU process industry.  
Exploitation Team:  
A spin-off company integrated by the key technological partners of the consortium. 
Market:  
Firstly, it will be oriented to process applications in steel and agrifood sectors, where the technology will 
be tested after this project completion. Later, it is already planned that the results will be extrapolated to 
other industrial sectors. 
Business Model:  
The spin -off company will leverage the key importance of the consortium’s End -users to prove the 
technology to companies with similar needs. 
Financial Projection:  
We predict that further investment is needed to build a demo system (TRL7), which will suppose another 
3 years of developments. The spin-off company will search for additional financing not only from other 
European funded R&D programs such as ERANET, LIFE, RFCS, and H2020s but also from  national 
calls in the EU interested countries.   
Commercialisation Roadmap:  
The first step, once the project is finalised is to design and build a demo  to reach TRL 7 , which it is 
estimated that would last 2-3 additional years. After this period, a validation process is needed to obtain 
results for a year in order to obtain conclusions about the covered demand (KPI 5) and the estimated energy 
cost. To make the decision of a capital investment with regards to this new technology and without 
significant track records, a relevant economic advantage needs to be demonstrated. ASTEP will address 
this need demonstrating the innovative technologies under real industrial environments. A techno -
economic analysis for ASTEP demonstrators will be carried out with based on the est imated yearly 
thermal energy production [MWh]. An important reduction in cost is expected based in: 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 32 
• LC-RES-07-2019 results (current proposal). 
• Demo building and operating. 
• Scaling factors due to the installation of larger numbers of modules. From the current SHIP 
installations, it is estimated a number of 330 modules/plant. 
• Process standardisation. 
With these data it will be performed a complete business plan.  
Financial Risk Assessment:  
Every innovative project always has associated financial risk that the consortium plans to reduce through 
the research and development associated to the current proposal . The current proposal will  analyse 
potential commercial and production risks before going into the next step to commercialization including 
standardization analysis. 
 
Technology Market Transfer: 
Despite qualifying as a RIA project, substantial technological developments are foreseen during the ASTEP project 
and full or partial market transfer of the more mature ASTEP technologies such as anti -soiling, LT structures, 
manufacturing and others are expected. A full market transfer of all ASTEP technologies into commercial scale 
solutions is expected in t he years following termination of the ASTEP project when some of the more innovative 
technologies have matured through an ASTEP follow-up project which we foresee, see Table 2.7 
 
Table 2.7 Technology Market Transfer per Key Technological Partner 
Partner Product/Processes/ 
Innovation/Services 
Target 
Market/Sector 
Measures to 
deliver 
innovation 
to Market 
(during 
Project) 
Measures to 
deliver 
innovation 
to Market 
(after 
Project) 
Global EU 
Market Size 
(M€) 
Provisional 
Sales 
Forecast 
ADSC Process industry 
consultancy 
Process 
industries using 
thermal energy 
Scientific 
papers; 
Networking 
Networking; 
consultancy 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
EXE Engineering design 
and integration 
consultancy services  
Process industry, 
solar thermal 
integration 
Networking, 
consultancy, 
conferences 
and seminars 
Continued 
networking, 
marketing 
platforms, 
trade fairs 
and 
conferences 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet  
Not 
quantifiable 
yet  
PWR Process industry 
consultancy, materials 
and elements  for the 
heat storage units 
manufacturing 
Process 
industries with 
thermal energy 
storage demands 
Scientific 
papers; 
seminars; 
networking 
Networking; 
consultancy; 
trade fairs; 
conferences 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet 
DRA Process industry 
consultancy 
Process 
industries using 
thermal energy 
Scientific 
papers; 
Networking 
Networking; 
consultancy 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
IRIS Services on process 
control design a nd 
implementation for 
process/energy 
devices. 
R&D 
departments and 
RTOs focused 
on energy 
developments 
Networking, 
conferences 
and seminars 
Networking, 
inclusion in 
services 
portfolio. 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet 
UNED Engineering design 
and industry 
consultancy 
Process 
industries with 
thermal energy 
demands 
Scientific 
papers; 
Networking 
Networking; 
consultancy 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
UPM Engineering design 
and industry 
consultancy 
Process 
industries with 
thermal energy 
demands 
Scientific 
papers; 
Networking 
Networking; 
consultancy 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
UPCT Hybrid Solar thermal 
Storage System 
Thermal energy 
sector 
Scientific 
papers; 
Networking; 
Continued 
networking, 
trade fairs 
and 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
Not 
quantifiable 
yet. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 33 
conferences, 
IPR 
 
Strategy for management and protection of information/data and knowledge  
Management of Intellectual Property: 
Intellectual property (IP) generated within the project will be protected by patents, if appropriate, and its management 
will be regulated in compliance with the final consortium agreement and the intellectual property agreement among 
the partners. The consortium has identified three levels of Foreground (Results) IP which will be created in the course 
of the project: 
• Individual and joint IP, which belongs to individual partners or is jointly owned by partners working in a particular 
task and is restricted to those partners. 
• Generic IP, which can be used by all partners of the consortium. Some of the generic IP will be made more widely 
available to European academics, SME’s and other industrial organizations. 
• Publicly available IP which will be published at conferences, on the public web site and m ade available with no 
restrictions. 
 
The general principles for Intellectual Property Aspects set out by the EC for Horizon2020 projects will apply in 
ASTEP. Existing know how (background or pre -existing intellectual property) of a specific partner shall be made 
available on transfer conditions to the Partner(s) within the consortium. The use of such existing know -how is strictly 
limited for use to the achievement of the project goals and for the duration of the project. An overview of the existing 
know how will be included as an annex to the consortium agreement. Foreground shall be owned by the partner(s) who 
developed these results. Each partner is responsible for taking the appropriate steps for securing intellectual property 
of the knowledge or results created during the project. 
Results (resulting from the project): owned by one or more of the partners shall be licensed to other partners of the 
consortium on favourable conditions to the extent necessary to enable these partners to exploit their own results. 
Publication of results: The partners are entitled to publish the project results in the usual scientific form. However, all 
concept publications must be put on the website and submitted to all Partners together with a request for permission to 
publish. Requests for such permission to publish shall be responded to within one month of receipt thereof. An 
agreement is considered to have been granted if no objection is raised within a period of one month after submission 
of the manuscript to all par tners. One of the pages of ASTEP website will contain an overview and archive of all 
published information: scientific articles, publications, press releases, conference papers, etc. Publications will be 
submitted to reputable journals (using peer-review) that can provide “gold” open access (immediate open access mode) 
to reach the broadest possible audience for the results within a short space of time. More details on these issues will be 
described in the Consortium Agreement. 
 
Open access for scientific publishing:  
The Horizon 2020 main guidelines are directed to have research based on sustainable and inclusive economy with the 
important role of promoting knowledge and innovation in generating growth 12. Since the Project follows the H2020 
open access strategy for scientific publications, all the results that are publishable will follow an open-access model in 
order to optimize the impact of publicly funded scientific research, both at European level (FP7, Horizon 2020) and at 
Member State level. This way, E urope’s ability to enhance the economic performance of its companies and improve 
the capacity to compete through knowledge is improved.  
The results of the project can therefore be disseminated more broadly and faster, to the benefit of researchers, innovative 
industry and citizens. Even though it is believed that Open Access can also boost the visibility of European research, 
and in particular offer SMEs access to the latest research for utilisation, it has to be kept in mind that Open Access will 
not inte rfere with Consortium decisions to exploit project research outcomes commercially or by patent process. 
Therefore, the project will take into account the legitimate interests of the partners in terms of data protection and IPR 
issues relate to commercial impacts of project outcomes.   
ASTEP will develop and implement open access to the project research results according to the following main 
conditions: All peer reviewed research article will be deposited into on line repository, 2) To make the best effort to 
have open access to the articles with a delay (embargo) of 6 -12 months as maximum. ASTEP will encourage partners 
also at their Member State level to Open Access publishing and thus contribute to their coordination within the 
European Research Area. The consortium partners will follow the “gold” model, as they wish to maximise public and 
researcher access. Consequently, open access will be granted to all scientific publications resulting from the 
project.  
 
 
12 European commission. Horizon 2020 in a brief. ISBN: 978-92-79-33057-5 doi:10.2777/3719. Luxembourg.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 34 
Research Data Management: 
All partners will be responsible for publishing project results in local and international press (press releases or 
newsletters in magazines and newspapers, etc.) and in peer-reviewed scientific journals and conferences. As previously 
mentioned, RELA will maintain an overview of all published results and in cooperation with the Project Coordination, 
RELA will intervene in case of results that have been classified as publishable do not receive the necessary 
dissemination. In addition, the Consortium  will ens ure that all project related publications can be read online, 
downloaded and printed. However, as any additional rights such as the right to copy, distribute, search, link, crawl, and 
mine increase the utility of the accessible publication, efforts will be made to provide for as many of them as possible. 
Several open access schemes will be proposed for use to all consortium members. Depending on the nature, the 
importance, the cost and the available budget, a decision will be taken by the coordinator in coo peration with the 
Dissemination Manager  and the proposing partner as to the best open access scheme which is to be followed. A 
dedicated budget for open access scientific publications has been reserved, which will be used for “green” or “gold” 
publications in reputable journals. Alternative repositories such as the Open Access Infrastructure for Research in 
Europe (OpenAIRE), the Registry of Open Access Repositories (ROAR) and the Directory of Open Access 
Repositories (OpenDOAR) etc will be also exploited, as there are supported by the EC and there is no cost related to 
using these repositories. In all cases, as soon as possible and at the latest within six months after the publication is 
performed, RELA will be responsible to collect a machine-readable electronic copy of the published manuscript version 
in order to be deposited in the project website either as a reproduction, if permitted by the publisher, or as a direct link 
to the publication. In addition, the research data and bibliographic metadata needed to validate the results presented in 
the deposited scientific publications will be stored in the respective area of the repository. Finally, REL A will contact 
and exploit EC portals and tools (OpenAIRE, Horizon the EU Research and Innovation Magazine, research*eu results 
magazine, research*eu focus, etc.) in order to make the ASTEP generated knowledge publically available. Since the 
aforementioned tools provide free of charge, online access to the respective publications for any user, they will ensure 
open access of these publications. 
ASTEP participates in the Pilot Action on Open Access to Research Data which is part of the Horizon 2020 program. 
The goal is to provide, where possible, accurate and high -quality data to the research community so that the p roject 
will contribute to future advancements in the field of  thermal solar energy in industrial sites. A table summarizing the 
generated data, how it will be accessible (if possible) and how it will be preserved  will be released within DMP . 
Commercially sensitive data are declared confidential and described in the exploitation plan and Intellectual Property 
Rights (IPR) section. 
 
Data Management Plan (DMP): 
Over the projects’ life significant amounts of data will be produced as a result of ASTEP joint R&D activities. A data 
management plan is developed to set standards for protecting and managing the generated data and to maintain its 
integrity such that it is available during and after the project to its owners, stakeholders and/or the public depending on 
the level of confidentiality. Furthermore, a well-structured data plan minimizes the risk of loss of valuable data which 
would negatively impact future projects building on the results of the ASTEP project.  
Therefore, a DMP template will be developed using guidance provided by the EU and the Digital Curation Centre. The 
corresponding deliverable will be issued by M6.and will be updated as new data sets are produced during the project 
life. The purpose of the DMP is to provide an analysis of the main elements of the data management policy that will 
be used by the applicants regarding all the datasets that will be generated by the project. The DMP is not a fixed 
document but evolves during the lifespan of the project. The DMP should address the poi nts below on a dataset by 
dataset basis and should reflect the current status of reflection within the consortium about the data that will be 
produced.  
• Data set reference and name  
Qualification database of the materials/coatings produced with actual st andards and new protocols for PSC 
developments and testing. In addition, a separate dynamic data base will be created for storing modeling designs and 
data. Each individual partner has the choice to adapt their own code structuring for tracking development s such that it 
matches with their internal procedures. However, some guidelines will be developed to simplify identification of data 
for multi-partner use.  
• Data set description  
WP leaders are responsible for generating and/or collecting data within the ir WPs (i.e. BUL in WP2, UNED in WP3, 
UPCT in WP4, EXE in WP5, UPM in WP6, UPM in WP7, and VERT in WP8), sharing of data through the appropriate 
channels and delivery of the data set description. A private section within the ASTEP website will be dedicated  for 
storing and access to these data bases. The dataset description will clearly define the nature of the data (generated or 
collected), type of data (testing, modeling, literature/market research), potential use of the data/results (internal, 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 35 
benchmark, publication, etc.) and the to whom the data could be of value. Furthermore, links to other relevant data 
sources will be included such that exploitation of the final results will be easy. 
• Data sharing  
During the life of the project, data will be shared between the partners and the European Commission. After the end of 
the project, it will be discussed if and how the data or part of the data can be made available to external parties, by 
providing open access.  
• Archiving and preservation (including storage and backup)  
Through the website of the project, the data base will be shared with the partners and EU Commission, and if proceed 
to the external parties, with a lifetime of 5 years after the end of th e project. A fee will be foreseen in case the data is 
open to external parties in order to afford data base update and management. 
 
Communication activities13,14 
ASTEP is aligned with the Rome Declaration on Responsible Research and Innovation in Europe and is fully 
committed with the EC DG Research and Innovation’s main objective of fostering public engagement and sustained 
two-way dialogue between science and civil society. Moreover, general public awareness and acceptance of their active 
role in the renewable energy markets is crucial for the success of the energy transition. 
Therefore, an intensive Communication Plan will be implemented within ASTEP with the aim of e ngaging all the 
societal actors via inclusive participatory approaches. Communication plan will be consistently implemented 
throughout the whole lifetime of the project and will focus on two main areas and objectives: 
Internal communication management: The main objective is to keep a fluid interaction between project partners and 
to establish a transparent and accessible information sharing mechanisms. Communication between different partner 
subgroups to work on common goals or tasks will be always performed in an orderly and detailed way, making use of 
some of the many technological tools for teleworking, and following a clear methodology to establish at all times how 
work must be done together. Communication between partners will be supported mainly by tel ephone and 
videoconferences, email and face-to-face meetings. Besides, a restricted access area of the project’s website will allow 
project documents sharing and monitoring of the progress status of the project. The project coordinator will be 
responsible for launching and keeping updated this private area. 
External communication activities:  Communicating relevant knowledge about the project’s latest activities and 
achievements to the relevant identified ASTEP target audiences is certainly a way to keep all partners actively involved 
in the project and the ASTEP consortium accordingly realizes that communication is not something that should be dealt 
as a side task; on the contrary, it is one of the topmost aspects, priorities and prerequisites of running a s uccessful 
research project. In this context, the draft communication plan for promoting this project and its results, include an 
efficient and effective mix of both interpersonal and mass communication tools. Moreover, it shall be strongly 
emphasized, that for each targeted audience, a distinct strategy using targeted messages, means and language has been 
planned. Namely, specific audiences and communication methods have been defined for promoting ASTEP and its 
main results: 
• Direct proactive communications and physical demonstration: Attendance in seminars and conferences, one -
to-one communication, e-mailing stakeholders, periodic newsletters, etc.; 
• Clustering activities: Contacting parallel related projects, cross-field events; 
• Mass and general communication: Project website, press releases, posters and leaflets; 
• Scientific excellence: Publications in highly-ranked journals, presentations in conferences; 
• Academic: Conveyance of the new knowledge into University curricula, publications of MSc and PhD theses. 
Target Groups/End users: As already stressed above, an extremely imperative precondition so as to ensure augmented 
exploitation, high impact and increased likelihood of uptake of the project’s results, is to prudently and effectually 
disseminate and communicate the appropriate information to the relevant and interested audience; in a concise, well -
articulated, understandable and attractively packaged manner. Hence communicating the right information and 
messages to the right people, using the right language  and suitable means is the key to a successful dissemination 
strategy. In this context, by clearly identifying and classifying the different ASTEP target groups, the messages and 
information to be consigned to each of them as well as the communication language, measures and channels with which 
they shall be sent to each tier of audience, the likelihood of uptake of the project’s findings is exceedingly increased. 
In this regard, the following Table 2.8 presents the main communication measures to be used for effectively diffusing 
project related knowledge and information to each ASTEP target audience/end user as below. The aim of the 
communication activities within the project is to inform as many people as possible about the existence, the activities 
 
1.1.1 13 See participant portal FAQ on how to address communication activities in Horizon 2020 
14 For further guidance on c ommunicating EU research and innovation for project participants , please refer to the H2020 Online 
Manual on the Participant Portal. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 36 
and the results of the project. Each target audience needs is specific message and channel. For this purpose, various 
communication actions will be undertaken in order to maximize the visibility of the project and therefore its impact. 
This greatly benefits the p roject as such but mostly the partners as the consequences can be a good exploitation or 
future research projects. As a whole, the European Union needs to show it excellence in the field of solar thermal 
energy utilization and the pioneering research projects for industrial application. 
 
Table 6 Communication activities 
Communication 
Measures/Actions Target Audience Timescale 
Project visual identity All 1-48 
Project Website with intranet Consortium, Researchers, Industries, General public 1-48 
Participation in fairs Research community, SMEs and large industries 6-48 
Wikipedia article Professionals and general public 6-48 
Newsletter Project’s community 6-48 
Videos General public and scientific community 44-48 
Press release General public 44-48 
Posters / Interviews Research community 6-48 
Twitter account and LinkedIn 
group 
General public and research community 1-48 
 
Strategies for effective communication: As far as possible when communicating about ASTEP, the consortium will 
communicate impact (change) of the action instead of communicating on administrative or procedural milestones. The 
consortium will make a concerted effort to find more effective ways to communicate impact, through storytelling as 
opposed to facts to improve the visibility of activities and impact. T hrough t his effective f orm of communication 
ASTEP will be able to support project transparency, demonstrate accountability and improve access to information. 
The consortium will look to build awareness of the outcomes of ASTEP among target audience and with user groups 
regionally, nationally and globally and thus, create wider engagement. 
 
3 IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
Overall description /graphical description 
The project is divided into 9 work-packages (WP), each with its own tasks, deliverables and associated milestones 
in order to facilitate implementation and monitoring of progress. First, the project management activities are centered 
in WP1. The End-user requirements for the prototypes Testing at the Industrial Sites are centered in WP2. The different 
technologies that will be developed in the proposal are: Application of SunDial Technology to the Solar Concept 
(WP3), Application of Energy Storage to the So lar Concept (WP4), Combined ASTEP Specification Design 
(WP5). The state of the art of the partners’ knowledge implemented in WP3-WP5 begins the actual proposal at TRL3. 
The different technologies are implemented and tested in the different partner’s laboratory in Construction, Testing 
and Validation of ASTEP (WP6) to lead the proposal to  TRL4. Finally, the complete concept proposal is tested in  
ASTEP Concept at Industrial Sites (WP7) at 2 End-Users (Arcelor Mittal Tubular Products Iasi (AMTP), and 
Mandrekas (MAND), using the ASTEP Concepts to test them at their Industrial Sites under Operational conditions 
to lead the project to the objective  TRL 5. A very important featur e of the current proposal is to assess the 
Sustainability Assessment of the Concept proposal  (WP8) not only in  a favorable geographical location, (lower 
than 40ºN Latitude for MAND acting as End-user), but also in a more unfavorable location (such as AMTP acting as 
End-User located in Iasi (Romania) at 46.7ºN). Finally, a key activity of the project is the definition of how the project 
developments are exploited, disseminated and communicated to the different stakeholders at Communication, 
Dissemination and Exploitation (WP9). 
 
WPs are described in Table 3.1a, the combined work effort of the project is summarized in Table 3.1b. The respective 
deliverables for each Work Package are listed in Table 3.1c. Each WP is led by a project partner experienced in the 
corresponding area, to ensure the best practice and work efficiency. The approach described in section 1.3 will ensure 
the correct testing of the technologies at the two (2) end-user’s facilities. 
The Program Evaluation Review Technique (PERT) chart showing the WP interdependencies among the different WPs 
and tasks is shown in Figure 3.1 while the Gantt Chart showing the timing of the Work Packages is shown in Figure 
3.2. The potential risks have been identified and contingency plans proposed (discussed in Section 3.2 under “ Critical 
risks and mitigation measures”).  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 37 
 
Figure 3.1: PERT Chart WP dependencies 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 38 
 
 
Start 
Month
End 
Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
WP1 Project Management and Coordination UNED 1 48
T1.1 Work plan, Coordination and 
Document  Management UNED 1 48 D1.1     D1.4 
T1.2 Administrative and Financial 
Management UNED 1 48 D1.4 D1.4  D1.5
T1.3 Advisory Board Management UNED 1 48   D1.2
T1.4 Overall Quality and Risk Control UNED 1 48 D1.3 D1.3 D1.3
T1.5 Data and Ethical Management, 
Planning and Assessment UNED 1 48 D1.2  D1.2  D1.2
WP2 Requirements for ASTEP & Concept 
Design BUL 1 9
T2.1 Renewable energy source scenario 
analysis and system development BUL 1 9 D2.1
T2,2 Level 2 End-users scenario Analysis and 
Development SUN 1 9 D2.2
T2.3 Concept Design Development BUL 1 9 D2.3
WP3 Application of SunDial Technology to 
the ASTEP Concept UNED 3 21
T3.1 Basic design of Sundial for AMTP UNED 3 18 D3.1
T3.2 Basic design of Sundial for MAND UNED 3 21 D3.2
T3.3 Optimisation of Daily and Yearly 
Operation of Sundial DRA 6 21  D3.3
T3.4 Preliminary Thermo-Mechanical 
Analysis ADSC 6 21 D3.4
T3.5
Development of Control Strategies and 
Identification of Suitable 
Electronics/Sensors
ADSC 6 21  D3.5
T3.6 Detailed design of Sundial for AMTP 
and MAND IRIS 12 21  D3.6
WP4 Application of Thermal Energy Storage 
to the ASTEP Concept UPCT 3 21
T4.1 Basic Design UPCT 3 18     D4.1
T4.2 Modelling, CFD Simulation, and 
Optimization ADSC 3 21    D4.2
T4.3 Selection and Definition of Materials 
and Manufacturing PWR 6 21 D4.3 D4.3 D4.3
T4.4 Overall Analysis of Storage System DRA 6 21  D4.4
T4.5
Development of Control Strategies and 
Identification of Suitable 
Electronics/Sensors
UPM 6 21  D4.5
Lead WPs and Tasks
Year 1 Year 3 Year 4Year 2
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 39 
 
Figure 3.2: Timing of the Work Packages 
 
Start 
Month
End 
Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
WP5 Combined ASTEP Specification Design EXE 3 21
T5.1 Conceptual design of the ASTEP system EXE 3 18  D5.1
T5.2 Simulation of the Thermodynamic 
Performance of the ASTEP System BUL 6 21  D5.2
T5.3
Overall integrated system designs and 
simulations of the ASTEP system for 
End-User cases
EXE 6 21  D5.2
T5.4
Integration of Control Strategies and 
Optimization of ASTEP system 
performance
IRIS 9 21   D5.3
WP6
Construction, Testing and Validation of 
ASTEP Concept at Laboratory 
Environment
UPM 21 30
T6.1
SunDial ASTEP component 
procurement, construction,  installation 
and tests
UPM 21 27 D6.1.1 D6.1.2 D6.1.1 D6.1.2
T6.2 Storage system ASTEP storage system, 
construction, installation and test. UPCT 21 27        D6.2   
T6.3 Absorption heat pump and heat 
exchanger selection and procurement EXE 21 27 D6.3 D6.3
T6.4 Control system components installation 
and testing IRIS 24 30 D6.4
T6.5 Test results integration UPM 24 30 D6.4
T6.6 Revaluation of Designs of WP3-WP4-
WP5 After Testing-Validation UNED 24 30  D6.5
WP7 ASTEP Concept at Industrial Sites DRA 30 45
T7.1 Implementation of Concept Design for 
2 Test Cases DRA 30 33  D7.1     
T7.2 Installation & Commissioning on Site DRA 30 33  D7.2     
T7.3 Monitoring DRA 33 45  D7.3  D7.3  
T7.4 Validation DRA 33 45  D7.4   D7.4  
WP8 Sustainability Assessment VERT 6 46
T8.1 Life Cycle Assessment VERT 6 46 D8.1   D8.1   D8.1
T8.2 Life Cycle Costing BUL 13 46  D8.2  D8.2  D8.2
T8.3 Social LCA VERT 6 46 D8.3  D8.3  D8.3
T8.4 Social Acceptance VERT 24 46    D8.4
T8.5 Exergy Analysis EXE 24 46  D8.5     D8.5
WP9 Exploitation, Dissemination and 
External Communication CHX 1 48
T9.1 Communication Strategy Activities UPCT 1 48  D9.1  D9.1    D9.1
T9.2 Dissemination Strategy Activities CHX 1 48  D9.3 D9.2 D9.2
T9.3 Solar Energy Helix ADSC 1 48  D9.4          
T9.4 Exploitation Strategy EXE 1 48  D9.5   D9.5
   DX.X stands for Deliverable (DX.X)
WPs and Tasks Lead 
Year 2 Year 3 Year 4Year 1
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 40 
 
Table3.1: Work Packages included in the ASTEP project 
Work 
package 
No 
Work  
Package 
Title 
Lead 
Participa
nt No 
Lead 
Participant 
Short Name 
Person-
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
month 
1 Project Management and 
Coordination 1 UNED 48 1 48 
2 Requirements for ASTEP & 
Concept Design 8 BUL 44 1 9 
3 Application of the SunDial 
Technology to the ASTEP Concept 10 UNED 64 3 21 
4 Application of Thermal Energy 
Storage to the ASTEP Concept 4 UPCT 77 3 21 
5 Combined ASTEP Specification 
design 7 EXE 49 3 21 
6 Construction, Testing and 
Validation of ASTEP at Laboratory 
Environment 
11 UPM 92 22 30 
7 ASTEP Concept at Industrial Sites 5 DRA 86 24 44 
8 Sustainability Assessment 3 VERT 61 6 46 
9 Communication, Dissemination and 
Exploitation 9 CHX 76,5 1 48 
  Total Person- Months 597,50 1 48 
 
Table 3.1a Work Package description 
WP 
Number 
1 Lead 
Beneficiary 
UNED Start 
Month 
1 End 
Month 
48 
WP Title Project Management and Coordination 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 14 6 1 1 2 10 1 1 1 
Participant Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND  
PM per Participant 1 1 2 2 1 2 1 1  
Objectives: 
The main objectives of this Work Package are: 
• To establish efficient operation of all project bodies, including proper decision making and conflict 
resolution at all levels. 
• To ensure required quality of project work and its results as well as to perform self -assessment and 
corresponding project monitoring, including risk management. 
• To organise overall project administration and supervision of financial flows as well as communication 
with EC and project reporting. 
• To provide necessary environment for collaboration within the consortium. 
• To lay down a set of tools and procedures in order to keep the documentation up -to-date, consistent and 
available for all the consortium members. 
Description of work  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 41 
Task 1.1 – Work plan, Coordination and Document Management (M1 – M48) Leader: UNED, Participant: 
ADSC. This task involves overall project planning, coordination (including internal project meetings, 
communication strategy and working environment) and management of the documentation that must be generated. 
This documentation will be used during the project  according to the management principles and structures laid 
down in Section 3.2 . Additionally, this documentation will set up the necessary internal p roject meetings, 
communication strategy and working environment to enable the objectives of the project to be completed.  
Considering self -assessment activities, quality assurance and management of risks, external project relevant 
factors, decision making  process and conflict management. The coordinator in this respect is responsible for 
supporting effective working, verifying that the technical information and action tasks are described in Table 3.1. 
Finally, the coordinator will c ontrol that deadlines  are met, quality control, communication organization and 
meeting among consortium partners, ensuring high-level project representation. 
Task 1.2 - Administrative and Financial Management (M1 – M48) Leader: UNED. This task covers the 
operation and maintenance of the project administrative and management infrastructure. It also includes the 
financial control and management of resources and the coordination of internal affairs as well as maintaining the 
EC’s relationship with the project. Through esta blishment of the Project Secretariat, this task will assure overall 
project administration and communication, project reporting, preparation of management reports and internal 
project reviews, administration of project meetings at all levels, keeping project accounts, etc. 
Task 1.3 -Advisory Board Management  (M1 – M48) Leader: UNED, Participant: External Advisory 
Members. The Advisory Board will be formed by external experts that will advise strategically the consortium. 
The composition of the Advisory Boar d will be heterogeneous, including expertise from different sectors, not 
specifically related to technological research objectives. Currently the External Advisory members as their support 
Letters are incorporated in the Section 4 of the current proposal are: 
• Joao Paulo Oliveira acting as Executive Administrator from “ The Navigator Company ”, leading pulp 
and paper company in Portugal 
• Cristina Cristalli acting as Research and Innovation Director from “ Loccioni”, leading Italian service 
provider in energy and manufacturing.  
• David Gallego Martínez acting as Manager from “Regenera Levante”, leading Spanish service provider 
in thermal energy. 
In this task all the aspects related to the management of the Advisory Board will be handled, that is: coordination; 
meeting organization; distribution of documents and exchange of information. The task is aiming to gather relevant 
knowledge to implement the technological improvement of ASTEP prototypes and to generate key ideas for future 
exploitation and development of business plans. Each Advisory Board meeting will generate minutes and a set of 
recommendations. 
Task 1.4 -Overall Quality and Risk Control (M1 – M48), Leader: UNED, Participant: ADSC. This task is 
completely devoted to the continuously monitoring and management of possible risks that may arise during the 
implementation of the project. As described in Section 3.2, several risks may occur, and proper solutions need 
to be taken in order to treat th em without affecting the expected outcomes of the project. For this reason, the 
coordinator along with the Project Management Committee support will continuous ly monitor the proceeding of 
the project and participation of the project beneficiaries to the wo rk carried out within the project. So, to easily 
identify possible risks and be able to take fast contingency actions and decisions about them. Additionally, to 
control and mitigate any risk, the task will be devoted to guarantee quality of the different activities and outcomes 
from the project. 
Task 1.5 – Data and Ethical Management, Planning and Assessment (M 1-M48), Leader: UNED, 
Participant: ADSC. Through this task, data materializing during the project will be analysed, and a Data and 
Ethical Management document will be delivered, identifying best practices and specific standards. It will take into 
account ethical and Intellectual Property (IPR) related constraints, for access, storage and curation of data collected 
during project’s activities (WP2-WP8). For this reason, guiding principles and procedures regarding privacy, data 
protection, legal issues and ethical challenges will be considered. Data suitability for sharing and reuse, in 
accordance with existing legislation framework and ethical requirements is guaranteed while satisfying the need 
of open access and open data guidelines of the EC will be assured. This document will be maintained and updated 
during the project, fully addressing the lifecycle of data generated at various phases of ASTEP. The Consortium 
Agreement will establish detailed processes for IPR management ASTEP Project Legal and Ethics Committee will 
incorporate European and national ethical and legal requirements. 
Role of Main Partners:  UNED will coordinate the WP and the p roposal assisted by the partners ADSC and 
EBOS. 
Deliverables  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 42 
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D1.1 Project management and quality handbook, UNED, R, CO, M1 
Report will include all necessary project management procedures (reporting, approvals, etc.) 
to be performed by consortium members. 
D1.2 Data & ethical management, UNED, R, CO, M6/M24/M48 
Periodical Report will include information required in the Guidelines on Data Management 
an Ethical Management in Horizon 2020. 
D1.3 Risk Management, UNED, R, CO, M6/M24/M48 
Periodical Reports will include the risk policy, forecasted and detected risks and the 
mitigation measures. 
D1.4 Project Management Report, UNED, R, CO, M24/M48 
Periodical management report summarizing the development and particularities of the 
Project Management.  
D1.5 Final Report, UNED, R, PU, M48 
The management reports will include information required in corresponding guidelines of 
the Horizon 2020 programme and every aspect related to the Advisory Board meetings.  
 
WP 
Number 
2 Lead 
Beneficiary 
BUL Start 
Month 
1 End 
Month 
9 
WP Title Requirements for ASTEP & Concept Design 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 2 0 0 1 2 0 9 16 0 
Participant Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND  
PM per Participant 0 1 4 1 0 0 4 4  
Objectives. 
The main objectives of this Work Package are: 
• To obtain thermal demand profiles of the SPIRE and other industrial sectors (Level 1) and identify the key 
performance indicators of the System 
• To obtain the thermal demand profiles developed for End-users. 
• To investigate integration strategies and design a demonstration rig capable of meeting the demonstration 
objectives keeping in mind the economic & commercial objectives. 
Description of work 
T2.1 Level 1 Thermal demand profile and definition of KPIs for ASTEP system (M1 -M5) Leader: BUL, 
Participant: All This task will review and identify the thermal demand profiles of several diverse industry sectors 
(including SPIRE, food processing, agricultural) and list the typical heating and cooling requirements and 
individual key performance indicators, design req uirements and operational limits (hours of operation, min/max 
temp) taking into account location and climate data and will be included as part of D2.1 report. The findings will 
be used to develop different industry application scenarios for the ASTEP modul ar system and be compared in 
WP5. 
T2.2 Level 2 End-users scenario Analysis and Development (M5-M9) Leader: SUN Participant: All 
This task examines potential end-user variations for the full-scale ASTEP modular system: 
• End-user Context 1 and 2 – Heat demand bias (temperature levels and heating hours) for AMTP and MAND 
• End-user Context 2 – Cooling demand bias (temperature levels and cooling hours) for MAND. 
• End-user Context 1 and 2 – Increasing energy storage infrastructure (demand response balancing) for AMTP 
and MAND. 
It will investigate and develop each scenario and produce schematics which go beyond the basic demonstration rig 
setup. This will involve, for example, designing compatible intelligent heating networks for each of the two sites 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 43 
(and cooling for the MAND site) and, analysing thermal storage integration. It will report on heat demand profiles, 
heat supply performance, demand response and commercial aspects relevant to industrial partners (e.g. 
summarising relevant financial incentives). The report will also provide data which will be used for the blockchain 
interactive and smart digital platform. The findings generated in this task will feed in to the tailored ASTEP design 
for the 2 End-users.  
T2.3 Concept Design Development (M1-M9) Leader: BUL, EXE Participant: All 
This task will outline the whole system in order to provide a preliminary concept design, searching for compatible 
and high efficiency SFR-heat pump/energy storage systems and integration strategies.  
 The report will also confirm key research schedules necessary in subsequent WPs which will be carried out to 
develop the state -of-the-art and to finalise equipment and system specifications. An initial concept report that 
provides a starting point for mod elling and research/engineering of the individual components in WP3 -5 will be 
developed and reviewed in a consortium meeting. 
Role of Main partners: BUL will coordinate the WP with information provided by AMTP and MAND and shared 
tasks with SUN and EXE to obtain the thermal demands from End-users. 
Deliverables  
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D2.1 Level 1 end user requirements and KPIs, BUL, R, CO, M5 
Report will include energy demand profiles, energy supply performance, demand response 
and commercial aspects relevant to SPIRE, food processing and agricultural industries. 
D2.2 Level 2 End-user and context analysis Report, SUN, R, CO, M9 
Report will include energy demand profiles, energy supply performance, de mand response 
and commercial aspects relevant to the end-users involved in the ASTEP project. 
D2.3 Final Concept Design Report, BUL, R, CO, M9 
The report will establish a strong evidence-based data set and formulate possible integration 
options. 
 
WP 
Number 
3 Lead 
Beneficiary 
UNED Start 
Month 
3 End 
Month 
21 
WP Title Application of the SunDial Technology to the ASTEP Concept 
Participant. Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 33 9 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 
Participant. Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND 
 
PM per Participant 0 10 0 0 0 8 0 0  
Objectives.  
The main objectives of this Work Package are:  
• Optical design and optimisation of the SunDial Fresnel collectors for each application and latitude. 
• Thermal-hydraulic design and optimisation of the receivers to accomplish the thermal requirements of 
the industry processes. 
• Analysis of the daily and yearly operation of the two end-user’s systems. 
• Thermo-mechanical analysis of the receiver and heat exchangers and link to the thermal stores. 
• Design of the control strategies and selection of the sensors and actuators. 
• Detailed design of the SunDial Fresnel collectors. 
Description of work 
T3.1 Basic design of Sundial for AMTP (M3-M18). Leader: UNED, Participants: AMTP, UPM, EXE, 
ADSC, DRA 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 44 
The preliminary design of the rotary Fresnel system for the application of AMTP will be addressed. In this case, 
the Sundial design will consist on a rotary platform containing several rows of rotating mirrors concentrating the 
irradiation to the linear receiver. Mirrors and receiver, which are parallel to each other, are installed onto a rotating 
structure. This platform will turn around a vertical axis so that the sun is always within the collector transversal 
plane. At the same time, mirrors will rotate around their longitudinal axis in order to reflect onto the receiver as 
the sun altitude varies. Thus, the system follows the Sun using a two-axis tracking system, i.e. the platform rotates 
with the sun’s azimuthal angle and the tilting angle of the mirrors change following the solar altitude. UNED leads 
the task and is responsible for the receiver design, aide d by UPM and ADSC. The kind of tube will be selected 
(evacuated or not evacuated, diameter, module length, etc.) as well as the selective coating and the secondary 
reflector characteristics. UPM is responsible for the solar field optimisation, aided by UNE D, including the 
geometric design of the mirrors, number of rows, width, optical properties, diameter and tilt of the platform, etc. 
The design will be addressed from  theoretical calculations and simulation tools. All the mathematical and 
numerical models will be developed ad -hoc for the project. They will be implemented in Matlab (or any similar 
tool). EXE, BUL and DRA will provide the information regarding the thermal requirement from the industrial 
processes.  
T3.2 Basic design of Sundial for MAND. (M3-M21). Leader: UNED, Participants: UPM, E XE, ADSC, 
DRA, MAND 
The preliminary design of the rotary Fresnel system for the application of MAND will be addressed. In this case, 
the Sundial design will consist of a rotary platform containing several rows of fix ed mirrors concentrating the 
irradiation on the linear receiver.  Mirrors and receiver, which are parallel to each other, are installed onto a rotating 
structure. This platform will turn around a vertical axis so that the sun is within the collector symmetry plane at all 
times (Fig. 2). Thus, the system follows the Sun using a one-axis tracking system, i.e. the platform rotates with the 
Sun’s azimuthal angle. UNED leads the task and is responsible for the receiver design, aided by UPM and ADSC. 
The kind of tube will be selected (evacuated or not evacuated, diameter, module length, etc.) as well as the selective 
coating and the secondary reflector characteristics. UPM is responsible for the solar field optimisation, aided by 
UNED, including the geometric design of the mirrors, number of rows, width, optical properties, diameter and tilt 
of the platform, etc. 
The design will be addressed form theoretical calculations and simulation tools. All the mathematical and 
numerical models will be developed ad -hoc for the project. They will be implemented in Matlab (or any similar 
tool). EXE and BUL will provide the information regarding the thermal requirement from the industrial process. 
T3.3 Optimisation of Daily and Yearly Operation of Sundial. (M6-M21). Leader DRA, Participants: 
UNED, UPM, DRA, AMTP, MAND, EXE 
Once the devices are outlined, in this task their performance will be evaluated and optimised. For that, the 
simulation at design condition and at part load operation of the Sundial is required. Th is simulation will be done 
using ad -hoc codes developed by UNED and UPM for this purpose. Also, the characterisation of the typical 
working day and meteorological year for the site of each End-User is needed. 
In a second step, the systems will be optimised to maximize the production, according to the requirements provided 
in WP2. Finally, the dynamics of the systems will be assessed. The evaluation will be carried out again using 
simulation codes developed ad-hoc. In this case, TRNSYS and/or Open Modellica will be used as simulation tools. 
UNED leads the task and is responsible for the steady state and transient simulations. UPM aids in the optimization 
process. DRA will assist with matching of the system operation with the thermal storage units. 
T3.4 Preliminary Thermo-Mechanical Analysis. (M6-M21), Leader ADSC, Participants: UNED, DRA 
This task aims to the thermal -hydraulic validation and thermo -mechanical analysis of the receiver and heat 
exchangers. This analysis will include environmental load factors in fluence on optical and thermal conversion. 
The analysis will be done using CFD simulation codes, particularly Ansys-CFX. ADSC will lead the task and will 
be responsible for the CFD simulations. UNED aids ADSC in the thermal -mechanical analysis of the syste ms, 
including the thermal -mechanical stress analyses, fatigue calculation and life prediction in order to estimate 
whether the initial design should be considered as valid or, on the contrary, some modifications are required. 
T3.5 Development of Control Strategies and Identification of Suitable Electronics/Sensors (M6-M21). 
Leader: IRIS, Participants: UPM, UNED, ADSC 
Once the basic designs for the two end users are defined, IRIS will establish the most adequate control strategy by 
integrating proper commercial sensors for monitoring the SunDial Technology (sun irradiance, temperatures, heat 
transfer fluid flow, etc.), designing the required electronic systems for signal conditioning and telecommunications, 
as well as defining robust and real-time control strategies for guaranteeing proper behaviour of the system. Further 
integration for the whole ASTEP control system will be performed in task 5.4 
T3.6 Detailed design of Sundial for AMTP and MAND (M12-M21) Leader: UPM Participants: UNED, 
DRA, ADSC, IRIS 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 45 
In this task, the final and detailed design s of the systems for both end-users and sites are defined. The definition 
includes the selection of materials, drawings and a cost evaluation. UPM leads th is task, aided by UNED and 
ADSC in the drawings and selection of materials. 
Role of Main Partners: UNED will coordinate this WP sharing tasks with ADSC, UPM to design two (2) SunDial 
rotary Fresnel collectors. 
Deliverables  
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D3.1 Preliminary design of Sundial for AMTP. UNED, R, PU, M18 
Basic design of the Sundial for AMTP. It will consist on  the optic design, including the 
definition of the array of mirrors, and the thermal design. The document will include the 
selection of a one-or multi-tube receiver design. 
D3.2 Preliminary design of Sundial for MAND, UNED, R, PU, M21 
Basic design of the Sundial for MAND. It will consist on  the optic design, including the 
definition of the array of mirrors, and the thermal design. The document will include the 
selection of a one-or multi-tube receiver design. 
D3.3 Design of the daily and yearly operation for AMTP and MAND. DRA, R, PU, M21 
This report will describe the results of the simulations and the consequences for the operation 
of both future installations. 
D3.4 Preliminary Thermo-mechanical Analysis, ADSC, R, CO, M21 
This report will include the results and recommendations obtained from the analysis 
performed using FEA and CFD tools for the preliminary SunDial designs. 
D3.5 Control strategy for Sundial systems. IRIS, R, CO, M21 
Report of the selected sensors and control strategy for the Sundial system. 
D3.6 Detailed design of Sundial for both end users. UPM, R, CO, M21 
This deliverable will include the final detailed design of concentrators for both end users. 
 
WP 
Number 
4 Lead 
Beneficiary 
UPCT Start 
Month 
3 End 
Month 
21 
WP Title Application of Thermal Energy Storage to the ASTEP Concept 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 1 9 0 18 4 0 0 0 0 
Participant Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND  
PM per Participant 0 1 0 0 36 8 0 0  
Objectives.  
The main objectives of this Work Package are: 
• Design of the hybrid thermal energy storage system, considering three subsystems:  
o PCM selected for two end-user’s requirements;  
o Shell-side insert;  
o Active hydraulic circuit and regulation. 
• Selection of the optimal geometry  for the inserts and multi -tube system, by means of modelling and 
simulation of the unsteady heat transfer phenomena during charging and discharging of heat energy in the 
storage system. Selection of metal alloy -based materials for the  inserts and assess investment casting and 
assembly procedures. 
• Overall analysis of the storage systems and their integration with the solar collectors. 
Description of work 
T4.1 Basic Design (M3-M18). Leader UPCT Participants: UNED, UPM, DRA, PWR 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 46 
This task is devoted to the definition of the overall engineering aspects of the energy storage system. Integration 
with the overall solar system and with the end user application s (steel industry and food sector)  will be the first 
objective, aiming at defining: a) heat transfer flui d (HTF), accordingly with the SunDial Fresnel collector design 
and operational conditions; b) flow rate of HTF and expected range of inlet temperatures, following the wide 
irradiance conditions in the end users location; c) maximum energy storage capacity.  
Likewise, the concept design of the active hydraulic circuit will be accomplished in this task. The engineering 
strategy for controlling the velocity for energy charging and discharging will be defined, based on a variable 
hydraulic resistance of the heat transfer fluid path through the energy storage system. 
T4.2 Modelling, CFD Simulation, and Optimization (M3-M21). Leader ADSC Participants: UPCT 
This task is aimed at selecting the thermal conductivity enhancement method  in the shell of the energy storage 
system. This will be followed by selecting the dimensions and distribution pattern of the selected method(s). It is 
possible that two methods will be selected, as heat storage media operating at two different temperatures are needed 
for the two prototypes.  Likewise, the modelling of the energy charging and discharging cycles under solar 
irradiance coupling conditions will be performed. 
Optimization routines will be considered for defining insert design that minimizes the metal weight yielding the 
best charging and discharging velocities. Some restrictions, like the shape of the inserts, the size and distribution 
of the heat transfer fluid conduits, and the mechanical strength of the overall system – based on the thermal cycle 
stresses – will be imposed. As a result of this task, a CAD model will be delivered to task T.4.3, for 3D printing of 
a polylactide polymer model. 
The understanding of the physical mechanisms that involve melting and solidification in the hybrid thermal energy 
storage system will be accomplished by means of numerical modelling and simulation. The coupling of the energy 
storage tank with the Fresnel collector, which works under continuously variable conditions, will be implemented 
in a CFD code for a proper modelling of the energy charging cycle. The discharging cycle will be described through 
a coupling of the  Thermal Energy Storage  (TES) with the end user application  (two being involved in this 
proposal). 
T4.3 Selection and Definition of Materials and Manufacturing  (M6-M21). Leader PWR. Participant: 
DRA 
This task will focus on the choice of PCM materials and manufacturing methods for PCM -based thermal energy 
storage units characterized by the high rate of charging and regulated rate of discharging and large storage capacity. 
At least two test units for composite PCMs storage systems shall be implemented and validated according to the 
criteria given by end-users. PCMs will be selected considering the appointed melting range (exceeding 175 °C or 
230 °C), possibly from multi -component mixtures of salts with high latent heat and low chemical affinity to 
aluminium inserts – a possible candidate for study will include sodium nitrate. Spatial metal inserts made of Al-Si 
alloys, characterized by a thermal conductivity of ≈164 W/m·K will be produced and applied in order to enhance 
the heat transfer within the energy storage units between outside source of heat and the PCM. The cho sen 
manufacturing technology of metal inserts (heat exchangers) consists of the following steps; FDM (Fused 
Deposition Modelling) realized by 3D printing from polymer, forming of the ceramic mould, removal of the 
polymer pattern by burning off and subsequent investment casting of the metal alloy in the mould cavity. Previous 
research confirmed the suitability of polylactide (PLA) polymer for 3D printing pattern which can be very quickly 
designed. Applied investment casting results in the manufacturing of exact copy of polymer pattern characterized 
by its complicated geometry. For complete filling of very intricate moulds the eutectic aluminium alloy AC 44200 
with good fluidity and thermo -physical properties can be used. Other Al-based alloys characterized by the k 
value of over 200 W/m K will be taken into consideration.  Modelled spatial designs of Al alloy-based inserts 
(heat exchangers) will be tested, but the particular emphasis will be placed on the honeycomb structures, because 
of their beneficial properties such as high stiffness and stress fatigue resistance. The design of the Al based inserts 
(heat exchangers) should ensure the mechanical resistance to stresses caused by the change of the coefficients of 
thermal expansion of the PCM during its phase transformation.   
The manufactured spatial elements with central pipe for the transportation of the heat transfer fluid will be joined  
by mechanical methods or by developed brazing method and by this way the large spatial element as the inside 
heat exchanger of the accumulator with the parallel and serial connections will be created.  
The two energy storage systems characterized by the above described design with the mixed insulation system 
(conventional and vacuum) will be built.  
T4.4 Overall Analysis of Storage System (M6-M21). Leader DRA Participants: UPCT 
The integration of the heat stores, the thermal fluid transfer mechanisms and the connection with the Fresnel solar 
collectors will be examined in detail to ensure that the thermal stores will meet the requirements of the two 
prototypes for the steel and f ood processing applications. This will be carried out in conjunction with Task 4.5 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 47 
below, as instrumentation and sensors to affect the control of the systems will, in many instances, need to be 
included within the stores and/or other components during the assembly process. Of particular importance will be 
the impact of changes in solar input during the times when solar energy is available, and the potential deterioration 
of storage potential in periods when the store is the only unit supplying the process heat (or, in the case of the food 
sector unit), cooling via the absorption chiller. 
T4.5 Development of Control Strategies and Identification of Suitable Electronics/Sensors (M6-M21). 
Leader: IRIS Participants: UPCT, DRA 
IRIS will design and implement the control strategy for the hybrid thermal energy storage system. Specific 
sensors for monitoring this technology will be selected (flow, temperature, pressure) and integrated. All the 
electronics systems will be taken into consideration and a reliable real-time control strategy will be put in place 
to assure proper performance of the system. Further integration for the whole ASTEP control system will be 
performed in task 5.4 
Role of Main partners: UPCT and PWR will share the development of the Thermal Energy Storage assisted by 
ADSC and DRA performing specific tasks. 
Deliverables  
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D4.1 Engineering configuration of the Thermal Energy Storage system, UPCT, PU, R, M18 
The thermal-hydraulic design of the TES system is reported including number of tubes, shell-
side inserts, heat transfer fluid and mass flow rates. 
D4.2 Modelling and simulation of the charging and discharging cycles of the TES. ADSC, 
PU, R, M21 
Analysis of the TES performance using CAE tools such as CFD 
D4.3 Selection and Definition of Materials and Manufacturing, PWR/UPCT/DRA, CO, R, 
M15/M18/M21 
• PCM selection and characterization. PWR, CO, R, M15 Phase change materials 
for each end user’s application will be selected and its thermal properties will be 
characterized. 
• Design of inserts for different end user’s applications, UPCT, CO, R, M18 The 
geometrical design of the shell-side inserts will be assessed for each application, 
using optimization routines 
• Assessment of the PCM insert manufacturing method and assembly. 
PWR/DRA, CO, R, M21 A definition of the metallurgical process for PCM 
manufacturing and assembly is assessed. 
D4.4 Report on the analysis of the storage system integration with other components. DRA. 
R, CO, M21 
The thermal stores for both industrial sites will be analyzed, taking into account the 
interconnection with the solar collectors, heat transfer links and, in one case, the absorption 
chiller. 
D4.5 Control strategy for hybrid thermal energy storage system. IRIS, R, CO, M21 
Report on the selected sensors and control strategy for the hybrid thermal energy storage 
system 
 
WP 
Number 
5 Lead 
Beneficiary 
EXE Start 
Month 
3 End 
Month 
21 
WP Title Combined ASTEP Specification Design 
Participant. Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 2 0 0 0 3 0 30 0 0 
Participant. Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 48 
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND 
 
PM per Participant 0 1 0 0 0 13 0 0  
Objectives.  
The main objectives of this Work Package are:  
• To define and numerically validate the individual components of the innovative ASTEP system and to 
develop an integrated model to facilitate system design with outputs from (WP3, WP4) 
• Study the critical design pathway with respect to the sizing and connectivity of the individual components 
and evaluate the design space against the conceptual demand profiles developed in WP2.  
• Produce designs for the integration of the ASTEP system to satisfy the thermal demands of the End -User 
Industrial sites highlighted in WP2 
• Validation and optimisation of the numerical model under simulation environment. 
• To integrate the overall control strategies of the units (WP3, WP4) for management of the integrated 
ASTEP system in real time. 
Description of work 
T5.1 Conceptual design of the ASTEP System (M3-M18). Leader: EXE, Participants: UNED, UPM, UPCT, 
DRA 
Component sub -models will be developed and integrated to form an overall dynamic system model under 
simulation environment. The component models will initially be validated using data from the literature and later 
using data obtained from tests of the deve loped components from WP 3 & 4. The overall system model will be 
developed to enable optimisation of design and control of the system and will have the capability to allow 
evaluation of the system performance with different component sizes and process conf igurations under different 
climate locations in order to satisfy thermal demand profiles with multiple heating and cooling requirements. 
T5.2 Simulation of the Thermodynamic Performance of the ASTEP system (M6 -M21). Leader: EXE 
Participants: UNED, UPM, UPCT, DRA 
This task will develop the specific design methodology for the ASTEP system using the model developed in task 
5.1. The design process will involve sizing, connectivity and scheduling for the components of the system: solar 
thermal, thermal storage, chiller (for one site, MAND), in order to meet the range of thermal demand profiles 
developed in WP2, leading to an assessment of the application of the ASTEP technology in a number of industrial 
scenarios. Design temperatures, working fluid(s), mass flow and other thermodynamic requirements will be 
determined in this task. The key performance indicators defined at WP2 will be analysed and included in the report. 
The design methodology will consider the stochastic nature of solar thermal generation and the design 
methodology will incorporate a target for the likelihood of the system to completely meet the thermal demand. 
This target, e.g., 95%, will be an important part of the design specification since it will capture the trade -off 
between system size (and therefore cost) and the fraction of the thermal demand met by solar energy. 
T5.3 Overall Integrated System Designs and Simulations of the ASTEP system for End-User cases (M6 -
M21). Leader: EXE Participants: UNED, UPM, UPCT, DRA 
Using the methodology develop ed in T5.2, two designs will be produced specifically tailored to the demands of 
the industrial partners, according to the requirements and geographical locations identified in WP2. The predicted 
performance of the designs will be assessed using the integr ated process model and component level design 
requirements will be provided to the partners such that the prototypes components fabricated in WP6 will meet the 
needs of the integrated systems. As a result of this task, a multi-parametric matrix which includes all the key design 
and operational parameters, will be produced. The results of these simulations will feed into the demonstration and 
validation activities. The results will be compared against the monitoring results during the last phase of the project. 
T5.4 Integration of Control Strategies and Optimization of ASTEP system performance (M6-M21). Leader: 
IRIS Participants: EXE, UNED, UPM, UPCT, DRA 
In this task different integrated plant wise control strategies will be designed and evaluated,  based on the unit 
control and instrumentation systems defined for both the Sun Dial technology (task 3.5) and the thermal energy 
storage system (task 4.5). Dynamic transient simulation using a virtual absorption machine will be performed by 
EXE, helped by  the outgoing experimental data. The available solar radiation determines the operating 
temperatures of the cycle, hence the importance of developing a control strategy that would maximize the available 
solar energy through the system operation under parti al load in an anticipated way. Managing a common heat 
generator to produce heating and cooling loads, requires regulation strategies that manage the optimal operating 
conditions and transients in each case. Therefore, this task will set up a framework for learning the energy needs, 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 49 
controlling, seeking to optimise the ASTEP system performance and meet  the end user requirements, for both 
heating and cooling requirements. 
Role of Main partners:  EXE will lead the integrated ASTEP system design assisted by IRIS  in the control 
strategies development. 
Deliverables  
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D5.1 Report on the integrated ASTEP model development and Conceptual Designs, EXE, R, 
PU, M18 
Report on the integrated ASTEP model, conceptual design, specification, sizing of ASTEP 
system and simulation results will be documented as part of this report. 
D5.2 System component and final integration design report, EXE, R, CO, M21 
Description of the final system components and its integration of ASTEP model specifically 
tailored for to two end user case profile will be listed as part of this report. 
D5.3 Integrated Control strategies and framework for ASTEP combined systems, IRIS, R, 
CO, M21 
Report describing the integrated control and instrumentation selected for the ASTEP 
combined system. 
 
WP 
Number 
6 Lead 
Beneficiary 
UPM Start 
Month 
21 End 
Month 
30 
WP Title Construction, Testing and Validation of ASTEP Concept at 
Laboratory Environment 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 15 11 0 11 3 0 8 0 0 
Participant Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND  
PM per Participant 0 30 0 0 9 5 0 0  
Objectives. 
The main objectives of this Work Package are: 
• Construction and installation of ASTEP concepts of the three main sub -systems: solar field, storage and 
integrated control system. 
• Tests of the three sub-systems under constrains stated by AMTP for different solar inputs. 
• Tests of the three sub-systems under constrains stated by MAND for different solar inputs. 
• Integration of sub -systems results, including data from WP3, WP4, and WP5, in a global model for 
revaluation to advance from TRL3 to TRL 4. 
Description of work 
T6.1 SunDial ASTEP component procurement, construction, installation and tests. (M21-M27). Leader: 
UPM Participant: UNED, IRIS 
During this task two ASTEP concentrators will be built using the design resulting from WP3 for both AMTP and 
MAND and tested during several months. As a result of the task, a complete model of the system must be obtained, 
which includes steady state operation, start up and shut off. UPM will lead this task, which will include the 
following sub-tasks: 
T6.1.1 Construction of ASTEP concentrator. Leader: UPM. Participant: UNED, IRIS 
UPM will lead this sub-task. The two ASTEP concentrators will be built in Tecnogetafe, close to Madrid. 
UPM will lead the installation of the solar platform, including the structure, mirrors, receivers and rotating 
joint. UNED will carry out the installation of an external heat exchanger, where the atmosphere will be 
the system heat sink. It must be developed so that exhaust air temperature is safe at operating conditions. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 50 
IRIS will implement the control system in order to  operate both prototypes: rotation of the platforms, 
rotations of mirrors for AMTP, pumping system operation and defocusing in case of critical temperatures. 
As a requirement for the ASTEP concentrators´ installation, common materials accessible in any loc al 
industry must be used in order to achieve a higher social impact.  
As a result of this sub-task, both ASTEP concentrators must be installed and fully operating for the tests.  
T6.1.2 Testing of AMTP ASTEP concentrator. Leader: UPM, Participant: UNED, IRIS 
UPM will lead this sub-task together with the collaboration of UNED, whereas IRIS will be in charge of 
the control system. First, a series of test for heating the system up and cooling down will be carried out. 
The objective of these tests will be to ac hieve temperature requirements given by AMTP while avoiding 
receiver damages due to thermal stresses. These tests will be developed first during the morning/afternoon, 
when the sun altitude is low and, thus, when the solar impin ging power is limited. Then,  tests will be 
carried out at midday, in order to simulate system heating for summer days. Then, continuous operation 
of the ASTEP concentrator will be tested for different days with important sun altitude variations 
(summer, spring and autumn). As a resul t of this sub-task, a relevant amount of data will be available in 
order to develop a model to integrate the AMTP solar field with the storage system and the ASTEP system.  
T6.1.3 Testing of MAND ASTEP concentrator. Leader: UPM Participant: UNED, IRIS 
UPM will lead this sub-task together with the collaboration of UNED, whereas IRIS will be in charge of 
the control system. First, a series of test for heating the system up and cooling down will be carried out. 
The objective of these tests will be to achie ve temperature requirements given by MAND while avoiding 
receiver damages due thermal stresses. These tests will be developed first during the morning/afternoon, 
when the sun altitude is low and, thus, when the solar imping power is limited. Then, tests wi ll be carried 
out at midday, in order to simulate system heating for summer days. Then, continuous operation of the 
ASTEP concentrator will be tested for different days with important sun altitude variations (summer, 
spring and autumn). As a result of this  sub-task, a relevant amount of data will be available in order to 
develop a model to integrate the MAND solar field with the storage system and the ASTEP system.  
T6.2 Storage system ASTEP storage system, procurement, construction,  installation and test. (M21-
M27). Leader: UPCT Participant: UPM, UNED, EXE, DRA, IRIS 
During this task a n ASTEP PCM storage system will be built and tested, employing the design resulting from 
WP4. UPCT will lead this task, which will include the following sub-tasks:  
T6.2.1 Construction of storage system. Leader: UPCT, IRIS, PWR 
As a result of this sub -task, two different ASTEP storage systems, working with different PCMs for the 
requirements of the test sites, will be installed for melting and solidification tests under realistic operating 
conditions. UPCT will lead this sub -task, PWR will assist with the integration of inserts  into the overall 
heat exchange equipment, and IRIS will implement the control system in order to operate  a controlled 
discharge process. The mechanical design will allow for a substitution of the phase change material, in 
order to test different PCMs. A cooling circuit will be employed to dissipate the stored energy in the TES, 
allowing for conducting discharging cycle tests.  
T6.2.2 Testing of storage system. Leader: UPCT. Participants: UPM, UNED, EXE, IRIS 
UPCT will lead this sub -task, where UPM and UNED  will collaborate in defining the charging 
requirements of the storage system whereas EXE and B UL will define the discharging requirements  and 
IRIS will be in charge of the control system . A  controlled electrical resistance, able to provide an 
irradiance-like variable heat source, will be employed for heating the heat transfer fluid during the charging 
cycle. First, tests will be carried out for steady state requirements under different thermal power exchange 
inputs. Then, a series of tests under transient power requirements will be carried out, including 
requirements given by AMTP and MAND solar fields.  A full characterization of the charging and 
discharging dynamics will be provided, as well as heat transfer coefficients during melting and 
solidification in the shell side of the TES. 
T6.3 Absorption heat pump and heat exchanger , procurement and interface system development.  (M21-
M27) Leader: EXE Participant: BUL, IRIS, DRA 
In order to ensure that the enhanced solar concentrator designs, it will be necessary to consider various 
commercially available small-scale absorption chillers and associated components e.g. heat exchangers. Based on 
activities and component selection in WP5, suitable absorption chiller devices, and other components will be 
purchased, and a design will be developed for an interface system that will couple the collector output to a low -
cost absorption chiller for MAND requirements. Once refined, a prototype version of the interface system will be 
built ready for testing, first in laboratory environment and, after revaluation, in intended environment. 
T6.4 Control system components installation and testing . (M24-M30) Leader: IRIS Participants: UNED, 
UPCT, EXE, DRA, UPM  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 51 
The control strategy defined in WP3, WP4, WP5 will be implemented in an embedded controller that will collect 
all measurements of sensors and apply control commands to all systems component and suitable. A specific 
electronic controller will be designed for the demonstrator ASTEP system by respecting the constraints of sensors 
integration, embedded computation, and external interface with computer to obtain an autonomous system to 
collect and monitor the performance of the system.  
T6.5 Test results integration (M24-M30) Leader: UPM Participants: UNED, UPCT, EXE, DRA 
This task is devoted to the integration of the results obtained in the previous tasks in a global model. UPM will 
lead the integration of the data obtained during the tests, where data of solar field tests will be provided by UPM 
and UNED, storage system data by UPCT whereas EXE and BUL will provide data from the ASTEP system. As 
a result of the model, an evaluation of the three sub-systems and their integration will be carried out. This analysis 
may prove that a sub-system model may need to be re-scaled for a more efficient integrated system, e.g. the ratio 
energy capacity/thermal power exchange of the storage s ystem may need to vary due to results obtained by the 
solar collector.  
T6.6 Revaluation of Designs of WP3 -WP4-WP5 After Testing -Validation (M24-M30) Leader: UNED 
Participants: UPM, UPCT, EXE, IRIS, DRA 
The basic design of the rotary Fresnel system , the storage system and the heat exchangers -absorption chiller will 
be checked and improved according to the test -validation task. In what refers to the solar concentrator , all the 
features of the systems (for both end -users) addressed in task s 3.1 and 3.2 will b e revaluated, considering the 
agreement between the testing results and the model’s prediction. The storage system tests will lead to a revaluation 
of the different phase change materials and structure and the compatibility with the needs of the chiller. In a second 
step, all the aspects learnt during the construction task and testing will be considered.  At this point, mitigation 
plans in case of eventual failures or contingencies will be implemented. Special attention will be put on the one - 
or two-axis tracking system that are key for the system, as well as the mirror mounting technique. Required changes 
on the three sub-systems will be done in order to optimize their performance at end-user sites. 
Role of Main partners: UPM will lead the ASTEP concept at Laboratory Environment assisted by UNED, UPCT, 
EXE, and ADSC.  
Deliverables  
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D6.1.1 ASTEP SunDial and corresponding Solar Field for AMTP. UPM, DEMO/R, CO, 
M21/M27 
• Demo ASTEP concentrator with two-axis tracking which will be used to carry out 
tests for AMTP system (DEMO, M21) 
• Report with the results from tests carried out on the two-axis tracking ASTEP 
concentrator, which will include heat output variation along different days. (R/M27)  
D6.1.2 ASTEP SunDial and corresponding Solar Field for MAND. UPM, DEMO /R, CO, 
M21/M27 
Demo ASTEP concentrator with one -axis tracking which will be used to carry out tests for 
MAND system (DEMO, M21) 
report with the results from tests carried out on the one -axis tracking ASTEP concentrator, 
which will include heat output variation along different days. (R/M27) 
D6.2 ASTEP Storage system and Test Results. UPCT, DEMO/R, PU, M21/M27 
• Demo storage system that will be used during the tests carried out in T6.2. This 
system will be able to use different PCMs (DEMO, M21) 
• Report with results from the tests carried out on the ASTEP storage system, 
including thermal efficiency and temperature loss for a complete cycle at 
temperatures. (R/ M27) 
D6.3 Integrated ASTEP system and Test results EXE, DEMO/R, PU, M21/M27 
• Demo of the heat exchangers and absorption chiller (for MAND) will be installed in 
order to carry out tests to validate the control of the ASTEP system. (DEMO, M21) 
• Report results from the tests carried out on the ASTEP system, including its 
behaviour for variable solar input along the day. (R, M27) 
D6.4 Integration of sub-systems results. UPM, R, PU, M30 
This report will include the integration of results obtained for the three sub-systems 
(concentrator, storage and heat exchangers/absorption chiller), including an analysis of the 
size of each component.   
D6.5 Revaluation of Basic Designs, UNED, R, PU, M30 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 52 
This report will include a revaluation of the designs carried out in WP3-5 for the three sub-
systems due to the results obtained in tasks T6.1-T6.3 respectively. Special attention will be 
paid to cost reductions. 
 
WP 
Number 
7 Lead 
Beneficiary 
DRA Start 
Month 
30 End 
Month 
45 
WP Title ASTEP Concept at Industrial Sites 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 2 5 0 0 13 11 2 0 0 
Participant Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND 
 
PM per Participant 9 9 11 11 0 3 0 10  
Objectives.  
The main objectives of this Work Package are: 
• Installation of the ASTEP units at the industrial sites (2 units). 
• Commissioning 
• Testing. 
• Monitoring and, finally, validation of the data obtained in the lab -trials based upon measurements made 
at the industrial sites. 
• Disseminating  the non-confidential data from the two Case Studies in a Report. 
Description of work 
The proposed work involves the integration of the ASTEP prototypes into the site -based industrial processes, 
involving (1) metal processing, and (2) dairy/cheese production , where they will be operated and monitored over 
a period of one year. 
Task 7.1 Implementation of Concept Design for 2 Test Cases (M30-M33). Leader: DRA 
Participants: See sub-tasks below 
• 7.1.1 (Metal processing) – AMTP, UNED, UPM, UPCT, IRIS, DRA 
For the AMTP site the ASTEP unit constructed and tested during WP6 will be dismantled and transported to 
the host company’s site. Any necessary troubleshooting will be undertaken, as will health and safety induction 
for both AMTP and visiting personnel. While it is anticipated that preparation work in WP6 will ease the path 
of the subsequent installation and commissioning, provision is allowed for changes in local conditions (such 
as production schedule) that might affect Task 7.2, part of which will run in parallel with the later stages of 
Task 7.1. Site weather conditions and solar insolation will be clarified during this stage. 
• 7.1.2 (Dairy/cheese production) – MAND, UNED, UPM, CRES, UPCT, IRIS, DRA 
The tasks here will be similar to those for Sub -task 7.1.1.  However, there will be an increased emphasis on 
ensuring that full hygiene procedures will be followed in commissioning etc., and also plann ing of the 
scheduling of the operation will be carefully studied to meet any changes in the production rota for the cheese 
etc. The addition of the absorption chiller will necessitate an extra emphasis on the scheduling and control 
aspects. 
Task 7.2 Installation & Commissioning on Site (M30-M33). Leader: DRA Participants: See sub-
tasks below. 
• 7.2.1 – AMTP, UPM, UNED, UPCT, IRIS, DRA 
AMTP engineers will assist the external team in assembling, installing and commissioning the solar thermal 
and storage system. Ideally this will be carried out during a process shut-down period, so that the control and 
storage systems can be tested without interference from or with the metallurgical processes. The performance 
of all components will be compared with those measured in laboratory testing and any anomalies addressed.  
This will be done on site where practicable. 
• 7.2.2 – MAND, UPM, UNED, CRES, UPCT, IRIS, DRA 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 53 
MAND scientists and engineers will assist the external team at this site. CRES will participate in the assembly 
and installation procedures of the solar system in the Greek industry and help in the positioning of the 
measuring equipment. The  commercially purchased absorption chiller will be integrated with the other 
components and included in the commissioning process. As in Sub -task 7.2.1, anomalies in behavior will be 
addressed. 
Task 7.3 Monitoring (M33-M45). Leader: DRA Participants: See sub-tasks below 
• 7.3.1 – AMTP, IRIS, RELA, EBOS 
• 7.3.2 – MAND, IRIS, CRES, EBOS 
This task will present all monitoring procedures carried out and results from the 2 Test Cases studies. The Task 
includes all the data from the measuring equipment, the various set ups tested together with data from the 
production process. The steel sector Test Case (AMTP) will be monitored by RELA while CRES will monitor the 
food sector Test Case (MAND) with special consideration of the absorption chiller unit. 
An important aspect of both monitoring exercises will be recording the maintenance needs – both preventative 
(e.g. keeping solar receivers clean) and addressing any breakdowns in the equipment, control system or other 
aspects of the installation. In both installations it will be important to ensure that the systems, should any failure 
occur, do not i nterfere with on -site metal or food production, and that a back -up system is available to ensure a 
smooth switch to normal operation should a failure occur. This task will include the development of an innovative 
dashboard by EBOS which will allow the collection of data from the various sensors and IoT gateways deployed 
at the lab sites. Using appropriate algorithms, analytics performance models will be created. All measurements and 
KPIs will be presented through a dashboard, using the latest state-of the-art web technologies, which will be able 
to remotely monitor in near real -time the various data collection points . CRES will gather the results from the 
Dairy industry (MAND), analyze the outcomes, and provide a comprehensive report detailing the system 
efficiencies. Similarly, RELA will gather similar results from the Steel industry (AMTP). 
Monitoring will extent over a one-year period to accommodate the four seasons. 
Task 7.4 Validation (M33-M45). Leader: DRA Participants: ADSC, UPM, UNED, UPCT EXE, 
BUL 
Validation exercises will be carried out based upon the data arising from both sites. This will involve comparisons 
of measured performance data with those obtained in laboratory trials. Of particular importance will be co -
ordination of plant performance data with the solar insolation during the trial period. A public report will be 
produced by DRA, bringing together data on the performance of both of the prototypes at the industrial sites. These 
will incorporate information on the LCA.  
The advanced intelligence dashboard developed by EBOS at T7.3 will be used for both understanding of the 
environment and for post data analytical purposes to assist in the validation exercises. The dashboard, supported 
by strong big data analytics mechanisms,  will enable the comparative assessment of the measurements performed 
against the expected KPIs, t hus supporting the WP actors to validate the  ASTEP concept and methodology, 
critically highlighting any relevant interference observed, gaps in the expected results, difficulties in the adaptation 
of the solution in the real use case, and other peculiarities of the context that might act as a constrain. 
Role of Main partners:  DRA will lead the ASTEP concept at the Industrial Environments assisted by UNED, 
CRES, RELA, EBOS, AMTP, and MAND. 
Deliverables  
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D7.1 ASTEP Transfer and Integration to End-user Sites, DRA, R, CO, M33 
Transfer of the prototype units to the sites and integration 
D7.2 Installation ad Commissioning of ASTEP units at Industrial Sites, DRA, R, CO, M33 
Installation and commissioning of the prototype units at the two industrial sites 
D7.3 Monitoring of the installations at the two industrial sites, DRA, R, CO; M38/M44 
Monitorization of ASTEP performance at two industrial Sites 
D7.4 Performance of the two ASTEP Installations at Two Case Studies, DRA, R, PU, M40/M46 
Validation comparing site data with the laboratory results and predicted performances 
Description of ASTEP performance for two Case Studies. 
 
WP 
Number 
8 Lead 
Beneficiary 
VERT Start 
Month 
6 End 
Month 
46 
WP Title Sustainability Assessment 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 54 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 1 0 24 0 1 0 7 24 0 
Participant Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND  
PM per Participant 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1  
Objectives.  
The main objectives of this work packages are: 
• To quantify and evaluate the effects to the environment caused by the manufacturing and using of the 
target heating/cooling modular system in industrial processes. 
• To determine the CapEx (Capital Expenditure) and OpEx (Operational Expenditure) at the different stages 
of the project and to guarantee cost -effectiveness and competitiveness of the target modular system  and 
forecast similar CapEx and OpEx analysis for the industrial version of the ASTEP 
• To identify and asse ss social aspects and overcome any possible related issues with the development of 
the target heating/cooling modular system.  
• To achieve a wide social acceptance by including all relevant stakeholders on the study and showing the 
advantages of implementing the target heating/cooling modular system in industrial processes. 
Description of work 
Task 8.1 Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). (M6-M46). Leader: VERT. Participants: EXE, BUL, UNED, 
UPCT, DRA, UPM, AMTP, MAND 
The present task will be focused on the assessment of the potential environmental impacts of ASTEP modular 
systems throughout their life cycle. The LCA analysis will involve the following stages: (i) definition of scope and 
goal, (ii) development of releva nt inventory inputs and outputs, (iii) assessment of their potential impacts and 
interpretation of results within the context of proposed targets. LCA will be carried out according to the guidelines 
of ISO 14040/14044. The environmental impact categories i nclude global warming potential, human toxicity, 
ecotoxicity, use of the resources, energy demand among others. Upon verification of the sensitivity and reliability 
of the study, relevant conclusions and recommendations will be created. The LCA will be per formed with the 
specialized software Simapro 8. The participation of technology developers and demonstrator´ managers will be 
required to provide information for the LCA Analysis. It is anticipated that the results of this study will demonstrate 
the positi ve environmental impacts of implementing the modular system for production of heating, cooling 
compared with similar heating/cooling systems at research stage too.  
Task 8.2 Life Cycle Costing (LCC) (M15-M46). Leader: BUL. Participants: VERT, EXE, UNED, UPCT, 
UPM, AMTP, MAND 
In this task the CapEx and OpEx costing for the use of the solar energy for generation of heating and cooling 
systems will be determined. They will be estimated on an annual basis and then related to the amount of generated 
energy divided by the expected amount of energy. A new decision support toolbox that covers all the aspects of 
the economic dimensions will be developed. It will cover two -way power flow and communications between 
various components . The toolbox will be able t o optimise several objective functions such as primary energy 
savings, emission reduction, minimum cost of CapEx and OpEx of the whole system.  It will be also used for 
determination of the indirect cost as productivity, costs of time, budget allocation an d compare the long -term 
expenses with the short -term expenses including CapEx. The developed model will then be used for the 
environmental and economic analysis of AMTP and MAND, respectively to find out the possible combinations of 
variables that will give the best performance concerning energy savings, emission reductions, and minimum cost 
of Renewable Energy Source (RES). 
Task 8.3 Social LCA. (M6-M46). Leader: VERT. Participants: EXE, BUL, UNED, UPCT, UPM 
Identify and assess social and socio-economic benefits of target modular system for production of heating, cooling 
and electricity. The Social LCA (S -LCA) methodology will be applied to evaluate the social impacts of 
implementing the target modular system in the project demonstrators and different impact  categories will be 
evaluated. The S-LCA is an innovative methodology that integrates traditional LCA methodological steps while 
having social impacts as focus. The basic steps of the LCA will be adopted also in S -LCA, namely: (1) defining 
goal and scope of the assessment; (2) inventory of the drivers which may lead to an impact; A life cycle inventory 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 55 
is elaborated for indicators (e.g. number of jobs created) linked to impact categories (e.g. local employment) which 
are related to five main stakeholder groups (e.g., [i] worker, [ii] consumer, [iii] local community, [iv] society and 
[v] value chain actors); (3) impact assessment based in the selection and calculation of proper indicators of impacts; 
and (4) interpretation of the results. The S -LCA methodolog y proposed embeds a detailed inventory method 
tailored on real data, collected directly from the field of application thanks to customized surveys that allow 
modelling the life cycle of the proposed technologies. S -LCA makes use of generic and site -specific data, can be 
quantitative, semi-quantitative or qualitative, and complements the environmental LCA and LCC. The envisaged 
positive results will constitute valuable inputs to stimulate preferences for these technologies and will be used as 
part of the bas eline information aimed to design an adequate strategy to increase stakeholders and consumers 
acceptance. 
Task 8.4 Social Acceptance. (M24-M46). Leader: VERT. Participants: BUL, ADSC, EBOS 
Specialized tools and methodologies such as Focus Groups Interviews , In-depth Interviews, Q -Sorts, Scenario 
Analysis, CO-creative workshops in order to involve the relevant stakeholders (e.g. user communities) from the 
early stages of the design and definition of Business Models will be realized, at local level, in each o f the 
demonstrators. As regards the focus groups, conceptualization (e.g. definition of population and samples) and 
logistics will be established, and skilled facilitators will encourage group interactions to capture relevant data and 
to provide a more com prehensive understanding of the group opinion. To recruit the participants for the focus 
groups the support of local agencies will be required. Several types of stakeholders will be involved, ranging from 
Public Authorities to community representatives. Ba sed on these results and sustainability assessments results, a 
strategy to improve Stakeholders’ acceptance and to engage a relevant number of stakeholders in the 
implementation of the target modular system will be realized. Gender balance will be considered. If gender-related 
differences are found in the acceptance of the proposed heating/cooling modular system these outcomes will be 
considered when preparing the strategy to increase social acceptance. Personal data collection will be limited to 
the data relevant for the research (i.e. age, education level). 
Task 8.5 Exergy Analysis (M6 – M42). Leader: EXE. Participants: BUL, UPM, UNED, UPCT 
An Exergy based simulation of different technology scenarios will be performed during this task. The simulations 
and optimization calculations will be based on the exergetic assessment of the mass and energy flux and will 
produce a comprehensive,  unbiased scientific rating that highlights the irreversibilities and inefficiencies within 
the ASTEP process.  The study will identify the efficiency of the whole system and of each individual component. 
Exergy assessment can define the steps of the process with the highest irreversibility and exergy destruction. This 
task will add a deeper view to improve the flexibility and optimization of the system and of each single component. 
In the first 20 months, a preliminary exergy study and optimization will be performed based on the available 
historical data or from theoretical assumption. This first analysis will be used to help define the best layout of the 
ASTEP technology. A first update of the exergy analysis will be performed in month 32 and month 42, the final 
study based on the data collected from WP6 and 7 will be carried out to verify, compare and propose additional 
improvements to the system. 
Role of Main partners: VERT will lead the Sustainability Assessment assisted by BUL, and EXE. 
Deliverables 
Deliv. 
(No.) 
Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D8.1 Report on LCA: Final results and recommendations, VERT, R, CO, M46 
Last phase 4 of LCA methodology (interpretation of results) will be finished ensuring that the 
conclusions are well-substantiated. 
• Report on LCA: System Boundaries and functional unit, VERT, R, PU, M18 
Phase 1 of LCA methodology (definition of scope and goal) will be finished to ensure the LCA 
is performed consistently. 
• Report on LCA: Screening test and first recommendations, VERT, R, PU, M34 
Phase 2 and 3 of LCA Methodology (development of relevant inventory inputs and outputs and 
assessment of their potential impacts) will be finished  and first recommendations will allow to 
make better business decisions. 
D8.2 Report on Life Cycle Costing BUL, R/DEMO, CO, M25/M40/M46 
• A new decision support toolbox for estimating Environmental Life Cycling Costings (LCC) 
developed (M25).  
• CapEx and OpEx costs of the proposed technology validated and demonstrated on the lab and 
industrial scale (CO, M40). 
• Open report provided for all the partners (PU, M46)  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 56 
D8.3 Report on Social LCA: Final results and recommendations, VERT, R, CO, M46. 
Last phase 4 of Social LCA methodology (interpretation of results) will be finished ensuring that the 
conclusions are well-substantiated. 
• Report on Social LCA: System Boundaries and functional unit, VERT, R, PU, M18. Phase 
1 of LCA methodology (definition of scope and goal) will be finished to ensure the Social LCA 
is performed consistently. 
• Report on Social LCA: Screening test and first recommend ations, VERT, R, PU, M34. 
Phase 2 and 3 of Social LCA Methodology (inventory of the drivers which may lead to an impact 
and impact assessment) will be finished  and first recommendations will allow to apply 
adjustments regarding socio-economic aspects. 
D8.4 Report on Social Acceptance, VERT, R, PU, M46 
Report on the Social acceptance of the proposed solar concept 
D8.5  Exergy Analysis of the ASTEP system, EXE, R, PU/CO, M25/M46 
• Exergy analysis of the system will be presented as part of this report (PU,M25).  
• Final Exergy assessment and improvements as compared to the intermediate report (CO, M46). 
 
WP 
Number 
9 Lead 
Beneficiary 
CHX Start 
Month 
1 End 
Month 
48 
WP Title Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation 
Participant Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Short Name of Participant 
UNED 
ADSC 
VERT 
UPCT 
DRA 
EBOS 
EXE 
BUL 
CHX 
PM per Participant 4 3,5 1 7 3 11 2 2 24 
Participant Number 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17  
Short Name of Participant 
RELA 
UPM 
AMTP 
CRES 
PWR 
IRIS 
SUN 
MAND  
PM per Participant 2 4 1 4 3 1 2 2  
Objectives 
The main objectives of this work packages are: 
• To communicate, create awareness and promote ASTEP , to the public, scientific and industry 
community in the media. 
• To disseminate the outputs of research activities  from researchers, to industry/S MEs and 
policy/regulators, and ensure academic, industry and other relevant publications and to be present at 
conferences and other relevant activities as appropriate.  
• To create the Solar Energy Helix (virtual technology cluster/community hosted on the CH X’s Platform 
to accelerate the dissemination and exploitation plans and support in achieving ASTEP’s project and post 
project impact objectives. The Solar Energy Helix will support in networking across Europe and 
internationally (including the Mediterranean and MPC), working closely with all partners, particularly 
ADSC, DRA, UPCT, EBOS, BUL, CRES and IRIS, who have extensive international networks in this 
field, and linking ASTEP to oth er funded projects in this space, and bringing these networks and 
stakeholders into the Solar Energy Helix, in order to create a self-sustaining European/international cluster 
in solar energy for industrial processes.  
• To Develop an Exploitation Strategy t o ensure the protection of strategically important Intellectual 
Property, and a robust business plan to ensure post project impact and sustainability beyond the lifetime 
of the project. 
Description of work 
Task 9.1: Communication Strategy Activities (M1-M48). Leader: CHX, Participant: DRA, UPCT and All)  
Target audiences will be identified, ranging from researchers, solar energy companies, industries /SMEs and the 
public etc. in order to develop complementary communication and dissemination strategies. ASTEP will develop 
and implement a communication strategy by Month 6, raise the awareness with entities such as the IEA Solar 
Energy Programme, the Inte rnational Renewable Energy Association, Solar Heat Europe . To implement the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 57 
communication strategy, we will set up a website and social media project accounts (i.e. Twitter, LinkedIn) , 
design and circulate leaflets and conference posters, and release press releases.  
The consortium website will be set up by the Coordinator, RELA, by Month 3. The website will serve as the 
primary contact point for external users and will include general information and updates on the progress made by 
ASTEP. The website will be divided into pages specifically focused on different end users (scienti sts, chemical 
energy, systems-catalysis and material engineering and manufacturing industries, and the public), and serve as a 
central hub for all communication to the wider public.  
Task 9.2: Dissemination Strategy Activities (M1-M48) Leader: UPCT, Participant: All)  
Target audiences will be identified ranging from researchers and industry/SMEs in solar energy and industrial 
processing especially in energy intensive sectors. UPCT will lead on generating a Dissemination Strategy, working 
in close collaboration with EXE, supported by all of the partners, who will lead on carrying out the dissemination 
activities. An important part of the Dissemination Strategy will be a timetable of  the dissemination activities, to 
ensure the protection of certain project results before being made public. Moreover, once the protection activities 
are concluded, UPCT will ensure that all internal dissemination has taken place before release of informat ion to 
the public. UPCT, ADSC, CHX, BUL, SUN, DRA, UNED, UPM , will consider  dissemination through all 
available media including, with focus on Solar Energy Helix to accelerate the disseminations strategy and 
results/information for dissemination through the Solar Energy Helix. 
The dissemination activities to actors who can leverage the produced results will include the publication of research 
papers in open-access journals such as Journal of Cleaner Production, Solar Energy, Renewable Energy, Thermal 
Science and Engineering Progress, and of papers jointly published with the industry, as well as the participation 
of consortium members in well-established conferences and workshops such as Eurotherm, HEFAT International 
Conference, ASME Power & Energy Conference, International Conference on Clean Energy and SolarPACES.. 
Task 9.3: Solar Energy Helix (M1-M48) Leader: CHX, Participant: All)  
CHX, working closely with partners, in particular  ADSC, DRA, EXE, CRES, UPCT, EBOS, BUL, IRIS, will 
create and manage a virtual cluster/community (Helix), called the Solar Energy Helix on the CHX platform that 
will act as the backbone of the dissemination and exploitation strategies developed in WP9 – for both during and 
after the project. As described in Section 2.2, The Crowdhelix (CHX) Network (https://network.crowdhelix.com/) 
has more than 400+ member organisations from 42 countries and is present in all EU Member State countries, 
from which there is an extended reach potential to more than 400 ,000 research and innovation actors. As CHX is 
set-up around thematic areas (Helixes), i.e. Energy, Climate, Manufacturing etc., and is supported by a technology 
platform where these virtual communities are hosted; CH X will create a new Helix for this proj ect. As CH X 
members have collectively won an estimated + 4 billion in funding from Horizon 2020, it will be able to easily 
connect with other funded projects from this call and previously funded projects in th ese areas (HYCOOL, 
SunHorizon, Innova-Microsolar) to bring them into the Helix. This will thereby leverage the EU’s investment into 
solar energy in industrial processes and decarbonisation, and facilitate knowledge sharing of results (open results) 
and connect all the projects to achieve a greater impact. The Solar Energy Helix will be set-up by Month 2, and 
profile >150 organisations (key stakeholders and end -users) by M24, including solar energy, and industrial 
processes and manufacturing industries and research actors, and participants of other funded H2020  projects 
and relevant actors across Europe/Interna tional. The organisations will be profiled in the following way: 1) 
People and Organizational Profiling ; 2) Knowledge and Expertise Profiling ; and 3) Projects in the area of 
solar energy and industrial processes (H2020, national and international). The organisations will be notified by 
the platform about the advancements of ASTEP project, with the aim of maximizing the visibility of results to 
actors best placed to make use of them, and broaden their impact enabling the creation of a community. CHX will 
work with in arranging three events, one per year, during the project, targeting key stakeholders to disseminate the 
results, and at the end of the project facilitate the exploitation/post project next steps (joint events with other funded 
projects in this sp ace will be considered, especially when targeting industry stakeholders). When launching and 
delivering the Solar Energy Helix , the following activities will take place: - In M2, launch Solar Energy Helix 
on the Crowdhelix Platform (design logo, launch sp ace on the platform, and communicate the new helix to the 
membership base); Profile >150 organisations (at researcher and organisational level) in the Crowdhelix platform 
(by M24); - Organise the first Helix event and launch/implementation of the its strat egy (M12); - Deliver impact 
in line with the Helix strategy (including supporting dissemination events, and building collaboration through the 
platform).  
Task 9.4: Exploitation strategy (M1-M48) Leader: EXE Participants: RELA, ADSC, EBOS, DRA, AMTP, 
MAND 
This task consists of the analysis of the project outcomes (technical innovations) with regard to their future 
exploitation possibilities along the different exploitation paths: 
• Transfer: enhance good practice by spreading results; 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 58 
• Commercialisation: creation of a new product or services or enhancement of existing ones; 
• Sustainability: keep project results visible and available for access of target audience. 
In order to continuously update and keep the focus on future exploitation, exploitation plans will be provided after 
each innovation cycle (midterm  and final exploitation plans). All partners are expected to actively plan their 
exploitation about future  market take-up. Detailed arrangements with respect to Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), 
access to partner owned knowledge and exploitation rules are settled by the Consortium Agreement which will be 
defined at the beginning of the project. IPR issues: exploitation of research results includes good preparation of 
IPR. It means that patents protect the results and that the results are exploited and are generating revenues for one 
or all partners of the projects. The IPR can be exploited by licensing the patent, selling the patent or if the patent 
is being used by the partners.   Exploitation activities will include: (i) Securing of intellectual property developed 
within the project, (ii) long term research and development strategy beyond the duration of the project and (iii) 
generation and implementation of an exploitation plan. The E xploitation Strategy will include the following 
elements: Main objectives and Responsibilities, Target groups and Key actors, Levels of exploitation and 
exploitable components, Communication channels and tools, to be coordinated with Task 8.1 and Task 8.2 from 
WP8. The first Exploitation strategy will be finalised at Month 24 and the final version will be prepared at the end 
of the project, to ensure a strategy that will be taken forward to take the results to the next phase following the end 
of the project. 
Role of Main partners: CHX will lead the Impact activities sharing tasks with UPCT, ADSC, EBOS, and EXE. 
Deliverables 
Deliv. (No.) Deliverable name, Lead, Type, Diss. Level, Del. Time 
D9.1 Communication Strategy, CHX, R, CO, M6/24/M48 
Communication Strategy for outreach to public and wider stakeholders 
D9.2 Dissemination Strategy, UPCT, R, CO, M24/M48 
Dissemination Strategy for targeted outreach to SMEs, industry and researchers (including an 
overall report with a summary of the dissemination activities carried out, and a compilation of 
the different types of publications achieved by the partners) 
D9.3 Project website and social media profiles, RELA, DEMO, PU, M3 
Development and publication of website and social media profiles in internet. 
D9.4 Solar Energy Helix, CHX, DEMO, PU, M2 
Cluster of stakeholders to facilitate engagement, new collaboration and acceleration of 
dissemination and exploitation strategies 
D9.5 Exploitation Plan, EXE, R, CO, M24/M48 
Exploitation plan to enable successful post project impact. 
 
Table 3.1c:  List of Deliverables15   
Delivera
ble No. Deliverable name WP 
number  
Lead 
participant  Type Dissemina
tion level 
Delivery 
date 
(Months) 
D1.1 
Project management and quality 
handbook 1 UNED R CO M1 
D1.2 Data & ethical management,  1 UNED R CO M6/M24/
M48 
D1.3 Risk Management 1 UNED R CO 
M6/M24/
M48 
D1.4 Project Management Report 1 UNED R CO M9/M24/
M48 
D1.5 Final Report 1 UNED R PU M48 
D2.1 Level 1 end user requirements and 
KPIs 2 BUL R CO M5 
D2.2 Level 2 End -user and context 
analysis Report 2 SUN R CO M9 
 
15  If your action is taking part in the Pilot on Open Research Data, you must include a data management plan as a distinct deliverable within the 
first 6 months of the project.  This deliverable will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to present the status of the project's 
reflections on data management. A template for such a plan is available in the H2020 Online Manual on the Participant Portal. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 59 
D2.3 Final Concept Design Report 2 BUL R CO M9 
D3.1 Preliminary design of Sundial for 
AMTP 3 UNED R PU M18 
D3.2 Preliminary design of Sundial for 
MAND 3 UNED R PUCO M21 
D3.3 Design of the daily and yearly 
operation for AMTP and MAND 3 DRA R PU M21 
D3.4 Preliminary Thermo-mechanical 
analysis 3 ADSC R CO M21 
D3.5 Control strategy for Sundial 
systems 3 IRIS R CO M21 
D3.6 Detailed design of Sundial for 
both end users. 3 UPM R CO M21 
D4.1 Engineering configuration of the 
thermal energy storage system 4 UPCT R PU M18 
D4.2 
Modelling and simulation of the 
charging and discharging cycles 
of the TES 
4 ADSC R PU M21 
D4.3 Selection and Definition of 
Materials and Manufacturing,  4 PWR/UPC
T/DRA R CO M15/M18/
M21 
D4.4 
Report on the analysis of the 
storage system integration with 
other components.  
4 DRA R CO M21 
D4.5 Control strategy for hybrid 
thermal energy storage system.  4 IRIS R CO M21 
D5.1 
Report on the integrated ASTEP 
model development and 
conceptual designs 
5 EXE R PU M18 
D5.2 System component and final 
integration design report 5 EXE R CO M21 
D5.3 
Integrated Control strategies and 
framework for ASTEP combined 
systems 
5 IRIS R CO M21 
D6.1.1 
ASTEP SunDial and 
corresponding Solar Field for 
AMTP. 
6 UPM DEM
O/R CO M21/M27 
D6.1.2.1 
ASTEP SunDial and 
corresponding Solar Field for 
MAND 
6 UPM DEM
O/R CO M21/M27 
D6.2 ASTEP Storage system and Test 
Results. 6 UPCT DEMO
/R PU M21/M27 
D6.3 Integrated ASTEP system and 
Test results 6 EXE DEMO
/R PU M21/M27 
D6.4 Integration of sub-systems results. 6 UPM R PU M30 
D6.5 Revaluation of Designs,  6 UNED R PU M30 
D7.1 ASTEP Transfer and Integration 
to End-user Sites 7 DRA R CO M33 
D7.2 Installation ad Commissioning of 
ASTEP units at Industrial Sites 7 DRA R CO M33 
D7.3 Monitoring of the installations at 
the two industrial sites 7 DRA R CO M39/M45 
D7.4 Performance of the two ASTEP 
Installations at Two Case Studies 7 DRA R PU M40/M46 
D8.1 Report on Life Cycle Assessment 8 VERT R PU/CO M18/M34/
M46 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 60 
D8.2 Report on Life Cycle Costing  8 BUL DEM
O/R PU/CO M25/M40
M46 
D8.3 Report on Social LCA 8 VERT R PU/CO M18/M34/
M46 
D8.4 Report on Social Acceptance 8 VERT R PU M46 
D8.5 
Exergy Analysis of the ASTEP 
system 8 EXE R PU/CO M25/M46 
D9.1 Communication Strategy 9 CHX R CO M6/M24/
M48 
D9.2 Dissemination Strategy 9 UPCT R CO M24/M48 
D9.3 
Project website and social media 
profiles 9 RELA DEM
O PU M2 
D9.4 Solar Energy Helix 9 CHX DEM
O PU M3 
D9.5 Exploitation Plan 9 EXE R CO M24/M48
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  
3.2.1 Organizational structure and decision making 
An organizational structure (see Fig. 3.3) with management procedures and decision -making mechanisms that are 
suitable for the scale of the project will be implemented to ensure the smooth implementation of the ASTEP project. 
The WP1 Project management and Coordination shall support the WPs, and the consortium partners. The General 
Assembly shall handle strategic and impact related decision -making. An Executive Board will be in charge of 
implementing the decisions. 
 
 
Figure 3.3: Organizational structure of the ASTEP project 
Project coordinator 
The Coordinator will be the intermediary between the partners and the EC and shall perform all tasks assigned to it as 
described in the Grant Agreement and the Consortium Agreement. As chairman of the General Assembly, 
responsibilities of the coordinator will include: 
• Monitor the compliance by the partners with their obligations, and that the project is implemented properly 
• Act as the intermediary for all communications between the partners and the EC 
• Request and review any documents or information required by the EC and verify their completeness and 
correctness before passing them on to the EC 
• Submit the deliverables and reports to the EC  
• Ensure that all payments are made to the other beneficiaries without unjustified delay 
• Inform the EC of the amounts paid to each partner, when required under the agreement or requested by the EC 
• Transmit documents and information connected with the project to any other partners concerned  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 61 
Furthermore, the coordinator will take over the day -to-day management of the project consisting of both strategic 
(technical management, risks, external opportunities,) and operational (animation, communication, reporting) 
management tasks (see WP1 for details). 
The project coordinator will especially oversee: 
• Chairing the Executive Board  
• Organizing (methodologies, tools, knowledge management) and piloting at project level the S&T management 
carried out by the WP leaders on WP basis 
• Providing the General Assembly with critical analysis on the global technical performance of the pro ject 
especially through a close follow -up of the project level indicators (balanced scorecard) included in the 
dashboard as well as summarize related recommendations 
• Collecting and consolidating the deliverables reports and contributions for the progress a nd financial reports 
before review and validation by the Coordinator 
• Ensuring that the internal quality processes, common templates and communication tools decided by the 
General Assembly are properly used by the consortium members  
• Implementing the global risk management linked to milestones as detailed below 
• Ensuring on a daily basis the communication between the different partners (notably by implementing 
collaborative platform, being responsible for official meetings organizations) 
• Detecting project related needs and opportunities (whether it is scientific, networking or funding related)  
•   
Professor Antonio Rovira (M) , coordinator of the ASTEP, has experience in team management from 2011, both in 
academic staff and research project s. Ph.D. from Universidad Politécnica de Madrid since 2004, Lecturer since 2006 
(junior and senior) and Professor since 2019. From 2011 to 2014 was Pro-Vice-Chancellor of Infrastructures of UNED, 
coordinating the building move of four schools and the construction of a new building for the Science School. Currently 
is the Head of Department of the Energy Engineering Department. 
From 2011 is the Head of the STEAM research group. Prof. Rovira has been the principal researcher of SDCC (2006-
2008), InteCCSol (2012-2015) and HICCSA (2016-2019) projects, being the responsible of for the coordinated projects 
InteCCSol-CompoCCSol and HICCSA -DECCSA, and he has led several tasks of the EUROfusion resarch project 
(within WP22, 2017 -2019). He has also worked on five  additional projects related to the integration of solar energy 
within thermal systems, particularly thermodynamic power systems, both at national and European level during the 
last ten years (Advanced concepts of concentrating solar energy systems, ReConS ol, ACES2030, ConSOLI+Da and 
Futuro Solar). Also, he has translated its experience from other technologies related to thermal systems into the CSP 
field. He is co-author of roughly 50 contributions in international journals and 18 patents.  
General Assembly (GA) 
The GA is the ultimate decision making and conflict resolution body of the project. It will be chaired by the coordinator 
and attended by one representative of each partner. The GA will be responsible for the overall strategic orientation and 
policy of the project. It will make sure that the adopted strategy is respected in order to reach excellence. Its tasks 
include: 
• Assessment / agreement on project progress and resources status and allocations 
• Changes of Grant Agreement & technical annex to be submitted for EC approval 
• Changes to the work programme and its timing  
• Modifications to Consortium Agreement notably to Background Included, additions to list of Third Parties for 
simplified transfer, additions to Identified Affiliated Entities 
• Evolution of the consortium: conditions of entry & withdrawal of parties, identification of breach by a party or 
defaulting party 
• Agreeing on external opportunities 
• Ensuring the leverage effect of the project and achievement of expected impacts 
The General Assembly will meet physically at least every 6 months, exceptional sessions (telephone or web conference) 
may be called upon and organized when needed or requested. 
Executive Board (EB) 
Chaired by the Project Coordi nator, the Executive Board will be responsible for t he proper execution and 
implementation of the decisions of the General Assembly. It will monitor the effective and efficient implementation of 
the Project. Particularly, the EB will: 
• Collect information at least every 6 months on the progress, IPR, dissemi nation, communication etc. and 
resources status of the project 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 62 
• Examine that information to assess the compliance of the project with the work plan and, if necessary, propose 
modifications to it to the General Assembly 
• Resolve conflicts on technical, financial and strategic issues and consult GA if needed 
• Agree on the members of the Management Support Team. 
• Support the Project Coordinator in preparing meetings with the EC and in preparing related data and 
deliverables 
• Prepare the content and timing of press releases and joint publications by the consortium or proposed by the 
EC 
• Propose and set up internal quality processes, common templates and communication tools 
• The EB members’ appointment will be validated by the members of the GA: 
Table 3.2 Executive Board and WP Leader Partners 
EB members Names 
MST members 
Project Coordinator Antonio Rovira, Male, (UNED) 
Scientific & Innovation Manager David Reay/Richard Law, Males, (DRA) 
Exploitation Manager Monica Osorio, Female, (EXE) 
IPR manager Coordinator Ruth Herrero-Martin, Female,  (UPCT) 
Dissemination Manager Ruth Herrero-Martin, Female, (UPCT) 
Communication Manager Kimberly Cornfield, Female, (CHX) 
WP leaders 
WP1 UNED 
WP2 BUL 
WP3 UNED 
WP4 UPCT 
WP5 EXE 
WP6 UPM 
WP7 DRA 
WP8 VERT 
WP9 CHX 
 
The EB will meet physically at least every 6 months. Additional meetings by teleconference may be organized when 
needed/requested. 
Management Support Team (MST) 
The Management Support Team members are proposed by the Coordinator (see below) and validated by the Executive 
Board. They will assist and facilitate the work of the Executive Board and the Coordinator for executing the decisions 
of the General Assembly and carry out high level day-to-day management of the project.  
• Scientific and Innovation Manager: 
David Reay is the Scientific and Innovation manager (M) M.Sc., C.Eng., M.R.Ae.S.. will manage the scientific 
and innovation parts of the proposal. The research and business interests of David Reay include: heat transfer, 
compact & intensified heat exchangers, heat pipes & thermosyphons, heat pumps, process integration and 
intensification, industrial energy efficiency, renewable energy and thermal storage. He wil l be Scientific and 
Innovation Manager in the project, as well as leading WP7, the site demonstrations . Academic & other positions: 
Honorary Professor – Nottingham University; Visiting Professor – Northumbria University, Newcastle; Principal 
Consultant – David Reay & Associates; MSc Course Tutor, Brunel University London. Other Activities & Awards: 
Editor-in-Chief – Applied Thermal Engineering (33 years) – Now Founding editor. Editor -in-Chief Thermal 
Science and Engineering Progress – 2015 onwards. First Honorary Life member of the Heat Pump Association; 
Member of the UK National Heat Transfer Committee; Pa st President of the Heat Transfer Society; Recipient of 
the IChemE Brennan Medal, 2008. Co -ordinator of the Heat Exchanger Action Group – www.hexag.org Co-
ordinator of the Process Intensification Network – www.pinetwork.org. Dr. Richard Law (M) will assist David 
Reay with this task. 
• Exploitation manager:  
Monica Osorio is the Exploitation manager (F) has more than 15 years of experience in the market intelligence 
industry developing successful alternatives from produ ct and market understanding to launch and 
commercialisation strategies. Mrs. Osorio holds a Bachelor’s degree in Economics, a Specialisation in Statistics, 
and a Master’s degree in Statistics. Also, she has received a certificate in Marketing developed in collaboration 
with the American Marketing Association. Ms. Osorio has broad experience in Market and Business Intelligence 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 63 
solutions working with companies such as Nielsen and Novartis. Ms. Osorio has been involved in R&D projects 
for the last 3 years helping partners understand the value proposition of their technologies and providing guidance 
on how to exploit the knowledge acquired when involved in innovation projects. She has led the exploitation 
management role of the projects RESSEEPE, PERCAL, GEOCOND, WASTE2BIO and NOVUM. 
• IPR Manager Coordinator 
Dr. Ruth Herrero Martin is the IPR manager (F), is an Associate Professor in Fluid Mechanics at UPCT since 
2006. has developed formative actions  within UPCT regarding IP awareness training for researchers, creativity 
skills, entrepreneurship, business models and lean startup. She has also coordinated formative actions within 
Enterprise+ European Project (Losledger methodology) and collaborated wit h the Office of Entrepreneurs and 
Technology Based Companies at UPCT.  
Her role as IPR manager will cover the following activities: 
o Assessment and protection of IP (Pre-publication reviews, Access and usage rights) 
o IP watch related to the project developed technology 
o Capture the IP to support the exploitation strategy 
o Access and usage rights for key IP before and after the project  
o IP awareness training for participants (to avoid IP value leakage) 
• Dissemination Manager 
Ruth Herrero Martin is the Dissemination Manager (F), is an Associate Professor in Fluid Mechanics at UPCT 
since 2006. Her expertise covers the experimental analysis and numerical modelling of heat and mass transfer 
phenomena, with applications in HVAC systems, renewable energy, thermal storage, desalination and che mical 
reactors. Dr Herrero-Martín was in charge during 2012-2017 of the professional development program at UPCT, 
covering the organization of workshops, seminars and dissemination actions. She has also been member of the 
organizing and technical committee s of several conferences at a national and international level and she also 
performs dissemination and communication activities within founded national research projects. She has also 
assisted the European Commission as an Expert within FP7 -ENERGY and Moni toring at H2020. Her role as 
Dissemination & Communication manager will cover the following activities: 
• Establishing and updating dissemination and outreach strategy, plan and dissemination 
• Dealing with Open access to publications 
Giving support while implementing the communication activities 
Networking and community building 
• Raising target groups awareness about project results 
• Communication & Solar Helix manager:  
Kimberly Cornfield is the Communication & Solar Helix Manager (F), She is responsible for overseeing the 
strategic development and facilitation of the CH helixes and will lead the creation of a technology Solar Energy 
Helix centred on the project. She has extensive experience in planning and managing complex international 
collaborative research and innovation projects, across numerous research fields (including climate, environment, 
energy, health, and ICT). She also has extensive experience in and developing internal and external networks to 
facilitate international, cross-organisational, and cross-disciplinary collaboration in research and innovation having 
overseen the successful award and delivery of Eur 200 million in research and innovation projects. 
Research & innovation activities reporting  
Technical and financial follow -up at the level of the whole project will be implemented on a 6 months basis and 
presented during General Assembly meetings who will assess the progress achieved by the project. Operational 
progress will be monitored by the Project Coordinator and WP leaders at the level of WP every 3 months. 
Physical meetings gathering the General Assembly will be organized on a 6-monthly basis in order to review and assess 
the project achievements. 
Project mid-term and final reviews will be implemented as stipulated in the Grant Agreement. The General Assembly 
will organize this mid-term meeting with all partners, and the EC if appropriate. The following criteria will be assessed: 
• Degree of fulfillment of the work plan for the relevant period and of the related deliverables 
• Continued relevance of the objectives and breakthrough potential with respect to the scientific and industrial 
state of the art 
• Resources planned and utilized in relation to the achieved progress, in a manner consistent with the principles 
of economy, efficiency and effectiveness 
• Management procedures and methods of the project 
• Partners’ contributions and integration within the project 
• Expected potential impact in economic, competition and social terms, and the partners' plan for the use and 
dissemination of results. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 64 
Decision making 
The GA will be the ultimate decision-making body for the project. The principles of the decision-making mechanisms 
to avoid status -quo or blocking situations, as described in the Consortium Agreement DESCA -H2020 under 
preparation, will be applied: 
• Each consortium body shall not deliberate and decide validly unless 2/3 of its members are present or 
represented (quorum). If the quorum is not reached, another meeting will be convened. 
• Each member present or represented shall have one vote (no vote for defaulting party) 
• Decisions shall be taken by a majority of 2/3 of the votes cast  
• From an operational point of view, the project will strive as follows for conflicts resolution:  
• Amicable solutions will be proposed for conflicted parties to find a compromise in an amicable and bilateral 
way; 
• If necessary, mediation will be conducted by the coordinator or an identified neutral party who will propose 
adequate timing for resolution; 
• Otherwise, rules of the Consortium Agreement (CA) will apply and decisions may be submitted to a vote; 
• In extreme cases, a clear risk assessment will be realize d and balance will be carefully weighed between the 
damages/solutions that can lead to defaulting partner exclusion. 
Important milestones have been identified for the project implementation and will be carefully monitored by the 
corresponding WP leaders, a nd at project level by the project coordinator. When the date of milestones review is 
achieved the results verification will be conducted against set objectives and a short report will be issued regarding the 
milestone’s assessment. When a milestone is del ayed or is not achieved, the impact on project course and WP will be 
assessed and a back -up plan will be proposed by the concerned WP leaders. Such issues will be reviewed by the EB 
who will report the milestones status to the GA. 
Table 3.2a:  List of milestones  
Milestone 
number 
Milestone name Related work 
package(s) 
Due date (in 
month) 
Means of verification 
MS1 Project Kick-off All M1 Signature of Gran Agreement and 
Consortium Agreement. Project 
team, role and responsibilities 
clearly defined. Project activities 
planning clearly defined. 
MS2 Solar Energy Helix WP9 M2 Visibility on the Crowdhelix 
Website and Platform. 
MS3 Requirements for 
ASTEP & Concept 
Design 
WP2 M9 Final Concept Design Report 
(D2.5)  
MS4 Detailed design of 
Sundial for AMTP and 
MAND 
WP3 M21 D3.1, D3.2, D3.3, D3.4, D3.5, D3.6 
MS5 Design of TES system WP4 M21 D4.2, D4.3, D4.4, D4.5 
MS6 Detailed design of 
Integrated ASTEP 
system 
WP5  M21 D5.2, D5.3 
MS7 Development and 
construction of ASTEP 
concepts and their 
control systems. 
WP6 M30 D6.1.1, D6.1.2, D6.2, D6.3, D6.4, 
D6.5 
MS8 Site installation & 
commissioning 
WP7 M32 D7.2 
MS9 Monitoring and 
Validation of the Site 
Trials 
WP7 M44 D7.3, D7.4 
MS10 Sustainability 
Assessment 
WP8 M46 D8.1, D8.2, D8.3, D8.4, D8.5 
MS11 Evaluation and 
Technical Validation of 
Projects Results 
All M48 Approval by European 
Commission Project Officer (PO) 
and workshop to potential SHIP 
industries. 
Knowledge management 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 65 
Project documentation will be stored and exchanged with a private and secure platform that will be administrated by 
the Project Coordinator. All project members will have a registered access for project internal document exchanges. 
Draft documents will be edited and stored following the project proposed quality chart. Such platform will allow an 
efficient knowledge management ensuring data and information exchanges between project members without 
unnecessary risk of external disclosure. 
Innovation management 
Innovation management involves different resources to successfully bring technologies generated from research 
activities to the markets. Such process requires a strong interlink between Research & Innovation activities, Intellectual 
Property Rights management and Exploitation management that are covered in the project, especially: 
• Results identification and recognition of intellectual property (IP) will be under the responsibility of the 
Exploitation & Innovation as well as IPR manager 
• IP assessment and protection will be under responsibility of the IPR manager 
• For all identified and exploitable IP, exploitation and business plans will be developed under the responsibility 
of the Exploitation & Innovation 
Identification and monitoring of such innovation related issues will be reviewed during EB sessions. The EB will report 
to the GA that will decide the innovation management policies to be implemented for the project in accordance to the 
Consortium Agreement rules (see Fig. 3.3) 
The EB will report to the GA that will decide the innovation management policies to be implemented for the project in 
accordance to the Consortium Agreement rules (see Fig. 3.4) 
 
 
Fig. 3.4 ASTEP project innovation management 
Critical risks relating to project implementation 
A crucial element in risk management is the risk ownership: assign risks to the most appropriate person and 
organization to ensure a tight monitoring, assessment and update of the risk management plan. While the global risk 
and quality policy of the project is monitored by the Project Coordinator, the risks ownerships have been defined as 
shown in Table 3.2b-0: 
 
Table 3.2b-0 Types of risks 
Risks 
categories 
Risk Ownership Resources 
Research & 
Technology 
Coordinator & respective 
WP leaders 
• Technology watch 
• Technical implementation monitoring (milestones & planning) 
Business Exploitation & Innovation 
Manager 
• Market intelligence,  
• Business/account planning,  
• Financing sources, 
Intellectual 
property rights IPR manager 
• IP landscape analysis,  
• Competitors’ analysis, 
• Strategy for IP protection 
• Collaborative and commercial agreements (NDA, MoU, 
licensing…)  
Environmental 
& societal 
Exploitation & Innovation 
Manager 
• Environmental legislation 
• User acceptance 
Risk owners will monitor, assess and update the corresponding risk management plan that will be reviewed during EB 
sessions. The role of risk owners will be to transform risk data into decision -making information (link to milestones) 
and proposed mitigating actions. Depending on the level of impact of proposed mitigation actions on the project, such 
actions will be assessed and validated by the GA. The table 3.2b-1 shows the critical risks for ASTEP implementation 
IPR 
management
Exploitation 
management
R&I 
Management
MARKETSTechnology watch
Risks 
management IP management & 
assessment
Market analysis
Access to finance
Business plan
Legislation & 
StandardsRESEARCH
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 66 
Table 3.2b-1:  Critical risks for ASTEP implementation  
Description of 
risk 
Impact Probab
ility 
WP(s) 
involved 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
A partner leaves 
the project  L L WP1 
The rest of the consortium will try to cover the partner objectives, 
responsibilities and resources. 
In case that it is not possible, the consortium will look for other 
partner with an appropriate profile 
A clear mechanism for replacement of partners will be included in 
the Collaboration Agreement.  
Intellectual 
Property L L WP1, 
WP8 
This risk is mitigated by the signature of the Consortium 
Agreement, which content will be agreed among partners, as well 
as setting up a series IPR Rules. In case additional protection is 
required, parties might require the signature of additional Non -
Disclosure Agreement. 
Problems with 
Delays in activities 
or nor having 
available resources 
M M WP1 The problem is mitigated by update meetings among WP leaders 
to accommodate potential delay and resource deficiencies. 
Over the 4-year 
period, key 
personnel may 
could become 
unavailable to 
work on this 
project due to 
professional, 
maternity or health 
reasons. 
L L W1, All 
Each partner in the consortium is responsible for engagement of 
human and technical resources. Frequent communication among 
partners and periodical project meetings will assure that all the 
potential problems are solved in timely manner. Signed CA will 
allow the option to delegate certain tasks to other partners in case 
one of the partners lacks the key personnel. 
Risk from Brexit: 
The participation 
of UK partners 
may risk their 
funding. 
H H All WP 
All UK partners remain committed to the project and hope that the 
UK reaches an agreement with EU allowing continued 
participation in H2020 and Horizon Europe. If this is not possible, 
the UK gov ernment has made public assurances that successful 
bids for EU funding until the end of 2020 will receive their full 
financial allocation over a project’s lifetime. 
Simultaneous 
control of multiple 
technologies can 
lead to inferior 
levels of 
performance. 
L L 
WP3, 
WP4, 
WP5, 
WP6 
This project includes a number of partners who have experience in 
integrating and controlling technologies. Also, performance of 
individual components will be measured prior to integration. Close 
collaboration between highly capable modelling partners (EXE) 
will ensure a safe and effective control design. 
End-users do not 
give all data for 
determining their 
energy demand 
profiles. 
L L WP2 
The needed data will be collected by means of datasheets of the 
equipment, interviews with the industrial partner and getting data 
from the literature. 
Accuracy of the 
models L L WP3 Re-evaluation of the designs after the model validation in WP6 
(activity considered in T6.5) 
Lack of robustness 
of the control 
system for the 
SunDial 
technology. 
M M WP3 
Simplification of the control strategy giving priority to robustness 
verification and testing for optimum operating conditions in open-
loop mode.  
Over-estimation of 
irradiation at End-
users sites.  
L L WP3, 
WP6 
In T3.1 and T3.2 several designs will be proposed, including one - 
and multi -tube solutions for the receiver that can enlarge the 
flexibility and operability of the system. If weather predicti on is 
wrong, the final design will be modified considering the choices 
proposed in T3.1 and T3.2. 
Undesirable 
thermo-mechanical 
stresses in the 
honeycomb design. 
M M WP4 Finned systems will be analyzed, at the expense of a lower surface-
to-volume ratio. 
Corrosion between 
metal inserts and 
PCM 
M M WP4 
This problem will be solved by the proper materials choice for the 
heat accumulator (including kind of PCM and materials of metal 
inserts) or by the selection of other non-corrosive PCM-s or by the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 67 
application of other synthetic or protective layers on met al 
elements. 
Lack of robustness 
of the control 
system for the 
energy storage 
technology.  
M M WP4 
Simplification of the control strategy giving priority to robustness 
verification and testing for optimum operating conditions in open-
loop mode. 
Control strategy 
for the integrated 
ASTEP system 
does not fulfill the 
needs of an end 
user. 
H H WP5 
Adaptation of the control strategy to the end -user needs and 
evaluation of manual mode strategies when automation is not 
feasible. 
The most 
promising 
technology is not 
up-scalable, 
development is too 
far away from the 
reality 
M M 
WP3, 
WP4, 
WP5, 
WP6 
Learn the limitations of the technology in the early stage 
 
Weather is not 
adequate for solar 
concentrator tests 
during the months 
specified in the 
project 
M M WP6, 
WP7 
SunDial concentrators will be ready and tests will be postponed. A 
higher work intensity during the sunny days will be scheduled.  
Components 
specified in the 
pre-design of the 
sub-systems 
(WP3-5) are not 
available or too 
expensive 
M M WP6 A fast revaluation of the pre -design will be carried out in order to 
find a viable construction alternative. 
Solar thermal 
power output 
variation during 
the tests is larger 
than expected. 
L L WP6 
Storage system will be revaluated in order to adapt t o the power 
output variation given by the solar concentrator and to the end user 
heat requirements.  
Part of the 
components 
damaged during 
the shipment 
L L WP6, 
WP7 Ensure proper shipping conditions 
Replication in 
Madrid of 
irradiation 
conditions at End-
Users sites 
H H WP6 Madrid is a site with good insolation conditions, so the operating 
conditions at both AMTP and MAND sites can be easily achieved 
Failure to provide 
data on the 
detailed design and 
integration on 
schedule from 
WP6 
L L WP6; 
WP7 
Close liaison between the leaders of WP6 and WP7 over a period 
of several months before due delivery date. 
Unavailability of 
the sites to allow 
installation to take 
place 
L L WP7 Early liaison with the hosts to confirm planning timescale and 
facilities available. 
Delays in 
component 
delivery for site 
work. 
M M WP7 
Regular checking of delivery schedules.  If delays cannot be 
overcome, attempt to catch up on later activities and operate 
available systems in parallel. 
System 
breakdowns 
following 
installation. 
M M WP7 
Trouble-shoot breakdowns and factor in some flexibility in the 
monitoring program. 
Make sure the systems do not directly impinge on the factory 
production outputs. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 68 
Extreme weather 
conditions during 
the 
monitoring/validati
on exercise. 
L L WP7 Consider safety of the plant and shut down systems if design loads 
likely to be exceeded.  
Negative impact 
on the production 
of the main 
products at either 
of the two host 
sites. 
L L WP7 
Install the ASTEP units in areas where they can be bypassed if they 
fail.  In this way normal production at the plants should not be 
affected (avoiding consequential losses and possibly damage 
claims). 
No data available 
for developing 
LCA, LCC, from 
certain processes. 
L L WP8 
The needed data will be collected by means of surveys, interviews 
with industrial partners outside the project and getting data from 
literature. 
LCAs indicate 
environmental 
impacts savings 
which do not 
comply with the 
environmental 
objectives of the 
project 
M M WP8 
Early screening LCA shall flag potential obstacles for reaching set 
environmental goals; readjustment of research plan if needed to 
meet goals 
Failure of 
dissemination 
strategy 
L L WP9 In case of need, partners will involve external agencies  
Lack of 
engagement of 
research 
community 
L L WP9 
Participants are proactive partners of the research community. 
They are used to promote the project scope and results and involve 
colleagues 
Lack of 
engagement of 
civil society 
M M WP9 
The message is too complex/not understood – to overcome the risk 
the project is planning different tools and different levels of 
dissemination. innovative means of promotion and dissemination. 
Lack of 
engagement of 
stakeholders 
M M WP9 
The project is planning proactive engagement and continuous 
interaction with stakeholders: if the dissemination is not effective, 
the partners will promptly re-plan actions and be more effective. 
In general, to overcome t he lack of engagement of the different 
addressed communities, the project will collect feedback and 
analyze the impact of the dissemination strategy. According to the 
result of the analysis result, small adaptation will be adopted for 
maximizing the outcome and effects of the project. 
Lack of 
participation to 
planned workshops 
and sessions 
L L WP9 
Partners have already successfully conducted similar 
events/actions. Some mitigation strategies are: to plan the events in 
easy-to-reach cities, have the events back-to-back to other key 
community events, promote the events quite in advance and keep 
remembering the community to participate, offer the possibility to 
present results from other projects/researches (e.g. open sessions, 
poster sessions), give travel grants to early researchers, etc.
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
The consortium consists of 17 partners including 1 RTO, 6 universities together with 8 SMEs and 2 Industrial 
Corporations; linking technology providers and RTO with end users, initially represented by the three trial houses. The 
consortium has well-balanced skill sets from 9 different member states with a balanced geographical distribution across 
Europe with SME representing a very important part of the industrial partners, 47% of the whole consortium. 
The partners have been selected from the leading groups in Europe to have complementary technical capabilities, 
infrastructure and know-how to reach the ambitious technological goals of the project. This represents the leading-edge 
nature of this field, which has yet to obtain significant traction amongst LEs. Consequently, the consortium assembled 
represents the state-of-the-art with regard to solar thermal energy and storage and advanced process integration  (Fig. 
3.5), and hence as a whole is the best-placed consortium to deliver the planned technological innovation. This reflects 
the current status of use of low-grade energy streams, in that the developments anticipated within this project represent 
enabling technologies for growth in  the importance of the technology and hence the size of the industrial companies 
involved. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 69 
In addition, the consortium has the capability to credibly exploit the project results both in short -term and in making 
plans for the long -term. Most of the partners ,  not only RTO and ACA but also SMEs, have already collaborated in 
other European projects and have thus shown their capability of efficient project collaboration  and in effectively 
generating, protecting and exploiting IP. The capabilities of the different partners are well equilibrated to complement 
each other in all major activities that ensures that there is no unnecessary overlap of activities as clarified in the WP 
descriptions. The effort of the consortium partners has been allocated to the tasks wi thin the different WPs based on 
their expertise and technical capabilities, as detailed in Section 3.4, 8 partners have also been appointed WP leaders, as 
shown in Table 3.2, based on their skills and experience. Each partner plays a unique role in the pro ject and provides 
technical support and assistance for other partners. 
The coordination of the project is ensured by Dr Antonio Rovira which has experience in leading large-scale European 
collaborative projects. In the area of securing maximum exploitation , the Partners will be assisted by Monica Osorio 
the Exploitation Manager (Section 3.2.1). The core skill sets and roles in the different European funded   project are 
shown in section 4-5. 
 
Fig. 3.5: Consortium as a whole
3.4 Resources to be committed 
The project ASTEP involves person efforts from the different partners in both human resources and economical 
resources to cover the expenses related to travel, equipment, expenses. A detailed description of the different types of 
expenses are shown in Tables 3.4 a and 3.4b. 
 
Tables for section 3.4 
Table 3.4a:  Summary of staff effort 
 
WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 WP9 
Total Person- 
Months per 
Participant 
UNED 14 2 33 1 2 15 2 1 4 74 
ADSC 6 0 9 9 0 11 5 0 3,5 43,5 
VERT 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 24 1 26 
UPCT 1 1 0 18 0 11 0 0 7 38 
DRA 2 2 4 4 3 3 13 1 3 35 
EBOS 10 0 0 0 0 0 11 0 11 32 
EXE 1 9 0 0 30 8 2 7 2 59 
BUL 1 16 0 0 0 0 0 24 2 43 
CHX 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 24 25 
RELA 1 0 0 0 0 0 9 1 2 13 
UPM 2 1 10 1 1 30 9 1 4 59 
AMTP 2 4 0 0 0 0 11 1 1 19 
CRES 1 1 0 0 0 0 11 0 4 17 
PWR  2 0 0 36 0 9 0 0 3 50 
IRIS 1 0 8 13 5 3 3 0 1 39 
SUN 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 7 
MAND 1 4 0 0 0 0 10 1 2 18 
Total 48 44 64 77 49 92 86 61 76,5 597,50 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
  LC-RES-07-2019 
Page 70 
 
Table 3.4b: ‘Other direct cost’ items (travel, equipment, other goods and services, large research 
infrastructure) 
For the following partners, their “other direct costs” exceeds 15% of the personnel costs, the details of these costs are 
described below: 
 
Participant: 2/ADSC Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  16.000 Project meeting travels, and congress travel cost for dissemination 
Direct Costs for Working Package 36.000 Lease of CFD software related 
Other goods and services   
Total 52.000  
 
Participant: 4/UPCT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  25.000 Consortium meetings, trips to industrial sites scientific conferences, 
trade fairs, workshops 
Direct Costs for Working Package 73.400 PCM 23.500 €; Consumables: 34900€ 
Other goods and services 8.500 Publication fees and Financial Auditing 
Total 106.900  
 
Participant: 8/BUL Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  16.800 Project meeting 
Direct Costs for Working Package 70.495 Consumables for demand site requirements, costs for dissemination, 
conference dissemination 
Other goods and services 3.000 Audit costs 
Total 90.295  
 
Participant: 10/RELA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  20.000 Project meeting travels, assistance for commissioning and maintenance 
Direct Costs for Working Package   
Other goods and services   
Total 20.000  
 
Participant: 11/UPM Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  16.800 Project meeting travels 
Direct Costs for Working Package 151.000 Manufacturing cost of 2 Rotary Fresnel Solar Collectors 
Other goods and services 26.600 Congress participation, Open Access Publishing fee, Financial audit, 
catering project meeting at UPM. 
Total 194.400  
 
Participant: 12/AMTP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  8.000 Project meeting travels 
Direct Costs for Working Package 136.000 Plant equipment (depreciation) used for trials plus raw material plus 
consumables for new device connection to existing equipment. 
Total 144.000  
 
Participant: 13/CRES Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  8.000 Project meeting travels 
Direct Costs for Working Package 4.500 Promotional goods, workshop 
Other goods and services   
Total 12.500  
 
Participant: 14/PWR Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  25.000 Consortium meeting, scientific conferences, trade fairs 
Direct Costs for Working Package 50.000 Equipment: 30.000€, Consumables: 20.000€ 
Other goods and services 5.000 Publication fees 
Total 80.000  
 
Participant: 15/IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  20.100 Trips for consortium meetings, commissioning and maintenance trips 
to end-users,  
Direct Costs for Working Package   
Other goods and services 30.000 Consumables for control dashboard for 2 ASTEP concepts. 
Total 50.100  
 
Participant: 16/SUN Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  4.000 Travel to project meetings 
Direct Costs for Working Package 20.000 Consumables, publication fees, software 
Other goods and services   
Total 24.000  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 4-5 
 
 
Call Topic: LC-RES-07-2019 – Solar Energy for Industrial Processes 
List of Participants 
Partner 
Number 
Short 
Name 
Organization Name Country Type 
P1 UNED UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL EDUCACION A 
DISTANCIA 
ES ACA 
P2 ADSC DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS  ES SME 
P3 VERT VERTECH GROUP FR SME 
P4 UPCT UNIVERSIDAD POLITÉCNICA DE CARTAGENA ES ACA 
P5 DRA DAVID REAY ASSOCIATES UK SME 
P6 EBOS EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD CY SME 
P7 EXE EXERGY UK SME 
P8 BUL BRUNEL UNIVERSITY LONDON UK ACA 
P9 CHX CROWDHELIX LIMITED IE SME 
P10 RELA PRODUCTION TRADE AND SUPPORT OF 
MACHINABLE PRODUCTS OF SOFTWARE AND 
INFORMATICS RELATIONAL AE 
GR SME 
P11 UPM UNIVERSIDAD POLITÉCNICA DE MADRID ES ACA 
P12 AMTP ARCELOR MITTAL TUBULAR PRODUCTS IASI RO IND 
P13 CRES CENTER FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES GR RTO 
P14 PWR POLITECHNIKA WROCLAWSKA PO ACA 
P15 IRIS IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, S.L. ES SME 
P16 SUN UNIVERSITÁ DEGLI STUDI DELLA CAMPANIA IT ACA 
P17 MAND MANDREKAS DAIRY GR IND 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
72 
SECTION 4: MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM ............................................................................ 73 
4.1. PARTICIPANTS ................................................................................................................................................ 73 
Partner 1: UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL EDUCACION A DISTANCIA, PIC: 999863294 ........................... 73 
Partner 2: DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL, PIC:961160488 ............................................... 76 
Partner 3 VERTECH GROUP, PIC: 958250294 ................................................................................................ 78 
Partner 4: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE CARTAGENA, PIC: 999828859 ......................................... 80 
Partner 5: DAVID REAY ASSOCIATES, UNITED KINGDOM , PIC: 946195813 ....................................... 82 
Partner 6: EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD, PIC: 997848022 ............................................................................. 85 
Partner 7: EXERGY LTD, PIC: 958260479 ...................................................................................................... 89 
Partner 8: BRUNEL UNIVERSITY LONDON, PIC: 999749610 ..................................................................... 92 
Partner 9: CROWDHELIX LIMITED, PIC: 905205165 ................................................................................... 95 
Partner 10: PRODUCTION TRADE AND SUPPORT OF MACHINABLE PRODUCTS OF SOFTWARE 
AND INFORMATICS – RELATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AE, PIC: 952910153 ........................................... 98 
Partner 11: UNIVERSIDAD POLITÉCNICA DE MADRID, PIC: 999974844 ............................................. 102 
Partner 12: ARCELOR MITTAL TUBULAR PRODUCTS IASI, PIC: 898938868 ...................................... 106 
Partner 13: CENTRE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES & SAVING, PIC: 999646014 ................. 110 
Partner 14: POLITECHNIKA WROCŁAWSKA, PIC: 999845931 ................................................................ 113 
Partner 15: IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, S.L., PIC: 998993786 ........................................................ 116 
Partner 16: UNIVERSITÀ DEGLI STUDI DELLA CAMPANIA), PIC: 999848356 .................................... 119 
Partner 17: MANDREKAS DAIRY, PIC: 952120088 .................................................................................... 122 
4.2. THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDING USE OF THIRD-PARTY RESOURCES) ............... 124 
Partner 1: UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL EDUCATION A DISTANCIA ...................................................... 124 
Partner 2: DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL ........................................................................ 124 
Partner 3 VERTECH GROUP .......................................................................................................................... 124 
Partner 4: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE CARTAGENA ................................................................... 124 
Partner 5: DAVID REAY ASSOCIATES ........................................................................................................ 125 
Partner 6: EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD ....................................................................................................... 125 
Partner 7: EXERGY LTD ................................................................................................................................. 125 
Partner 8: BRUNEL UNIVERSITY LONDON ............................................................................................... 126 
Partner 9: CROWDHELIX LIMITED ............................................................................................................. 126 
Partner 10: PRODUCTION TRADE AND SUPPORT OF MACHINABLE PRODUCTS OF SOFTWARE 
AND INFORMATICS – RELATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AE ...................................................................... 126 
Partner 11: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE MADRID .......................................................................... 127 
Partner 12: ARCELOR MITTAL TUBULAR PRODUCTS IASI .................................................................. 127 
Partner 13: CENTRE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES & SAVING ............................................. 128 
Partner 14: POLITECHNIKA WROCŁAWSKA ............................................................................................ 128 
Partner 15: IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS S.L ...................................................................................... 129 
Partner 16: UNIVERSITÀ DEGLI STUDI DELLA CAMPANIA .................................................................. 129 
Partner 17: MANDREKAS .............................................................................................................................. 129 
SECTION 5: ETHICS AND SECURITY .............................................................................................. 130
5.1 ETHICS............................................................................................................................................................ 130
5.2 SECURITY ....................................................................................................................................................... 130 
ANNEX 1 LETTERS OF SUPPORT .................................................................................................... 131 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
73 
 
Section 4: Members of the consortium 
4.1. Participants 
The consortium has been carefully selected to enable the achievement of the objectives set in cross -cutting call 
“Building a Low -carbon, climate resilient future ” for Topic  LC-RES-07-2019 “Solar Energy in Industrial 
Processes”. O perational capacities, knowledge and experience of the project partners (described below for each 
partner) are on top-level in Europe, which ensures efficient exploitation and impact of the project. 
 
Partner 1: UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL EDUCACION A DISTANCIA, PIC: 999863294 
Short Name UNED Country Spain 
 
Type ACA Website www.uned.es 
Brief description of the organisation 
The UNED-STEM (Thermal Systems, Energy and Environment) research group was created in 2007, within 
the Energy Engineering Department at UNED (National Distance Education University, Madrid, Spain). 
This group has focused its investigations in the fields of optimisation and management of thermal and 
thermoelectric systems, in particular, sol ar thermal plants. The main research lines of the group are the 
following: 
▪ Analysis and simulation of Concentrating Solar Power Plants (CSPP): optics, receivers, storage 
systems and power blocks. 
▪ Thermodynamic and thermoeconomic optimization of combined cycles: conventional technologies 
(CCGT) and hybrid technologies with solar integration (ISCC). 
▪ Design, simulation and development of absorption chillers for the production of solar cooling in 
buildings; solar heating systems with flat plate collectors of high efficiency. 
▪ Energy efficiency and emissions reduction in buildings: analysis and modeling of heat bridges in 
buildings; simulation and analysis of the components in thermal installations; energy and environmental 
certification in the buildings. 
The UNED-STEM group has an extensive experience in the Fresnel collector technology. The group has 
participated, together with the UPM (Polytechnic University of Madrid), in the project "Concentrated Solar 
Power for Electricity Generation" (2012 -2013), granted by  the German Ministry: Bundesministerium für 
Bildung und Forshung. More recently, the research group has participated in the Future Solar project, with 
the UPM and the OHL company, which consists of the design and construction of an advanced Fresnel 
prototype in the UPM technological campus. 
Role in the project 
UNED will be the coordinating entity from the consortium as they will be the leader of WP1. They will 
apply its knowledge and expertise on solar systems as leader of WP3. Additionally, they will also collaborate 
in WP1, WP2, WP4, WP5, WP6, WP7  with other consortium partners. UNED will provide information 
for the sustainability assessment in WP8. Finally, U NED will also collaborate in communication, 
exploitation and dissemination activities in WP9. 
Key personnel 
• Professor Antonio Rovira (M) , coordinator of ASTEP  proposal, has experience in team 
management from 2011, both in academic staff and research projects. Ph.D. from Universidad 
Politécnica de Madrid since 2004, Lecturer since 2006 (junior and senior) and Professor since 2019. 
From 2011 to 2014 was Pro -Vice-Chancellor of Infrastructures of UNED, coordinating the building 
move of four schools and the construction of a new building for the Science School. Currently is the 
Head of Department of the Energy Engineering Department. 
From 2011 is the Head of the STEAM research group. Prof. Rovira has been the principal researcher of 
SDCC (2006-2008), InteCCSol (2012-2015) and HICCSA (2016-2019) projects, being the responsible 
of for the coordinated projects InteCCSol -CompoCCSol and HICCSA -DECCSA, and he has lead 
several tasks of the EUROfusion resarch project (within WP22, 2017-2019). He has also worked on five 
additional projects related to the integration of solar energy within thermal systems, particularly 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
74 
thermodynamic power systems, both at national and European level during the last ten years (Advanced 
concepts of concentrating solar energy systems, ReConSol, ACES2030, ConSOLI+Da and Futuro 
Solar). Also, he has translated its experience from other technologies related to thermal systems into the 
CSP field. He is co-author of roughly 50 contributions in international journals and 18 patents.  
• Dr. María José Montes (F) Ph.D. from Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. She is Associate Professor 
at UNED University, and she is currently working in several projects related to the solar thermal energy, 
in particular: HICCSA Project (National Project Ref. ENE2015 -70515-C2-1-R ): about Advanced 
Integrated Solar Combined Cycles; RecSolCon Project (UNED project): about Fresnel and Central 
Receiver Technology; and ACES 2030 (Project funded by the Community of Madrid): about Fresnel 
Technology and SCO 2 cycles coupled to Central Receiver Technology. She is also working in 
Eurofusion Project (Euratom Horizon 2020 programme), in the thermal design of all the heat exchangers 
and steam generators of the power block. 
Dra. Montes has participated in several na tional and international research projects and contracts with 
companies such as OHL, Técnicas Reunidas, Abengoa and the German research center IASS. She is the 
author or co-author of more than 40 international contributions, being cited 854 times (source: Web of 
Science). She is co-author of 16 patents, most of them expanded internationally Finally, she completed 
a two-year stay at the Spanish research center CIEMAT, where she participated in a project led by 
Professor Carlo Rubbia, about the design and con struction of an advanced parabolic trough loop 
refrigerated by gas. 
• Dr. Consuelo Sánchez (F) , Ph.D. from UNED, is an Associate Professor at UNED. She works in the 
modeling and simulation of the thermal performance of the equipment in thermal power plants 
(including solar plants), as well as in the global operation of these facilities. She has a wide experience 
in simulation studies and optimization of thermodynamic processes to increase the efficiency of 
different thermal facilities. The tools used to carry out the mentioned studies have been Matlab and EES, 
having developed specific calculation programs. She has participated in several national and 
international projects focused on thermal systems and solar energy.  
• Dr. José Daniel Marcos (M) , Ph.D. from Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, he is working as Associate 
Professor at UNED University. His main research topic has been the modelling, simulation and 
development of new solar cooling absorption prototypes with which he obtained his PhD and the 
mention of "Doctor Europeus". He made research stays in the “Solar Energy Lab” at the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison with Professor Sanford Klein and at the Delft University of Technology with 
Professor Carlos Infante Ferreira. He has participated in several national research projects related to the 
solar heating and cooling, highlighting: SIMUFRISOL (where he was the Principal Investigator), on the 
development of a high efficiency absorption chiller prototype for solar cooling and trigeneration; 
INVISO, on the theoretical and experimental evaluation of a solar heating and cooling prototype for the 
generation of sustainable energy in buildings. He has actively participated in Task 38 and Task 45 of 
the International Energy Agency (IEA) by publishing a chapter in the Handbook on Solar Cooling 
Systems. He has published 17 articles in international journals of the JCR and 33 works in international 
conferences. He is also a reviewer of 6 indexed international journals. 
• Dr. Fernando Varela (M) , Ph.D. from Universid ad de Valladolid, is an Associate Professor in the 
School of Engineering, in the area of Thermodynamics, at UNED. He holds his Bachelor in Mechanical 
Engineering, MSc. in Mathematics and Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering. He is currently His main 
research fields are building physics and energy systems, and CSP plants. He is co -author of 14 JCR 
articles and 25 contributions in international congresses. Dr. Varela has been also working in software 
development for Saunier Duval, energy monitoring for Daikin, training for UPONOR, and LEED 
certification for INDRA. 
• Dr. Marta Muñoz (F)  ), Ph.D. from UNED,  is an Associate Professor in the Energy Engineering 
Department at UNED University, belongs to the UNED -STEM research group since its formation, 
taking part in various of the current research projects. Her research activity began in the field of 
reciprocating thermal engines (PhD Thesis), but nowadays she is centered in the simulation of thermal 
processes, namely, power plants with solar energy hybridization and design and off-design performance 
of thermal equipment. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
75 
● María José Montes; Rubén Abbas; M. Muñoz; J. Muñoz -Antón; J.M. Martínez -Val. Advances in 
the linear Fresnel single-tube receivers: Hybrid loops with non -evacuated and evacuated receivers . 
Energy Conversion and Management 149, 318 – 333 (2017) 
● Antonio Rovira, Rubén Barbero, María José Montes, Rubén Abbas, Fernando Varela. Analysis and 
comparison of Integrated Solar Combined Cycles using parabolic troughs and linear Fresnel reflectors 
as concentrating systems. Applied Energy, 162, 990-1000 (2016) 
● A. Rovira, J.M. Martínez -Val, M. Valdés. Thermoeconomic Coherence: A Methodology for the 
Analysis and Optimisation of Thermal Systems. Entropy 18 (7), 250. (2016) 
● M.J. Montes, R. Barbero, R. Abbas, A. Rovira. Performance model and thermal comparison of 
different alternatives for the Fresnel single-tube receiver. Appl. Therm. Eng.  104, 162-175. (2016) 
• M.J. Montes, C. Rubbia, R. Abbas, J.M. Martínez -Val. A comparative analysis of configurations 
of linear Fresnel collectors for concentrating solar power. Energy 73, 192 – 203 (2014) 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• "Solar concentrating thermal power in the transport sector and the int heat/electricity production 
(ACES2030)". P2018/EMT-4319.. Several Universities and technological centers (CIEMAT, IMDEA and 
CSIC) participate in this project. As the name suggests, the project covers the three main areas of application 
of concentrated solar energy: transport, heat and electricity production. The UNED group is responsible for 
the development of supercritical CO2 cycles and the development of Fresnel technology applied to process 
heat. From 01/01/2019 – 31/12/2022 
• “Advaced Integrated Solar Combined Cycles . (HICCSA)”. Spanish National Project. ENE2015-
70515-C2-1-R. This project has been coordinated by UNED and UPM Universities. The project has been 
focused in the integration schemes, as well as in the thermal simulation of the different components, in 
particular, all t he components in the solar subsystem, in which the three main technologies are included: 
Parabolic Trough Collectors, Central Receiver and Fresnel Collectors. From 01/01/2016 – 31/12/2019. 
• “Futuro Solar” This project was accomplished by UNED, UPM and OHL company. The main 
objective of the project was the design, the optimization and the construction of a Fresnel Collector 
Prototype. The main task for the UNED group was the thermo-fluid dynamic design of the Fresnel Receiver. 
The group also participated in the optical design. As a result of all these studies, UPM and UNED presented 
several patents, most of them extended to an international level. From 1/8/2014 to 31/12/2015. 
• “Technological investigation and thermo -economic optimization of Integrated Solar 
Combined Cycles (InTecSol) ”. Spanish National Project ENE2012-37950-C02-01 This project, also 
coordinated by UNED and UPM, is previous to HICCSA project, and it is also focused on thermal systems 
and thermal components, included the solar field. From 01/02/2013 to 01/01/2016. 
• “Concentrated Solar Power for Electricity Generation”. Project granted by the German Ministry:  
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forshung  . This project was accomplished by the IASS (Institute for 
Advanced Sustainability Studies), UPM and UNED University. The UNED contributed in the development 
of a program for the optical characterization of a Fresnel Collector using the ray tracing and Monte Carlo 
methods. From 01/02/2012 to 01/01/2013. 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
N/A 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
76 
 
 
Partner 2: DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL, PIC:961160488 
Short Name  ADSC  Country Spain 
 Type SME Website www.analisis-dsc.com 
Brief description of the organisation 
The company is known commercially as ANALISIS -DSC is a SME engineering company specialized in 
mechanical engineering and process engineering in applications related to fluid mechanics, heat transfer, 
bulk materials using CAE tools such as CFD, FEA, etc.  
The company was founded in the year 2002 in Madrid, Spain. The company has a high specialization in the 
analysis of complex industrial processes involving fluids in tasks of: 
• Basic Engineering, 
• Failure Engineering, 
• Analysis, Optimization and Scale-up of Industrial Processes. 
ANALISIS-DSC usually works for customers in the Iberian Peninsula and subcontracted to other 
international customers which might need our specialized engineering services when they face operational 
or design problems. ANALISIS -DSC is a h orizontal engineering company with references in most of the 
main economic sectors such as Naval, Energy, Civil, Hydraulics, Chemistry, etc 
Role in the project 
ADSC will collaborate in the general coordination of the project in WP1. ADSC will mainly perform tasks 
of thermomechanical analysis of the SunDial in WP3, charge -discharge analysis of the thermal storage in 
WP4 using CAE tools such as CFD  in WP2. ADSC will also participate in the revision of the developed 
models in WP6. ADSC will collaborate in the validation of the models in WP7. ADSC will collaborate in 
general sustainability tasks in WP8. Finally, ADSC will collaborate in general dissemination and 
exploitation tasks in WP9.  
Key personnel 
• Dr. Rubén Barbero (M)  is the Technical Manager, ANALISIS-DSC. Doctor of Renewable Energies 
(UNED, Spain) on Thermosolar energy. Industrial Engineer specialized in Energy Techniques from 
ETSII-Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. Work Experience relevant to this project: Project manager 
of projects in the area of energy, and basic and detailed engineering and construction of a microfiltration 
module for a biodiesel plant. Knowledge of CAE tools such as Ansys CFD, CEI Ensight, FDS, CFAST, 
Ansys ICEM-CFD. Over 15 years of working experience on CFD tools. 
• Jerónimo Domingo (M) is the  Scientific Manager, ANALISIS -DSC. Phd Naval Engineer at the 
Helsinki University of Technology. Finland (Research area: Energy and Environment. Thesis: 
“Numerical Simulation of Diesel Engine Particle Deposition on  WHR-boilers.”). Naval Engineer from 
the ETSIN - Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. Work experience relevant to this proposal: Project 
Technical Manager of the DSC contribution to the IbD project (EU Project: 680565). Project Technical 
manager of 2 internal  R&D projects financed by CDTI and Ministry of Industry on pharmaceutical 
biomass analysis and scale -up from lab scale to industrial scale. Project manager of biomass boilers 
using CFD programs Analysis of the obtained chemical results. Knowledge of CAE tools such as Ansys 
CFD, CFAST, FDS, CEI Ensight, Ansys ICEM -CFD. Over 15 years of working experience on CFD 
tools. 
• Juan Enríquez Paraled  (M) is the  CEO and founder of the company ANALISIS -DSC, MBA at 
Instituto de Empresa, Madrid. MSc in Aerospace Engineering from University of Cincinnati and BSc in 
Aerospace Engineering from SUNY Buffalo and University of Cincinnati. He worked at VTT -Energia 
carrying process engineering using CFD tools in the pharmaceutical sector. ANALISIS -DSC has been 
both engineering consultancy company on CFD-FEA-DEM services and distributor of CAE tools such 
as Ansys CFX, Ansys ICEM -CFD, Gridgen (Pointwise), CEI Ensight, DEM Solutions. Knowledge of 
CAE tools such as Ansys CFD, EDEM, Ansys ICEM -CFD, CEI Ensight. 20 years of working 
experience on CFD tools. 
• Laura Torre s Gordo (F) is the  Business Development and Marketing Manager, ANALISIS -DSC, 
MBA at Instituto de Empresa, Madrid, Msc in Business Administration from University of Carlos III, 
Madrid. She has worked for over 10 years in the areas of business development and strategy to provide 
technical solutions that can help to understand and give a better solution to the end-user needs. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
77 
Relevant publications 
• R. Barbero, A. Rovira, M. J. Montes y J.M. Martinez Val. M.  “A new approach for the prediction of 
thermal efficiency in solar receivers”. Energy Conversion and Management, 2016 
• Rubén Barbero’s Thesis: “Development of a Theoretical Model for the Thermal Performance 
Characterization of Solar Collector. Application to Electrical Generation Technologies.” . UNED, 
Madrid, June 2018 
• Ruben Barbero, Daniel Cuadra, Jerónimo Domingo, Alfredo Iranzo, Eduardo Gallego, “Investigation of 
the near-range dispersión of particles unexpectedly released from a nuclear power plant using CFD”, 
Environmental Fluid Mechanics, Springer, DOI 10.1007/s10652-014-9359-y. 
• J. Domingo ANALISIS-DSC, Ruben Barbero ANALISIS -DSC, Alfredo Iranzo ANALISIS -DSC, Daniel Cuadra 
ANALISIS-DSC, et al, “Analysis and Optimization of ventilation systems for an underground transport 
interchange building under regular and emergency scenarios” , Tunnel. Underg.Space Technol. 
(2010), doi 10.1016/j.tust.2010.07.001 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• IbD [EU]: ‘Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handling’. The 
project focused on the intensification of processes involving solids handling  developing a web based 
intensification platform including tools such as analytical predimensionig, CFD, LCA, Controls, 
etc.(01/09/2015 – 31/08/2018). ibd-project.eu. 
• DIY4U [EU] “Open Innovation Digital Platform and Fablabs for Collaborative Design and Production 
of personalized/customized FMCG”. The project focuses on the ado ption of collaborative production 
engineering approaches in the Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) sector (1/10/2019-31/09/2022) 
• Ocean Cleaner: Optimization of the collecting tray of in ports of oil spills in ports of a catamaran. 
Analysis and optimization of a collecting oil spills tray in the port of a catamaran, it is part of a SME 
instrument H2020 European funded project (783773-OCTECH) (2018-2020). 
• Iberdrola Ing. Y Const.: Analysis of aero dynamical loads on thermo solar parabolic lenses  
(IBER01_022010). Study of a set of different wind velocities, assuming an atmospheric boundary layer 
on the thermo solar parabolic lenses. Contingency analysis on the maximum allowable wind force. 
Analysis of the eddy interactions among lenses (2010). 
• Modelization for the Biotechnology production of Carothenoids and Cephalosporins, IDI -
20100445). Internal R&D project financed by CDTI (Center Development and Technology and 
Industry), www.cdti.es. The analysis of biomass growth from lab scale to industrial scale using CFD 
tools. (2010-2012). 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
ADSC has a wide variety of cluster of computers to use with the proper CAE tool depending of the 
application. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
78 
 
Partner 3 VERTECH GROUP, PIC: 958250294 
Short Name VER Country France 
 
Type SME Website www.vertech-group.com 
Brief description of the organisation 
Vertech-Group (VER) is a French research-intensive SME that focuses its business on providing advanced 
environmental and sustainable solutions for   different sectors such as new materials, ICT platforms, waste 
management, industry and biotechnology. Verte ch Group is specialized in sustainability assessments of 
novel technologies and innovative materials considering the three pillars of sustainability (environmental, 
economic and social aspects). Vertech is also specialized in circularity analysis and envir onmental 
modelling. Vertech has vast experience in several sectors such as advanced materials and high-performance, 
green components, waste management, green manufacturing, secondary raw materials recovery & recycling, 
energy efficiency at industrial level , etc. Vertech Group is member of the SPIRE platform, the BIC 
consortium, the ERRIN network, among other relevant boards in the field of sustainability at European and 
International levels.  
Vertech Group not only integrates its highly qualified team of pr ofessionals but scans along its own long 
network of contacts, creating at the same time business opportunities for third parties under a win - win 
scenario.  
The company is based in Nice -France. Vertech also is present in Spain and has expansion plans to ot her 
markets besides Europe (e.g SouthAmerica). 
 
VER is a member of A.SPIRE, the European Association which is committed to manage and implement the 
SPIRE Public-Private Partnership. 
Role in the project 
VER will collaborate with general coordination of the project in WP1. VER will lead most of the 
sustainability tasks in WP8 with their expertise on 1) Environmental life cycle analysis (LCA) . 2) Social 
LCA and 3) Social acceptance . Finally, VER will collaborate on general tasks of dissemination and 
exploitation of WP9 
Key personnel 
• Dr. Paola Castrillo (F)  has a BSc. in food engineering, a BSc. in industrial engineering, a MSc in 
materials engineering and a Science and Materials Engineering PhD from Carlos III University of 
Madrid. From 2004 to the present she has been active in the preparation, management and coordination 
of several European R& D projects in the areas of sustainability, circular economy, high-grade materials, 
energy and resources efficiency. Her research interests include sustainability and circularity assessments 
of innovative value chains and capacity building on life cycle thinking. She is the Technical Coordinator 
of the CLOSEWEEE (H2020) and FFW (FP7) projects. Currently working as R&D Manager for 
Vertech Group. Dr. Castrillo is member of the Forum for Sustainability through Life Cycle Innovation, 
the Indian LCA Alliance and she contributes with the Iberoamerican Life Cycle Network. She 
contributes with the UNEP/SETAC LCA initiative. 
• Dr. Erasmo Cadena (M)  has a PhD in Environmental Science from Universitat Autónoma de 
Barcelona (UAB). He holds a Msc in Enviromental Engineering. Postdoctoral Researcher at University 
of Cambridge-UK and Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), BarcelonaTech. He has experience 
in international research initiatives and his research interests include tech nical, environmental and 
economic analysis of new processes and high -performance products, life cycle assessment, life cycle 
costs analysis. 
• Dr. Camilla Tomasetta (F) obtained a PhD in Economics and Management of Technology (DREAMT) 
from the University of  Pavia. During her PhD project on Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment, she 
collaborated with the LCA Working Group from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia and with 
the CIRAIG research Centre. She also holds a joint master’s degree in environmental  sciences with 
focus on Sustainable Development released by Ca’ Foscari University and Utrecht University. During 
and after her studies, she worked on the Life Cycle Assessment and waste field with research centres 
and private companies, such as Deltares and EcoInnovazione. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
79 
Relevant publications / products / services 
• Vertech services includes: Environmental Impact Assessments; Life Cycle Costing; Social Life 
Cycle Assessments; Environmental modelling. Circular business models 
• Dubois-Iorgulescu AM., Bernstad Saraiva AKE., Saraiva, Valle R., Mangia Rodrigues L. (2018). 
How to define the system in social life cycle assessments? A critical review of the state of the art and 
identification of needed developments. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. Volume 23, 
Issue 3, pp 507–518. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• SOCRATCES-H2020: Solar Calcium -looping integration for Thermo -Chemical Energy 
Storage.14 Partners / 8 Countries / 5M€   www.socratces.eu  From January 2018 to December 2020    
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
Software SimaPro® 8 (PRé Consultants) and Ecoinvent v.3 databases (Swiss Center for Life -Cycle 
Inventories, 2010). Analytical tools in accordance with ISO 14040 & 14044 standards (ISO 14042, 2000). 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
80 
 
Partner 4: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE CARTAGENA, PIC: 999828859 
Short Name UPCT  Country Spain 
 
Type ACA Website www.upct.es 
Brief description of the organisation 
UPCT (Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena) is a public University committed to the promotion of R&D, 
innovation and scientific exchange with numerous public and private, national and international institutions, 
reinforcing its links with industry. With ov er 90 R&D groups, UPCT seeks knowledge dissemination and 
scientific/technological creation.  
The Research Group of Fluid Mechanics and Thermal Engineering was founded in 1999 at UPCT. The 
host research expertise involves the development and application of experimental and modelling methods 
to provide satisfactory solutions to practical thermo -fluid problems. The research activity carried out is 
focused on: heat transfer enhancement, design and analysis of thermo-fluid systems, renewable energy and 
HVAC syst ems. The research group has gained international reputation in the field of heat transfer 
enhancement. Public funds and industrial sponsors have extensively supported our research. 
The UPCT has a supporting office, the OPECT, which vast experience on European project management. It 
possesses an active communication channel ensuring a proper project progress and report of project 
development, including administrative and financial aspects on costs related to the action.  The European 
Projects Office of UPCT has a wide experience in EU and international projects. Since its creation in 2009 
we have applied for more than 180 projects in different European calls. Currently, the office is managing 14 
European projects, in major programs, such as Horizon 2020, Directorate General, Erasmus+, Interreg Med 
and Sudoe, PRIMA, etc. 
Furthermore, the IPR Office at the UPCT facilitates and promotes collaboration between the world of 
university research and the companies in its socio-economic environment. It has the following functions: 
• Identification, evaluation, protection, dissemination and promotion of the knowledge and skills 
generated within the UPCT, promoting technology transfer 
• Promotion, participation and advice in the preparation and negotiation of research agre ements and in 
the preparation of project proposals. 
Role in the project 
The UPCT team will have an active role to undertake WP5. Furthermore, UPCT will take an active and 
supportive role in relevant tasks of the other work packages based on its technical and scientific background. 
UPCT EU project office will help the coordinat or with administrative tasks, financial reporting, research 
and legal advising and any other relevant issues that may appears throughout the project period. UPCT will 
also participate in WP8, following the long -term experience of the participating members in sustainability 
assessment for energy production and conservation. This partner will be the leader of WP5. 
Key personnel 
• Dr. Juan Pedro Solano (M) is an Associate Professor in Thermal Engineering at UPCT. His research 
interests cover the experimental and numerical analysis of enhanced heat transfer technologies of and 
thermal energy storage.  During the last years, he has applied his expertise analysis of active heat transfer 
enhancement techniques, with applications to mechanically-activated heat exchangers, oscillatory flow 
reactors and also to the development of novel designs of enhanced flat -plate solar collectors. He is 
currently principal inves tigator of the project ACCUSOL (program ERANet -LAC), focused on the 
implementation of thermal energy storage configurations to solar rigs in building applications. He is the 
author of more than 80 publications. Dr. Juan Pedro Solano has a large experience in project 
management and collaboration at international and national level. 
• Dr. Ruth Herrero Martín (F)  after working in the private sector as an R&D manager, moved to 
academia where she is currently an Associate Professor in Fluid Mechanics. At UPCT she joined the 
research group "Fluid Mechanics and Thermal Engineering", where she has since applied her tra ining 
in experimental research to the study of thermal and fluid dynamics phenomena of industrial and 
technological interest. Dr. Herrero-Martin has been involved in competitive research contracts (funded 
by regional, national, and European agencies) and has extensively collaborated with industry in research 
contracts. She has published over 70 articles and conference papers within this topic. She is currently 
principal investigator of the national project ALTES, exploring active techniques for the control of 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
81 
power and capacity in thermal energy storage systems. She has also assisted the European Commission 
as an Expert within FP7 -ENERGY and Monitoring at H2020.  She is the dissemination and IPR 
manager of the consortium. 
• Dr. J osé Pérez García (M)  is an Asso ciate Professor of Fluid Mechanics at UPCT. His research 
interests cover the experimental analysis of fluidic systems, the development of enhancement techniques 
for solar energy systems and the numerical study of heat transfer phenomena in thermal energy storage 
systems. He has accomplished numerous consultancy works in the field of energy recovery, and holds 
a strong expertise in the integration of fluid and thermal facilities in buildings. He has been Head of the 
Thermal and Fluid Engineering Department a t UPCT (2010 -2012) and Vice -rector of Campus and 
Sustainability (2012-2016).  He has published over 40 articles and conference papers in the fields of 
Energy, Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
• García, R. Herrero-Martin, J.P. Solano, J. Pérez -García, The role of insert devices on enhancing 
heat transfer in a flat -plate solar water collector , Applied Thermal Engineering, Volume 132, 2018, 
Pages 479-489, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.12.090. 
• J. Pérez-García, A. García, R. Herrero-Martín, J.P. Solano, Experimental correlations on critical 
Reynolds numbers and friction factor in tubes with wire -coil inserts in laminar, transitional and low 
turbulent flow regimes , Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science, Volume 91, 2018, Pages 64 -79,  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2017.10.003. 
• González-Juárez, D. Solano J.P., Herrero -Martín R., Harvey A.P. Residence time distribution in 
multiorifice baffled tubes: A numerical study .     Chemical Engineering Research and Design, Volume 
118, 259 – 269 February 2017 Volume 118, Pages 259–269 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2016.12.008 
• Huertas, J. P. Solano, A. Garcia, R. Herrero -Martín & J. Pérez -García Tube-side Heat Transfer 
Enhancement in Flat-plate Liquid Solar Collectors with Wire Coil Inserts. Experimental heat transfer 
(2015) http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08916152.2015.1124156 Volumen: 30   Número: 1   Páginas: 1-10   Fecha 
de publicación: 2017 
• J.F. Cerón, J. Pérez-García, J.P. Solano, A. García, R. Herrero-Martín. A coupled numerical model 
for tube -on-sheet flat -plate solar liquid collectors. Analysis and validation of the heat transfer 
mechanisms. Applied Energy (2015) Volu men: 140 Pages: 275 -287 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.11.069 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• ERANET-LAC Project " ACCUSOL : Elaboration of the novel cooling/heating system of 
buildings with the application of photovoltaic cells, solar collectors and heat accumulators". (2017-2020) 
• MINECO Project "ALTES: Active latent thermal energy storage". (2019-2021). 
• "Heat transfer enhancement and fouling prevention in heat exchangers employing dynamic 
inserts" (2004-2006) 
• "Heat transfer and ice slurry production analysis in plate heat exchangers and tubular heat 
exchangers with linear and rotational scrapers". (2007-2011) 
• "Heat transfer enhancement and increase in efficiency in flat plate solar collectors with tube 
inserts". (2012-2014) 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
The hosting group counts on three different facilities (an outdoor rig for characterizing the efficiency of 
solar thermal devices, an indoor rig for testing of enhanced heat transfer in solar collectors, and a thermal -
hydraulic rig for general purpose mixed convection heat transfer research) plus on e (evacuated-tube solar 
collector rig with latent-thermal energy storage (TES) systems). The research facilities are owned by UPCT 
and the research premises are wholly independent from other entities. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
82 
 
 
Partner 5: DAVID REAY ASSOCIATES, UNITED KINGDOM , PIC: 946195813 
Short Name DRA Country United Kingdom 
 
Type SME Website www.drassociates.co.uk 
Brief description of the organisation 
David Reay & Associates (DRA) was set up early in 1987 as a consulting engineering organisation with an 
emphasis on energy technologies. It currently operates as a 'sole trader' with David Reay as Principal 
Consultant. While DRA has had Associates for many years, including Professor Colin Ramshaw, regarded 
as the ‘father’ of process intensification, in 2012 it was decided, because of increasingly close involvements 
with areas such as process intensification, compact heat exchangers and energy storage, to expand the 
organisation by bringing in three additional Associates, all highly qualified for this project.  They 
complement the activities of Professor Colin Ramshaw, who has been an Associate for many years. DRA 
was a major player in the IbD SPIRE Project, that provides significant input/tools to our current proposal. 
DRA also took over some Management roles in IbD from other partners 
Role in the project 
DRA will act as scientific and innovation managers, will assume a scientific co -ordination role. DRA will 
participate in WP3 and WP4 and assist in WP9 on Dissemination. This partner will be the leader of WP7. 
Key personnel 
• Dr David Reay (M) M.Sc., C.Eng., M.R.Ae.S.. He will lead the DRA activities in the project. The 
research and business interests of David Reay include: heat transfer , compact & intensified heat 
exchangers, heat pipes & thermosyphons, heat pumps, process integration and intensification, industrial 
energy efficiency, renewable energy and thermal storage. He will be the Process Implementation 
Manager in the project. Academic & other positions:  Honorary Professor – Nottingham University; 
Visiting Professor – Northumbria University, Newcastle; Principal Cons ultant – David Reay & 
Associates; MSc Course Tutor, Brunel University London. Other Activities & Awards: Editor-in-
Chief – Applied Thermal Engineering (33 years) – Now Founding editor. Editor -in-Chief Thermal 
Science and Engineering Progress – 2015 onwards . First Honorary Life member of the Heat Pump 
Association; Member of the UK National Heat Transfer Committee; Past President of the Heat Transfer 
Society; Recipient of the IChemE Brennan Medal, 2008. Co -ordinator of the Heat Exchanger Action 
Group – www.hexag.org Co-ordinator of the Process Intensification Network – www.pinetwork.org. 
He is the Scientific manager of the consortium. 
• Dr. Richard Law (M) PhD., M.Eng. AMIChemE (Newcastle) (Male). Richard is a lecturer in Chemical 
Engineering at Newcastle University and is also currently engaged in numerous projects with DRA. His 
research interests lie in heat transfer enhancement, carbon capture systems, renewable energy and waste 
heat recovery systems. He is proficient in the design and analysis of heat exchangers and other thermal 
systems. His work for DRA to date includes: 1. Undertaking a major role in the recent IbD project, 
including coding of a knowledge-based selection tool, case study management and various design tasks; 
2. Numerous design and modelling studies for complex thermal systems; 3. Energy auditing, 
thermodynamic analysis, process integration and coding. 
• Dr. Ahmad Mustaffar (M) e University (PhD), both in chemical engineering. For his PhD, he 
investigated passive cooling in traction using phase change materials and heat pipes, a work that 
benefitted from accurate transformation of CT scans into 3D models which he conducted earlie r on 
during his PhD. For DRA, his portfolio includes CFD modelling of thermoplastic -based air -cooled 
condensers for Alstom Power, and light-weight heat exchangers for the Airbus Zephyr 9 solar aircraft – 
among others. Upon completion of his PhD, he worked for Newcastle University in the Intensified-by-
Design (IbD) HORIZON 2020 project, which produced a comprehensive online platform for solids 
processing. The project involved 22 European partners and spanned a three -year period. In the Sanofi-
Aventis’ case study, he was responsible for improving the production efficiency of Levothyroxine solid 
dosage forms, compliant with US FDA Quality -by-Design standards for continuous processing/online 
monitoring (PAT) – by using twin screw granulator. For his various work  tasks, he was also trained in 
artificial intelligence (e.g. neural networks, deep learning), big data cloud computing (Amazon Web 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
83 
Services) and handling analytical equipment such as thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), differential 
scanning calorimetry (DSC) and SEM imaging. 
• Dr. Peter Kew  (M) MA, PhD, CEng, FEI. Honorary Associate Professor, Heriot -Watt University, 
Edinburgh. (Male). Dr Kew has experience in industry working on a range of contract R & D projects 
ranging from energy conservation (particularly heat pumps and heat pipes) to simulation and testing of 
nuclear reactor components under failure conditions. He was employed by Heriot -Watt University for 
almost 30 years in various capacities but with an ongoing research interests centering on heat trans fer 
in compact geometries leading projects funded by EPSRC and the EC. During this period, he carried 
out several consultancies independently and with DRA including reviewing heat transfer technologies. 
Dr Kew is now working as a consultant in energy and as an independent assessor for Universities. 
• Professor Chris Underwood (M) BSc, PhD, CEng, MCIBSE, MASHRAE, Chris is Emeritus Professor 
at the University of Northumbria, Newcastle upon Tyne.  His areas of expertise are: Building services 
engineering; model ling and smart control of HVAC plant; geothermal heating and cooling; urban 
renewable energy systems; modelling of future climate impacts on buildings. He is Senior Consultant 
to Concept Energy Solutions Ltd (2018 -date); Practice Consultant to R W Gregory LLP (1990-2005); 
Director, Geothermal+ Ltd. (2005 -2012). Chris is also Editorial Board  Chair; Building Services 
Engineering Research & Technology (London: Sage) (2009-2016), and International Advisor; HKIE 
Transactions. He is the author or co-author of 2 books, 6 book chapters, 43 refereed journal papers, 36 
refereed conference papers, 5 editorials, 18 invited presentations and media contributions, 1984 -2018. 
He was awarded the 2004 CIBSE Napier-Shaw Medal for research and the 1998 CIBSE Dufton Medal 
for research. He was involved in the construction of a Linear Fresnel Collector array at Almatret, Spain 
– which can go to 400 deg.C. An M-Simulink model was constructed and can be adapted for this project. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
• Law. R., Reay, D.A., Mustaffar, A., McGlen, R.J., Underwood, C. and Ng, B. (2018). Experimental 
investigation into the feasibility of using a variable conductance heat pipe for controlled heat release 
from a phase-change material thermal store . Thermal Science and Engineering Progress 7 (2018) 125 -
130 
• Imhamed M. Saleh Ali, Tapas K Mallick, Peter A Kew, Tadhg S O'Donovan, K S Reddy. Optical 
performance evaluation of a 2 -D and 3 -D novel hyperboloid solar concentrator.  World Renewable 
Energy Congress XI 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 
• Sturm B, Meyers S, Zhang Y, Law R, Valencia EJS, Bao H, Wang Y, Chen H. Process 
intensification and integration of solar heat generation in the Chinese condiment sector -A case study 
of a medium sized Beijing based factory. Energy Conversion and Management 106 (2015) 1295-1308 
Books: 
• Reay, DA., Kew, PA. and McGlen, R. Heat Pipes: Theory, Design and Applications. 6th 
Edition. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2014. 
• Hesselgreaves, JE., Law R., and Reay, DA. Compact Heat Exchangers: Selection, Design and 
Operation. 2nd Edition. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2017. 
• Harvey, AP., Ramshaw, C., and Reay, DA. Process Intensification . 2nd Edition. Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2013. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• IbD [EU]: ‘Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handling’. 
The project focused on the intensification of processes involving solids handling. One of the case studies of 
the project was intensification of mineral process ing, especially the grinding circuit and beneficiation. 
Raman spectroscopy was used in the IbD project to measure mineral concentrations and abundances during 
the grinding and flotation processes . DRA managed the 6 Case Studies in the project.  (01/09/2015 – 
31/08/2018). ibd-project.eu.  
• Exploratory Award Contract JOE3 -CT97-1016. Novel compact heat exchanger/absorber 
technology for cost-effective absorption cycle machines. March 1998. 
• UK Technology Strategy Board project on Thermal Storage for Domestic CHP, using Variable 
Conductance Heat Pipes for Discharge Control. 2013-2015. 
• Managing the Heat Exchanger Action Group (HEXAG with several hundred academic, research 
and industrial members, used to extensively promote heat and mass transfer -related projects, new 
technologies (e.g. 3D printed heat exchangers). 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
84 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
DRA will access software for cooling cycle design and CFD analyses of heat transfer in thermal stores. 
DRA has no hardware in terms of infrastructure relevant to the proposed project 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
85 
 
Partner 6: EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD, PIC: 997848022 
Short Name eBOS  Country Cyprus 
 Type SME Website www.ebos.com.cy 
Brief description of the organisation 
EBOS Technologies Ltd (EBOS) is an innovative and client -focused Information Technology (IT) SME 
software house with head offices in Cyprus and branch offices in Ireland and in the UK. EBOS is dedicated 
in providing comprehensive and cost -effective technologically advanced e-business software solutions to 
enterprise customers worldwide.  
EBOS product portfolio provides a wide range of Windows and web-based customisable business solutions 
targeted for the enterprise market. EBOS core product offering, WiseBOS Ent erprise Resource Planning 
(ERP), is a state -of-the-art comprehensive software Suite, that offers complete, innovative, and proven 
solutions for enterprises of all sizes who want to thrive in the new digital era. WiseBOS ERP Suite is 
designed to adapt in fl exible ways to the ever -changing business needs of companies, unleashing the real 
potential of having fully integrated solutions that are fully-aligned with their business directives.   
EBOS is heavily investing in beyond the state-of-the-art technologies, thereby accelerating future digital 
innovation. EBOS Research & Development (R&D) division is focused on future -oriented research in a 
broad area of activities and domains, such as ICT, wireless communication networks including 5G, Next 
Generation Intern et Technologies, Big Data analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, 
Cybersecurity, Augmented & Virtual Reality. EBOS long-term expertise and experience of 16+ years have 
been boosted though the company’s successful engagement in cutting -edge re search projects funded 
primarily by the European Commission. In collaboration with large international research teams, EBOS has 
managed to become a highly respected and reliable partner and has made significant achievements at the 
frontier of ICT developme nt, to drive industry development and business model success via technological 
breakthroughs.   
To date, EBOS has participated in 17 EU-funded and national R&D projects totalling €190m funding. EBOS 
currently participates in the following H2020 projects: 5G-SOLUTIONS, INSPECTr, ICONET, 
CIVILnEXT, CHARIOT and SELIS. 
EBOS is a member of the NESSI (Networked European Software and Services Initiative), NEM (New 
European Media), NetWorld 2020 European Technology Pl atforms and NGI (Next Generation Internet) 
Initiative and actively provides input to the EU Institutions on research actions and technology matters of 
particular importance to the software and interactive technologies domain. EBOS is also a member of 5G-
PPP. 
EBOS also actively takes part in Crowdhelix, the Open Innovation platform connecting an international 
network of universities, research organisations & companies and promoting collaboration between 340+ 
leading institutions & innovating companies worldwide. 
In January 2019, the Ministry of the Finance of Cyprus has distinguished eBOS Technologies with the 
‘Innovative SME’ certificate in recognition of its efforts in research, development and innovation activities. 
The certification is the result of an independent evaluation that confirmed eBOS engages an important share 
of the company’s financial and human assets in continuous research and innovation efforts. Nation -wide, 
eBOS Technologies is the 13th SME recipient of the award, highlighting the rigor and  ambition of the 
criteria to be achieved. 
Role in the project 
In ASTEP, EBOS will involve its Research and Development department (R&D) coordinating the 
involvement of EBOS in research projects implemented in collaboration with international partners. The 
R&D department will provide expertise mainly in the areas of Interactive dashboards, Data Visualisation, 
Smart Dashboards as well as Open -standards APIs development, application integration and 
interoperability. Where applicable, machine lear ning algorithms will be investigated  for WP7. For 
dissemination and communication purposes, eBOS will also involve its Creativity department providing a 
range of professional services including Website design, Content Marketing, etc for WP9. 
Key personnel 
• Dr. Stelios Christofi (M) is the founder and Director of the company. He holds a BSc degree with first 
class honours and an MPhil degree in Computer Science from the UMIST University (UK), and a PhD 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
86 
from City University (UK), where he has also published numerous research papers. He is a specialist in 
web applications development, cybersecurity, cloud computing and private corporate security systems 
and technologies including dynamic systems integration. He has developed an innovative state -of-the-
art software suite including the co nception, design, development and continuous evolution of the 
company’s innovative WiseBOS platform, which is used for rapid application development. He is also 
responsible for enriching and embedding in EBOS inhouse developed applications and solutions 
‘security and privacy by design’ approaches making the products fully compliant with EU and national 
policy directives. He has more than 18 years of experience in these fields and he leads the company’s 
strategic and technological direction, business evoluti on and financial department.  He is also 
responsible for management decisions and for implementing the company's long and short -term 
strategic vision plans. 
• Dr. Loizos Christofi (M)  is the R&D Director of the company, leading the way for the company’s 
innovation. He has coordinated the elaboration of numerous H2020 proposals, including a very recently 
funded proposal in 5G -PPP Phase 3b (5G -SOLUTIONS) which ranked at the top of the ICT -19-2018 
funded projects. He holds a BEng degree with first class honours, as well as MPhil and PhD degrees in 
Electrical Engineering and Electronics with specialisation in Digital Communications from UMIST 
University (UK). From 2001 -2017, he worked as a full -time senior telecommunications engineer at 
Cyta, the incumbent telecom operator of Cyprus. He is a specialist in the design, planning, development 
and evolution of Cyta’s fixed and mobile telecommunications networks, with a particular focus in 
networking technologies, such as softswitch, IP Multimedia Subsystem, Software Defined Networking, 
Network Functions Virtualisation, as well as in cybersecurity solutions. He has also been responsible 
for the Quality Assurance and Risk Management of the processes and procedures. He has been involved 
in numerous research projects and pu blications. He has an extensive experience and expertise in the 
fields of technical specification elaboration, tender evaluation, equipment procurement, strategic studies 
elaboration, quality assurance, project coordination and management, successfully man aging and 
leading Cyta’s fixed -mobile convergence and Class5 replacement project implementations. During 
2004-2009 he has been, in parallel, a visiting lecturer in the computer science department at Frederick 
University Cyprus, delivering computer networki ng related lectures. He is a member of the Technical 
Chamber of Cyprus in the fields of Electronics and Computer Engineering. He has more than 20 years 
of experience in research and innovation projects.  
• Gotelenne Piaton (F)  is the Program & Communication  Manager of the company. She is a business 
development and project management expert with a wide range of experience attained from working in 
demanding international environments in Paris, Brussels and Nicosia in the areas of public diplomacy, 
international development, marketing and IT. From 2012 to 2017, she held the position of Business 
Development and Quality Manager at Axiom Consulting, a loyalty marketing and IT solutions provider. 
From 2009 to 2011, she worked at the Permanent Representation of France to the EU where she was in 
charge of relations with EU think tanks and research centres. In 2008, she served as Internal 
Communications Executive for the industrial Group Thales in Paris. During her studies, she interned for 
the United Nations Development Programme and the European Commission in Cyprus. Gotelenne holds 
an MA in International Relations (2007) from the Institute of Political Studies of Lille, France, an MA 
in International Communication Strategies (2008) from the University of Dijon, France and is a certified 
Project Management Professional (PMP) from the Project Management Institute, United States, since 
2016.  
• Philippos Philippou (M) is a Senior Project Manager in the Research and Development (R&D) 
department of the company. He holds a BEng degree in Civil Engineering from the UMIST University 
(UK) and a Master degree in Business Administration from the University of Bradford (UK). He has 
more than 25 years of experience in the fields of Operations Management and Supply Chain 
Management in a wide spectrum of business environments both in Cyprus and the Gulf region. He is 
also experienced in quality management systems, GDPR, risk analysi s, business process analysis and 
re-engineering. 
• Frini Lazarou (F) is the Project Support Manager of the company. She holds a BSc degree with First 
Class Honours in Political Science and a minor degree in Gender Studies from the University of Cyprus 
since 2011. In 2012, she was awarded a Master’s degree in Globalisation and Development from the 
University of Sheffield (UK) with Distinction. Frini is supporting project management and the quality 
assurance of the company’s R&D projects, ensuring the timely d elivery of qualitative project 
deliverables.  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
87 
Relevant services 
 
 
A leading Platform for Web & Windows Applications 
 
The WiseBOS Platform enables the EBOS software development team to easily create robust, bug-free and 
reliable software applications in the least possible timeframe. Thus, EBOS gains customer satisfaction and 
confidence in EBOS products with respect to the competition which uses standard methods of manually 
developing software coding, that requires inevitably longe r development times and rigorous testing before 
it can be commercially deployed. So, EBOS customers enjoy higher quality services with increased 
reliability, better support and with lower costs of ownership and lower operational costs. 
WiseBOS Platform lev erages the latest Microsoft .NET software programming language, which provides 
us with the most advanced application development tools for continuously incorporating innovation, 
scalability, robustness and security to all of EBOS’ solutions. Having that in mind, all WiseBOS applications 
blend easily with the customer’s existing infrastructure, allowing them at the same time to work with tools 
that are already known to them, thus minimising the implementation and infrastructure costs and also 
minimising their learning curve. 
WiseBOS platform empowers all company’s flexible customer -centric solutions and offers inherent 
integration with all software components and modules in EBOS product portfolio. WiseBOS Platform is 
designed to provide the ability to package  different applications based on each enterprise specific business 
needs. EBOS customers can extend the functionality of each product they select, easily and seamlessly with 
the modules that are offered through the WiseBOS Platform and unleash the real pot ential of having an 
integrated solution that is fully aligned with their business requirements. 
  
 
WiseBOS Content Management System (CMS) is EBOS proprietary and powerful web editor. WiseBOS 
CMS is an important part of any website because it gives the flexibility to create, customise and manage the 
content. It gives the user a plethora of user -friendly tools to work with. Users can choose their own design 
for their website from a wide selection of template layouts, edit images, upload documents and manage the 
SEO metadata. All these are manageable without any technical skills of HTML or CSS through the user-
friendly interface of WiseBOS CMS. The solution supports multiple file formats, languages and dynamic 
menus, is social media friendly, includes inquiry forms and is integrated with a mail database for newsletters. 
Its SEO and e -shop features make it t he perfect system for efficiently managing all aspects of an 
organisation’s digital marketing strategy. 
Relevant projects 
• 5G-SOLUTIONS [EU]: ‘5G Solutions for European Citizens’ is a 5G-PPP project supporting the EC’s 
5G policy by implementing the last phase of the 5G cPPP roadmap. It aims to prove and validate that 
5G provides prominent industry verticals with ubiquitous access to a wid e range of forward -looking 
services with orders of magnitude of improvement over 4G, thus bringing the 5G vision closer to 
realisation. This will be achieved through conducting advanced field -trials of innovative use cases, 
directly involving end -users across five significant industry vertical domains: Factories of the Future, 
Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports, Media & Entertainment. (01/06/2019 -31/05/2022). 
www.5gsolutionsproject.eu/.  
• INSPECTr [EU]: ‘Intelligence Network & Secure Platform for Evidence Correlation and Transfer’.  
The principal objective of INSPECTr will be to develop a shared intelligent platform and a novel process 
for gathering, analysing, prioritising and presenting key data to hel p in the prediction, detection and 
management of crime in support of multiple agencies at local, national and international level. This data 
will originate from the outputs of free and commercial digital forensic tools complemented by online 
resource gathering. (01/09/2019 – 31/08/2022). Grant agreement signed. 
• ICONET [EU]: ‘New ICT infrastructure and reference architecture to support Operations in future PI 
Logistics NETworks’. ICONET will significantly extend state of the art research and development 
around the PI concept in pursuit of a new networked architecture fo r interconnected logistics hubs that 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
88 
combine with IoT capabilities and aiming towards commercial exploitation of results. (01/09/2018 – 
28/02/2021). www.iconetproject.eu/.  
• CIVILnEXt [EU]: Next generation of in formation systems to support EU external policies. The 
CIVILnEXt project supports the development of a solution addressing existing “fragmentation” and 
closing “gaps”, to provide civilian CSDP missions with the next generation of secure and cost-effective 
information systems. CIVILnEXT contributes to the development of beyond the state -of-the art 
communication tools to support external policy objectives (e.g. cooperative working, augmented and 
virtual reality (AR/VR) environments, sensor -integration and int eroperability with EU member states 
agencies). (01/05/2018 – 30/04/2021). www.civilnext.eu/  
• CHARIOT [EU]: ‘Cognitive Heterogeneous Architecture for Industrial IoT’. CHARIOT will provide 
a design method and cognitive computing platform supporting a unified approach towards Privacy, 
Security and Safety (PSS) of IoT Systems (01/01/2018 - 31/12/2020) www.chariotproject.eu/.  
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
89 
 
Partner 7: EXERGY LTD, PIC: 958260479 
Short Name EXE Country United Kingdom 
 Type SME Website www.exergy-global.com 
Brief description of the organisation 
EXERGY is a leading renewable energy and engineering company with the expertise in architecture, solar 
technologies, monitoring systems, heating and cooling systems, industrial process engineering and energy 
performance assessments. EXERGY provides services, across the globe, construct and operate projects that 
contribute to developing a low carbon and sustainable future. Exergy’s senior team has been in the built 
environment and renewable energy industry for over 10 years, playing a major role in the devel opment of 
sustainable and energy efficient engineering systems. Operating across a range of innovative low -carbon 
energy technologies, Exergy’s capabilities cover everything from project planning to construction and from 
operation to re-use, while they stand by our clients as technical experts throughout the project life cycle.  
Exergy helps their clients manage the cost and implementation of their building’s services and construction 
projects, guide them throughout the project life cycle and achieve target  sustainability ratings and 
benchmarks. Exergy collaborates with architects, facility and construction managers to deliver efficient 
systems, buildings and communities. 
Exergy undertakes a variety of R&D activities and deliver research projects that guide strategy and stimulate 
the sustainable growth. Developing and implementing computerized modelling tools, collecting and 
analysing quantitative and qualitative data, and consulting with prestigious research institutions and 
universities, Exergy possesses a great example of knowledge transfer and drive environmental and social 
sustainability at local and international levels. Development of a large scale solar farm in Nigeria, retrofitting 
of a prestigious university’s campus buildings whilst achieving the ta rget sustainability measures, analysis 
and assessment of a sea water reverse osmosis plant located in Spain, installation and commissioning of a 
variety of technologies and monitoring systems are a few examples of Exergy’s technical and practical 
capabilities which have given them industry-leading skills and expertise. 
EXERGY possesses a multi-disciplinary team supported by senior engineers with a wide experience in the 
following areas: resource efficiency and environmental engineering, water efficiency and  management, 
construction and project management, indoor air quality monitoring and data storage, sustainability planning 
and assessments, process engineering and energy modelling, bio-based materials and biofuels. 
 
EXE is a member of A.SPIRE, the European Association which is committed to manage and implement the 
SPIRE Public-Private Partnership. 
Role in the project 
EXE is one of the main technology developers in the consortium. EXE will lead WP5 with their technology. 
Additionally, EXE will also participate in WP6. EXE will provide support to the end-users in WP7. Finally, 
EXE will participate in the sustainability assessment of the project at WP8. EXE is the exploitation manager 
of the consortium and will co llaborate in the different exploitation, dissemination and communication 
activities in WP9. 
Key personnel 
• Sreenivaasa R Pamidi (M)  Senior Research Engineer at Exergy Ltd with more than 5 years of 
Experience in managing and coordinating multidisciplinary research projects, proposals under FP7, 
H2020, IUK and other European and national research funding’s. Background in mechanical and Energy 
Engineering with a master’s degree in MSc Renewable Energy and Environmental Modelling from 
University of Dundee, Scotland. He has worked on several European research projects including the 
ZEPHYR and PROMETHEUS projects, which have focused on his ma in area of expertise in Energy 
Harvesting Infrastructure, solar thermal and Energy Efficiency Optimization 
• Dr. Matthew Moss (M) Holder of both a PhD and MEng from the University of Sheffield in Chemical 
& Biological Engineering. His main area of expertise is in carbon dioxide capture and utilisation and 
has numerous peer -reviewed publications in this field. His PhD thesis focuses on the validation of 
experimental and computational modelling of a pulsed corona plasma reactor for the reduction of carbon 
dioxide. Within Exergy his role is as a Chemical Process Engineer to provide simulation and design 
expertise to innovative technology across a range of sectors within the circular economy.  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
90 
• David Aston (M) Material and Process Engineering (Hons) from University of Waikato, NZ. Head of 
Sustainable Processes Exergy. David has experience working in a variety of different environments and 
roles including process design/commissioning engineer, management, business development.  He holds 
many years of experience designing, installing, commissioning, and operating industrial plants in 
biofuels, fermentation, dairy and food, chemicals and fert ilizer industries.  He has experience in 
industrial, laboratory, and office environments. In the past, he has spent many years working with gas 
fermentation to ethanol.  The main process was using CO as a feedstock and a using proprietary bacteria 
in an an aerobic fermentation process to produce an ethanol broth.  Following this there was further 
downstream processing to separate the ethanol, and other catalytic processes to convert the ethanol into 
bio-jet fuel.  His work in this included process design, R& D, construction, commissioning, operation, 
management, business development, lab development and testing. 
• Andy Thompson (M) is an experienced engineer and project manager, with a strong background in 
building services and energy efficiency. An accredited PRINCE2 Practitioner, he also holds a BEng 
(Hons) in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Bristol (UK), supplementing this with further 
study at the University of Sydney (Australia). Andy began working in energy efficiency in 2010 and has 
gained extensive project experience both in Australia and the UK. As Senior Energy Efficiency Engineer 
at Exergy, Andy provides technical and project management expertise for projects throughout Europe 
and the US. 
• Dr. Mark Walker (M) He holds as MEng in Engineering from the University of Durham and a PhD in 
Environmental Biotechnology from the University of Southampton followed by 10 years of experience 
working on a broad portfolio of translational research projects as a post-doctoral researcher across three 
Russel Group universities in the UK (Southampton, Leeds and Sheffield). His research has focused on 
bioenergy production, sustainable organic waste and wastewater treatment and energy systems 
integration, he has published 12 articles in high impact academic journals and has been awarded almost 
£1M in successful grant applications as a principal or co -investigator.  At Exergy his role is a Senior 
Process Engineer and he brings expertise in process modelling, process development/design, laboratory 
and pilot scale testing and technoeconomic assessment. 
• Monica Osorio (F) Mrs. Osorio has more than 15 years of experience in the market intelligence industry 
developing successful alternatives from product and market understanding to launch and 
commercialisation strategies. Mrs. Osorio holds a bachelor’s degree in Economics, a Specialisation in 
Statistics, and a Master’s degree in Statistics. Also, she has received a certificate in Marketing developed 
in collaboration with the American Marketing Association. Ms. Osorio has broad experience in Market 
and Business Intelligence solutions working with companies such as Nielsen and Novartis. Ms. Osorio 
has been involved in R&D projects for the last 3 years helping partners understand the value proposition 
of their technologies and providing guidance on how to exploit the knowledge acquired when involved 
in innovation projects. She participated in the tasks related to dissemination and exploitation for 
RESSEEPE and TRIGEN. She is the Exploitation manager of the proposal. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
• Thermal performance of lithium bromide ejector -boosted absorption – U.A. Muhammad, D. 
Bhattacharyya, S.Pamidi and J.L.Endrino published at Economy, Sustainability Development & Energy 
International Conference (ESDEIC) 
• EXERGY LTD. The Parliament Magazine: “ EU is key funding research for the PV Industry  
“Posted on March 22, 2014 
• Unkaya, G. The role of Display Energy Certificates in the decision-making process, University 
College London, 2013. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• RESSEEPE (FP7 EEB, GA 609377). www.resseepe-project.eu. The core idea of the RESSEEPE 
project is to technically advance, adapt, demonstrate and assess a number of innovative retrofit technologies. 
Reductions in the area of 50% will be achieved in terms of energy consumption. Exergy is leading Scientific 
and technical management to ensure a sound coordination and management of the project covering scientific 
and technical issues. This involves management of activities directly aimed at creating new knowledge, new 
technologies, and products. 
• ZEPHYR (PF7 ENV, GA 308313). www.zephyr-project.eu The Zephyr project aims to introduce 
an innovative technology built on pre-cultivation of forest regeneration materials in a zero-impact and cost-
friendly production unit. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
91 
• PROMETHEUS (FP7 ENERGY, GA 308975). www.prometheus-energy.eu The project aims to 
develop, validate and implement a novel solid -state conversion mechanism able to transform concentrated 
solar radiation into electric energy, at very high efficiency, with a direct conversion obtained by an enhanced 
electron emission from advanced semiconductor structures. 
• TRIGEN (Innovate UK, 132401):  The TRIGEN project (Modular system for production of 
heating, cooling and electricity using ejector-boosted absorption) will confirm the technical feasibility of a 
tri-generation system, based on an integrated system of solar linear collector and a hybrid absorption heat 
pump, in the range of 50-100 kW for decentralized applications of energy production. 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
Software Licences: AspenONE® Engineering Desktop, Media Version 8.0. And other as: 
Dymola/Modelica, Matlab, R, Data Lab, AutoCAD, Contam, Eikon, Fluent, Gambit, HAP, EES, Origin, 
Phoenics and TRNSYS. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
92 
 
 
Partner 8: BRUNEL UNIVERSITY LONDON, PIC: 999749610 
Short Name BUL Country United Kingdom 
 
Type ACA Website www.brunel.ac.uk 
Brief description of the organisation 
Brunel University London (BUL) in West London is a dynamic institution with over 12,500 students and 
over 1,300 academic staff operating in a vibrant culture of research excellence.  With a turnover of more 
than £200 million, the University is a Higher Education and research establishm ent with considerable 
intellectual, financial and social resources and makes a major contribution to the economy and community 
of the West London region. It also plays a significant role in the higher education scene nationally and has 
numerous national an d international links and partnerships with both academia and industry. BUL has 
climbed 14 places in the 2019 QS World University Rankings , and is now placed in the top third of 
universities worldwide.  Brunel prides itself on its multicultural environment and has gained countless 
benefits from having staff and students from over 113 different countries contributing to both its academic 
and social environment. The university holds a European Commission HR Excellence in Research award 
for its commitment to supporting its researchers.  
BUL has a long history of successful bidding for European funding and of managing EU projects, BUL was 
involved in 120 projects within FP7 with a cumulative value of over 37 Million Euros, and has been 
successful with over 60 Horizon 2020 proposals to the value of 30 million Euros, of which it is leading and 
coordinating 9 projects. 
Since the launch of the university in 1966, research has been at the very heart of Brunel's academic 
activities. Today, we have three Research Institu te’s covering most of these areas. The research groups 
within them are world leading, with highly cited papers, substantial grant income, established reputations 
for particular methodological approaches, and a community of PhD graduates pursuing successful  careers 
in industry and academia;  
The Institute of Energy Futures (IEF) is one of the institutes at BUL with a holistic approach to the energy 
costs of food distribution, bringing together researchers from a range of disciplines, as well as mainstream 
engineering research. It has a particular strength in refrigeration, heating and cooling and in environmental 
design. The Institute main themes include Advanced Powertrains and Fuels, Energy Efficient and 
Sustainable Technologies, Smart Power Networks and Re source Efficient Future Cities.  The Centre for 
Sustainable Energy Use in Food Chains is part of the IEF and is one of the 6 Centres funded by the 
Research Councils, UK to address 'End Use Energy Demand Reduction' in the UK. The Centre with an 
additional £5.0 m from BUL has established state of the art facilities for resource use reduction across all 
stages of the food chain. These include energy efficient food storage, transport, preservation and 
manufacturing technologies, and the use of low carbon energy in food processing. 
Role in the project 
BUL will coordinate WP2. BUL will be also involved in LCC analysis in WP8. Finally, BUL will also 
collaborate in general coordination tasks in WP1 and different activities in dissemination, exploitation 
communication in WP9. 
Key personnel 
• Dr. Valentina Stojceska, (F) has been employed as a Senior lecturer (Associate professor) and a co -
investigator in the CSEF, IEF.  She is a course director of MSc – BSEM, a Module leader of a number 
of MSc Modules and supervises PhD students and postdoctoral researchers. Her research interests focus 
on innovative solutions for improving environmental sustainability of the industrial processes that 
include waste utilisation and energy and resource efficiency enhancement. She has published over 100 
peer- review papers, book chapters, reports and conference papers. Dr. Stojceska has led and managed 
a range of projects in excess of over £1.2 M supported by the Innovate, UK, DEFRA, TSB, Welsh 
Assembly, British Council, Roche Foundation for Anaemia Research, EU Frameworks, North West 
Development Agency and a large number of industries supported projects.   
• Dr Z Dehouche,  (M) is employed as a Senior lecturer (Associate professor) in Renewable Energy 
Engineering, Thermofluids and Energy Conversion, Storage and Management and MSc Course Director 
of Renewable Energy Engineering & Sustainable Energy Technologies and Management Programmes. 
He is a member of the IEF. Dr. Dehouche has supervised a number of industry sponsored projects related 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
93 
to the sustainable technologies such as solar Photovoltaic -Thermal systems, regenerative fuel cells for 
energy storage, waste -to-energy systems and phase change materials/solar -air heater incorporating 
aerogel for sustainable buildings. He has authored over 120 interdisciplinary journal and conference 
papers and three patents being applied for. He is a member the American Nano -Society and he is co -
author of New Nanotechnology Research and Hydrogen Energy Storage, Nova Science publisher, 2006 
& 2018 and Guest Editor for MDPI Special Issues "Bimetallic Catalysts -Application in Hydrogen 
Storage, 2012 and “Smart electro -catalysts for fuel cells sustainable development”, 2019. He has been 
involved in a number of research consortiums in Canada and Europe. 
• Prof.  Savvas Tassou (M) is a Director of the IEF, and Director of CSEF. He has been in the forefront 
of research in energy demand reduction in the food sector for more than 25 years including the 
development and commercialisation of innovations in heat pump, refrigeration and tri -generation 
technologies and has published extensively in the field. In 2014-15 he was member of the DECC/BEIS 
Steering Group for Industrial Decarbonisation and Energy Efficiency Roadmaps to 2050 and he is 
currently member of the BEIS Phase II Steering Committee for the development and implementation of 
energy efficiency and decarbonisation action plans to 2050 for the Food and Current major relevant 
projects as PI include: i) CSEF with the Universities of Manchester and Birmingham £5.8 million; ii) 
Innovate UK project ‘Cool Food -Novel energy effi cient food safe air distribution for cooling food 
factories’ aimed at reducing the energy consumption in chilled food manufacturing facilities and EU 
H2020 project ‘I-ThERM’ addressing heat recovery from industrial processes. 
• Dr. Mohamed Darwish  (M) is a Senior Lecturer (Associate professor) and Course Director and in 
Power Electronics and Systems: Has supervised more than 30 PhD research students and published over 
150 journal and conference papers.  He is the PI for a recent £1m Innovate UK grant (revolutionary low-
loss cable). He was the PI for an EPSRC grant (Programmable Tuned Filters for Retrofit Applications), 
a TCS grant (Power Quality Solutions), and an Institutional Links - British Council grant (UK -Egypt 
enhanced research network in solar energy system to support economic development). Dr Darwish is a 
Chartered engineer. 
Relevant publications 
Meng, F., Dehouche, Z., Ireland, T. and Fern. G. 2019.  Improved photovoltaic performance of 
monocrystalline silicon solar cell through luminescent down-converting Gd2O2S:Tb3+ phosphor, Prog 
Photovolt.  Res Appl.(27):640–651. 
Meng, F., Dehouche, Z., Nutasarin,A.  and Fern, G.F. 2018.  Effective MgO-doped TiO2 nanoaerogel 
coating for c-Si solar cells improvement, International Journal of Energy Research, 1–13. 
• Noya, L.I., Vasilaki, V., Stojceska, V., González-García, S., Kleynhans, C., Tassou, S., Moreira, M. 
T.  & Katsou, E. 2018. An environmental evaluation of food supply chain using life cycle assessment: 
A case study on gluten free biscuit products. Journal of Cleaner Production, 170, 451-461 
• Youssef, W., Ge, Y. Tassou, S. 2017. Indirect expansion solar assisted heat pump system for 
hot water production with latent heat storage and applicable control strategy . Energy Procedia (123), 
180-187. 
• Sehil, K. & Darwish, M. 2017. Critical analysis of power conversion topologies for stand-alone 
PV systems with super-capacitor, International Journal of Computers and Applications, 39 (4). 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• RCUK (Research Councils UK Centre) for Sustainable Energy Use in Food Chains – Under the 
EPSRC programme on Centres for End Use Energy Demand Reduction (www.foodenergy.org.uk). 
EP/K011820/1, Brunel Leading with Manchester and Birmingham Universities. From 2013 to 2019 
• Development of sustainable manufacturing system for producing high quality baking products. 
From 2014 to 2017 
• Solar Saver - Solar powered modular food drying system to reduce food production losses for off 
grid Africa and other Developing Countries. From 2019 to 2020. 
• Kolokotroni, M (PI) and Dehouche, Z (Co -I).  The Application of Solar -Powered Polymer 
Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) Electrolysers for the Sustainable Production of Hydrogen Gas as Fuel for 
DomesticCooking (EuropeAid/130381/D/ACT/A CP-22. Collaborative EU Project - ACP Caribbean & 
Pacific Research Programme for Sustainable Development (10th European Development Fund).From 2012 
to 2016 
• UK-Egypt enhanced research network in solar energy system to support economic development and 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
94 
social welfare (workshop). 2017). Funder: British Council 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
Different softwares to measure the energy requirements of the end-users and for LCC analysis.  
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
95 
 
Partner 9: CROWDHELIX LIMITED, PIC: 905205165 
Short Name CHX Country Ireland 
 
Type SME Website www.network.crowdhelix.com/  
Brief description of the organisation 
Vision2020: The Crowdhelix Network (CH) is a pan -European Open Innovation Network that enables 
Research Technology Organisations (RTOs) and businesses to collaborate, innovate and grow. Based at the 
Tyndall National Institute at University College Cork, the Crowdhelix Network has more than 400+ member 
organisations from 42 countries and is present in all EU Member State countries. The network membership 
is reported to have won more than 2.5 billion euros of funding under Horizon 2020, highlighting the quality 
of its membership base.  
The network is structured around virtual technology clusters known as Helixes. There are currently 18 live 
Helixes in areas such as Digital, Health and Energy etc. The network hosts focused collaborative events for 
each Helix ea ch year where the aim is to connect organisations across Europe and promote collaboration 
and open innovation. In addition to hosting and running events, CH also has its own technology tool called: 
Crowdhelix. The tool is designed so people and organisatio ns can profile their expertise and capabilities 
within a Helix area. It is then used to help organisations post opportunities, which are matched to people’s 
profiles within the platform. Once a match is made the CH team then help to facilitate an opportunity so that 
it then turns into a tangible collaboration. 
Role in the project 
CHX will set up a bespoke technology cluster ( Helix) for the project,  in turn acting as a commercial 
accelerator for the project with the principal goal of driving sustained indu stry exploitation, identifying IP 
licencing opportunities for continued revenues, motivating commercial partnerships, and steering industry 
& economic sustainability paths. The Helix will include all project partners, as well as relevant stakeholders 
from the pan-European CH community that currently has a reach to over 500,000 actors across 42 European 
countries (EU SMEs, RTOs, Universities and Industries). More fundamentally, the Helix will profile and 
inject relevant commercial actors from across Europe, such as SMEs and Industry leaders commercialising 
in this space, with a view to forging alliances and partnerships that are in the spirit of growth, expansion and 
ongoing sustainability and advancement of the IP created beyond the end of the project. The project’s Helix 
will also integrate other aligned projects in the domain of the project, with the end goal of establishing and 
motivating commercial partnerships across domain relevant sister -projects in this space, thus fusing and 
joining relevant actors on a path towards realising commercial outputs through commercial partnerships that 
the Helix will identify and motivate.  
The Helix will also identify relevant and appropriate open source communities with a view to ensuring that 
open outputs from the project are made available and accessible to all EU SMEs, RTOs, Universities and 
Industry actors, in the spirit of open dissemination and sharing.  
CHX will play a central role in enabling and supporting commercialisation and Industry adoption of the IP 
created, with appropriate outreach activities channelled and driven through the Helix. The project’s 
commercialisation, exploitation and IP strategy will be part of, and integrated into, the Helix activities and 
the Helix will also help to form and drive new forms of untapped capability and capacity in this area. The 
Helix will act as a commercial and economic accelerator for the project both during the project and after the 
project has ended. CHX will continue to manage the community beyond the end of the project – promoting 
the project’s outputs and impacts and enabling new forms of collaboration and open innovation across the 
European Research Area. 
CHX will set up a bespoke technology cluster ( Helix) for the project,  in turn acting as a commercial 
accelerator for the project with the principal goal of driving sustained industry exploitation, identifying IP 
licencing opportunities for continued revenues, motivating commercial partnerships, and steering industry 
& economic sustainability paths. The Helix will include all project partners, as well as relevant stakeholders 
from the pan -European CH X community that currently has a reach to over 500,000 actors across 42 
European countries (EU SMEs, RTOs, Universities and Industries). More fundamentally, the Helix will 
profile and inject relevant commercial actors from across Europe, such as SMEs and Industry leaders 
commercialising in this  space, with a view to forging alliances and partnerships that are in the spirit of 
growth, expansion and ongoing sustainability and advancement of the IP created beyond the end of the 
project. The project’s Helix will also integrate other aligned projects  in the domain of the project, with the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
96 
end goal of establishing and motivating commercial partnerships across domain relevant sister -projects in 
this space, thus fusing and joining relevant actors on a path towards realising commercial outputs through 
commercial partnerships that the Helix will identify and motivate.  
The Helix will also identify relevant and appropriate open source communities with a view to ensuring that 
open outputs from the project are made available and accessible to all EU SMEs, RTOs , Universities and 
Industry actors, in the spirit of open dissemination and sharing.  
CHX will play a central role in enabling and supporting commercialisation and Industry adoption of the IP 
created, with appropriate outreach activities channelled and driven through the Helix. The project’s 
commercialisation, exploitation and IP strategy will  be part of, and integrated into, the Helix activities and 
the Helix will also help to form and drive new forms of untapped capability and capacity in this area. The 
Helix will act as a commercial and economic accelerator for the project both during the project and after the 
project has ended. CHX will continue to manage the community beyond the end of the project – promoting 
the project’s outputs and impacts and enabling new forms of collaboration and open innovation across the 
European Research Area. 
Key Personnel 
• Abdul Rahim (M)  is a founder and director of CH X (https://network.crowdhelix.com/). He has a 
proven track record of establishing strategic, mutually beneficial partnerships and relationships.   He is 
an expert in public funding and has secured several € millions for organisations and institutions. Abdul 
has significant links with UK and European Universities and focuses on connecting business to research 
institutions. He was on the board of London Metropolitan University from its formation to March 2010. 
He was Vice Chairman and Chair of its Finance and Human Resources Committee.  Prior to that he was 
on the board of University of North London and was on the joint board during the merger with London 
Guildhall University to form London Metropolitan University. He is currently an Advisory Board 
Member, Facu lty of Business and Management at Regent’s University. Abdul holds a Master in 
Business Administration (MBA) and is a Fellow of The Royal Society of Arts & Manufacturing. 
• Kimberly Cornfield is the Communication Manager (F)  is responsible for overseeing th e strategic 
development and facilitation of the CH helixes, and will lead the creation of a technology Helix centred 
on the project. She has extensive experience in planning and managing complex international 
collaborative research and innovation projects,  across numerous research fields (including climate, 
environment, energy, health and ICT). Through her roles as Senior Project Manager and Head of 
Proposal Management at UCL, she has overseen the overseen the successful award and delivery of ca. 
€200 million in UCL led Horizon 2020 collaborative research and innovation proposals/projects. She 
also has extensive experience in and developing internal and external networks to facilitate international, 
cross-organisational, and cross-disciplinary collaboration in research and innovation. She has industry 
consultancy experience in supporting SMEs in developing grant-funding strategies to complement their 
investment strategies. She holds an MSc Strategic Management of Projects (UCL), a diploma in 
International Project Management (Finland), and holds a voluntary role as Strategic Management of 
Projects Alumni Director (voluntary) at UCL, developing international alumni outreach and networking 
engagement. Kimberly is also a guest lecturer on strategy and project management as UCL, and provides 
Project Management and Innovation Management training within the higher education sector. 
• Riam Kanso (F) is responsible for overseeing the progress of the platform and its position in the 
academia-industry ecosystem. Riam has a research background (Neuroscience PhD) and has worked on 
building academic-industry collaborations throughout her career, both in the public sector and private 
consultancy space. Riam has been involved in the creation and management of acceleration programmes 
for start-ups and their training and has great experience in working with mid -cap companies. Due to 
previous positions in academia and government, Riam has acquired significant experience and 
knowledge in science policy. 
• Rusty Nash (Male) is a founde r and the CTO of Crowdhelix, overseeing its development and the 
strategic roadmap for the technology platform, and will work with Riam Kanso on the creation and 
development of Helix on the Crowdhelix Platform.  Rusty has an academic background having studied 
Medical Biology at Brunel University and UCL. He is also the CIO of Satalia, a spin -out from UCL's 
department of Computer Science, which is an AI consultancy. Over his seven years at Satalia Rusty has 
developed a number of bespoke platforms, includ ing a decentralised organisational operating system 
and has increased his practical and technical knowledge of machine learning, natural language 
processing and artificial intelligence. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
97 
Relevant publications / products / services 
• N/A 
Relevant Projects 
• PRIME-VR2 [EU H2020]: PRIME-VR2 will develop an accessible, collaborative VR 
rehabilitation environment for users with compromised physical capability on the path to rehabilitation. 
CHX is developing a Virtual Reality Helix, which will focus on developing a marketplace for the PRIME-
VR2 exploitation. From 1/10/2019 to 30/09/2022. 
• MultiCycle [EU H2020]: MC will develop advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value 
chains for plastic-based multi-materials. CH is developing the Circular Plastics Helix and will lead on the 
Dissemination and Capacity building activities and contribute to the exploitation and commercialisation 
activities From 2018 to 2020. 
• OPENiSME [EU]: The overall objective of the project is to help unlock innovation capabilities for 
SMEs that aspire to grow through the facilitation of new open innovation partnerships. www.openisme.eu/ 
From 1/11/2014 to 31/10/2018. 
• ERC=ScienceSquared [EU]: CH X’s role in this Horizon 202 0 project to communicate and 
disseminate success stories from the European Research Council across its community and the broader 
European Research Area. www.sciencesquared.eu/. From 01/10/2015 to 31/03/2019 
• PBNv2 [EU H2020]: a European Training Network, where CH’s role is to connect researchers with 
businesses – both through physical and technological / CH X enablers - to communicate the project and 
promote new forms of collaboration and open innovation. https://www.h2020-pbnv2.eu/. From 01/05/2017 
to 30/04/2020. 
Significant Infrastructure 
The Crowdhelix platform is technology arm of the CH X network. It hosts Helixes (virtual technology 
communities) across the network and enables organisations and people to profile themselves in the platform. 
It acts as a matchmaking and profiling tool for organisations. A technology Helix will be designed and 
centred around the project within the platform which will open up the project beyond the project consortium 
to other member organisations (400+ organisations in 42 countries) as well as commercial partners, clients, 
commercial acceleration bodies, related EU projects with overlapping interests with a view to forging 
commercial partnerships/collaborations, as well as the VC and Angel network with interests in the domain 
areas of the project. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
98 
 
 
Partner 10: PRODUCTION TRADE AND SUPPORT OF MACHINABLE PRODUCTS OF SOFTWARE 
AND INFORMATICS – RELATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AE, PIC: 952910153 
Short Name  RELA  Country Greece 
 Type SME Website www.relationalfs.com 
Brief description of the organisation 
Founded in Athens, Greece in 1995, Relational Technology SA has evolved over the years from one of the 
most promising independent software vendors in Greece, to an International Software Developer & Integrator 
with international presence and offices in Romania, Croatia, UK and a client base all over Europe, Middle 
East and North Africa. Its strategy supports strongly its expansion to markets outside Greece with current 
intense marketing activities in Europe (especial ly Balkans), Middle East and North Africa. Relational 
Technology SA has an average annual revenue of € 12.000.000 the last three years and employs an average 
of 130 persons. 
In addition, Relational provides system services relating to the following: 
• Project Management : Relational’s project management services undertake the task of planning, 
organizing, securing, and managing resources to achieve a project’s specific goals and to bring added 
value to the end result.  
• Business Process Reengineering (BPR): is defined as the fundamental rethinking and radical redesign 
of business processes to achieve dramatic improvements in critical contemporary measures of 
performance such as cost, quality and speed. BPR aims to make the structure of an organization serve 
the flow of products/services and result in the production of leaner and fitter organizations. 
• Software Development : actively participates in a number of European Community and National 
Research Projects with emphasis on intelligent data explo itation techniques defining and 
implementing efficient algorithms on data representation. 
• Anti-Fraud Management: experience and know-how as well as the technical competence required to 
effectively manage the anti-fraud lifecycle. 
Over the last 20 years, Relational Technology SA has worked extensively on many relevant aspects related 
to electricity, gas, oil, coal, renewable energy, energy efficiency and sustainable development for both EU 
and non EU Mediterranean countries. Relational Technology SA has a lo ng-standing experience in 
coordinating research projects on energy including renewable energy in the Euro -Mediterranean area with a 
large number of partners and in organising conferences for the dissemination of the research results for 
various stakeholders, including the European Commission, the World Bank, the International Energy Agency. 
Overall, it has been partner or coordinator of about 30 EU research projects. In addition, Relational 
Technology SA closely cooperates with a large network of experts in industry, universities, ministries, energy 
agencies, international organizations. Relational Technology SA is also partner of the Mediterranean 
Renewable Energy Programme, the Type II Initiative launched by the Italian government in 2002 and is also 
collaborating with the Secretariat of the UfM and Medgrid, under the framework of different memoranda of 
understanding. Its staff is composed of experienced engineers and economists from various Mediterranean 
countries, with solid analytical background on energ y scenario modeling, policy and market analysis. The 
organization is structured around four main fields of work: Hydrocarbons, Electricity, Renewable Energy, 
Monitoring and Modeling. The Technical Committees of Relational Technology SA , decide on priority 
projects, activities or studies to undertake, bring together representatives from members and external partners 
and regional stakeholders. 
Relational Technology SA is certified with the international quality standard EN ISO 9001, since May 2003, 
thus consolidating its philosophy for quality services, continuous improvement and increasing satisfaction 
for both of its customers worldwide and its partners, at all levels. Having placed Quality on the top of its 
strategic orientations, acknowledging that it is the most essential factor that provides the competitive edge in 
all services, Relational has developed and implements a certified - Quality Management System. This Quality 
Management System was planned and developed in conjunction with all the critical mana gement functions 
as reflected in the documented procedures and guidelines. The ISO 9001certification demonstrates that its 
Quality Management System is comprehensive and in accordance to the internationally accepted quality 
standards. The total quality ser vices and solutions offered arise from the integrated team approach and the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
99 
total quality culture encountered in everyday operations. Finally, Relational Technology SA holds the ISO 
27001 certification. 
Relational Technology is also active in Horizon 2020 in projects relating to Cloud computing, Open Source 
Software, Renewable energy sources , Software engineering, solar cell . Relational is currently participating 
in the following H2020 projects: 
• MOBI-DEV – http://www.mobi-dev.arakne.it (MOBIle DEVices for healthcare applications, IST -
2000-26402 under the 7th Framework Programme): Design and Development of IT infrastructure 
aiming at the provision of access to patient’s medical records and other healthcare  information 
(protocols, medication interaction, new medical treatments, laboratory exams etc.) from any location 
and at any time to improve the quality of care and reduce cost. The IT Infrastructure consists of a 
new generation of mobile device for health care professionals that facilitates and improves the daily 
routine of medical personnel, e.g. doctors, nurses and other health care professionals facilitating the 
delivery of Care Services. 
• MOUNTAIN RES -RUE - The mountainous – agricultural communities cou ld benefit from 
Renewable Energy Sources (RES) and Rational Use of Energy (RUE) applications based on their 
high RES potential as well as the increased energy and electricity consumption, as an inevitable 
outcome of their economical development. Scope of this project is the RES and RUE stimulation of 
four local communities of the European Union (EU), in a way that will ensure both the integrated 
and balanced evolution in the economical – employment, environmental, social and technological 
dimension of the sustainable development. The project’s primary objectives set as the identification 
of specific RES and RUE needs and preparation of viable and socially matured development 
opportunities along with the formulation of the first European “sustainable energy n etwork in 
mountainous - agricultural communities”. 
Role in the project 
RELA will collaborate in the project coordination in WP1. RELA will monitor the testing activities of 
LabScale at AMTP in WP7. RELA will be involved in WP8: Sustainability Assessment, by analysing the 
environmental and socio-economic benefits of solar applications in the selected case studies.  
Finally, RELA is involved on promotion and dissemination of knowledge, thus within the activities of WP9 
the organization will assure transnational access to R&D facility, will assure exchange of personnel, and will 
support dissemination, organization and realization of edu cational/professional courses. All the three 
technical units will be involved in these activities. 
Key personnel 
• Dr. Christos Roupas (M) is the Head of EU Projects for Relational. In this role, he is responsible for the 
coordination and delivery of security research activities at TRT Netherlands and collaborates closely with 
the Thales Group security research and development communities, both in the Netherlands and at group 
level. He received a Ph.D., in the area of Security for Distributed Systems, and a M.Sc. in Computer 
Science from University College Cork in Ireland. He previously worked as part of the IIDS group in the 
Vrije Universite it Amsterdam, working in the areas of Distributed Systems Security and Crisis 
Management. He originally studied Computer Engineering in the University of Limerick in Ireland. He 
has also held both CISSP (Certified Information Systems Security Professional)  and CEH (Certified 
Ethical Hacker) certifications. His research interests include the security of information and the security 
of distributed systems. He has worked in the S3MS FP6 and the ALIVE, AMADEOS, ATHENA, 
BRIDGE, and OPTET FP7 projects as well as EDA (IN -4-STARS2.0) and ITEA2 (FED -SS, APPS) 
programs, along with national and regional programs. He is the global consortium coordinator. 
• Mr. Agathoklis Gourgoulis  (M) is the project manager of Relational team. He holds a BEng in 
Computer Engineering, a MSc in Advanced Software Engineering, and a MPhil in Cluster and Grid 
Computing. He has a working experience (more than 6 years) as a Project Manager and a Senior 
Developer in a wide variety of IT projects about developing cloud-, web- and mobile-based applications 
and systems in multi-cultural environments. He is proficient in programming languages (e.g. Java, J2EE, 
JSP, JMS, JavaScripts, Spring Framework, C, C++), RDBMS (e.g. MS SQL server, Oracle, and Sybase 
ASE), case tools (UML), and the use of open source software (e.g. Drupal, MySQL, PostgreSQL). 
• Mr. Panagiotis Markantonatos (M)  is an economist with a MSc in Innovation Management. He has 
worked as Technology Consultant 2003 -2007) and has contributed decisively to the creation and 
operation of the Inc ubator of New Enterprises of Business Innovation Center of Attica in collaboration 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
100 
with the Technology Park of the National Technical University of Athens. As a communication 
consultant (2007-2010) has worked and has produced important marketing strategy a nd communication 
projects for large private companies and public institutions. He worked at the Strategic Planning Bureau 
of the General Secretariat of the Prime Minister (2012 -2015) with principal responsibility for 
coordinating government's work as well as the design and implementation of an innovative monitoring 
and coordination tool of the Central Government. Since February 2015 he is Senior Expert in Relational, 
and is also working with the Athens Incubator THEA as a mentor in marketing and communication. 
• Mr. George Litainas (M) holds a Bsc in Computer Science. He is a Senior Software Engineer. He has 
an extensive working experience (more than 13 years) in developing web & mobile-based systems, ERP 
and banking systems. He is proficient in programming languages (e.g. JAVA, J2EE, J SP, JMS, 
JavaScripts), in RDBMS (e.g. MS SQL server, Oracle, and Sybase ASE), and the use of open source 
software (e.g. Drupal, MySQL, PostgreSQL). 
Relevant products / services 
• i-Apply: It is an Application Workflow & Document Management System built on state of the art internet 
technologies that handles loan decisioning, origination and management processes in a set of 
comprehensive workflows built to serve a wide variety of financial products (ranging from Mortgages to 
Debit/Credit Card applications and from corporate to personal loans). 
• Decision Engine: Business Rules Management software solution - It allows organizations to manage 
their business policies and rules in a highly user friendly, graphical environment, which is optimized for 
use by business people and is separated from complex low level IT infrastructure. 
• AroTRON: Its strategy management rule -engine workflow, task automation and standardization and 
unprecedented functionality  allow for the integration of all the processes related to the Collection and 
Recovery of debts in arrears and their supervision, from early collections (actual or predictive delay) till 
recovery, litigation, write-off or final settlements. 
• Financial Cubes: It is an Enterprise Performance Management (E PM) tool that can cater for all types of 
planning and forecasting, from simple small processes to complex multi -layer processes, while also 
providing consolidation and easy to use reporting. 
• Relational Technology SA develops mission critical software asse ts for Financial Institutions, 
Government, Retail, Telecoms and SMEs, while in addition represents actively and exclusively a number 
of International software vendors and their respective product portfolios, namely SAP AG, Informatica 
SA, Microsoft, BMC Software and UC4. Relational Technology SA is since 2001 an SAP/BW Certified 
Partner specializing in the Business Intelligence offerings of SAP AG, and since December 2013 a Gold 
Partner of Microsoft for its competence in Business Intelligence. For over 10 years, the IT consultants of 
Relational Technology SA have matched appropriate technologies to business requirements through the 
employment of proven project management methodologies (PRINCE II and PMI guidelines), risk 
management methodologies (COBRA), IT systems development methodologies (scrum and kanban) and 
its delivery frameworks, SAFE™ (Solid Advanced Framework to Enable) and REWARD™ (Relational 
technology Warehouse Architecture for Rapid Deployment). 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• APOLO [EU]: ‘SmArt Designed Full Printed Flexible RObust Efficient Organic HaLide PerOvskite 
solar cells’. APOLO consortium will surpass the aforementioned barriers for market deployment by 
providing flexible and stable PSCs using scalable and low cost processes, reducing amount of toxic 
materials tackle the challenges to provide market niches solutions. APOLO developments will ensure to 
enhance the TRL of PSC technology. APOLO consortium will work on advanced materials, from cell to 
encapsulant to develop flexible PSC, fully printable, with efficiency of 22% with at least 80% of initial 
performance after relevant accelerated test from standards.  Relational SA, will be responsible for 
preserving the data that will be produced a nd will also conduct the t technology monitoring and IPR 
management and protection along with the development of all the databases of the project. From 2018 to 
2022). www.project-apolo.eu/. 
• ElasTest [EU]: ‘an elastic platform for testing complex distributed large software systems’  is a cloud 
platform designed for helping developers to test and validate SiL (see definitions above), while 
maintaining compatibility with current CI practices and tools. In Elas tTest A Next Generation, Secure 
Linked Data Medical Information Space for Semantically‐Interconnecting Electronic Health Records and 
Clinical Trials Systems Advancing Patients Safety in Clinical Research), – Relational’s role: coordinator, 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
101 
core technical partner and integrator. For this, ElasTest bases on three principles: 1) instrumentation (i.e. 
customization of the SuT infrastructure so that it reproduces real -world operational behavior); 2) test 
orchestration (i.e. to combine intelligently testing units for creating a more complete test suite following 
the “divide and conquer” principle); and 3) test recommendation (i.e. to use machine learning and 
cognitive computing for recommending testing actions and providing testers with friendly interactive 
facilities for decision taking). Hence, ElasTest main objectives relate to improving the testing of SiL. We 
refer to these as “Outcome objectives”. To accomplish them, a set of instrumental objectives (i.e. “Process 
objectives”), is also set. (01/01/2017 – 31/12/2019). www.elastest.io/. 
• PIXEL Ports are a great example of heterogeneous information hubs. Multiple stakeholders operate 
inside and outside them with different motivations and businesses. Although document and dat a 
interchange are already in place through Port Community Systems (PCS), the interchange is limited to 
official documentation and services of the Port Authority, such as custom declarations, import/export of 
cargo, and other formal documents. However, an e ffective integration of operational data is far from 
optimal in most ports, and especially so in medium or small ports, where budget is limited and IT services 
usually is outsourced. PIXEL will enable a two -way collaboration of ports, multimodal transport agents 
and cities for optimal use of internal and external resources, sustainable economic growth and 
environmental impact mitigation, towards the Ports of the Future. PIXEL will leverage technological 
enablers to voluntary exchange data among ports and stakeholders, thus ensuring a measurable benefit in 
this process. The main outcome of this technology will be efficient use of resources in ports, sustainable 
development and green growth of ports and surrounding cities/regions. 
• RADICAL [EU]: ‘ RApid Deploym ent and adoptIon of sustainable soCiALly -aware and intelligent 
sensing services for emerging smart cities’. RADICAL will enable the development and deployment of 
interoperable pervasive multi-sensory and socially-aware services, by leveraging Internet of Things (IoT) 
and Social Network (SN) technologies, emerging from leading edge R&D results from the 
SmartSantander, BonFIRE, SocIoS, and +Spaces projects. The RADICAL platform will also facilitate 
smart governance and flexible replication of services across cities and regions, through mechanisms that 
assess the cities’ peculiarities in terms both of their technical infrastructures and of the socio-economical 
characteristics and the legal and governance environments. RADICAL will integrate, deploy and pilot 
seven services in the areas of Cycling Safety, Green Products Management, Data Journalism, 
Participatory Urbanism, Augmented Reality, Eco-consciousness and Commercial and transactional data 
for pedestrian flows. http://www.radical-project.eu/ 
• ECIM [EU]: ‘European Cloud marketplace for Intelligent Mobility’: ECIM will 1) provide a pathway 
for cities and businesses to easily migrate services to the cloud, 2) open these services to innovators for 
use as the basis for new applications and services and 3) lever age existing CIP Marketplaces for 
Intelligent City (EPIC & EnoLL) services to promote new services across Europe. The EPIC marketplace 
features a secure and sustainable Platform as a Service (PaaS) that enables SMEs from across Europe to 
sell their web services and applications to Public Authorities. Pilot sites in Barcelona, Spain, Paris, France 
and Brussels, Belgium and a proof of concept in Birmingham region (UK) will validate the ECIM 
solution by 1) submitting existing services 2) engaging citizens and SMEs to co-create new services and 
3) implementing new ECIM services in their own areas. Pilots will upload and share new services 
between themselves to demonstrate the robust, cross border interoperability of the solution. ECIM has 
selected mobility and parking as a validation scenario because these services can easily be migrated to a 
cloud infrastructure and are consistently cited as high priorities for citizens and public service providers 
alike. (2012-2015) www.ecim-cities.eu/ 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
Relational counts with a high-performance computer environment that can be used for internal development 
and experimentation in parallel with the project’s s infrastructure. It is composed by the following elements 
(> 140 K€ worth): 
• One server HP ProLiant DL980 G7: 512 GB RAM, 8 processors Intel E7 2860 with 10 cores each 
(total 80 cores), I/O accelerator card of 320GB MLC, 2 HD SAS, 146 GB each, OS : Ubuntu server 
12.04 LTS. 
• Two servers HP ProLiant SL390s G7: 3 GPU devices, 24 cores, 96 GB RAM, HD 5,5 TB, OS: 
Ubuntu 12.04 LTS 64bit. 
• HP P6350 Storage System: 14 TB of capacity in online disks, 48 TB of capacity in nearline disks. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
102 
 
 
Partner 11: UNIVERSIDAD POLITÉCNICA DE MADRID, PIC: 999974844 
Short Name UPM Country Spain 
 
Type ACA Website ww.upm.es 
Brief description of the organisation 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM) is the largest Spanish technological university specialized in all 
engineering fields and architecture. With two recognitions as Campus of International Excellence, its 
outstanding research activity together with its highly qualified professional trainings, make UPM a really 
competitive university at international level. More than 2.400 researchers carry out their activity at the UPM, 
grouped in more than 200 Research Groups, 20 Research Centers or Institutes and 55 Laboratories, all of 
them committed to transform the knowledge generated into innovation advances applied to the productive 
sector, contributing to solve the challenges of the European citizens. 
The intense collaboration with governmental bodies and industry guarantees that research at UPM offers 
real solutions to real -world problems. The dyna mism of R&D&I activity at the UPM, together with the 
transfer of knowledge to society, are among its lines of strategy.  
These two commitments place UPM among the Spanish universities with the greatest research activity, both 
at national and international level, counting on an International Project Office that helps and support 
researchers in the international research arena. UPM highly innovation driven commitment is showed by 
the application for around 40 patents/year thanks to its Technology Transfer Off ice and by the generation 
around 20 spinoff/year (70% survival rate) trained and mentored by the UPM Center for Innovation Support. 
Moreover, UPM is highly committed to communication and outreach with and specific unit devoted to it. 
All this shows that UPM is an institution committed to the transfer of knowledge generated through its 
research structures to society, and its transformation into advances and technological developments applied 
to the productive sector. 
UPM-GIT (Universidad Politécnica d e Madrid – Thermoenergetic Research Group) was created in 2006, 
when it was focused on modeling of thermal energy systems, both renewables and nuclear.  Since then its 
activity has been growing yearly, especially in the field of concentrating solar power.  
The main research lines of the group are the following: 
• Design and optimization of concentrating solar power plants: optics, receiver, storage, etc. 
• Analysis and simulation of innovative power cycles. 
• Design of turbomachinery for ORC. 
• CFD simulation: solar receivers and turbomachinery. 
• Design of superconductor refrigeration systems. 
The intensive activity of UPM -GIT in several national and international projects has led to more than 50 
patents and 100 published articles. This includes the p articipation in a  project ended in the design, 
construction and test of a trough collector loop cooled by CO 2 at high temperature (500ºC) and pressure 
(100 bar) with CIEMAT at Plataforma Solar de Almería, and project  "Concentrated Solar Power for 
Electricity Generation" (2012 -2013), granted by the German Ministry: Bundesministerium für Bildung und 
Forshung. More recently, the research group has participated in Futur o Solar project, with STEM-UNED 
and OHL company, which consists on the design and construction of an advanced Fresnel prototype in the 
UPM technological campus.  In addition, UPM -GIT has participated in the FP7 project named BEST 
PAHTS, coordinated by Red Eléctrica de España with a total budget of 62.8 M€ for the development of 
HVDC corridors 
Role in the project 
UPM is the leader of WP6 with the expertise on solar collectors and solar systems in general. Additional, 
UPM also collaborates in WP2, WP3, WP4, WP5, WP7  and WP8. Finally, UPM will collaborate in 
different activities for exploitation, and dissemination and communication activities in WP9. 
Key personnel 
• Dr. Jose María Martínez-Val (M) He is the leader of UPM -GIT research group since its foundation, 
he has been the Director of ETSI Industriales, one of the main colleges of UPM, and he is the Director 
of the F2I2, created in 1993 in collaboration with UPM and the Spanish Ministry of Indus try. His 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
103 
professional activity has been focused on Nuclear Energy from 1983 till 1997, and on Thermal 
Engineering since then. He has published more than 100 articles including “Physics Letters” and 
“Physical Review E” and he is the main inventor of more th an 50 patents. He has coordinated 
several projects related to concentrating solar power in national and international frameworks, Due 
to his experience, he will act as the Scientific Supervisor of UPM tasks in the project.  
• Dr. Ruben Abbas (M) Dr. Abbas is Engineer at Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Engineer at Ecole 
Centrale de Lyon and MSc. at Imperial College London. At current time he is a lecturer at UPM. He has 
a deep experience in optical design of thermal systems, including analytica l and numeric design. He is 
an expert on Monte Carlo Ray Tracing simulation. In addition, he works on design of turbomachinery 
for innovative organic Rankine cycles. He has participated in many projects related to concentrating 
solar power. He was in charg e of the concentrator design in Futuro Solar project, when an innovative 
Fresnel concentrator oriented East-West was installed. He also participated in a project granted by the 
German Ministry in collaboration with IASS (Institute for Advanced Sustainabili ty Studies), 
coordinated by Carlo Rubbia (Nobel Prize in Physics 1984) and in a FP7 project, BEST PATHS. He has 
published 19 articles in international journals of the JCR and dozens of works in international 
conferences. He is co-author of 8 patents and main author of one of them. Due to his expertise in Fresnel 
concentrators and solar systems, he will be the scientific coordination of the group. 
• Dr. Alberto Abánades Velasco (M) . Industrial Engineering Ph.D since 2002, specialised in Energy 
Technologies by the ETSII of the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, staff professor of the Department 
of Power Engineering of the ETSII -UPM. He starts his academic career in the Department of Nuclear 
Engineering and Fluid-Mechanics of the University of the Basque Country  in 2001 involved in Fluid -
mechanics analysis.  Senior fellow of the Institute of Advanced Sustainability Studies, in Potsdam 
(Germany) from 2011 to 2013 and currently is scientific advisor in the Spanish Research Agency (AEI) 
since the end of 2015. He is Vice-dean of postgraduate and doctoral studies at the Industrial Engineering 
School (ETSII) of the UPM since April 2018.  At present time he develops academic and research 
activities in the field of Thermal systems, Concentrated solar technology, Hydrogen production and 
Low-carbon technologies, being invited to specialized seminars and conferences in those fields, with a 
background that has produced 15 patents, 40 international publication in highly cited journals, 80 paper 
in international and national conferences, and 7 doctoral Ph.D thesis. 
• Dr. Manuel Valdés del Fresno (M) Manuel Valdés has taught in UPM from 1985 in sever al subjects 
related with combustion engines and thermal turbomachinery. He has been the Director of the UPM 
Official Master Degree in Energy Engineering. He has participated in many projects related to thermal 
energy engineering. At present he is in charge  of a four years research project called "Diseño y 
evaluación de equipos de ciclos combinados solares avanzados" within an official program funded by 
the Spanish government. The project is aimed at the design of special turbomachinery to be used in 
combined cycles at solar facilities. He has been the director of eight Ph. D. Thesis. He has published 25 
articles in international journals of the JCR and many papers in national and international conferences. 
He is co-author of 15 patents and main author of one of them. 
• Dr. Celina González Fernández (F) She has been Research Vice -Dean of ETSI Industriales - 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (ETSII-UPM) between 2008 and 2012. In this position she promoted 
the collaboration of the University with several companies. She also enlarged the visibility of all 
research activities of ETSII-UPM. She has also led the Research Group of Applied Thermodynamics at 
UPM for seven years. All her teaching and research activities has been carried out in the field of Energy. 
Initially she worked in Nuclear Fusion, a field where she developed her PhD on numerical methods for 
plasmas. She has worked since in the area of Thermodynamics design and optimization of power cycles 
using conventional and renewable sources. She has jointly directed and participated in 17 national and 
international competitive projects and she has published more than 20 scientific articles in indexed 
journals. 
• Dr. Javier Muñoz (M) . Dr. Muñoz -Antón is Mechanical Engineer (2005) and PhD on Energy 
Engineering and Fluidmechanics (2008) by Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. At current time, he is a 
lecturer at UPM on the topics heat transfer, heat and cold production, thermal engineering, solar thermal 
energy and heat transfer with ANSYS. He is an expert in pi ping design, solar receivers design and 
industrial heat exchanger design due to his participation in several projects with industrial partners 
(ABENGOA, OHL Industrial, among others) and research institutions (PSA-CIEMAT, IASS Potsdam, 
IMDEA Energía, among others) in the topics of solar thermal receivers, electricity production, process 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
104 
heat. He participated in a project granted by the German Ministry in collaboration with IASS (Institute 
for Advanced Sustainability Studies) in 2012, and also in the development of a gas cooled solar trough 
collector at high pressure and temperature with PSA-CIEMAT in 2006-2011, both projects coordinated 
by Carlo Rubbia (Nobel Prize in Physics 1984) and in a FP7 project, BEST PATHS. He has published 
30 articles in international journals of the JCR and near 100 works in international conferences. He is 
co-author of 29 patents. 
• Dr. Eng. Susana Sánchez Orgaz (F)  Electronics and Mechanical  Eng. 2005, PhD Mechanical Eng. 
2012, is currently Lecturer in Thermodynamics at the Dept. of Energy Engineering, ETSII. Her expertise 
lies in the analysis of solar power plants and hybrid solar-fossil power plants, using advanced simulation 
and thermodynamic methodologies. She has participated in a number of research projects funded by the 
Spanish National R&D Plan, and has been awarded several scholarships by the Fundación Memoria de 
D. Samuel Solórzano Barruso. She has authored 5 articles in JCR -indexed journals, 2 book chapters, 
and has ~20 contributions to national and international conferences. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
● M.J. Montes; R. Abbas; M. Muñoz; J. Muñoz -Antón; J.M. Martínez -Val. Advances in the linear 
Fresnel single -tube receivers: Hybrid loops with non -evacuated and evacuated receivers . Energy 
Conversion and Management 149, 318 – 333 (2017) 
● R. Abbas; J.M. Martínez -Val. A comprehensive optical characterization of linear Fresnel 
collectors by means of an analytic study. Renewable Energy 185, 1136 – 1151 (2017) 
● L. Gonzalez-Portillo, J. Muñoz, J.M. Martínez-Val. An analytical optimization of thermal energy 
storage for electricity cost reduction in solar thermal electric pla nts. Applied Energy, 185, 531-546 
(2017) 
● A. Rovira, J.M. Martínez-Val, M. Valdés. Thermoeconomic Coherence: A Methodology for the 
Analysis and Optimisation of Thermal Systems. Entropy 18 (7), 250. (2016) 
● R. Abbas, A. Sebastian, M.J. Montes, M. Valdes. Optical features of linear Fresnel collectors 
with different secondary reflector technologies. Applied Energy 232 386-397 (2018) 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
• Solar concentrating thermal power in the transport sector and the int heat/electricity production  
(ACES2030). P2018/EMT-4319. Several Universities and technological centers (CIEMAT, IMDEA and 
CSIC) participate in this project. As the name suggests, the project covers the three main areas of application 
of concentrated solar energy: transport, heat and electricity production. The UNED group is responsible for 
the development of supercritical CO2 cycles and the development of Fresnel technology applied to process 
heat. From 01/01/2019 – 31/12/2022. 
• Advanced Integrated Solar Combined Cycles . (HICCSA). Spanish National Project. ENE2015-
70515-C2-1-R. This project has been coordinated by UNED and UPM  Universities. The project has been 
focused in the integration schemes, as well as in the thermal simulation of the different components, in 
particular, all the components in the solar subsystem, in which the three main technologies are included: 
Parabolic Trough Collectors, Central Receiver and Fresnel Collectors. From 01/01/2016 – 31/12/2019. 
• Futuro Solar  This project was accomplished by UNED, UPM and OHL company. The main 
objective of the project was the design, the optimization and the construction of a Fresnel Collector 
Prototype. The main task for the UNED group was the thermofluidynamic design of the F resnel Receiver. 
The group also participated in the optical design. As a result of all these studies, UPM and UNED presented 
several patents, most of them extended to an international level. From  28/02/2014 – 30/12/2015 
• “Technological investigation and t hermo-economic optimization of Integrated Solar 
Combined Cycles (InTecSol)”.  Spanish National Project ENE2012-37950-C02-01This project, also 
coordinated by UNED and UPM, is previous to HICCSA project, and it is also focused on thermal systems 
and thermal components, included the solar field. From 01/02/2013 to 01/01/2016. 
• “Concentrated Solar Power for Electricity Generation”. Project granted by the German Ministry:  
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forshung  . This project was accomplished by the  IASS (Institute for 
Advanced Sustainability Studies), UPM and UNED University. The UNED contributed in the development 
of a program for the optical characterization of a Fresnel Collector using the ray tracing and Monte Carlo 
methods. From 01/02/2012 to 01/01/2013. 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
105 
The UPM team can use the infrastructure, laboratories, instrument ation and equipment of Tecnogetafe, a 
compound of installations to foster research activities and technical services.  The industrial part of 
Tecnogetafe is operated by Fundación para el Fomento de la Innovación Indus trial (F2I2), a private 
foundation with historical ties with UPM Coll ege of Industrial Engineering. There is an official long -term 
contract between UPM and F2I2 (arriving up to 2045) related to Tecnogetafe, where the foundation has a 
workforce exceeding 100 persons (Ph. D., Engineers, Technicians, Staff...) with capability for carrying out 
different types of embodiments (see www.f2i2.net). 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
106 
 
 
Partner 12: ARCELOR MITTAL TUBULAR PRODUCTS IASI, PIC: 898938868 
Short Name AMTP Country Romania 
 
Type IND Website http://tubular.arcel
ormittal.com 
Brief description of the organisation 
AM Iasi belongs to ArcelorMittal Tubular Products – AMTP – Europe Division within ArcelorMittal, the 
world’s leading steel and mining company. 
In particular, AM Iasi is engaged with the manufacturing of welded steel tubes for many diverse applications. 
Their main products are: 
• hollow sections for structural purposes 
• pipes for the conveyance of fluids  
• tubes for mechanical applications 
• tubes for automotive applications (they are starting in this sector) 
The main manufacturing process used in the plant is the cold-forming of the tubes, through which a steel 
slitting coil used as raw material is formed into a rounded shape in a continuous forming process for a 
subsequent welding operation where both edges of the steel band are joined together obtaining a cir cular 
tubular section. In some occasions, the weld seam can be in -line heat-treated by a seam annealing process. 
In any case, this circular tube is then passed through a set of sizing rolls for getting the final cross -section 
of the tube (can be circular, square, rectangular, oval…) and it is cut to the required length. 
Finally, depending on the final use of the product, the extremes of the tubes can be grooved or chamfered. 
Also the whole tube can be colour-coated both for aesthetic and corrosive purposes. 
The company is commercializing its products all around Europe taking advantage of the wide footprint of 
the Division all around the continent. 
AM Iasi is immersed in a set of actions with the goal of modernizing the plant, gaining productivity, and 
increasing the quality of their products as well as improving their environmental impact. 
Furthermore, a Product Development Team has been recently constituted in the plant in order to boost 
Product and Process Development projects in a coordinated manner within the AMTP division. 
Role in the project 
AMTP will collaborate in the general coordination in WP1. AMTP will collaborate in the heat plant needs 
definition at WP2. AMPT will help with the tests definition to be carried out during WP7. AMTP will also 
provide data for the sustainability assessment of the project as end -user in WP8. Finally, AMTP will 
collaborate in general activities of communication, dissemination and exploitation activities in WP9.  
Key personnel 
• Romel Nedelcu (M) is Maintenance Manager in AM Iasi. He is Graduate Engineer. Over 29 of working 
experience in the field of manufacturing and quality of tubular steel products. Specialities: Continuous 
improvement, Quality Management, Quality tools, Lean management, PDCA, Cust omer technical 
service, Steels & Tubes, Materials, Production, Process, WCM, R&D, Product developments . He will 
be the project leader from AM Iasi  due to his active involvement in new equipment installation in the 
plant, so his experience and deep knowledge of the industrial processes and how to implement a new 
device in an existing mill will be key for the project. 
• Ioan Hrituleac (M)  is the Quality Manager, ArcelorMittal Tubular Products Iasi SA.  He is Graduate 
Engineer. Over 29 of working experience in the field of manufacturing and quality of tubular steel 
products. Specialities: Continuous improvement, Quality Management, Quality t ools, Lean 
management, PDCA, Customer technical service, Steels & Tubes, Materials, Production, Process, 
WCM, R&D, Product developments. His role is fully complementary with the one of Romel Nedelcu. 
As a matter of fact, both are key people in any of the recent relevant projects (new manufacturing lines, 
revamping and improving of existing ones, etc.) carried out in the plant during the last years. Ioan 
Hrituleac is the Head of the Product Development Team of the plant. 
• Dr. Gorka Iglesias (M) is Head of Product Development and Standardization in ArcelorMittal Tubular 
Products. He is PhD Engineer, holding a Master in Renewable Energies and an MBA (Master in 
Business Administration).  He is in charge of R&D projects coordination in the division of Tubular 
Products and has previous experience in the development of European Research Projects as he took part 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
107 
in FRISCC (RFCS call), HOLLOSSTAB (RFCS call) and INNO3DJOINT (RFCS call), see below. He 
is also member of different European and International Committees. He will be able to offer his 
experience in the management of large R&D Projects and the potential use of solar power in the AM 
Iasi industrial processes as well as, once the project is over, to replicate the solution in other AMTP 
plants reducing the CO2 footprint of the full division. As he is not having a contractual relation with AM 
Iasi, he will act as third party for AM Iasi in the project. He will act as Third party (see Section 4.2) 
• Elena Burdea (F) is Chief of Production Department in AM Iasi. She is Graduate Engineer. She is part 
of the Product Development Team of the plant and her knowledge and experience will be highly useful 
especially for the implementation of the new device into the current industrial process of AM Iasi. 
• Constantin Maftei (M) is Chief of Electrical Maintenance Lines in AM Iasi. He is Graduate Engineer.  
With over 10-year experience in electrical field he is specialized in industrial automation, software 
development and maintenance of electric equipment. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
● Petru Simion, Gabriela Hrituleac, Vasile Dia, Corneliu Munteanu, “ Research Regarding the 
Development of Manufacturing of Electrical Welded Pipes from Micro -Alloy Steel with Good 
Weldability and Toughness” October 2015  
● Petru Simion, Bogdan Istrate, Corneliu Munteanu, Vasile Dia, Gabriela Hrituleac  “Study of fatigue 
behavior of longitudinal welded pipes ”, Conference: ModTech International Conference - Modern 
Technologies in Industrial Engineering IV, At Iasi, Volume: IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and 
Engineering 145” (2016) 
● One of the most valuable products for AM Iasi are the colour-coated pipes where a tubular pipe (for 
the conveyance of a fluid) is coated externally by a coloured layer that normally adds both an aesthetic 
appearance (making it easily identifiable in a piping system) and an anti-corrosion resistance. Very recently 
a new colour-coating station has been acquired increasing not only the plant’s capacity, but also the variety 
of product finishing as it constitutes a new technology for the company. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
Even though this project would be the first EU funding project of AM Iasi, the whole division as well as 
Gorka Iglesias have previous experience in European projects/proposals management: 
● FRISCC – Fire Re sistance of Innovative and Slender Concrete Filled tubular Composite 
Columns (RFCS 2012). Project where the behaviour of tubular columns was deeply analysed in fire 
situations in order to define a new set design method to be included in Eurocode 4. Part 1-2, the referenced 
Code in Europe for the design of composite structural elements. From 01/07/2012 to 30/06/2015 
● HOLLOSSTAB - Overall-Slenderness Based Direct Design for Strength and Stability of 
Innovative Hollow Sections (RFCS 2015). Analysis of slender columns (mainly of high strength steel) 
behaviour under compression or compression + bending loading in order to define a new design method for 
such structural elements, avoiding the current cross -section classification and optimizing the structural 
capacity of tubular columns. From 01/07/2016 to 30/06/2019 
● INNO3DJOINTS - INNOvative 3D JOINTS for robust and economic  hybrid tubular 
construction (RFCS 2016). Development of innovative plug -and-play joints for hybrid tubular 
construction, whereby tubular columns are combined with cold-formed lightweight steel profiles to provide 
a highly efficient structural system. From 01/07/2017 to 30/06/2020 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
As already mentioned, one of the key finishing for the AM Iasi’s products is the so -called colour coating, 
consisting on a thin layer of (epoxy, water -based, thermoplastic, etc.) coloured protective/decorative 
material covering the whole tube external surface. For the proper application and fixation of the coating the 
tubes need to be pre-heated at different temperatures depending on the kind of coating to be applied. 
In particular, for the purpose of this project, the newly acquired powder colour coating equipment is 
considered. Here, the tubes need to be pre-heated to a temperature of 200oC. 
The equipment is able to produce CCT using powder technology for epoxy powder coating - min 80 microns/ 
layer and also thermoplastic powder coating - 120 microns/layer. 
INCOMING MATERIAL: 
Hot rolled coil grades S235, 
S275, S355  For all dimensions 
Tube OD (Outer Diameter)  min. 26.9 mm 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
108 
max. 88.9 mm 
Tube WT (Wall Thickness) 
min. 1,5 mm 
max. 4 mm 
Equipment speed - 2 pipes 
in same time 
 36 m/min 
Tube length (min. – max.) 3 m ÷ 6 m 
The CCT system  includes all equipment and work units required for the assembly of a powder coating 
plant for external pipes, which must be installed in the production line. 
• CCT LINE  LOAD AREA: 
• SHOT BLASTING AREA:  
- Inclined biconical rollers at inlet point of shot blaster, motorized under inverter.  
- Free-flame unit for pipe drying. 
• SHOT BLASTER AND FILTER 
- High-efficiency turbines with high quality anti-abrasion components.  
- Cabin protected with anti-abrasion materials to guarantee the integrity of the structure.  
- Automatic system for measuring the efficiency of the dust filtration system. 
• COATING AREA: 
- Rolls conveyors  
- Handling of recovery after painting with series of pipes and cooling nozzles.  
- Coating station,  
- Pipes for air filter expulsion, with terminal for internal mechanisms.  
- Water collecting tank adjacent to the cooling zone outside the processing structure, built in 
stainless steel, with intake pump housing, with a length that is part of the length of the output 
roller conveyor 
- Manifold and adjustable cooling sprayers, complete with flow sorting valves, flexible and static 
hoses, and connection pipes. 
• INDUCTOR-400 kw  
• UNLOADING AREA 
Comparative with water base (25 microns) and melamine (40 microns) technology which  are 
primary painting (extra coated are required) powder coated technology offer final coated pipes. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
109 
 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
110 
 
Partner 13: CENTRE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES & SAVING, PIC: 999646014 
Short Name CRES Country Greece 
 
Type RTO Website www.cres.gr 
Brief description of the organisation 
CRES is a public entity supervised by the Ministry of Environment and Energy, and has financial and 
administrative independence. CRES is active in the fields of Renewable Energy Sources (RES), Rational 
Use of Energy (RUE) and Energy Saving (ES). Its primar y aim is to promote technological applications in 
the above-mentioned fields both at a national and international level. CRES was appointed by Law 2244/94 
and Law 2702/99 as the National Centre for Coordination in the fields of its activity. It acts as an advisor to 
the Greek State, and has established a highly visible profile of a strong and reliable national energy centre.  
CRES has a scientific staff of more than 120 highly qualified engineers and other scientists (among total 
personnel of 160) and, over  the years, has participated in more than 600 European and national projects. 
These include R&D projects, demonstration projects, development of energy information systems & models, 
assessment and analysis of energy policies, feasibility studies, technical  and economic studies, market 
research, as well as training and promotional activities on the RES/RUE/ES related issues.  
CRES co-operates with other institutes, organizations, universities, consultants, international organizations 
(such as the IEA, UNESCO, ISES, PLEA, IEC, CEN, etc), while it is an active member of various European 
and international networks, such as the EnR, MEDENER, EUFORES, OPET, EUREC Agency, etc.  
CRES has supported numerous municipalities and regional authorities to develop sustainable energy plans, 
energy efficiency interventions and promotional campaigns and has also developed national energy 
sustainable energy schemes for municipalities. Since F ebruary 2012 CRES is the Greek National 
Coordinator for the Covenant of Mayors. Additionally, CRES has strong competencies on borehole heat 
exchangers and heat pumps technology research, demonstration and market development. Specific expertise 
and skills include technology optimization, operation, monitoring and evaluation, technical & financial case 
studies compilation, sectorial analysis, innovation system analysis, business models, development of market 
introduction supporting measures, as well as in management and dissemination actions.  
The Department of Buildings in the Division of Energy Efficiency in CRES has long experience on: 
• Technical support of the state on the energy performance of buildings and ES, of the industry on the 
optimisation of buil ding materials and elements and of the private sector (including households, offices, 
hospitals, industrial, educational and tourist buildings) with the bioclimatic design of buildings and open 
spaces, the optimisation of energy performance of the building  and the use of RES and ES applications in 
buildings. 
• Conduction of energy audits in buildings and industrial plants.  
• Development of passive solar systems and new ES technologies on the building envelope. 
• Support of the public and private sector on ES investments with new financial mechanisms. 
• Contribution on the design of ES at national level and the implementation of EU directives, 
regarding energy savings in the building sector. 
The laboratory facilities of the Buildings dept. provide with accredited testing services for the determination 
of the thermal characteristics of building materials and components. It can also carry out measurements for 
the evaluation of the efficiency of boilers, photovoltaic and solar thermal systems. Additionally, it i s 
equipped with all the necessary measuring devices to carry out energy audits of various building types (i.e. 
residential, office, industrial plants, hospitals, hotels) and various other laboratory equipment and software 
tools for the determination of dif ferent aspects which affect the energy conservation and efficiency in 
buildings. 
Role in the project 
CRES will collaborate in the general coordination activities in WP1. CRES will collaborate to obtain the 
heating and cooling needs for the Greek end-user (MAND) in WP2. CRE  will analyze the measurements   
and study the possible scenarios to optimise the operation of the prototype solar thermal system  in WP7. 
Finally, CRES will carry out dissemination activities to interested parties. 
Key personnel 
• Andreas Androutsopoulos (M)  holds a Master’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering. He is working at 
CRES in the Buildings Department / Division of Energy Efficiency since 1994. Additionally, he is 
involved with the quality assurance and accreditation of the building components thermal t esting 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
111 
laboratory according to EN ISO/IEC 17025 and his is currently in charge of the Energy Measurements 
Laboratory. He has participated in many European and national projects. His fields of expertise are the 
passive solar systems, natural ventilation, th ermal comfort in buildings, and thermal energy systems. 
His research activities are in the areas of energy efficiency, renewable energy sources, thermal and solar 
building applications along with dynamic analysis methods applied to the energy performance i n 
buildings. He has also participated in national committees for the implementation of EPBD in Greece, 
carried out projects for the up -taking of EPCs and energy renovation in buildings and is member of 
various national technical committees regarding energy  efficiency in buildings. He has more than 60 
publications in scientific journals and conferences, and 25 publications in technical magazines. 
• Lena Lampropoulou (F) is an Architect and holds a Master’s Degree in Environmental Design and 
Engineering. She has over 23 years of experience in the building energy sector. Since 2008, she is the 
Head of the Department of Buildings in the Division of Energy Efficiency, at CRES, while since 1993 
she was project manager (EU and National), energy con sultant, in the Department of Buildings, at 
CRES. She is highly experienced in building energy issues, as well as in the coordination/management 
of EU funded and National projects on energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies in 
buildings, energy design of buildings, building energy Codes and Policy Action Plans for the 
implementation of EU policies in Greece. She has been participating in the IEE Concerted Action CA 
EPBD and in national committees for the implementation of the EPBD in Greece. She is also involved 
as a key expert in projects providing Technical Assistance and transfer of know-how on EE Policies and 
Strategies and on the development of EE legislative / regulatory frameworks to other countries in the 
MENA region, EU Neighborhood regio n and East and Southern Africa. She has thorough knowledge 
of the EU procedures, EU Project Cycle Management, EU and international financial instruments. 
• Vassiliki Drosou (F) holds a PhD Concentrating solar thermal systems, and an MSc in Energy. She is 
Head of the Solar Thermal Dept. of CRES. She is experienced in RES and solar thermal technology, 
coordination and management of EU-funded and national projects. She is board member of Greek Solar 
Thermal Industry Association, certified Energy Auditor from th e Ministry of Environment Energy and 
Climate Change, instructor on RES and Energy Saving in School of Pedagogical and Technologic 
Education ASPETE, certified trainer for RES from the Human Resources Development Authority of 
Cyprus, member of scientific com mittees in International conferences, national representative in 
SolarPACES Executive Committee. She participates as technical secretary of CEN TC312 "Thermal 
solar systems and components". 
• Elpida Polychroni (F) is a Mechanical Engineer and holds a Master’s Degree in Energy. She is working 
at CRES, in the Department of Buildings / Division for Energy Efficiency, since 2000. Her field of 
expertise is energy saving in the building sector. This includes energy design of buildings with 
application of bioclimat ic design principles, integration of RES and EE measures/technologies for 
heating and cooling, energy performance analysis with the use of simulation models, and technical 
support and advice to architects and engineers, and the State. She has been involved  in the preparation 
of national technical guides for the implementation of EPBD in Greece and has participated in numerous 
energy audits in buildings. She has participated and managed several EU projects as well as national 
projects and private projects of the Greek market. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
● A.V. Androutsopoulos, A. Spanou, 'Energy efficiency actions to uptake energy retrofitting 
measures in buildings', Procedia Environmental Sciences 38 (2017) 875-881. 
● G.M. Stavrakakis, A.V. Androutsopoulos, J. Vyörykkä, “Experimental and numerical 
assessment of cool-roof impact on thermal and energy performance of a School building in Greece” , 
Energy and Buildings, 130 (2016) 64-84. 
● Αrgyro Dimoudi, Andreas Androutsopoulos, Spyros Lykoudis, “Experimental study of the 
cooling performance of a ventilated wall component” , Journal of Building Physics, 39(4) (2015) 297 -
320. 
● Vassiliki N. Drosou, Panagiotis D. Tsekouras, Th.I. Oikonomou, Panos I. Kosmopoulos, 
Constantine S. Karytsas, “The HIGH-COMBI project: High solar fraction heating and cooling systems 
with combination of innovative components and methods”, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 
29 (2014) 463-472. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
112 
● HIGH-COMBI: High solar fraction heating and cooling systems with combination of innovative 
components and methods, Commission of the European Communities, Contract 
TREN/07/FP6EN/S07.68923/038659. From 2007 to 2011. 
● Concerted Action CA-EPBD V Energy Performance in Buildings, Horizon 2020, Grant Agreement 
No. 820497. Monitoring of all national actions related to the energy efficiency in buildings EU targets. 
(https://www.epbd-ca.eu/). From 05/2018 to 04/2022. 
● ENERFUND - An ENErgy Retrofit FUNDing rating tool. Horizon 2020, Contract No. 695873. 
Development of a tool that rates and scores deep renovation and opportunities. The too l is based on a 
methodology developed and on a set of parameters such as EPC data, number of certified installers, 
governmental schemes running, etc. By providing a rating for deep renovation opportunities funding 
institutes can provide targeted loans, retrofit companies can identify sound opportunities, municipalities can 
promote targeted incentives and the public's trust for retrofitting will be enhanced. (www.enerfund.eu) From 
2016 to 2019 
● TESSE2B: Thermal Energy Storage Systems for Energy Efficient Buildings. An integrated solution 
for residential building energy storage by solar and geothermal resources (TESSe2b, 
http://www.tesse2b.eu/); HORIZON 2020 / RESEARCH AND INNOVATION ACTION / 680555. 
● STEAM UP: ST Eam And Management Under Pressure;  Energy Saving in the industrial sector; 
(https://steam-up.eu/en);  Horizon 2020, Contract No. 649867. From 03/2015 to 02/2018. 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
Department of Buildings in the Division of Energy Efficiency in CRES has a variety of temperature sensors 
(Pt 100, TC’s T-type, E-type) and temperature meters, relative humidity sensors, velocity sensors, heat flux 
sensors, flow meters, and energy meters. It also has p ortable measuring equipment for thermal comfort 
studies with data acquisition. It also has equipment to measure the efficiency of solar thermal systems. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
113 
 
 
Partner 14: POLITECHNIKA WROCŁAWSKA, PIC: 999845931 
Short Name PWR Country Poland 
 
Type ACA Website www.pwr.edu.pl 
Brief description of the organisation 
Wroclaw University of Science and Technology is the leading scientific and educational centre in Poland. 
Its position among technical universities in both Europe and the rest of the world is increasing every year. 
Development of the University is confirmed by research potential, didactics, innovation and also cooperation 
with the industry. The University educates specialists who are valued and sought after in the labour market. 
Role in the project 
PWR will mainly collaborate with their know -how and expertise on materials for the thermal storage in 
WP4 and WP6. Additionally, PWR will participate in general coordination activities in WP1 and activities 
in dissemination, exploitation and communication activities in WP9. 
Key personnel 
• Jacek W. Kaczmar  (M) is the Head of Chair of Foundry, Polymers and Automation of Faculty of 
Mechanical Engineering of Wrocław University of Science and Technology. He was awarded with the 
title of Professor of Wrocław University of Science and Technology  in 2000 and then in 2015 he was 
nominated as the Full Professor. His scientific interests include plastics processing, composite materials 
manufacturing - both with polymer and metal matrices - and the use of these materials in the field of 
thermal energy accumulation. Profes sor Jacek Kaczmar has been managing and participating in the 
following research projects in the last 10 years: “Micro - and Nanocrystalline Functionally Graded 
Materials for Transport Applications, MATRANS”, “Composites and Nanocomposites od Ceramic -
metal T ype for the Applications in Car and Aircraft Industry, KomCerMet”, "Elaboration of the 
innovative technology of energy storage with the use of artificial intelligence techniques”, “Elaboration 
of the novel cooling/heating system of buildings with the appli cation of photovoltaic cells, solar 
collectors and heat accumulators,  ACCUSOL”  and “The evaluation of the generation process of the 
joint at the interface metal -polymer applying the markers of flow, methods of active infrared 
thermography, holographic vibrometry and shearography, OPUS-11”. He is the author or co -author of 
154 scientific publications. He actively participates in the life of the scientific community taking part in 
renowned scientific conferences and trade fairs.  He has participated in numerous internships abroad as 
well as in the expert visists: 1. Belgium, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Departement Metaalkunde en 
Toegepaste Materiaalkunde, Leuven, Research on injection moulding of metallic particles and sintering 
of Al powders, 1981-1983; 2. Germany,  Technische Universität Clausthal, Institut für Werkstoffkunde 
und Werkstofftechnik, Clausthal -Zellerfeld, 1990-91; 3. Helmholtz -Zentrum Geesthacht, Magnesium 
Innovation Center MagIC, 2006, 2008, 2015, Research on sinterd composite Al -based ma terials 
strengthened with ceramic fibres; 4. Alexander von Humboldr Scholarship founded by the German 
Government  1990-1991, 1993, 1996; 5. Short visits at the Universities in Germany, Slovenia, Austria, 
Mexico, Chile, Turkey, between 2009-2019. 
• Krzysztof Naplocha  (M) is professor of Wrocław University of Science and Technology He is the 
Vice-head of Chair of Foundry, Polymers and Automation of Faculty of Mechanical Engineering of 
Wrocław University of Science and Technology. He was awarded with the title of Professor of Wrocław 
University of Science and Technology  in 2016. His sc ientific interests cover: materials engineering, 
metallurgy, squeeze casting, metal matrix composites, ceramic performs, Self -propagating High -
temperature Synthesis, microwave heating, metal foams, automation of the casting processes and the 
application of casted elements in the heat accumulation. Dr habil. Eng. Krzysztof Naplocha has been 
participating in the following research projects in the last 10 years: “Micro - and Nanocrystalline 
Functionally Graded Materials for Transport Applications, MATRANS”, “C omposites and 
Nanocomposites od Ceramic -metal Type for the Applications in Car and Aircraft Industry, 
KomCerMet”, "Elaboration of the innovative technology of energy storage with the use of artificial 
intelligence techniques”, “Elaboration of the novel coo ling/heating system of buildings with the 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
114 
application of photovoltaic cells, solar collectors and heat accumulators,  ACCUSOL” and “The 
evaluation of the generation proces of the joint at the interface metal -polymer applying the markers of 
flow, methods of active infrared theromgraphy, holographic vibrometry and shearography, OPUS-11”. 
He is the author or co-author of 130 scientific publications. He actively presents the results of research 
carried out during renowned scientific conferences. He also partici pates in industry fairs, abroad 
internships (HZG - Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht Centre for Materials and Coastal Research, 
Germany, as scientific researcher on “Light Metal Matrix Nanocomposites – MMNCs” from 15.07.2018 
to 15.08.2018) and expert visits: 1.  “Casting methods and composite materials” lectures, Karaganda 
State Industrial University, Temirau, Kazachstan, (November -December 2016); 2. “Advance casting 
composite materials” lectures, Parul University, Vadodara, India, (July 2017); 3.  “Advance engineering 
material-casting methods” lectures, Royal University of Bhutan, Dewathang Samdrup Jongkhar , 
Bhutan (September 2018). 
• Anna Dmitruk (F) the scientific interests of Anna Dmitruk are focused on composite materials and 
materials used in heat accumulati on. PhD Anna Dmitruk actively participates in numerous seminars, 
trainings, summer schools, trade fairs, as well as foreign and national scientific conferences related to 
the conducted research. Since 2015, she has been working at the Chair of Foundry, Pol ymers and 
Automation of Faculty of Mechanical Engineering of Wrocław University of Science and Technology 
(October 2015 - September 2018: Research -Teaching Assistant, October 2018 - present: Assistant 
Professor). She is the author or co -author of 33 scient ific publications. She has participated in the 
following scientific projects: "Elaboration of the innovative technology of energy storage with the use 
of artificial intelligence techniques” and "Elaboration of the novel cooling/heating system of buildings 
with the application of photovoltaic cells, solar collectors and heat accumulators, ACCUSOL". In 2017, 
she carried out a research internship funded by the KMM-VIN association at the Tecnalia Research and 
Development Center in San Sebastian, Spain. In 2018,  she conducted research at the National Institute 
of Physics of Materials in Bucharest as part of cooperation with the CERIC consortium. 
• Jakub Grzęda (M) The scientific interests of Jakub Grzęda are focused on materials and structures 
used in heat transfer, manufacturing technologies and materials processing. He actively participates in 
scientific conferences and seminars related to conducted research areas. He currently participates in the 
project "Elaboration of the novel cooling/heating system of buildi ngs with the application of 
photovoltaic cells, solar collectors and heat accumulators". Since 2018, he has been working as working 
as Research -Teaching Assistant at the Chair of Foundry, Polymers and Automation of Faculty of 
Mechanical Engineering of Wrocław University of Science and Technology. 
•  Alicja Kucharczyk (F) The scientific interests of Alicja Kucharczyk are focused on metal foams, their 
production methods and properties modifications. Alicja Kucharczyk organizes and actively participates 
in scientific conferences and seminars related to the conducted research. Since 2017, she has been 
working as Research-Teaching Assistant at the Chair of Foundry, Polymers and Automation of Faculty 
of Mechanical Engineering of Wrocław University of Science and Technology. She is the author or co-
author of 8 scientific publications. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
● Naplocha Krzysztof, Dmitruk Anna, Kaczmar Jacek, “Thermal performance of composite phase 
change materials in energy storage units”, Composite Material Congress, 03-06 June 2018, Stockholm, 
Sweden: Proceedings & Abstracts Book, VBRI Press, 2018. 
● Dmitruk Anna, Naplocha Krzysztof, Kaczmar Jacek, Lichota Janusz, Smykowski Daniel, “Heat 
Transfer In PCM Enhanced By Al Alloy Based Pin -Fin Structure”, CD Proceedings, 13th National 
Congress on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Sofia, 6th - 10th September 2017. 
● Caceres Gustavo, Fullenkamp Karina, Montane Macarena, Naplocha Krzysztof, Dmitruk Anna, 
“Encapsulated Nitrates Phase Change Material Selection for Use as Thermal Storage and Heat 
Transfer Materials at High Temperature in Concentrated Solar Power Pl ants”, Energies, 2017, 10, 
p.1318. 
● Naplocha Krzysztof, Dmitruk Anna, Kaczmar Jacek, Lichota Janusz, Smykowski Daniel, “Effects 
of cellular metals on the performances and durability of composite heat storage systems”, International 
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 2017, 114, p.1214-1219. 
● Lichota Janusz, Smykowski Daniel, Kaczmar Jacek, Naplocha Krzysztof, Trzaska Oliwia, Dmitruk 
Anna, “Concept of the novel low temperature heat accumulator based on PCM and zeolite ”, The 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
115 
Clearwater Clean Coal Conference: Proceedings of the 42nd International Technical Conference On Clean 
Energy, June 11 to 15, 2017, Clearwater, Florida, USA, 149, p.1-8. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
● ACCUSOL “Elaboration of the novel cooling/heating system of buildings with the application of 
photovoltaic cells, solar collectors and heat accumulators” (ERANET-Lac, Cod. No. ELEC2015/T06-0523), 
From 2017 to2020 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
LABORATORIES – Chair of Foundry, Polymers and Automation, Wrocław University of Science 
and Technology. There is the possibility of manufacturing of chosen spatial metal structures applying 
methods of the investment casting. 
• Laboratory of Casting of Metals with the conventional and induction furnaces for melting of metals  
• Laboratory of Microscopy  
• Laboratory of Processing of Polymers and Polymer Composites  
EQUIPMENT – Chair of Foundry, Polymers and Automa tion, Wrocław University of Science and 
Technology 
• Test stand for charging/discharging of the heat accumulators with multiple sensors system and 
SCADA (PWR) 
• FDM 3D printers (HBOT)  
• Testing machine for the investigations of mechanical properties (TINIUS OLSEN)  
• Optical and Scanning Microscopes with EDS system (NIKON, OLYMPUS, HITACHI)  
• Device for the measuring of contact angles (temp. range 150-1000°C) (KRUSS)  
• Dilatometers for measuring the thermal expansion of solid bodies (LINSEIS L 75H) 
• Cristaldigraf NCX for derivative and thermal analysis (ATD)  
• Device for the forming of porous structures from the molten metal  
• Emission spectrometer GNR miniLab150  
• Spectral analyzer GDS 750 QDP (LECO) 
• Microhardness tester: Vickers NEXUS 400D, PMT 3, Innovatest  
• Hardness testers: Brinell, Vickers and Rockwell  
• Devices for metallographic preparation LaboPol-5 (STRUERS)  
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
116 
 
Partner 15: IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, S.L., PIC: 998993786 
Short Name IRIS Country Spain 
 Type SME Website http://www.iristechnolo
gygroup.com/ 
Brief description of the organisation 
IRIS Technology Group is an advanced engineering Group that was established in Barcelona in 2007. Since 
2011, it also operates from Dublin (Ireland) whereas the Barcelona office is referred to as IRIS Technology 
Solutions S.L. It specialises in the manufac ture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) -
based real -time quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart 
manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In part icular, 
our product line comprises proprietary state -of-the-art IR analysers for at -line and in -line process 
monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of MEMs, 
Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hy perspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, 
whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and 
active control, as well as for decision support systems. In addition to photonics -based analysers, we also 
work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning 
industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud -based for mobility, remote monitoring and 
multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, 
and an Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic 
lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 
• New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
• ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
• Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects 
with industry partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D 
projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. 
The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is 
equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-
ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as 
a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial 
networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space 
(association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
117 
Role in the project 
IRIS will collaborate in the general coordination activities in WP1. IRIS will be leading the design and 
implementation of the control system for the ASTEP solution in WP3, WP4, WP5 and WP6. Furthermore, 
IRIS will participate in the commissioning of the lab-scale system in WP7. IRIS will also assist in impact 
activities in WP9. 
Key personnel 
● Ignacio Montero (M) Project and Innovation Manager. Chemical Engineer from University of 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, and Master in Process Engineering from Polytechnic University of 
Catalonia, Spain. Ignacio comes from a background in process control and industrial safety, developing 
applied research in self-optimizing control strategies for industrial facilities and environmental risk analysis 
for the Catalan department of Industry. He spent almost 3 years on the Circular Economy unit of LEITAT 
Technological Centre working as R&D engineer and technical project manager. During this period, he was 
responsible for management, execution and proposal writing of Public Funded Research Projects under the 
different financial International, National and Regional schemes: H2020, CIEN, LIFE. Since joining IRIS 
in July 2018, he has been providing business management services to support the award, coordination and 
implementation of EU funded projects on Applied Photonics, ICT & Digitalisation and Circular & Bio -
economy sectors 
● Sergio Bona (M) Senior Mechanical Engineer at IRIS. BEng Mechanical Engineering Degree from 
"Public University of Navarre", Spain. Sergio comes from a Product Mechanical Design background with 
more than 3 years of experience researching and developing emissions monitoring systems in the UK, 
including optical sensors, eductors and heater chambers and he is an expert on product development 
methodologies. He has joined Iris in July 2018, with the aim of complementing our product development 
processes, expanding our product portfolio and researching and developing new technologies 
● José Fernández (M) Automation Engineer. Degree in Industrial engineering (Anahuac university) 
and mechatronics engineering (Laureate International Universities). I’m a very creative Mechatronics 
Engineer, with more than 5 years of professional experience and successful project implementations in Start-
ups, SME and Multinationals of various sectors across Europe and Latin America. With strong 
communication skills and great leadership, I´ve worked for companies aiming to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of processes from a Mechatronics perspective, developing successful IIoT projects, industrial 
automation and supporting the solution and anticipation for critical data issues. At this moment, I find myself 
applying my knowledge for Research & Development in European Horizon 2020 projects that aim to tackle 
pollution. 
Relevant publications / products / services 
● Relevant product lines  in monitoring devices for real -time quality control  (near infrared 
spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging spectroscopy) 
● B2B contracts in the field of process control and sensoring. 
● Relevant development lines in telemetry and Internet of Things solutions applied to multiple sectors. 
● A. Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing 
Plants. Monitoring and Improvement. Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley -Vch. Print 
ISBN: 978-3-527-34074-3 in press 
● D.F.Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales  Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line 
Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Manufacturing Process 
Modeling, , London, UK, July 28-29, 2016. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
● OLEDSOLAR: Innovative manufacturing processes and in -line monitoring techniques for the 
OLED and thin film and organic photovoltaic industries (CIGS and OPV)  (H2020-FOF-03-2018, Grant 
Agreement no: 820789, From 2018 to 2021. 
● OptiNanoPro: Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar 
panel processing lines (H2020- NMP-PILOTS, Grant Agreement no: 686116, From 2015 to2018. 
● ProPAT: Robust and affordable process contro l technologies for improving standards and 
optimising industrial operations (H2020- SPIRE, Grant Agreement no: 637232, From 2014 to 2018. 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and 
tools: signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
118 
for programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and 
CAD software [SolidWorks], among others. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
119 
 
 
Partner 16: UNIVERSITÀ DEGLI STUDI DELLA CAMPANIA), PIC: 999848356 
Short Name SUN Country Italy 
 Type ACA Website www.unicampania.it 
Brief description of the organisation 
The University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli" (Second University of Naples, before the change of name), 
known as SUN, was established in 1991 (Decree MURST, 25 March) with the aim of relieving the 
overcrowded conditions of the major Neapolitan university known as the “Federico II”. On the official date 
of November 1st 1991, the Vanvitelli University began to function autonomously with nineteen thousand 
enrolments and eight faculties located in five different te rritorial areas of Caserta and Naples.  Currently, 
there are thirty thousand students attending the Vanvitelli’s 18 Departments.  The University’s multicampus 
structure has two offices for its Rector: one in Naples and the other in Caserta. Currently, ther e are thirty 
thousand students attending the UCLV’s 16 Departments. 
The Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell'Università degli Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli” is involved in 
numerous national and international research activities. Strategic areas are Aer ospace and Mechanical 
Engineering, Computer and Automatic Engineering, Electronic and Telecommunications Engineering, 
Civil, Building Structures and Environmental Engineering as well as Design and History as well as Electrical 
Engineering, Chemical and Materials Engineering. Several laboratories with advanced equipment are in the 
Department. In addition, numerous agreements, contracts and research collaboration agreements have been 
stipulated with national and international Universities, associations, consortia and companies. 
The Research Group of Heat Transfer  (HTGroup) develops a strong research activity in Heat Transfer 
and Energy and collaborates with several Regional, National and International companies and industries 
interested in Energy and Applied Heat Transfer.  
In its Laboratories are developed fundamental and applied heat transfer in: 
• Micro and nanotechnologies, thin films, nanofluids, micro and nanochannels, porous media and 
foams 
• Material and manufacturing processes by localized sources such as laser and electron beam 
A particular interest is oriented to thermo  fluid-dynamics in air -conditioning, energy saving, renewable 
energy and energy efficiency improvement in buildings, safety in historical buildings and infrastructures. 
By the experiences acquired along the years, the HTGroup has developed thermal design and optimization 
techniques in systems and components. Some particular experience s are oriented in electronic cooling 
systems, systems and components for energy conversion in renewable energy with strong experience in high 
concentration solar energy and high thermal temperature storage 
Role in the project 
The SUN team will have an active and supportive role in WP1 and WP2. SUN will support the end-users in 
the thermal design and optimization of single components and system. SUN will also participate to in WP9 
based on its experience in organization scientific conferences and participation to COST action. 
Key personnel 
• Bernardo Buonomo (M) is currently a Technical Researcher at Università degli Studi della Campania 
"Luigi Vanvitelli". He received his PhD degree in Aerospace Science and Technology in 2003 from 
Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli. His research intere sts include analysis of active and passive 
solar systems, thermodynamics analysis of natural convection in open -ended cavities, analysis of heat 
transfer in porous media, microchannels and nanofluids. N. of papers in indexed journals: 30, h -index: 
11 (Scopus) 12 (Scholar Google). 
• Oronzio Manca (M)  is Full Professor at Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli". 
Coordinator of the PhD courses in Industrial and Information Engineering. He was coordinator of 
Mechanical Engineering Courses from November 2000 to December 2004 and of Industrial Engineering 
Area from January 2005 to October 2011 at SUN. He earned his MSc degree, in Mechanical Engineering 
at Università degli Studi di Napoli, Italy, in July 1979. The main scientific activities are on Heat Transfer 
and Applied Thermodynamics. Member of the Scientific Council of International Center for Heat and 
Mass Transfer, American Society of Mechanical Engineering, Associazione Itliana Gestione Energia 
AIGE, Unione Italiana di Termofluidodinamica UIT. Invited Professor at University of Paris-Est Marne-
la-Vallée. Coauthor of the book "Applied Diffusion Processes from Engineering to Finance", Wiley -
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
120 
ISTE, 2013 and co-Editor of the book "Heat Transfer Enhancement with Nanofluids", Publisher CRC, 
Taylor and Francis Group, 2015. Associate Editor for the ASME Journal of Heat Transfer from 2010 to 
2016, "Journal of Porous Media" from September 2010. He is a member of the Editorial Boards for 
"Advances in Mechanical Engineering", "Heat Transfer Research",  "Inventors", "Journal of 
Engineering", "Thermal Science and Engineering Progress" and "The Open Thermodynamics Journal". 
N. of papers in indexed journals: 150, h-index: 32 (Scopus) 35 (Scholar Google). 
● Sergio Nardini is a Full Professor at the Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università degli Studi 
della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”. Some of his recent research activities include heat conduction, 
numerical and analytical evaluation, and analysis of linear and nonlinear problems in solids with moving 
or stationary heat sources such as laser and electron beams. Nardini's research activity on natural and 
mixed convection in open -ended cavities includes: experimental investigations on natural and mixed 
convection of air in inclined and horizontal channels with secon dary motions which determine three -
dimensional effects (3D); evaluation of correlation, and optimal geometrical configurations of vertical, 
inclined, and horizontal channels. He carries out also researches on analysis of active and passive solar 
systems, h eat transfer enhancement, numerical and experimental investigations on impinging jets, 
extended surfaces, and swirl flows in presence of nanofluids. He is member of the Editorial Boards: 
Mechanical Engineering of The Scientific World Journal; Cogent Engine ering Journal of Engineering; 
Metalurgia International; Journal of Thermal Engineering; African Journal of Engineering; American 
Journal of Scientific Research and Essays MAYFEB Journal of Mechanical Engineering. He is Promoter 
and Board Chairman of Sun Energy Europe Srl, an Academic Spin-off company from Università degli 
Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”. N. of papers in indexed journals: 72, h-index: 21 (Scopus) 25 
(Scholar Google) 
Relevant publications 
● Barbato, M., Cirillo, L., Menditto, L., Moretti, R., Nardini, S., Feasibility study of a geothermal 
energy system for indoor swimming pool in Campi Flegrei area , Thermal Science and Engineering 
Progress, vol. 6, pp. 421-425, 2018. 
● Buonomo, B., di Pasqua, A., Ercole, D., Manca, O., Nardini, S., Numerical investigation on 
aluminum foam application in a tubular heat exchanger, Heat and Mass Transfer, vol. 54(8), pp. 2589-
2597, 2018. 
● Bianco, V., Cascetta, F., Marino, A., Nardini, S., Understanding energy consumption and carbon 
emissions in Europe: A focus on inequality issues, Energy, vol. 170, pp. 120-130, 2019. 
● Buonomo, B., Celik, H., Ercole, D., Manca, O., Mobedi, M., Numerical study on latent thermal 
energy storage systems with aluminum foam in local thermal equilibrium , Applied Thermal 
Engineering, vol. 159, 113980, 2019. 
● Bondareva, N.S., Buonomo, B., Manca, O., Sheremet, M.A., Heat transfer performance of the 
finned nano -enhanced phase change material system under the inclination influence , International 
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, vol. 135, pp. 1063-1072, 2019. 
Previous projects / activities related to the subject of this proposal 
● EliosLab grant 2006-2010: Laboratorio di Ricerca per le Tecnologie Solari ad Alta Temperatura” 
(Research Laboratory on High Temperature Solar Technologies), research project funded by Italian 
Department of Research and University (MIUR) in the frame of "articolo 12 del D.M. 593/2000 (D.L. 
297/1999) Bando Laboratori Pubblici-Privati. From 2006 to 2010. 
● CNR Bilateral research grants 1994-1998. International project funded by Italian National Research 
Council (CNR): “Natural and mixed convection in partially open cavity with porous media”. The partner 
abroad was professor Kambiz Vafai from UCR. The main application of the research activity is related to 
flat solar collector and the evaluation of thermal and fluid dynamic behaviours and optimization. From 1994 
to 1998. 
● MIUR (PRIN) grant 2017 -2020: National project title: Analysis and Application of Foams, 
Nanofluids and Nanoparticles in Heat Transfer Enhancement and Thermal Energy Storage; Local Activities: 
Procedure method to obtain new possible nanofluids mixture and their characterization in terms of 
thermophysical properties evaluation and convective behaviors. Evaluation of correlations for thermal 
conductivity and viscosity of different nanofluids mixture. Exp erimental and numerical investigation in 
forced and mixed convection in metal and ceramic foams with nanofluids and comparison with 
microchannel heat sinks or compact heat exchangers. Thermal and fluid dynamic characterization of 
nanoparticle charged phase change materials. Ferrofuids and ionic fluids with magnetic fields and magnetic 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
121 
nanoparticles. Thermal and fluid dynamics characterization of nanoparticle charged PCM in metal and 
ceramic foams and honeycombs. Thermal and fluid dynamics characterization o f sensible thermal energy 
storage systems and heat exchangers with honeycombs. 
● COST action with the project NanoUptake.  Objective: to create a Europe-wide network of leading 
R+D+i institutions, and of key industries, to develop and foster the use of nano fluids as advanced heat 
transfer/thermal storage materials to increase the efficiency of heat exchange and storage systems.  By 
developing of nanofluids up to higher Technological Readiness Levels (TRL) and overcoming commercial 
application barriers, Nanouptake will contribute to achieve the European Horizon 2020 Energy and Climate 
objectives (Societal Challenges 3: Secure, efficient and clean energy; and 6: Climate action, environment, 
resource efficiency and raw materials). From 2016 to 2019. 
● Erasmus+ action K2 with the project MARUEEB (2016-2018). Objective: To establish and develop 
a new Master on «INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES in ENERGY EFFICIENT BUILDINGS» for 3 
Russian Universities and 2 Armenian Universities with affiliation to other 2 Russian Universities, according 
to student-centred or output-based approach. From 2016 to 2018.  
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
Data acquisition systems, calibration systems, commercial codes for heat transfer, applied thermo fluid -
dynamics and energetic in research analysis, design and optimization; high performance computers. 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
122 
 
 
Partner 17: MANDREKAS DAIRY, PIC: 952120088 
Short Name MAND Country Greece 
 
Type IND Website www.mandrekas.gr 
Brief description of the organisation 
MANDREKAS SA is a family owned dairy. It started with Dimitrios Mandrekas the founder back in 1954. 
He produced and sold over the counter Greek traditional yogurt from sheep/cow milk. In 1984 Evangelos 
Mandrekas took over after coming back from his studies in England (B.Sc , M.Sc in Engineering). 
 
In 1991 a new plant was commissioned outside Corinth -Greece where modern yogurt production is still 
taking place. The business grew up and MANDR EKAS SA is one of the largest private label yogurt 
producers in the country. Our main core business is production of Greek Yogurt, branded and private label. 
We also have developed exports in Europe and USA where Greek Yogurt has become a household novelty. 
 
We produce all types of yogurt plus some yogurt desserts (tzatziki sauce ) and milk desserts, (rice pudding, 
custard cream and chocolate). Today, we employ 55 people and our motto is FFF (Fast, Flexible, Fresh). 
We can deliver all over the world either from our factory in Greece or from selected co -production dairies 
around the world, where the product is produced with our recipes and technology, under our supervision. 
Role in the project 
MAND will provide information about their heating and cooling needs in WP2. Mainly, MAND will offer 
its facilities for the installation of the project in WP7. MAND will provide the staffs’ technical expertise on 
the theoretical and practical aspects of the  project . MAND will help with m onitoring and assistance with 
the collection of data or other information required by the other participants . MAND will also collaborate 
with the sustainability assessment of the proposal concept in WP8. Finally, MAND will help with the impact 
activities in WP9.  
Key personnel 
• Vasileios Mandrekas  (M) CEO Vasileios holds a Ba.Sc. in Industrial Engineering from the University 
of Toronto. Before joining MANDREKAS S.A, he was working for PEPSICO Canada, collecting 
valuable experience in their largest Canadian beverage factory. He claimed many roles through his years 
in departments such as production, technical and warehouse departments. Prior to that, he was a 
Logistics Analyst for Wal-Mart Canada, completing projects aiming to  increase the efficiencies of the 
logistics network of the company.  
Since 2015, he has joined MANDREKAS S.A, taking over the position of the operations manager and 
eventually the CEO. The company has shown a steady growth through the years of the recession, 
increasing its market presence and sales within Greece and other countries across Europe, Middle East, 
US and Asia.   
• Evangelos Mandrekas (M) Founder Evangelos Mandrekas, holds a M.Sc in Mechanical and Electrical 
Engineering from Kings College, London. He is considered one of the few experts in Greek Yogurt 
production c ounting 45 years in the industry. He has experience designing and setting up facilities 
around the world, such as Wisconsin, USA, Brazil, Saudi Arabia and Mongolia. 
• Giorgos Vozalis (M)  technical supervisor, he, is responsible of the technical department o f the 
production facility. He has experience of 30 years in the industry, being involved in all technical projects 
in the facility since its creation. He is the most capable and knowledgeable employee to assist with any 
technical project in the production facility. 
Relevant Products 
● Greek Yogurt 
● Fresh Milk 
● Milk Dessers (rice pudding, vanilla cream etc) 
● Salad Dressing (tzatziki etc) 
Significant infrastructure and major items of equipment, relevant to the project 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
123 
• Infrastructure and facilities needed to install the new equipment 
• Complete system to test the equipment with refrigeration units, steam needing equipment (i.e 
pasterizers, boiling tanks etc) 
• Steam production equipment  
o Boiler  
o Steam generator 
• Measurement equipment: Temperature, relative humidity, flow meters etc 
 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
124 
 
 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) 
Partner 1: UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL EDUCATION A DISTANCIA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties1 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners2 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Partner 2: DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties3 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners4 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
Partner 3 VERTECH GROUP 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties5 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners6 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
Partner 4: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE CARTAGENA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
Y 
A part of the budget has been planned for subcontracting subtasks (cost of 40.000,00€) related to boilermaking 
and welding jobs for the construction of the latent thermal energy storage containers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
125 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties7 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners8 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
Partner 5: DAVID REAY ASSOCIATES 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties9 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners10 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
Partner 6: EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties11 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners12 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
Partner 7: EXERGY LTD 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties13 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners14 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
 
8 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding under 
Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
9 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
126 
Partner 8: BRUNEL UNIVERSITY LONDON 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties15 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners16 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Partner 9: CROWDHELIX LIMITED 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
Y 
A subcontracting budget of 7.500,00 € has been planned for additional support to the Crowdhelix Platform 
Development Team, as the platform is where the Helix will be virtually hosted both during and after the end of 
the project. Technology development work will be required during the project to support the development of the 
virtual helix. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties17 Y 
Eur 12,000 in direct personnel costs (approx. 2 Person Months) for the Crowdhelix Ltd. Platform 
Development Team, who will lead the platform development, has been budgeted under Crowdhelix 
Ltd.’s parent company (PIC: 939904587, which is based in the UK) where the Platform Development 
Team is based. 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners18 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Partner 10: PRODUCTION TRADE AND SUPPORT OF MACHINABLE PRODUCTS OF SOFTWARE 
AND INFORMATICS – RELATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AE 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties19 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners20 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
16 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
17 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
 
19 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
20 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
127 
 
 
Partner 11: UNIVERSIDAD POLITECNICA DE MADRID 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties21 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
Y 
The Foundation for the Promotion of Industrial Innovation (F2I2) was created in 1993 by the Technical University 
of Madrid (UPM) in collaboration with the Ministry of Industry and Energy (currently the Ministry of Industry, 
Commerce and Tourism - MINCOTUR), at the request of the Higher Technical School of Industrial Engineers 
(ETSII) of the UPM. 
This Foundation supposes a new impulse in the already long tradition of work towards the  Industry that the 
Laboratories, Institutes and Departments of the ETSII have been carrying out since its creation, concretized in the 
accomplishment of works of investigation and development, essays, calibrations, consultancies, surveys or studies, 
in a l arge number of scientific and technical areas, mainly in the electrical, vehicle and thermal fields, both for 
national and international industry. 
These tasks are linked to its close relationship with MINCOTUR, in technical support work in the development of 
electrotechnical regulations, industrial product control campaigns and international technical support in EU work 
groups. 
The Foundation has an important number of professionals of recognized prestige, adequate facilities and equipment. 
It has the Offic ial Central Electrotechnical Laboratory (LCOE) and laboratories arranged with another 23 of the 
ETSII, in addition to a client-oriented administrative and management support. 
Main tasks in the project: 
Foundation F2I2 professionals will provide expertise in dealing with glasses and mirrors. They have a 
lab for breaking glasses in order to study their behavior in particular circumstances (as automobile 
crashes). They have also demonstrated capabilities to build electrical systems for different types of 
motion, from sun trackers to electric vehicles. Their work will be much more oriented to practical 
tasks in building and managing proto-industrial systems, which is the role assigned to them in this 
project. Therefore, they will collaborate with UPM in the construction of the SunDial labScale 
concentrators on sub-task 6.1.1. 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners22 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Partner 12: ARCELOR MITTAL TUBULAR PRODUCTS IASI 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties23 Y 
 
 
22 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
23 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
128 
Dr. Gorka Iglesias (M) is Head of Product Development and Standardization in ArcelorMittal Tubular Products.  
He would add 21.800,00 € of direct costs to this member. As linked Third party, it entitled to indirect costs as 
well. he is working for the whole division, his contractual relation is not directly with AM Iasi, so he will act as 
third party for AM Iasi in the project. He is in charge of R&D projects coordination within the whole division 
(Tubular Products) and has previous expe rience in the development of European Research Projects as he took 
part in different projects such as FRISCC (RFCS call), HOLLOSSTAB (RFCS call) and INNO3DJOINT (RFCS 
call), see above. He is also member of different European and International Technical Committees. 
He will be able to offer his experience in the management of large R&D Projects and the potential use of solar 
power in the AM Iasi industrial processes. Finally, once the project is over, he would help replicate the solution 
in other AMTP plants reducing the CO 2 footprint not only of AM Iasi, but also of the full Tubular Products 
division. Even the results could be presented to other different ArcelorMittal divisions multiplying the immediate 
impact of the project. Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners24 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Partner 13: CENTRE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES & SAVING 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties25 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners26 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Partner 14: POLITECHNIKA WROCŁAWSKA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
Y 
Consulting on the properties of PCM materials with high thermal conductivity, it has a cost of 20.000,00€. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties27 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners28 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
 
 
25 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
26 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
27 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
28 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
129 
Partner 15: IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS S.L 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties29 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners30 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
If yes, please describe the International Partner(s) and their contributions 
 
 
 
Partner 16: UNIVERSITÀ DEGLI STUDI DELLA CAMPANIA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties31 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners32 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
 
Partner 17: MANDREKAS 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks  (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted) 
Y 
The intention is to subcontract the costs of the modification of the production facilities to connect the ASTEP 
concept (cost of 125.000,00 €). 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties33 N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners34 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
 
29 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
30 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
31 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
32 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
33 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
34 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non-associated third country which is not eligible for funding 
under Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
130 
 
Section 5: Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
 
No ethics related issues related to this proposal.
5.2 Security35 
• Activities or results raising security issues: NO 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO 
 
  
 
35 See article 37 of the Model Grant Agreement. . For more information on the classification of Information, please refer to the 
Horizon 2020 guidance: https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/hi/secur/h2020-hi-guide-classif_en.pdf. 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
131 
ANNEX 1 LETTERS OF SUPPORT 
The current Letters of Support were sent when the proposal had a different Name: “Combined Trigeneration 
Storage Process” whose Acronym was: “Co-TriS-Pro” 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
132 
 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
133 
 
  
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 LC-RES-07-2019 
134 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Antonio ROVIRA on 27/08/2019 13:57:53 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)