3.1  WORK PLAN AND RESOURCES ............................................................................................................................. ....... 36 3.2 
 CAPACITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................................................................. 37  
4  ETHICS ...................................................................................................................... ........................................................ 40  
  
Figure 1. BIOGEMSE overall concept and key developments.  
    
1  EXCELLENCE #@REL-EVA-RE@#   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
In line with the Green Deal objectives , Europe’s industrial future must undergo a “biological” transformation 
(biologisation) that includes a regenerative production ambition to meet environmental and societal goals, while 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 2 of 41  
increasing production efficiency and competitiveness. This evolution goes far beyond bio -inspiration and 
biointegration, directly enabling an interface between technical and biological systems to develop cleaner and more 
sustainable and efficient processes, technologies and products while decreasing fossil fuel dependency (aligned with 
the EU´s Green Deal 1  and REPowerEU Plan 2 ). Enhancing biology -driven features in human -made structures, 
systems and components, and even the interaction between them, is opening new innovation spaces to achieve global 
sustainability goals3. In particular, bio-intelligent manufacturing accelerates disruptive changes in society to cope 
with the challenges outlined in Sustainable Development Goals -SDGs- (11, 12 and 13, specially), for achieving 
industrial climate neutrality by 2050 through a responsible production supporting the deployment of sustainable and 
liveable cities and communities while fighting the climate change. Cement is the most widely manufactured product 
in the world by mass and accounts for almost 10% of the global CO 2 emissions (a large portion released during the 
burning of fossil fuels for transforming limestone into clinker)4, which are embodied in buildings and infrastructures, 
constituting the basis of the construction sector. The construction sector (9% EU´s GDP, 18M jobs, 3M companies)5 
accounts for up to 40% of the global energy demand4, 37% of the global CO2 emissions5, 50% of all extracted material 
and over 35% of the EU’s total waste generation8. Furthermore, the sector is intimately interrelated with other major 
sectors such as energy and steel. Consequently, construction plays a critical role in achieving the SDGs, reaching the 
Zero Pollution vision by 2050 and making cities (68% of world´s population by 20506) more sustainable and liveable, 
preserving the architectural dimension and its value, aligned with the principles of the New European Bauhaus 
(NEB)10. Redesigning building products through bio-inspired designs, bio -based materials, and “biologized” 
manufacturing approaches (manufacturing “biologisation” as the integration of technical and biological processes 
in manufacturing industry) to deliver bio-intelligent performance, represents an opportunity to empower cities with 
new relationships between nature, technology, and architecture11.   
BIOGEMSE project  aims at the development and advanced manufacturing of bio -intelligent, sustainable, 
circular and safe, modular construction products for pioneering a new way of building under a modern, 
aesthetically appealing, and industrialised architecture. In doing so, BIOGEMSE aims to unveil the potential of 
bio-based materials to deliver bio -intelligent performance (extended when combined with specific design -enabled 
features and advanced manufacturing processes), boosting their potential as a replacement of conventional cements, 
at large scale. Therefore, the project targets solutions for all involved stakeholders (covering the construction value 
chain, from professionals -architects, engineers, suppliers, constructors- to authorities, regulators, etc. ) under three 
key interrelated working fields: i) Circular and sustainable bio-based materials for AM processes, and therefore, 
expanding their opportunities in the construction as green and circular mortars (incorporating significant amounts of 
industrial waste) focused on optimizing material processability; ii) production “biologisation” through highly flexible 
and cost-effective digital manufacturing technologies (robotised Additive Manufacturing -AM- for cementitious 
materials), and; iii) Manufacturing-enabled bio -intelligent product performance through bio -inspired, design -, 
materials- and manufacturing-processes derived active behaviour. Those working fields are linked to 6 different 
Research & Innovation Areas (RIAs) that are combined t o form 4 Tech nical Pillars (TP), as indicated within the 
project overall concept  (Figure 1 ). This approach will boost the industrialisation of the construction industry, 
transitioning towards a climate-neutral, energy efficient, circular and digitised production thus delivering a resilient, 
regenerative and sustainable industry, matching production and consumption to respect the boundaries of our planet.  
To that end, BIOGEMSE will use already de veloped advanced bio-based materials from previous R&D initiatives 
that will be AM- and functionalities- oriented (sustainable and circular mortars with embedded active additives, 
such as TiO2, biochar and Phase-change materials - PCMs), combined with the power of generative AI tools to 
expand design spaces and explore novel bio-mimicking structures and geometries supporting engineers and architects. 
Moreover, Multi-Criteria Decision Support (MCDS) approaches will be applied to build novel modular and bio -
intelligent construction elements aligned with the standards and principles of those bio -inspired designs. 
Environmental impact, circularity and safety will be carefully considered from the initial design by deploying sound 
Safe and Sustainable by Design (SSbD) methodologies under a lifecycle approach.   
The combination of new construction materials and innovative designs may lead to a new paradigm of bio-intelligent  
 
1 https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en   
2 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022DC0230   
3 Bio-intelligent Manufacturing. Definitions, International Status, Potentials for Europe and Recommendations. ManuFUTURE BIM sub-platform whitepaper. 
4 European Innovation Council. 2024 Work Programme. Pathfinder challenge: Towards cement and concrete as a carbon sink 5 Built4People Partnership. 
Strategic Research & Innovation Agenda (SRIA) 2021-2027.  
4 Tracking Clean Energy Progress 2023, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-clean-energy-progress-2023 , License: CC BY 4.0.  
5 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction: Towards a Zero‑emission, Efficient and Resilient Buildings and Construction Sector. UNEP 2022. 8  
A new Circular Economy Action Plan For a cleaner and more competitive Europe. 2020.  
6 World Health Organization. Urban Health Fact sheet 2024 Available at: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/urban-health  
10 New European Bauhaus: beautiful, sustainable, together - European Union. Available at: https://neweuropeanbauhaus.es/  11 Tokuç et 
al. Biomimetic façade applications for a more sustainable future. 2018.  
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 3 of 41  
  
functionalities on manufactured products7 demanding a new level of flexibility and customisation potential only Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 provided by Additive Manufacturing (AM) techniques. However, the specific 
properties of the targeted bio-based materials (rheology, curing times, size distribution, etc.), combined with the 
generation of complex external and internal shapes, patterns and geometries will require to overcome current AM 
equipment limitations, at hardware ( robotised 3D printing system  for 1K&2K materials 12, incorporating kinetics 
redundancy -adding a polar axis to the linear ones- to deliver flexibility, adaptability and precision) and software levels 
(extending digital capabilities of systems -path planning, slicer, HMI, control system - coupled with inline 
multiparametric monitoring), and backed by the latest advancements in digital tools for advanced manufacturing. 
Specific efforts will be devoted to delivering smart simulation workflows  (combining different computational 
approaches) for assessing componen ts manufacturability alternatives. The extension of relevant information 
provisioning for designers and production engineers will be conducted through the development of Product and Process 
Digital Twins (DTs) and exploring their connection with information exploiting tools such as  the Digital Product 
Passport (DPP) and advanced product monitoring and performance sensing solutions.   
This innovative project holds the potential to transform the manufacturing of construction components by showcasing 
the viability, adaptability, and functionality of bio-inspired modular structures under different conditions and climates, 
allowing for the optimisation of both comfort/functionality levels and resource utilization, fostering regenerative 
production8. In BIOGEMSE, adaptable modular structures will be developed (TRL6) and placed in 3 Smart Living 
Labs (SLLs) with different functional requirements and climatic conditions (pollution, noise levels, humidity, 
temperature, radiation). To this end, the modules will feature bio-intelligent functionalities  inspired by nature 
mechanisms such as: i) the thermal and ii) noise insulation of the trabecular structure of shells such those of turtles; 
iii) the evaporative cooling of the skin of mammals such as elephants for temperature self-conditioning; iv) the flame-
retardant properties of natural fabrics such as sil k or wool; v) the natural creation of biological soil crust through 
rough surface patterns to promote the fixation of organisms; vi) the plants’ pollutant absorption mechanisms.  The 
potential of BIOGEMSE for transforming the building and construction sector is immense. The full adoption of 
BIOGEMSE’s products and technologies for an industrialised manufacturing of construction products may contribute 
on the long -term with up to 80%9  reduction of CO 2 emissions and  up to 60% less waste 10  in the sector and 
applications addressed, an extra 0,92€ billion to the annual GDP  (due to improved performance and efficiency of 
industrialised AM-production) and the creation of over 15,000 new skilled jobs in EU (see S2.1). To address this 
complex challenge, BIOGEMSE gathers a competitive, industry -driven, multidisciplinar, balanced 
(academiatech. development-industry) and value-chain oriented consortium (2 RTOs, 5 SMEs, 2 LEs), from 6 EU 
countries.
1.1  Objectives and Ambition #@PRJ-OBJ-PO@#  
BIOGEMSE will empower cities through climate -neutral and responsible products to be more safe, resilient and 
sustainable, and will significantly contribute to the twin -transition of the sector (a major GHG emitting sector), by: 
1) decarbonisation through t he use of circular bio-based materials replacing fossil -intensive ones (OPC); 2) 
embedding bio-intelligent and bio-inspired functionalities in construction products for sustainable cities; 3) boosting 
the implementation of advanced manufacturing technologi es (i.e. AM) coupled with the potential of digital 
technologies to enhance efficient, cost -effective and flexible manufacturing for customised and complex designs, 
delivering bio-intelligent performance. The substitution of fossils-intensive materials will help to reduce the carbon 
footprint of the building and construction sector and boost carbon-neutrality and products circularity, opening a new 
path for regenerative manufacturing. This project will leverage cutting -edge research and developments to creat e 
biointelligent components that will be seamlessly integrated into modern construction practices, enhancing the 
aesthetic appeal of buildings while assuring their structural integrity and extending their functionalities (air 
purification, energy savings, etc.) mimicking nature mechanisms. By focusing on the unique properties of proposed 
circular bio-based materials, BIOGEMSE seeks to push the boundaries of what is possible in construction, ensuring 
that the materials used will not only deliver adequate cha racteristics but also positive environmental impact. 
Moreover, it will promote the creation of local industrial hubs that symbiotically integrate industrial waste (i.e. 
biomass, sludge, etc.) as secondary raw material for bio-based construction components under a truly Circular 
Economy (CE) approach.  
 
7 K=one-component printing material for straight forward elements; 2K=two-component printing material (liquid accelerated) for complex design applications  
8 Regenerative Manufacturing: Crafting a Sustainable Future through Design and Production (2023). https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202345301038   
9 Buildings and construction. https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/industry/sustainability/buildings-and-construction_en   
10 How 3D printing in the construction industry works. https://www.cemexventures.com/3d-printing-in-construction/   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 4 of 41  
BIOGEMSE will develop advanced technologies for manufacturing bio-intelligent, sustainable, and modular 
components with complex shapes, specifically tailored for the needs of the construction sector.  By utilizing 
circular bio-based materials (fully recyclable and produced from industrial waste streams) this innovative initiative 
will accelerate the biologization of the European manufacturing industry while aligning it with the SDGs and 
the NEB goals for cities. Fostering circularity and sustainability, BIOGEMSE will contribute to the creation of 
urban environments that prioritize eco-friendly, appealing and resilient construction components, enhancing the 
industrialisation of their production and, therefore, boosting efficiency and competitiveness.  
  
1.1.1. Specific objectives (SO) of BIOGEMSE and alignment Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025with 
the topic scope  
SO1 - Expand the opportunities of bio-based materials for climate-neutral and bio-intelligent construction 
products (WP2, WP4, WP6).  
a) To reduce the impact of construction products by extending the use of advanced, fully recyclable, and 
sustainable bio-based materials in the sector. BIOGEMSE will use fully circular bio-based materials coming from 
industrial bio-derived waste, replacing conventional construction fossils-dependant materials, contributing to a more 
sustainable and climate -neutral urban landscape and reducing the carbon footprint of the resulting products.  
BIOGEMSE leverages eco -design and circularity -by-design approaches for such materials, assessing their 
sustainability, circularity, safety and overall environmental footprint reduction in an integrated SSbD framework.  
b) To research specific manufacturing processes-derived functionalities. Additional functionalities will be 
integrated into the bulk properties of the bio-based materials allowing for tailored bio -intelligent products 
functionalities (mimicking nature mechanisms), with a special focus on enhancing thermal comfort, insulation, CO2 
capture, self-cleaning and/or pollutants degradation. Beyond the adjustment of processing parameters, also the use of 
bio-based additives are considered (TiO2 particles11, biochar12 and PCMs13).  
c) To optimize material-derived process parameters for additive manufacturing (AM). In BIOGEMSE, 
biobased mortars manufacturing processes (mixing or curing processes) will be adapted to be compatible with 3D 
printing equipment. Key requirements for the printable material include achieving the right rheology for extrusion 
and deposition, managing setting times to balance workability and layer bonding, and ensuring adequate mechanical 
strength. Furthermore, BIOGEMSE will upscale the production of these printable bio-based materials.  
: i) Standardised circular bio-based materials (content of recycled material >70 wt.% from bio-derived waste) 
functionalized with active additives (>3), targeting different AM process-/material-/derived bio -intelligent 
functionalities (>4); ii) upscaled materials processing parameters for industrial scale consumption, delivering 80% 
less CO2 emissions than OPC during production14 and being 100% recyclable (several loops of circularity enabled).   
Topic Alignment: “Technological advances and improvements in sustainability […] arising from the integration of 
biointelligent principles […] in manufacturing”; “Substitution of raw materials by bio -based materials, […]”; 
“Integration of bio -intelligent structures, processes, organisms or materials into technology by systematically applying 
knowledge from biology”; “Expanding opportunities of bio-intelligent and bio-based materials by substituting fossil-based 
raw materials  
[…]”; “Reducing the carbon footprint of production and products, and foster circularity […]”.  
SO2 - Apply Generative Design (GD) tools for creating bio-mimicking features that transfer a targeted 
function and its underlying principles from a biological model to a technical product (WP2, WP3, WP6).   
a) To leverage GD tools to create bio -mimicking natural features in building components, endowing 
them with bio -intelligent properties . These properties will encompass design -derived (or improved) crucial 
functions such as thermal and acoustic insulation, evaporative cooling or organism fixation mechanisms inspired 
by nature for enhancing the performance of construction elements for buil dings (such as façades or roofing 
elements). The automated design methodology will rely on creating a new generation of virtu al models to analyse 
the bio-inspired functional behaviour of building components. The technologies to be explored include AI-supported 
GD, modelling & simulation tools (FEM, CFD, ROMs…), and multi-criteria optimization (through MCDS).   
b) To establish specific computational workflows for GD tailored for AM. Workflow orchestrators and ad 
hoc programming functions will be considered to conveniently define the design workflows for modular 
construction components with intricate bio -inspired shapes, patterns and geometries that deliver specific bio -
intelligent functionalities, while accounting for AM manufacturing constraints and bio-based materials properties 
 
11 Dikkar H, et al. Titanium dioxide as a phototcatalyst to create self-cleaning concrete. Mat. Proc. 45, 4, 4058-4062 (2021)  
12 Barbhuiya, S. et al. Biochar-concrete: A comprehensive review of properties, production and sustainability. Case Studies in Construction Materials (2024).  
13 Elhamy A. et al. Phase change materials integrated into the building envelope to improve energy efficiency and thermal comfort. Future cities (2024).  
14 Louise K. Turner, et al, CO2 emissions: A comparison between geopolymer and OPC cement concrete, Construction and building Mat 43 (2013) 125-130.  
KPIs 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 5 of 41  
(SO1). Existing design datasets (and models) will be explored and complemented by BIOGEMSE experimental 
work.  
c) To support architects and engineers in the definition of novel bio -intelligent products through the 
incorporation of the GD tools (a) & b)) and the MCDS solution in the design decision -making to determine if 
further iterations in the product design generation phase or specific simulations are required. BIOGEMSE ambitions 
the exploration of larger design spaces coupled with the state -of-art (SoA) professional procedures. BIOGEMSE 
will integrate into the decision criteria results from different analytical perspectives: SSbD assessment framework, 
including Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment (LCA+LCC+S-LCA), and circular economy principles.  
: i) Different designs of complex -shape bio-based modular structures delivering 3+ shape -derived 
biointelligent functionalities (e.g. trabecular structures for thermal and noise insulation); ii) a GD-application 
methodology for the construction sector; iii) a public design dataset (incorporating modelling -MODA- and 
characterisation data -CHADA) following EMMC guidelines; iv) detailed engineering (including Bill of Materials 
-BOM) of 3 modular components: large façade panel (tertiary building), small façade panel (residential building), 
and roofing panel (urban infrastructure).  
  
Topic Alignment:  “Access to bio -intelligent production technologies and architecture”; “Technological advances and 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/15 25 improvements in sustainability […] arising from the integration of bio -
intelligent principles, functions, structures and technologies in manufacturing”; “convergence of biotechnology with 
mechanical engineering, production technology and information technology […]”; “Bio-inspired manufacturing processes 
[…]”; “systematic application of the knowledge of nature and/or natural processes aiming at optimising a manufacturing 
system […]; development of digital and green technologies that facilitate the upscaled m anufacturing of bio-based or bio-
intelligent products […]”.  
SO3 – Extend AM technology (3D printing system) to process bio-based materials and manufacture the 
complex shapes, patterns and geometries needed for bio-intelligent performance (WP2, WP4, WP6).  
a) To develop a novel 3D printing robotised printhead incorporating a novel polar-axis end-effector and 
2K printing capabilities . BIOGEMSE will extend manufacturing versatility, precision and adaptability through 
redundant kinematics (extra degrees of freedom) through a new polar-axis in addition to the linear ones and through 
the modification of the printhead enabling 2-component (2K) materials (enabling the injection of accelerant directly 
to the mortar paste at the extruder nozzle) for ultra-fast hardening, allowing for extreme form freedom to enhance the 
replication of complex surface patterns (biomimicking nature) at the internal and external shapes of the manufactured 
products enabling bio-intelligent shape-linked functionalities.  
b) To extend CAM software (SW) capabilities by integrating novel information sources and models , 
resulting in flexible, environmentally friendly, digitized, and cost -efficient AM processes for producing bio -
intelligent construction elements with bio-based materials. This will involve advantaging from DT (SO4) for AM 
processes through the use of physics -based models, AI and monitoring data to support the conversion of designs 
(SO2) into efficient product manufacturing strategies (CAM) to be implemented in VER´s proprietary path planning 
solution.  
c) To implement novel photonic solutions for real -time monitoring of AM processes and inline quality 
assurance. BIOGEMSE will develop and implement novel multivariate monitoring solutions (vision-based) coupled 
with machine learning (ML) algorithms for inline control of key process parameters, such as layer thickness, material 
temperature and cooling rate, extrusion  rate and/or environmental conditions. This will enable not only to improve 
the inline control of the process (closed-loop control correcting minimal deviations from layer to layer) but also gather 
relevant manufacturing information to be correlated with the performance of the component during its use phase 
(SO5), enabling new paths towards design optimisation. Moreover, sensing solutions will be dev eloped to monitor 
and validate the performance of the bio-intelligent products when in use in the SLLs.  
d) To implement and deploy Industry4.0 manufacturing approaches (digitised, connected, robotised and 
smart) for bio-intelligent components. Based on digital design approaches (SO2), and enhanced process reliability 
(smooth CAD-CAE-CAM transition), zero-defect manufacturing (ZDM) strategies (adaptative control strategies and 
experience-derived self -learning capabilities) will be developed, bo osting sector efficiency (economies of scale, 
offsite industrialisation) and transitioning from conventional onsite one -of-a-kind construction to customised 
massproduction schemes on controlled environments (increasing safety and standardisation potential) through AM.  
: i) One 3D printer prototype with a new polar -axis and 2K printing capabilities and with integrated sensors 
and monitoring tools; ii) accuracy of the ML algorithms for defect detection over 95%; iii) adaptive control 
algorithms based on the developed DT, for a real -time and closed -loop control capable of correcting process 
 
15 RAMI (2018). Reference Architecture Model for Industry 4.0 (link).  
KPIs 
KPIs 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 6 of 41  
deviations; iv) at least 3 different modular bio-intelligent component typologies prototyped and performance validated 
at lab scale.   
Topic Alignment: “Access to bio -intelligent production technologies and architecture”; “Technological advances and 
improvements in sustainability […] arising from the integration of bio -intelligent principles, functions, structures and 
technologies in manufacturing”; “convergence of biotechnology with mechanical engineering, production technology and 
information technology […]”; “Bio-inspired manufacturing processes (biomimicry, biomimetics)”; “Reducing the carbon 
footprint of production and products, and foster circularity […]; “[…] facilitate the upscaled manufacturing of bio-based 
or bio-intelligent products in one manufacturing value chain”; “Address either advanced manufacturing techniques to 
process bio-materials or bio-intelligent components for upscaled production […]”.  
SO4- Deploy a standardized, data-driven and interoperable collaborative framework (WP2, WP5, WP6).    
a) To develop a modular digital architecture and middleware to ensure seamless integration and 
interoperability of all digital assets and tools developed  during the project. BIOGEMSE will develop a digital 
platform (RAMI 4.020 compliant and based on IDS-RAM16) for interoperable data sharing and services deployment, 
leveraging advanced technologies and techniques to end-to-end data handling (large data volumes and heterogeneous 
sources). Additionally, at the device-level, a dedicated SW (Scadalytics) will be adapted to create a secure and scalable 
IoT architecture that enables effective communication with the platform (AutomationML 17 as a standardised and 
open CAE exchange format and OPC-UA23 as an open-standard secure communications protocol). The platform will 
integrate the process DT, IoT devices and real-time data to optimize the AM process. BIOGEMSE will promote  
  
a data-driven collaborative framework to facilitate trustworthy and efficient cooperation at the value chain levelAssociated 
with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025.  
b) Asset Administration Shell (AAS)-based Digital Twins (DT) will be established  as transversal Industry 
4.0 components based on physical surrogate models for product and process following IDTA´s recommendations. 
AAS and standardised data formats for assets representation will be considered, guaranteeing the compatibility with 
data neutral models and open -standard protocols. DT will be able to provide real -time monitoring, simulation of 
what-if scenarios and predictive capabilities for the process to avoid err or propagation and mitigation/correction 
through the adaptation of subsequent layers based on simulation models (SO2) and monitoring data (SO3).  
c) To design and implement a Digital Product Passport (DPP)  providing comprehensive product 
information, tracking lifecycle stages, and ensuring compliance with sustainability standards. Additionally, the 
proposed development and management of the AAS -DT, will enable effective data flows and integration potential 
with other systems and applications and, specifically, enhancing asset management and interoperability with the DPP.   
d) To ensure effective data management, by implementing the FAIR principles in the Data Management 
Plan (DMP ). Actions will be taken to assist in ontology development, establishing linkages to ensure data 
interoperability, contributing, along with other research data management practices (see section S1.2.8&9), to FAIR 
data management, ensuring that BIOGEMSE contribute with Open Science (OS) approaches.  
: i) 1 IDS -RAM compliant digital infrastructure; ii) end -to-end modular digital pipelines along product 
manufacturing (product and process DT) aligned with AAS standards and offering predictive capabilities; iii) 
DPP tool suited to the construction value chains (ontology, data model and services); iv) 1 agreed DMP by M4.  
Topic Alignment: “[…] digitalisation of the industry”; “Contribute to standardization”; “Interoperability for data 
sharing […] through the implementation of the F AIR data principles”.  
SO5-Pioneering regenerative construction products and value chains (WP6, WP7, WP8 & WP9).   
a) To validate BIOGEMSE’s solution by establishing different Smart Living Labs (SLLs) with the 
different bio -intelligent products. 3 different EU climatic regions have been selected to build the SLLs 
(Mediterranean, Atlantic and Scandinavian), which will consist also of different building configurations and needs, 
demanding different product functionalities (residential building, tert iary building and urbanism infrastructures). 
Furthermore, monitorization solutions will be developed and integrated on these SLLs to validate the performance of 
the solutions.  
b) To pioneer regenerative production by developing fully circular, safe and sustainable bio -intelligent 
products. BIOGEMSE aims to achieve a net -positive impact on the environment, emphasizing not only the 
responsible use of limited resources but also their restoration to minimize the overall resources consumption, keeping 
 
16 IDS-RAM (2019). International Data Spaces Reference Architecture Model. Version 3 (link).  
17 AutomationML (2015). The glue for seamless automation engineering (link). 23 
OPC foundation for Industrial Interoperability standard (link).  
KPIs 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 7 of 41  
these resources in the loop and actively promoting efforts to reverse ecological damage. LCSA assessments will be 
updated with the real data coming from the production and use phase of the bio-intelligent products in the SLLs.  
c)To foster the acceptance and uptake of BIOGEMSE’s solutions . A robust Dissemination and Communication 
(D&C) Plan will be developed to extend the impact of BIOGEMSE, targeting all identified stakeholder groups (i.e., 
construction professionals, authorities, regulators and society).  
d) To accelerate the uptake of BIOGEMSE solutions through skilling opportunities and standardisation. 
Novel materials and technologies face the reluctancy of the construction sector to disrupt the status quo by replacing 
current material specifications due to the lack of case studies, knowledge and skills gaps, as well as the necessity to 
comply with existing standards and regulations. BIOGEMSE´s goal is to enhance the needed training for 
professionals (beyond the consortium) when manufacturing and using the novel bio-intelligent products. Moreover, 
specific work towards project results (materials, technologies, etc.) standardisation and standards alignment will be 
pursued.   
e) To implement a strategically oriented commercialization plan as well as sustainable business models 
(BMs), addressing a regenerative production, extending the impact to the whole construction sector.  
: i) 3 fully deployed and operating (6+ months) SLLs during the project; ii) online trainings (webinars, 
materials) and entrepreneurial educational programs (3+ educational documents) on BIOGEMSE’s solutions 
(120+ trainees); iii) active D&C Plan engaging 200+ stakeholders from targeted groups (>6 Workshops/webinars); 
iv) 1 overall agreed exploitation strategy and sustainable BMs for BIOGEMSE products; v) active alignment with 
EU standardization initiatives (data, manufacturing technologies -AM-, construction products).  
Topic Alignment:  “Technological advances and improvements in sustainability […] arising from the integration of 
biointelligent principles, functions, structures and technologies in manufacturing”; “[…] regenerative production”; 
“Upscaled manufacturing of bio -based or bio -intelligent products […]”;  “sustainable business models […]”; “[…] 
business case and exploitation strategy”; “A strategy for skills development”; “[…] associating social partners and civil 
society; “collaboration with existing projects and develop synergies with other EU initiatives […]”.  
1.1.2. BIOGEMSE ambition and progress beyond the state of the art  
RIA1: Climate-neutral bio-based materials for construction products manufacturing (TRL4 → TRL6).  
The 2015 Paris Agreement18 established an action plan to prevent the planet’s temperature from rising by more than  
2°C. That target was deemed reachable only if GHG emissions could be significantly reduced. It was therefore agreed  
  
to establish urgent measures in the energy industry and advancing Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 the 
Circular Economy (CE) in all manufacturing sectors, including construction. In this context, eco -friendly alternative 
binders (such as alkali-activated cements or geopolymers25) have emerged as a promising alternative offering solutions 
to the sustainability challenges posed by ordinary Portland cements (OPC) 26. Novel formulations of these alternative 
binders, based on industria l waste (including nature -based sources, such as biomass or sludge from water treatment 
plants), explored at laboratory and pre -industrial scales at TRL4 27 [AIM, ITA, COR, IRI], have demonstrated CO 2 
reduction potential of up to 80% when compared with current OPC emissions 28. However, despite offering significant 
solutions to the sustainability issues of OPC, their widespread adoption faces considerable challenges, including the 
lack of standardized guidelines, regulatory frameworks, and knowledge of key processes (mixing, curing) and inherent 
properties (rheology), hindering their adoption. Furthermore, their full potential is realized when performance demands 
go beyond OPC-like characteristics and are exploited in advanced manufacturing processes (e.g., 3D printing), enabling 
complex and demanding geometries and functionalities. Sustainable and circular  mortars produced with these 
alternative binders pose additional challenges in relation to the needed properties for the AM processes (mixing, 
pumping, extruding, and curing) when considering not only the binder but the additives, water and aggregates.  
Overcoming these obstacles is crucial for successfully transitioning to more sustainable construction practices.   
Beyond SoA : BIOGEMSE will cover two innovative aspects concerning bio-based materials (eco -friendly 
biobased binders and additives) processing for advanced manufacturing techniques (i.e. AM). On the one hand, 
optimization of process parameters (mixing time, curing conditions) for the printable material to achieve the right 
rheology for extrusion and deposition, managing setting times to balance workability and layer bonding, and 
ensuring ade quate mechanical strength. On the other hand, added -functionality manufacturing process will be 
applied for developing bio-intelligent products. The innovative approach of BIOGEMSE combines bio-intelligent 
modular construction with the environmental benefits of bio-based materials (fully circular, lower CO2 emissions, 
customisable functionalities, etc.) and the precision, shape/geometry/pattern flexibility and efficiency of AM 
processes (energy efficiency, precise deposition, waste reduction/avoidance, optimal resource use) [AIM, VER]. 
 
18 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/climate-change/paris-agreement/   
KPIs 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 8 of 41  
AM allows for the creation of complex and customized designs that are not possible to achieve with conventional 
construction methods (either in-situ or precast), facilitating the transition to a more sustainable and resilient built 
environment to combat climate change and preserving the EU standards of living, in alignment with the NEB.  
Upscaled fabrication of bio-intelligent construction elements will be validated in real conditions (TRL 6).  
- RIA2: Generative Design (GD) strategies for tailored product design (TRL3 → TRL6).  
The integration of GD with AM has significantly expanded design possibilities, enabling the creation of complex 
shapes and improved performance of 3D -printed components by incorporating manufacturing constraints and 
shapelinked benefits into the design process. Studies on cellular structures29 and on bio-inspired GD30 showcase the 
complexity achievable in other materials and fields, yet GD remains at its infancy. Current research 31,32,33, 
demonstrates the potential of AI and performance -driven generative modelling in exploring larger de sign spaces. 
However, these studies often focus on traditional materials and fabrication techniques for highly -innovative sectors 
(aeronautics, space, defence), leaving a gap in applying these advanced methodologies to bio-based materials and 
AM techniques (showing greater potential for exploring expanded design possibilities) and, specifically, in those 
lagging sectors such as construction5. In building, optimization needs to find the best arrangement between a number 
of interrelated parameters (structural performance, costs, functionality, aesthetics, environmental impact)34,35. Despite 
advancements in GD within the construction sector, there is little research addressing multi -objective optimization 
problems and most of the research on bio -inspired designs is based on theoretical hypotheses. A recent study (TRL 
3)36, confirmed the feasibility of learning optimal designs from single-physics solutions and combine them to address 
multi-physics problems using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs).   
Beyond SoA : BIOGEMSE will contribute to expand the opportunities of bio-based materials and AM 
technologies for the manufacturing of novel bio -intelligent products, while considering their circularity, 
sustainability and safety through SSbD methodological framework application, by pushing the boundaries of GD 
for AM-oriented product design and optimization of bio-inspired building modular components. The project targets 
achieving a TRL 6 through innovative approaches in the capabilities of virtual modelling tools with computational 
multi-physics and multi-scale approaches in optimization and GD [ITA], particularly for the  
  
25 For simplicity, the term geopolymer is used to refer to all type of alkali-activated materials, regardless of the calcium content in their composition 26 
Fernandez-Jimenez A et a. Sustainable cements: Hybrid alkaline cements overview, 68 (2023).  
27 HE projects justifying TRL: AMBIANCE (GA 101058406); BIO-UPTAKE (101057049), BIOMAC Test Bed (952941).  
28 AIM previous research work: GEOPOLAR (national R&D project, IN852A 2018/44, 2018-2020).  
29 A. Nazir et al.A SOA review on types, design, optimization, and additive manufacturing of cellular structures. The Int. J. of AM Technology, 2019  
30 Y . Zhang et al. Bio-inspired generative design for support structure generation and optimization in AM. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology, 2020. 31 W. 
Liao et al. Generative AI design for building structures," Automation in Construction, vol. 157, p. 105187, 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105187 32 R. 
Danhaive et al., "Design subspace learning: Structural design space exploration using performance-conditioned generative modeling," (2021).  
33 S. Qin et al. Intelligent design and optimization system for shear wall structures based on LLMs and generative AI. J. of Building Engineering, 2024  
34 H. Wang et al. Joints f34or treelike column structures based on generative design and AM. J. of Constructional Steel Research, 2021  
35 A. Kanyilmaz et al., "Robustness-oriented topology optimization for steel tubular joints mimicking bamboo structures," Mat. Des. & Process. Comm., 2019. 
36 H. Kazemi et al. Multiphysics Design Optimization via Generative Adversarial Networks. J. of Mechanical Design, 2022.  
construction sector. The methodologies and insights developed in Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025the 
EU-funded ICLIMABUILT project [ITA,  
IRE] will support BIOGEMSE in predictive modelling and multi -scale simulations for mimicking material 
behaviour and analysing functionality of building components. This will be accomplished by validating these 
methodologies in controlled laboratory environments (developing CHADA and MODA datasets following EMMC 
guidelines) [ITA, AIM]) as well as at the SLLs (TRL6). By leveraging multi -objective optimization algorithms, 
BIOGEMSE will demonstrate the feasibility of using bio-based materials for manufacturing bio-intelligent 
products for construction (detailed engineering [RIN]) delivering multi-objective bio-inspired performance.  
- RIA3: Advanced Additive Manufacturing (AM) technologies (TRL4 → TRL6).  
Industrialized construction19 has pursued the use of AM in the sector, leading to reduced costs and the potential for 
increased energy efficiency and decarbonization. Some construction projects have been implemented by using AM 
leveraging new business opportunities across the EU. However, although AM is advancing quickly, challenges 
remain. Most AM processes rely on in situ installed structures for concrete/mortar pouring, while just few projects 
utilizing robotised industrial cells/stations have been performed in last years (TRL4) 38. Furthermore, materials and 
process limitations (poor flexibility on those systems to fully achieve design freedom), as well as lack of inline quality 
tools to prevent, detect and correct errors, are still challenges. Indeed, unavailability of building guidelines combined 
 
19 Industrialized construction uses industrialized production methods (e.g high-volume off-site construction, prefabrication, and on-site construction automation) 
38 XTREEE (WOOL2LOOP h2020, HINDCON h2020) and COBOD (BEEYONDERS HE, RobetArme HE) projects.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 9 of 41  
with unskilled workforce limit the adoption of 3D printing techniques. In the specific case of cementitious materials, 
small variations in the rheological properties of the material may result in failed parts and/or system failure20,21.  
Beyond SoA: BIOGEMSE will develop [VER] customized printing hardware (through redundant kinematics and 
2K accelerator printhead for really complex shapes) for bio-based materials together with different SW solutions 
[VER, ITA] (to improve CAE -manufacturability simulation- and CAE-CAM transition, machine control, user 
experience) and monitoring tools [IRI] to detect unexpected behaviours, performance issues, or non-compliances, 
in an automated manner, in a way that variations in the process conditions or material properties will not lead to a 
defective AM component. In particular, different optical systems for in -process quality monitoring will be 
deployed at 3 levels: i) before deposition, to detect variations in the properties of the material; ii) during deposition, 
to measure the width of the extruded l ayer in real time to detect problems of over - or under-extrusion, providing 
feedback for controlling the extrusion and adjust the material deposition rate accordingly; and iii) after deposition, 
to assess the parts quality. Continuous monitoring of the printed material condition, machine status, variables, and 
working environment conditions will contribute to maintaining the stability, repeatability, and efficiency of the 
AM production. Furthermore, by using and exploiting AI -based adaptative control strategies, based on ML 
algorithms and the existence of a comprehensive digitisation strategy (RIA4) [COR], parts quality prediction, 
defects correction and system self -learning from experience (cognition) capabilities will be developed, 
implemented and demonstrated on VER´s 3D printing equipment (TRL6).  
- RIA4: Digitalization as key enabler of manufacturing industry (TRL5 → TRL6).  
The integration of digital tools and services in manufacturing has experienced a great push during the last years, due 
to the relevance that Industry 4.0 principles have reached for improving efficiency and productivity. Digital Twin 
(DT) technologies have transformed industries by digitizing processes and production assets22,23. Those DT concepts 
face challenges due to limited generalizability of available tools, difficulty in linking the physical and digital models 
both in terms of hardware (HW) and interoperability and require significant expertise to be deployed in production24. 
Physics-based simulations provide synthetic data and allow the use of Reduced Order Models (ROMs), enhancing 
distributed computation (edge vs cloud). In the specific case of mortars 3D printing, multi -physics simulation 
approaches are emerging over the last years (TRL5)25,26, focused on extrudability analyses through CFD techniques27, 
and component buildability assessment, through thermo-mechanical analysis by the Finite Element Method (FEM)28. 
Data connectivity and interoperability within manufacturing has been supported by IoT connectors (OPC UA or 
MQTT), and AAS as an information model based on servitization-oriented architectures (RAMI4.0). Some industry 
implementations of AAS (e.g. BaSyx or AAS Package Explorer) already exist but lack flexibility to be adapted to a 
number of production scenarios, as is the case of construction (TRL5). Moreover, data gathering and exploitation is 
also essential. New monitoring devices demand data processing and analytics tools (AI -empowered) to obtain and 
interpret data from industrial processes. Data analytics, through AI techniques (ML), demands the combination of DT 
and seamless communication when solving complex manufacturing processes, such as AM.   
Moreover, industrial and public institutions in the EU have promoted the creation of DPP as specific trustable and  
  
decentralized digital assets for habilitating digitally based CE business models, based on the creation of a multiAssociated 
with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025-node federated cross-sectorial collaboration network29. The coordination between 
the digital assets representation proposed by AAS -based DT and the DPP is still incipient (TRL4/5). Despite the 
promising contributions of ongoing initiatives (e.g., IDTA and ZVEI DPP4.0 initiative), the significant expertise 
requirements to deploy DT and DPP in real production and value chain environments30 are still to be explored.  
Beyond SoA: BIOGEMSE will deploy a user -friendly, collaborative and decentralized digital framework fully 
compliant with services provisioning (IDS -RAM compliant) [COR], ensuring OT/IT/ET convergence through 
Industrial IoT gateways [IRI] to manage different types of data, and to interoperate across different end -devices 
along the manufacturing value chains. The digital infrastructure and middleware will be based on AAS to enable 
secured data exchange among the required reso urces (real-time communication capability). Based on this end -
 
20 Roussel, N. 2018. Rheological requirements for printable concretes. Cement and Concrete Research, 112, 76-85.  
21 Ter Haar, et al., 2023. Off-site construction with 3D concrete printing. Automation in Construction, 152, 104906.  
22 Kousi, N.,et al., 2021. Digital Twin for designing and reconfiguring human–robot collaborative assembly lines. Appl. Sci. 11  
23 S. Huang, et al. 2022. Building blocks for digital twin of reconfigurable machine tools from design perspective. Int. J. of Production Research, 60:3  
24 https://new.siemens.com/global/en/company/stories/research-technologies/digitaltwin/digital-twin.html   
25 S.A. Khan et al. Numerical modelling and simulation for extrusion-based 3D concrete printing: The underlaying physics, potential, and challenges. 2022  
26 V . Nguyen-Van et al. Modelling of 3D concrete printing process: A perspective on material and structural simulations.Additive Manufacturing. 2022  
27 Y . Wei at al., Numerical simulation of 3D concrete printing derived from printer head and printing process. Journal of Building Engineering 2024  
28 T. Ooms et al. A parametric modelling strategy for the numerical simulation of 3D concrete printing with complex geometries. Additive Manufacturing 2024  
29 DIGITAL CIRCPASS Project (GA 101083432): https://cirpassproject.eu/. H2020 DigiPrime Project (GA 873111): https://www.digiprime.eu/  
30 https://www.altair.com/digital-twin/   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 10 of 41  
toend product and process data handling, BIOGEMSE will advance the SoA by deploying product and process DT 
[COR], allowing for Al-based simulation optimization based on ML (TRL6).  
A robust cloud middleware will be developed as a reliable communication platform among heterogeneous 
components, data sources, and applications. The platform's modular approach, built onto a common IoT-oriented 
infrastructure layer, will integrate a diverse range of data sources, including AI models, physics -based DT and 
MCDS tools, providing inputs for optimizing the design and manufacturing phase [IRI, COR]. BIOGEMSE’s 
platform/cloud middleware will empower users to make simulation -based and data-driven decisions effectively. 
ML algorithms and data analytics will provide val uable insights by correlating sensor readings with process 
outcomes to identify trends and improve the process interpretability [IRI]. Deep Learning (DL) and data fusion 
techniques will be applied to integrate multi-modal data from various sources and extract meaningful features for 
predicting the performance of the bio-intelligent products, to be validated in a real environment at the SLLs (TRL 
6). Moreover, in BIOGEMSE, different kind of sensors, in combination with AI tools, will be enablers for advanced 
process control. SoA multi-physics simulation approaches will be tailored to be applied to the extrudability and 
buildability analysis of bio-based materials in the 3D printing equipment, to optimize the process and provide 
manufacturing feasibility prediction capabilities to the GD process [ITA].   
Finally, BIOGEMSE will build a DPP tool on the top of the digital architecture to facilitate the structured, secured 
and reliable exchange of key information, enabling sustainable business models (RIA6) [COR]. This DPP tool 
will take advantage of the data availability provided by the AAS-based product DT to build a specific sub-model 
where the key information needed to enhance the sustainable business models among stakeholders will be offered.  
- RIA5: Safe and Sustainable by Design (SSbD) approaches for manufacturing industry (TRL4 → TRL6). 
Manufacturing biologisation opens opportunities to develop new concepts of production processes considering 
existing demands in the manufacturing industry aligned with the promotion of the Circular Economy (CE) and 
industrial symbiosis. Different CE framew orks have been detailed for enabling those principles in manufacturing 
value chains from research  31, industrial standards 51 and initiatives such as the European Platform on Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA)32, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation33, or Carbon Trust54. A transition is currently being fueled by 
the EC towards considering safety and sustainability by design ( SSbD). SSbD approaches (incorporating LCSA 
analysis) are used to gain a deep knowledge of both the human health and sustainability aspects of the materials 
across all life cycle stages (including end -of-life -EoL) of the manufactured products, to foster advanced CE 
strategies. Risk assessments are supported by material hazard analysis and on -site measurements for airborne 
hazardous substances, also considering the health and safety criteria of the SSbD framework. SSbD applied to 
construction is still incipient, being mainly applied in R&D projects34 and initiatives35 at low TRL (TRL4).  
Beyond SoA : BIOGEMSE will combine the comprehensive approach of SSbD (Hazards, Risks, and LCSA 
assessment) [IRE] with a customizable MCDS algorithm based on an Analytical Hierarchical Approach (AHP) or 
an equivalent MCDS method [ITA], to generate a Holistic Framework for Data-Driven Sustainability Assessment, 
which will allow us to establish a transparent and traceable decision -making process with clear results, where 
different conventional approaches applied separately would show non-confluent or even contradictory results.  
BIOGEMSE will demonstrate the results of those analyses and methodological approaches on the SLLs (TRL6).  
- RIA6: Sustainable business models and circular economy -oriented exploitation strategy (TRL5 → 
TRL6) The manufacturing industry may enable the transformation to truly circular business models (BMs) and the 
production of new eco-friendly products in existing and emerging value chains (fostering industrial symbiosis), also 
including circular loops. Nevertheless, several challenges are identified for the implementation of CE models in the  
  
construction sector, related to knowledge, technology, environmental and policy challenges36Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/202557,37,59. Moreover, positioning professionals at the center of the innovation map is essential to 
realise Industry 5.0. I5.0 extends the I4.0 approach by transitioning towards a human-centred, sustainable and resilient 
EU industry38. Previous projects61 have shown clear needs towards the definition of symbiotic industrial frameworks, 
 
31 Centobelli, P. et al. 2020. Designing business models in circular economy: A systematic literature review and research agenda. Buss. Strategy and the Env.. 51 
ISO 14040:2006 on Environmental Management, ISO 14041: 1998 on Life cycle assessment.  
32 https://eplca.jrc.ec.europa.eu/   
33 https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/material-circularity-indicator  54 
https://www.carbontrust.com/resources   
34 MOZART (HE GA 101058450), TORNADO (HE GA 101091944), ANALYST (HE GA 101138548) projects.  
35 IRIS – The international SSbD network. https://IRIs-ssbd.eu/   
36 Jayakodi, S. et al. Circular Economy Business Model in the Construction Industry: A Systematic Review. Buildings, 14(2), 379. 2024  
37 Agyekum, K et al. Challenges to implementing CE: empirical evidence among built environment firms in Ghana. Int. J. of Construction Mngmnt,2024 59 
Charef, R. 2024. A Digital Framework for the Implementation of the CE in the Construction Sector: Expert Opinions. Sustainability, 16(14), 5849.  
38 EC DG for Research and Innovation, Breque, M. et al. 2021. Industry 5.0: towards a sustainable, human-centric and resilient European industry. 61 
H2020: AI4REGIO (GA 952003), COLLABORATE (GA 820767), HuMan (GA 723737), PRODUCTIVE4.0 (GA 737459)  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 11 of 41  
where knowledge sharing and adaptive learning solutions support personalized competence development, under the 
Operator4.0 paradigm39. However, there is a lack of structured approaches to facilitate those technologies adoption by 
existing workforce, with limited digital skills (from architects/engineers to operators)63. Skilling opportunities for novel 
technologies are needed for a wide adoption and specific initiatives have arisen recently (Didactic Factories)64, but are 
still far from maturity (TRL5).  
Beyond SoA: BIOGEMSE will entail a deep understanding of the market landscape by identifying target markets 
and different needs to make a significant impact, thanks to the comprehensive value chain approach provided by 
key players in the sector [RIN, ACC, VER]. New economically viable and environmentally sustainable BMs will 
be defined for each bio-intelligent product developed [RIN], to enable the new practices related to supply chains 
as well as effective exploitation of innovations. The new BMs approaches will consi der LCSA inputs (RIA5), 
regulatory aspects, ownership and liability, as well as expected revenue, expenses and cash flow. The market 
potential of each bio -intelligent product will be investigated to establish the roadmap for exploitation aiming at 
EU-wide replication. IPR strategies will be also defined to maximize exploitation potential. A results maturing 
roadmap, from TRL 6 (end of BIOGEMSE project) to market, will be considered as well as replication activities 
through engaging primary producers, indust ry associations, potential customers and other stakeholders. Finally, 
the project will produce training material to address the future workforce needs, complemented by the extension 
of the developed tools for training applications [EIT], as well as offering partners existing Didactic Factories (DF) 
as test-and-feel training facilities, for those validated technologies at TRL6.   
The progress beyond the SoA  in the different 
technologies mentioned, will deliver a unique 
approach that will facilitate the wider adoption of 
bio-intelligent manufacturing approaches (digital 
and sustainable), benefitting the EU Twin 
Transition of the manufacturing industry, and 
impacting a wide range of critical value chains and 
their main stakeholders, especially in the 
construction sector. In an era characterised by 
mounting environmental concerns, the 
manufacturing industry needs to drive a 
“Regenerative Manufacturing” approach as a 
strategy that not only tries to lower the ecological 
footprint of production but also seeks to restore and 
rejuvenate ecosystems. The BIOGEMSE approach 
will deliver a set of advanced manufacturing tools 
aligned with the regenerative manufacturing Figure 2. BIOGEMSE Research and Innovation areas. concept and oriented towards 
delivering bio -intelligent products. BIOGEMSE will provide bio -inspired, digitised and green manufacturing 
technologies for circular bio-based materials use in products’ agile desig n, zero -defects and sustainable 
manufacturing. Complementarily, an interoperable digital framework (incl. a decentralised DPP and IoT 
connectivity) will ensure agile and robust data management along the value chain (Figure 2). This technologicaldriven 
strategy will set up the basis for sustainable BMs. In addition, specific education and skills strategies leveraged on 
the partners involvement on training and skilling initiatives (e.g. DF) will contribute to overcome a doption barriers 
for bio-intelligent manufacturing approaches in the sector. Overall, the combination of this portfolio of solutions will 
meet the uncovered needs of a growing EU manufacturing ecosystem, thus triggering breakthrough innovation to 
harness important business opportunities in strat egic manufacturing markets such as construction or architecture. 
Complementarily to the market analysis (trends, needs and opportunities, fully delivered in section 2.2.), a first 
analysis of the IP landscape has been made to guarantee Freedom-to-Operate (FTO)40. The analysis showed positive 
results as findings do not endanger the project FTO and project results are mainly built over the partners’ own IPR.  
§PRJ-OBJ-PO§#
1.2  Methodology #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#   
 
39 Romero et al. 2016. Towards an Operator 4.0: a human-centric perspective on the 4th industrial revolution technologies, Int. Conf. on Computers & Ind. Eng. 
63 Kaasinen, E. Et al. 2020. Empowering and engaging industrial workers with Operator 4.0 solutions. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 139 64 Different 
associated concepts have surged, such as Teaching Factories, Learning Factories or Didactic Factories.  
40 Already provided within the SoA assessment  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 12 of 41  
1.2.1 BIOGEMSE concept and overall methodology 
BIOGEMSE has been conceived to advance on achieving the 
biological transformation of the European manufacturing 
industry, based on the combination of circular, sustainable 
and safe bio-based materials, highly efficient manufacturing 
processes and advanced digital tools. The concept combines 
innovation in terms of enabling the adoption of bio-based 
materials in construction and unveiling their potential 
through specific design -driven performance optimisation 
(GD for biomimicking approaches fostering extra 
functionalities), only possible through advanced 
manufacturing technology ( AM through robotic 3D 
printing). Principles derived from biological Figure 3. BIOGEMSE targeted bio-intelligent functionalities. models (Figure 3) will 
be integrated in the design, and manufacturing will be supported by digital technologies (simulation, DTs, AI, 
monitoring and control tools, DPP) to provide bio -intelligent functionalities to the construction modules. 
Furthermore, followin g a modular approach will ensure adaptability to different architectural scenarios while 
increasing production efficiency through customised mass -production schemes, boosting industrialised 
manufacturing of multifunctional components for the construction s ector. BIOGEMSE will enable this ambitious 
approach through a sound and agile methodology suited to the manufacturing of construction products, considering 
the sector´s specific BMs archetypes, value chain dynamics and incentives selection for cooperation.  The goal is to 
revolutionize the building and construction sector by significantly increasing  the presence of industrially 
manufactured bio-based components while preserving architectural freedom, aesthetics, sustainability and safety.  
Overall, BIOGEMSE is being built onto 4 interrelated technical Pillars (Figure 4) grouping the following (8) technical 
developments: i) bio-based materials processing technologies to unveil their true potential (adapting mixing and 
curing processes coupled with active additives); ii) innovative product-design strategies mimicking natural structures 
and mechanisms based on computational GD methods, considering bio-intelligent performance, bio-based materials 
properties and AM potentialities; iii) novel advanced HW and SW solutions for robotic 3D printing enabling the 
processing of highly-accurate, -complex, and -quality bio-intelligent products supported by advanced physics based 
simulations, monitoring and control solutions delivering predictive, corrective and self -learning capabilities; iv) a 
IDS/RAMI4.0/IIRA -compliant digital infrastructure, supporting BIOGEMSE digital tools and services provisioning; 
it will be aligned with standardised industry initiatives, establishing any needed IoT connectors and gateways to 
guarantee ET/IT/OT convergence, and ensuring product and process data integration, enabling multidirectional 
dataflows boosting  data sharing along the product lifecycle by connecting all hierarchy levels and assets; v) dynamic 
DTs (of processes and products) by promoting the holistic integration of advanced simulations and retrieved real -
world data along the products lifecycle, as baseline tools for product design optimisation strategies; vi) advanced 
product monitoring tools (AI-supported algorithms, IoT-empowered sensing and monitoring,) to trace products status 
along the use phase and feed with data the ML/AI algorithms to optimize BIOGEMSE products design and functional 
performance (long-term self-learning strategies); vii) SSbD methodological framework deployment for the evaluation 
and assessment of sustainability, safety and circularity to support decision-making along the products lifecycle, and; 
viii) DPP tool following data standardised approaches to be easily integrable with DT solutions and working as a 
trusted and secured relevant -product information digital representation, oriented to coordinate business operations 
and decisions among manufacturing value chain actors.  
In relation to the implementation of the methodological approach, BIOGEMSE has defined a plan based on agile 
management methodologies, defining specific milestones (MS) along the project duration ( see section 3) as crucial 
point for decision -making. The BIOGEMSE proposition is to start working in parallel on the 4 different Pillars 
(WP3,4,5) that converge into a technology maturing and upscaling activity (WP6) prior to the real -world validation 
at the SLLs (WP7). This rationale enhances prioritizing cross-functional collaboration and continuous improvement 
with specific scheduled test sprints to validate the technology developments in specific cycles of planning, execution 
and validation. Considering the number and typology of technologies being developed within the project, following 
a traditional waterfall approach would result in bottlenecks during the project execution. Thus, breaking the project 
into iterative phases and incremental efforts will reduce the risk associated to delays, underperformance and lack of 
alignment with industrial needs. In this regard, BIOGEMSE plans 6 key milestones ( see Table 3.1d), some of them 
associated to the main expected reporting periods -RP- (M9 -technical review-, M18, M36 & M42), leading to a final 
validation stage (M31-42). Regarding the outreach, standardisation and exploitation (WP8-9), BIOGEMSE delivers 
a set of syner gic actions. The project methodology also plans assessment activities through the inclusion of SSbD 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 13 of 41  
framework (including LSCA) activities to monitor different impact domains as well as market analysis to develop 
sustainable BMs. The wide replication potential of BIOGEMSE bio -intelligent products is ensured through 3 very 
different climatic conditions and building typologies (SLLs), ensuring optimal performance across different needs.  
  
Figure 4. BIOGEMSE conceptual framework and relation among Pillars and SLLs.  
Moreover, BIOGEMSE will deploy a skilling strategy to strengthen EU’s workforce in relation to bio -intelligent 
manufacturing and bio-based materials adoption through online training and educational contents as well as opening 
access to partners Didactic Factories. In addition, BIOGEMSE proposes a sound methodology towards 
nontechnological limiting factors by addressing: i) Knowledge, advanced manufacturing technologies and bio -
intelligent products will be developed, tested and validated (SLLs); ii) Transfer, a comprehensive skills strategy 
(materials, courses, etc.) will be realised (WP8-9) for workforce training, complementing the project’s OS approach 
(see S1.2.10&.11); iii) Harmonize by contributing to existing standards and working on the development of new ones; 
iv) Protect and exploit  by pursuing IP generation and protection and sustainable business models deployment; v) 
Engage, by deploying a community building strategy for targeted stakeholders (S2.2.1). Finally, BIOGEMSE is being 
conceived for the materialisation of the Cluster 4 Key Strategy Orientation (KSO) A, C, D, as described in S2.1.3. In 
order to implement the BIOGEMSE approach, a coherent working plan and an adequate management structure, 
bodies, and procedures have been developed (see S3). To accomplish the key deve lopments described above, 
BIOGEMSE leverages the acquired know -how from key past and running H2020/HE EU projects ( e.g., FoF , MiE, 
CBE, see S1.2.3). BIOGEMSE concept is based around the following 4 key technical Pillars.  
PILLAR 1: SUSTAINABLE, CIRCULAR AND SAFE BIO-BASED MATERIALS (WP2,4)  
BIOGEMSE fosters alignment with high -level EU objectives by proposing an integrated approach towards 
manufacturing and construction sustainability, safety and circularity, enabled by the use of bio-based materials 
adapted to the requirements of advanced manufacturing technologies, supported by a holistic SSbD framework (inc. 
LCSA). Creating novel, bio-based, bio-intelligent, sustainable and fully recyclable (circular) modular construction 
products able to compete with conventional, resource -intensive and fossil -dependant ones, is highly challe nging, 
considering how well established (standards, regulations, guidelines, procedures) these traditional materials are on a 
global scale, and the higher costs (lack of economies of scale, inexistence of needed value chains for local symbiosis, 
etc.) for novel materials implementation. Nevertheless, this ambition also creates a unique opportunity as linear 
economy models of traditional construction materials and products are incompatible with the current social and 
political demands for sustainability and circularity 41  by directly addressing its source ( e.g., circularity and 
sustainability by design, replacing fossil -dependant raw materials with fully recyclable bio-based options)67. ▪ 
BIOGEMSE proposes a holistic approach for the evaluation and assessment of sustainability, safety and circularity 
(SSbD) of bio-based materials (and bio-intelligent products) focusing on their entire lifecycle [IRE], and considering 
multiple categories of environmental impacts, thus preventing potential problem-shifting between stages and impact 
categories. This will be achieved by applying a SSbD approach to quantify the environmental impacts and risks of 
BIOGEMSE products, combined with improved design strategies ( GD-supported) and multi -objective decision -
making tools (PILLAR 2). The effort to maximize the sustainability of the manufactured products will not only focus 
on the upstream process impacts (e.g., using bio-based and recycled raw materials instead of fossilintensive resources 
 
41 Jayakodi, S., Senaratne, S., & Perera, S. “Circular Economy Business Model in the Construction Industry: A Systematic Review”. Buildings, 2024, 14(2). 67 
Adams, K. et al. CE in construction: current awareness, challenges and enablers. Proc. of civil engineers-waste and resource management, 2017.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 14 of 41  
and relying on minimal materials-consumption manufacturing techniques - PILLAR 3), but also during the use phase 
(i.e., CO2 and pollutants adsorption, temperature control, etc.) through bio-inspired functionalities and at EoL (i.e., 
fully recyclable materials). Furthermore, in order to ensure that novel materials do not pose any risks for human health 
and the environment, LCA methodology will be combined with Hazard and  
  
Safety assessments over their entire lifecycle, as part of the SSbDAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 approach 
[IRE]. The iterative application of the  
(re-) design phase and the assessment phase of the SSbD framework may constitute an opportunity for further 
improvement not just during the project but in the long-term when combined with other optimisation tools (PILLAR 
2 & 4). To ensure the reliability and robustness of the achieved results, standardized and  established methodologies 
will be followed (e.g., ILCD handbook, ISO standards 14040:2006 and 14044:2006, EC-JRC SSbD framework, ISO 
12901-2:2014, ISO 12885:2018 ). Furthermore, SoA commercial and open access software and data sources (e.g, 
SimaPro, EcoInv ent, REACH dossiers, etc.) will be employed to analyse the materials, processes and products, 
together with information from simulations [ITA], experimental tests [AIM, IRI, VER] and validation phase at the 
SLLs [ACC, EIT, IRI], undergoing meticulous evaluation of their representativeness, accuracy and reliability.  
▪ Bio-based and circular materials 42 : Geopolymers generated from 
biobased precursors represent a transformative approach to sustainable 
materials, utilizing renewable, plant -based resources to create 
highperformance alternatives with reduced CO 2 emissions by 80% when 
compared to OPC 69,70. Moreover, these geopolymer -based binders offer 
relevant properties when compared with traditional cements, such as high 
mechanical strength and excellent durability. Additionally, they provide 
tailored properties and/or functionalities, depending on the process 
parameters (mixing time, curing temperature and moisture, additives, 
etc.). BIOGEMSE will deliver sustainable and circular binders 
incorporating a large fraction of bio-based waste (>70%, e.g. biomass 
ashes, sludges…) as precursor, allowing the substitution of OPC and  
delivering a bio-based mortar as construction material with a full Figure 5. 
Bio-inspired functionalities delivered by recycling potential [AIM].  materials for the construction sector.  
▪ Material-derived bio -intelligent functionalities  will be provided by the bio-based materials and extended by 
specific designed shapes (PILLAR 2), feasible to be manufactured through the flexibility provided by BIOGEMSE 
AM technologies (PILLAR 3) and supported with the digital tools (PILLAR 4). Geopolymers have already shown 
functional properties such as fire resistance or acoustic insulation properties, due their unique structure, mimicking 
nature mechanisms 71. Furthermore, the addition of specific commer cial bio-based additives will provide new 
functionalities: i) PCMs to improve the thermal efficiency; ii) photocatalytic TiO2 particles for pollutant degradation 
and surfaces self-cleaning, and iii) biochar for CO 2 adsorption. The combination of geopolymers, specific additives 
and tailored process parameters for AM will enhance the BIOGEMSE materials-derived bio-intelligent functionalities 
(Figure 5) [AIM]. These process parameters will be optimized for AM processing and upscaled for industry -scale 
usage [AIM, VER]. Furthermore, the upscaling of these processes for the industry -scale fabrication of project bio -
intelligent products will be executed and validated (SLLs) [VER, IRI, ACC].   
▪ Sustainable manufacturing technologies : AM significantly reduces materials and energy consumption, waste, 
costs and construction time while increasing design possibilities and quality. In BIOGEMSE, bio-based materials 
processing parameters and processes (dosing, mixing, curing) will be tailored for AM processes [AIM, VER], mainly 
through adapting extrudability and rheology properties, aiming at the best final bio-intelligent product possible.  
PILLAR 2: AI GENERATIVE DESIGN (GD) STRATEGIES BIOMIMICKING NATURE (WP2,3,6)  
The importance of advanced products design is underscored by its potential to break away from traditional business 
models. The construction sector needs a new wave of redesign -enabled manufactured products, considering novel 
advanced functionalities (i.e. thermal and acoustics, pollutants degradation, aesthetics, etc), to meet societal demands 
(SDGs and NEB) and take advantage of new business opportunities. By considering the entire lifecycle of a product, 
 
42 Existing certifications (USDA BioPreferred, Okbiobased, Karibati), define bio-based products as those containing 20-95% material from biological origin. 
69 GEOPOLAR (national R&D project, IN852A 2018/44, 2018-2020); AMBIANCE (HE-2022 GA 101058406) GEOS23d (national R&D project, 2022). 70 
R.Pena et al. Life cycle assessment of new construction materials based in geopolymers obtained from waste, Life Cycle Management Conference (2017) 71 
Cong, P ., & Cheng, Y . 2021. Advances in geopolymer materials: A comprehensive review. J. of Traffic and Transportation Engineering, 8(3), 283-314. 72 W. 
Liao, et al. Generative AI design for building structures. Automation in Construction, vol. 157, p. 105187, 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105187 73 B. A. 
Jasperson et al. A dual neural network approach to topology optimization for thermal-electromagnetic device design. CAD, vol. 168, 2024.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 15 of 41  
designers, architects and engineers may promote the application of sustainable and functional materials and the 
implementation of modular structures, boosting sector industrialisation and, therefore, competitiveness, while 
promoting circularity (easy disassembly, reuse, recycling, etc.). BIOGEMSE will contribute to this design -centric 
transformation of manufacturing through the research of innovative generative AI-based design. Optimization based 
on virtual models has been gradually gaining tract ion in rece nt years 72,73. This approach integrates advances in 
material science, manufacturing technologies, and structural modelling, addressing the complexity of multi-scale and 
multi-physics structural material systems. Advanced optimization methodologies combined with structural modelling 
tools allow for the efficient exploration and enhancement of design performances, enabling faster innovation cycles 
and reducing the cost of experimental fabrication and characterization tests (PILLAR 1 & 3). Traditionally, desig n 
optimization involves minimizing a cost function using techniques such as the steepest descent method, which  
  
requires multiple problem-solving iterations for each tentative case. However, alternative approaches, including Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
ROMs -Reduced Order Models - (SSL PGD, sPGD) 43  or ML meta -modelling techniques 44  are examples of 
breakthrough techniques which are powering the use of generative design (GD) optimization in modelling software.   
▪ In BIOGEMSE, computational GD methods and tools  
[ITA] will be applied for the design and optimization of novel 
modular and bio -inspired building components [RIN] that 
mimic natural structures, enhancing their shape -derived 
biointelligent properties. In particular, the design of modular 
bio-inspired AM structures with tailored performance will be 
based on a multi-criteria optimization methodology 
(MCDS). This methodology considers various criteria while 
accounting for AM-derived manufacturing constraints and 
specific bio -intelligent features of the demons trators. 
Specifically, the numerical approach will be built on virtual 
multi-scale and multi -physics models  to replicate 
biointelligent behaviours such as mechanical strength, 
thermal or acoustic insulation or increased surface and/or 
slope for radiation absorption, etc. (Figure 6) Additionally, 
buildability assessment  will be performed through a 
simulation methodology (workflow) considering timerelated 
material properties (associated to curing process), providing 
additional information. AI-based generative models  (e.g. 
GANs, VAEs) will be explored to generate novel Figure 6. Bio-inspired functionalities delivered by the design.  design alternatives 
by learning from existing design datasets, hence reducing the need for exhaustive Finite Elements (FE) simulations. 
Moreover, Deep Learning (DL) techniques will be employed to speed up the analysis process by creating surrogate 
models that approximate FE simulations. Data input from experimental tests and guidelines from MCDS will provide 
further inputs for optimizing the design and manufacturing phases. In the optimization process, which considers 
various design alternatives to enable a comprehensive exploration of possibilities, a solution can be determined either 
by startin g from an unrestricted design space or by guiding the solution through certain constraints to serve a 
candidate. High-level optimizations, including parametric optimizations, will further refine the design, leading to 
smaller experimental validation and design cycles and to the selection of the best candidate geometries for 
engineers/architects to validate and transform into detailed engineering blueprints to be manufactured and tested.   
Following the described methodology for AI-supported GD strategies biomimicking nature, BIOGEMSE researches 
innovative building components (façade and roofing panels) with enhanced bio-intelligent properties, contributing to 
the advancement of the construc tion industry. These designs will be implemented at SSLs ensuring their feasibility 
and performance in real-world applications and further allowing new design loops for future applications.  
PILLAR  3:  ADV ANCED  
BIOLOGISATION (WP4,6)  
MANUFACTURING  APPROACHES  TOWARDS  PRODUCTION 
Manufacturing industry biologisation 45 incorporates principles of biological systems into the production processes 
and manufactured products. This approach pulls the adaptability, efficiency and resilience found in nature to create 
 
43 V . Zambrano, et al., TWINKLE: A digital-twin-building kernel for real-time computer-aided engineering. SoftwareX, vol. 11, p. 100419, 2020.  
44 N. Escribano et al. Pymetamodels: A Python Package for Metamodeling and Design Automation. SoftwareX, vol. 26, 2024, Art. no. 101735.  
45 Biologisation as defined by the whitepaper from ManuFUTURE “Biointelligent Manufacturing. 2022”, the replacement from non-bio to bio (e.g. of a material).  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 16 of 41  
more efficient but also more sustainable manufacturing systems. BIOGEMSE vectorises this trend aiming at a 
comprehensive and coherent integration of bio-based materials and complex bio -inspired AI-enabled designs for 
manufacturing construction components, representing a significant advancement in sustainable and high-performing 
production technologies. One of the key challenges in enabling the use of bio-based materials is the adaptation of 
current manufacturing technologies to effectively process these mat erials (different properties and behaviours), 
without losing their superior capabilities and performance. Therefore, significant research efforts are required to 
develop and implement new Additive Manufacturing systems. Focused on industry biologisation, B IOGEMSE will 
take advantage of different advanced manufacturing concepts to adapt AM to the needs of the construction 
components. The project will leverage on already existing knowledge for zero -defect manufacturing (ZDM), 
extensively investigated in the last few years due to the uprise of the Industry 4.0 concept. BIOGEMSE will analyze 
and adapt these strategies to properly respond to specific research challenges in relation with the 3D printing of 
cementitious materials for building very complex shapes, extending their approach by including sustainability, safety 
and circularity. This approach will be complemented by a digital framework capable of enabling an efficient and 
reliable data provisioning and exploitation (PILLAR 4). Indeed, the project targets to revolutionise the versatility, 
flexibility and efficiency of AM systems for the processing of high-quality bio-intelligent products:  
  
▪ Novel dexterous printing head enabling bio-intelligent products manufacturingAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 
- 14/05/2025: In BIOGEMSE, a novel robot head incorporating a polar-axis compatible with the existing robot arm will be 
developed [VER] for improving the manufacturing flexibility to cope with very complex shapes (as those enabled by 
PILLAR 2) without compromising the accuracy and precision ( Figure 7 ) 46 . BIOGEMSE relies in the kinetics 
redundancy (6+ degrees of freedom) provided by this extra polar axis to augment dexterity that can be exploited to 
achieve several objectives (i.e. obstacle avoidance and 
constrained motions, improvement of manipulability and local 
or global optimization of generic performance indices). 
Moreover, an advanced printhead for 2component (2K) 
materials (mortar and accelerator) will be developed, enabling 
printing both materials at the same time with only 1 printing 
head further enabling the exploration of ultra -fast hardening 
[VER]. This approach allows for changing material properties 
throughout the printing process, by con trolling various 
additives, in turn setting the bio-based material on demand. 
Furthermore, when combined with material active behavior, it 
will deliver material-derived active bio-intelligent functionalities. Further, HW modularity and  
plug-and-play capabilities will be promoted to favour quick Figure 7. Redundancy resolution inspired in nature compliant device 
changes, including BIOGEMSE monitoring solutions. mechanisms (i.e humans’ elbow).  
▪ Extrudability and buildability modeling: Extrudability and buildability are critical aspects to consider for the 
optimal manufacturing of complex bioinspired designs by 3D printing. Cementitious materials, and particularly 
geopolymers, have a complex rheological behaviour that restricts their pro cessability. In BIOGEMSE, constitutive 
model selection and adjustment to the fresh material rheological behaviour will be done based on experimental 
characterization tests and considering the variability of bio-based material properties [ITA, AIM]. High fidelity 
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) models will be built for the extrusion nozzles used at the lab scale to initially 
validate the models with the experimental results [ITA]. The full-fidelity complex physical models will be simplified 
by reducing the number of equations (or equivalently the tensor rank) needed to perform simulations, thereby allowing 
for faster computations without compromising the model accuracy. This step is crucial for integrating physics-based 
knowledge into the DT [AIM, ITA, COR]. To this aim, advanced DL techniques could be additionally explored to 
create surrogate models that approximate the multi-scale CFD models47. For that, a design of experiments (DoE) will 
be executed covering different nozzle types, material properties and processing conditions [AIM, VER]. Results will 
be employed as a dataset for creating ROMs that can be used as subrogate models in decision s upport systems or 
optimization routines. Furthermore, buildability of the bio -inspired products will be also assessed by process 
modelling (hardening behaviour in relation to stiffness and plasticity) and simulation, at two scales [ITA]: i) at 
geometrical feature scale (e.g. trabecular structures) by analysing representative volume elements by FEA to 
determine local buildability constraints and relate to the GD approach (PILLAR 2); and ii) at full component building 
 
46 E. Ferrentino et al. 2021. Globally optimal redundancy resolution with dynamic programming for robot planning: a ROS implementation. Robotics 2021  
47 Gunasegaram, Dayalan R., et al. Towards developing multiscale-multiphysics models and their surrogates for DT of metal AM. Additive Manufact. 2021 79 
Nguyen-Van, V ., et al., Modelling of 3D concrete printing process: A perspective on material and structural simulations. Additive manufacturing, 2023  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 17 of 41  
scale by employing FEA models to assess the risk of plastic failure and elastic buckling. Overall, a simulation 
workflow will be developed based on these models (Figure 8)79,48 to support the manufacturing of the bio-intelligent 
products when upscaled to an industry scale for the SLLs.  
▪ Digital Twin of the AM process: In turn, an integrated intelligent DT will be developed, as a sophisticated 
multifaceted digital representation of the AM process, integrating various information streams, from design, process 
parameters and materials properties to tailored physics -based simulations and ML models [COR]. The DT will 
facilitate real -time monitoring, simulation of what -if scenarios and predictive capabilities. For that, the DT will 
implement methods for seamless integration of heterogeneous da ta sources from different spatio -temporal scales, 
including IoT data from process monitoring, physics-based metrics and (inline & offline) quality metrics [COR, ITA, 
IRI, AIM, VER]. Moreover, pipelines for data pre -processing49  and multi -modal data fusion techniques 82will be 
employed for signal feature extraction and correlation analysis [COR, IRI]. Finally, the DT will integrate the 
outcomes of the ML algorithms for zero-defect manufacturing (next point). AAS framework for structuring static and 
dynamic data associated with products and processes and resources is foreseen, also to benefit the DPP tools.  ▪ 
Online monitoring and adaptive control algorithms towards zero defects manufacturing (ZDM): BIOGEMSE will 
deploy multivariate spectroscopy (including Machine Vision -MV-) techniques for data processing) approaches for 
developing an advanced monitoring system (NIR -based) suited for the requirements of cementitious 3D printing 
(detection of bubbles, scratches, humidity, etc.) [IR I]. The objective is to define, analyse, and control the 
manufacturing process by measuring Critical Control Parameters (CCPs) that affect product variability, such as  
  
humidity or temperature, and conducting real -time inline 
monitoring of analytical Critical Quality Attributes 
(CQAs), such as defects in products ( e.g., bubbles, 
scratches), instead of post-production quality testing. This 
will be enabled by integrating real -time monitoring tools 
into the AM system. BIOGEMSE will be backed on the 
online monitoring to deploy Zero -Defect Manufacturing 
(ZDM) strategies. Indeed, online self -adaptative control 
strategies [IRI, COR, ITA, VER], based on AI, data 
analytics and DT will enhance real -time closed -loop 
control and process -deviations correction through process Figure 8. BIOGEMSE AM approach towards production 
parameter tuning (i.e. temperature, extrusion, robot biologisation.  
trajectories, etc), ensuring high quality production standards. This control model will be integrated within VER´s 
system. Process and product data will be link to DT to obtain a process model that will be continuously updated, 
based on the gained knowledge from the manufacturing processes (cognition). Data-driven pattern recognition (mean 
failures) will provide feedback to the engineering (updating design models), based on experience.  
PILLAR 4: DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND DATA ASSETS SUPPORTING BIO-INTELLIGENT 
PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING (WP2, 4, 5 & 6)  
Smart manufacturing involves complex production and business ecosystems, requiring an intensive systems 
crosscollaboration and data streamlining along manufacturing phases (design, engineering, fabrication and use). In 
such a context, data availability, in teroperability and connectivity are major enablers for efficiency, quality and 
optimisation. Digital representation of manufacturing assets, including products and processes, through the usage of 
AAS metamodels to generate standardised digital representati ons ( DT), integrating other type of data (such as 
sustainability or safety related information -PILLAR 1), eases decision-making under a holistic approach (not only 
at manufacturing but also at use and EoL stages). Moreover, it eases the cross -exchange of information with other 
value chain stakeholders when incorporated to data -sharing tools, as the DPP, a main enabler for trust among 
business-level stakeholders in a circular economy framework. BIOGEMSE research will focus on 3 digital areas:  ▪ 
A modular, interoperable and service -oriented digital infrastructure [COR]:  BIOGEMSE will deploy a digital 
platform acting as a centralized hub, integrating and coordinating the various digital tools and technologies used 
throughout the project ( Figure 9-right). BIOGEMSE will implement an end -to-end digital framework adopting a 
product-service-systems scheme, boosting data sharing and leading to a vertical and horizontal integration using best 
of breeds European technologies for manufacturing excellence. Intero perability is a must to achieve a solid 
connectivity. The different data streams will feed adaptive, secure, and on-demand services, based on RAMI 4.0. To 
 
48 Khan, S. et al., Numerical modelling and simulation for extrusion-based 3D concrete printing: The underlying physics, potential, and challenges.2022.  
49 Kumar, Ganesh, et al. "Data harmonization for heterogeneous datasets: a systematic literature review." Applied Sciences 11.17 (2021): 8275. 82 
Gao, Jing, et al. "A survey on deep learning for multimodal data fusion." Neural Computation 32.5 (2020): 829-864.  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 18 of 41  
efficiently manage the big data volumes from industrial processes, BIOGEMSE will deploy high-performance cloud 
and on-premise servers, storage, and data processing units leveraging on key technologies (e.g. Kubernetes, Docker, 
Ceph, ROCE, KVM, OpenZFS, etc .), delivering cloud middleware and data warehouse security and real -time data 
high-availability through distributed resources (redundancy, min. latency, recovery capability) for advanced decision-
making processes, optimization of resource allocation, and increased efficiency.   
▪ IoT monitoring systems and sensing solutions for inline quality assessment and products performance sensing 
[IRI]: To ensure the digital continuity between the digital platform and the shopfloor, BIOGEMSE will rely on IoT 
data connectors (based on well-established standards, e.g. MQTT) between the assets and middleware. BIOGEMSE 
will leverage monitoring systems (PILLAR 3) to provide key information on process and products status. For that, a 
multi-range spectroscopic and a machine-vision platform coupled with Machine Learning hybrid-ensemble modelling 
for data fusion will be employed, aiming smart sensing systems50. Based on real-time data provided by the monitoring 
system in relation to the CQAs of the manufactured parts, CPPs will be modified in real -time, based on adaptive 
models to ensure optimal quality (under a ZDM approach) of the manufactured product. For th is, IRI will leverage 
their VISUM Fusion Multirange Spectroscopic Platform84 for easy model development, training and deployment. 
Moreover, for product performance tracking (during use phase), off -the-shelf compatible sensors will be deployed 
and the information fused with the spectroscopy and imaging data, correlating production q uality parameters with 
product performance. Devices data will be collected in the Scadalytics Data Management Platform 51 (Figure 9-
left), acting as a communication interface and API layer for data integration from monitoring, sensing and business 
layers (SCADA/ERP, PLC). Interoperability among IRI´s and COR´s platforms will be ensured.  ▪ AAS-based DT 
and DPP for bio-intelligent products and processes digitalization [ITA, AIM, VER, IRI, COR,  
RIN, ACC, IRE]: BIOGEMSE’s digital infrastructure will facilitate the integration and interoperability of digital  
  
assets by using AAS as a standardized interface for the digital representationAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 
14/05/2025 of the main processes, assets and products, following Platform Industrie 4.0 guidelines. The AAS metamodels 
will enable the creation of AAS compliant -DT which will be fed with static and dynamic information from 
manufacturing processes as well as other systems ( IoT-based approach). BIOGEMSE will develop AI -supported DT 
performing predictive capabilities in relation to performance, quality or durability. Prediction will be enabled through 
the use of ML algorithms 52 and/or customised deep learning architectures 53. Robustness and reliability of predictive 
capabilities will be assessed through different techniques: sensitivity analysis, statistical methods -confidence intervals, 
Bayesian inference 54  and probabilistic graphical models (PGM) 55 . Transfer learning techniques 90 combined with 
experimental data will be explored to minimise model development and training. The predictive models will be exported 
in a dockerized form and deployed in a cloud architecture to enable real-time inference. DT-driven optimisation will be 
employed to upscale manufacturing processes and finetune bio -intelligent products performance prior to their 
deployment at the SSLs. Finally, a DPP tool will be developed for bio-intelligent products [COR], benefitting from 
DT data structuring, generating a decentralized service for accessing key product data by different value chain 
stakeholders, boosting sectorial acceptance of the Circular Economy. Critical information will be included under a 
business and regulatory perspe ctive within each bio -intelligent product DPP. The DPP solution will be built on an 
interoperable self-sovereign identity (SSI) technology (e.g. Hyperledger Aries AIP 1.0/2.0), including decentralized 
identifiers and verifiable credentials. This will boost value chain trust and ensure compliancy with EU standards and all 
relevant EU Identity Ecosystems (e.g. eIDAS 2.0 or EUDI wallet infrastructure). User-friendly interfaces will promote 
customer accessibility, enhancing societal readiness and bio-based & bio-intelligent products acceptance.  
 
50 Vijay Kotu, Bala Deshpande, Chapter 2 - Data Mining Process, Predictive Analytics and Data Mining, Morgan Kaufmann, 17-36, 2015. 84 
https://www.iris-eng.com/project/applied-photonics/  
51 https://www.iris-eng.com/project/data-management-platform/   
52 Ke, Guolin, et al. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree."Advances in neural information processing system 30 2017.  
53 Xu, Jiawen, et al. "A review on AI for smart manufacturing: Deep learning challenges and solutions."Applied Sciences 2022.  
54 Chen, R., et al. Ontology-driven learning of bayesian network for causal inference and quality assurance in AM. IEEE Robotics & Automation Letters 2021.  
55 Ademujimi, Toyosi, and Vittaldas Prabhu. Digital twin for training bayesian networks for fault diagnostics of manufacturing systems.Sensors 2022. 90 
Xia, Min, et al. Intelligent fault diagnosis of machinery using DT-assisted deep transfer learning. Reliability Engineering & System Safety 2021.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 19 of 41  
  
Figure 9. High-level digital conceptual approach. Left: IoT approach for data gathering, fusion & processing through the multirange 
spectroscopic and Scadalytics platforms. Right: BIOGEMSE RAMI 4.0 compliant digital platform architecture.  
1.2.2  BIOGEMSE Smart living-labs (SLLs)  
The adaptable bio -intelligent, sustainable and complex -shape modular 
construction products (façade and roofing panels) developed at TRL6 in 
BIOGEMSE will be implemented in different SLLs (Figure 10). This will 
serve to demonstrate and validate the bio -intelligent performance at 
realworld living laboratories while also demonstrating the potential of the 
modularity for easy -to-install and cost -efficient construction. The SLLs 
will be located in 3 different European climatic conditions: Atlantic, 
Mediterranean and Scandinavian, fostering a EU-wide replicability. These 
locations will also cover different urban environments and building 
typologies (residential, tertiary building and urban infrastructure) posing 
different requirements, in terms of installation, safety, supplies, etc. 
Overall, the needs derived (clime and typologies) cover relevant aspects 
of BIOGEMSE’s innovations, including different air and climate Figure 10. BIOGEMSE SLLs concept. conditions 
(pollution, humidity, tª or solar radiation) and different building requirements such as size, aesthetics, acoustic 
insulation, pollutants removal, fire resistance, thermal efficiency or maintenance-related needs (e.g.  
  
cleaning). BIOGEMSE will cover these requirements by developing Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 
14/05/2025different kind of modular products (small façade panels, large façade panels and roofing panels) that will be 
installed in situ , considering their needs in relation to the other building or urban elements/components [ACC] 56 . 
Moreover, different sensors will be deployed throughout the different SLLs, aiming to collect real-time in-field data for 
further validation of the bio -intelligent performance, as well as to provide feedback to the design and manufacturing 
stages of deve loped models and prototypes [IRI]. Monitored data will also feed the sustainability impact assessment 
[IRE] as well as the DPPs, supporting the promotion of the Circular Economy within the sector. The design -freedom 
provided by AM will also enhance cocreation approaches where architects and engineers, municipalities and end-users 
(citizens) could innovate together.   
Table 1. Overview of BIOGEMSE Smart Living Labs (SLLs).  
Smart Living Lab 1:  Residential building  Location:  Madrid (Spain)   
Environmental conditions : Mediterranean climate, mild, rainy (wet) winters and warm, sunny summers. 
Reference site for challenges in terms of thermal insulation and evaporative cooling performance.  
Functionalities: i) Thermal efficiency & self -conditioning, ii) organisms fixation, iii) acoustic insulation & iv) 
aesthetics.  
 
56 EIT will manage the local installation in the Gothenburg SSL with local providers while under the supervision and support from ACC. 92 
KPIs will be monitored at the Use Cases through specific sensing, testing and lifecycle assessment methodologies implementation.  
   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 20 of 41  
SSL description: This demonstrator aims to validate BIOGEMSE solutions for 
the residential housing environment. For that, small bio -intelligent façade 
panels (of around 1,5x1,5m) will be built using AM, assembled on a modular 
building and validated. This modular approach will facilitate the installation 
process while allowing to increase the design freedom by playing with the sizes 
and geometries of the panels for aesthetic purposes (aiming at double curvature 
panels, a long -time architectural ambition for  cementitious-like materials). 
Furthermore, since these panels will be employed for residential buildings, 
improved acoustic insulation through complex structure design and material -
derived properties will be another key functionality to provide,  
increasing residents’ comfort. On the exterior, organism fixation through surface patterning will be enabled, 
fostering natural green façades. Regarding climate conditions for this demonstrator, a specific focus would be on 
improving the thermal insulation of the panels to minimize losses and self-conditioning to reduce cooling demand 
and energy consumption of the building (thermal efficiency). For that purpose, the joint effect of fillers (PCMs) 
and specific complex designs will be required. Overall, the design of this modular bio-intelligent panels will be 
supported by the GD strategy mimicking nature-based structures (i.e. the trabecular structure of shells, the skin 
morphology of elephants and the rough surface patterns of biological soil crust).  
KPIs92: i) 4 small façade panels of 1,5x1,5m will be installed; ii) double curvature shape and rough surface (x5 
compared to traditional cement-based ones, enabling organism fixation); iii) 35%+ increased thermal 
insulation; iv) +30% acoustic performance; v) -20% of energy demand for the temperature control; vi) -60% 
CO2 emissions due the use of bio-based materials in the manufacturing of the components.  
  
Smart Living Lab 2:  Tertiary building  Location:  Galicia (Spain)  
Environmental conditions: Atlantic climatic conditions with heavy rain, windy winters and high humidity  
Functionalities: i) Flame retardancy, ii) air quality improvement, iii) acoustic insulation, & iv) aesthetics & self-
cleaning capabilities.  
SSL description : This demonstrator aims to shows the potential of 
BIOGEMSE solutions to meet the needs of the tertiary building (offices, 
public buildings, hospitals, schools, etc.) and, specifically, the needs of a 
hospital building. For that, large size façade modular panels (up to 3x3m) will 
be built through AM, assembled on a representative façade, tested and 
validated. Main functionalities to consider for this type of building (tertiary 
use – health sector) would be improved flame-retardant properties (to increase 
user safety under emergencies), achieved through material-derived properties, 
further improved by complex internal structural design. Additionally, building 
maintenance will benefit from the self -cleaning properties provided by the 
photocatalytic behaviour of TiO2 additives. These additives will also allow to neutralize pollutants, enhancing air 
quality, which is especially important for meeting the needs of certain patients. Furthermore, increased acoustic 
insulation will be delivered to improve professionals,  patients and visitors’ comfort. Finally, and in alignment 
with the NEB strategy, the architectural aesthetics of this construction will be also a priority.  KPIs92: i) Flame 
retardancy standards compliance (20%+ when compared to traditional panels); ii) large modular façade panels 
(<3x3m) easy to install in relation to other building façade elements; iii) façade cleaning  
  
operations avoidance (100%) during the validation period; iv) Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 
14/05/2025improved aesthetics with external decorative  
patterns; v) +35% acoustic performance; vi) +20% air quality improvement due pollutants absorption (NOx,  
CO2, VOCs); vii) -80% CO2 emissions due the use of bio-based materials in the manufacturing of the 
components.  
  
Smart Living Lab 3:  Urban infrastructure   Location:  Gothenburg (Sweden)  
Environmental conditions: Subarctic climate (Scandinavian), with short and fairly warm summers, but long, 
freezing winters, posing challenges for thermal insulation and freezing hazards for population.   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 21 of 41  
Functionalities: i) Acoustic insulation, ii) thermal efficiency & self-conditioning, iii) organisms fixation & iv) air 
quality improvement.  
SSL description: This demonstrator aims to validate BIOGEMSE solutions 
within the urban environment by targeting an urban element such as a public 
transportation shelter (i.e. bus shelter roof, being a reference case for pollutants 
adsorption/degradation). These elements a re relevant, considering the hard 
conditions during the winter (citizens needs to be under comfort and 
weatherindependent safe conditions). In particular, the roofing component will 
be built (1,5x3m rectangular panels) and assembled on a conventional shelt er 
(compatible with existing models). Main functionalities to consider for this type 
of building (public, urban environment) are improved noise reflection to avoid 
uncomfortable spaces for citizens as well as air quality improvement by traffic pollutants adsorption. 
Furthermore, improvements on organism fixation through surface roughness adjustment will also improve air 
quality and CO 2 capturing, mimicking plant natural mechanisms. Regarding climate conditions for this 
demonstrator, a specific focus will be put on improving thermal efficiency and self-conditioning of the panels to 
maximise the users’ thermal comfort. For this SLL, the combination of different additives (PCMs, biochar and 
TiO2) will be explored, aiming to improve both thermal efficiency and air quality, respectively.   
KPIs92: i) 3 rectangular roofing panels of 3x1,5m will be installed; ii) increased surface roughness (x5 compared 
to traditional cement -based ones, enabling organism fixation); iii) 45%+ increased noise reflection; iv) 
energyfree demand for + -5ºC shelter inner temp erature conditioning due thermal efficiency and self -
conditioning; v) +30% air quality improvement due pollutants absorption (NOx, CO2, VOCs) and CO2 capturing; 
vi) -70% CO2 emissions due the use of bio-based materials in the manufacturing of the components.  
-BIOGEMSE project methodology environment harm assessment:  
BIOGEMSE has defined its methodological approach considering the 6 environmental objectives in EU Taxonomy 
Regulation57 and how to avoid harm (indicating any significant foreseeable impact demanding DNSH assessment): ▪ 
Climate Change mitigation (Y/N): BIOGEMSE has a clear strategy towards CO2 emissions minimization (replacing 
cement) -see EO#2 & EO#3- both in the processes, products and SLLs.   
▪ Climate change adaptation (Y/N): It is about building resilience against extreme events. In this sense, BIOGEMSE 
enables EU-based, resource-optimized & versatile technologies delivering resiliency against disruptive scenarios. ▪ 
The sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources (Y/N): Extending products lifespan and enhancing 
materials and components reuse contributes to protecting water and marine resources.  
▪ The circular economy (CE), including waste prevention and recycling  (Y/N): BIOGEMSE’s circular bio -based 
materials and circular -by-design strategies will boost the realization of the CE in the EU manufacturing sector. ▪ 
Pollution prevention and control to air, water or land  (Y/N): BIOGEMSE approach has a clear focus on defining 
sustainable and minimally polluting processes and products as well as pollutants control/reduction during operation.  
▪ The protection and restoration of biodiversity/ecosystems  (Y/N): By industry rationalization through resource 
reduction, BIOGEMSE aims to limit manufacturing pressure onto natural ecosystems and biodiversity.  
1.2.3  Related national/international research and innovation activities  
BIOGEMSE is rooted in a strong background of partners and other institutions58 research & innovation activities:  
Sustainable, safe & circular bio-based materials  
-AMBIANCE (HE-CL4-TT-01-05) (ITA (co), AIM, COR): Advanced manufacturing of bio-based products for 
urban outdoor applications supported by physics-based computer-aided tools for AM process.  
-BIOMAC (H2020-NMBP-TO-IND) (AIM, ACC): New technologies and solutions (including AM) enabling 
bio-based materials applications in construction, food packaging, electronics and automotive sectors.  
-GEOS23D (CPP2022) (AIM): Novel technologies (alkaline activation of wastes) and AM processes to obtain 
innovative cementitious products with improved properties and adopt green materials in construction.  
-CIRCULESS (HE-CL4-TT-01-42) (AIM, IRE):  Circulating Construction and Demolition mineral waste 
through eco-design, advanced logistics, quality control and digital solutions for the construction market.  
  
-INN-PRESSME (H2020-NMBP-TO-IND) (IRE): Development ofAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
new market-ready functional products from bio -based materials by feedstock conversion supported by data and life 
cycle value chain modelling tools.   
 
57 Article 17 of Regulation (EU) No 2020/852 ('EU Taxonomy Regulation').  
58 Projects highly relevant for BIOGEMSE to be engaged with: H2020 (ENSNARE), HE (NEWwA VE, METAFACTURING, WASTE2BIOCOMP).  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 22 of 41  
Smart manufacturing technologies for zero-defect & quality production  
-BEEYONDERS (HE-CL4-2021-TT-01-12) (ACC (co), ITA): Robotic manufacturing solutions for different 
construction scenarios endowed by AI, automation and digitisation of the manufacturing technologies.   
-EXPLOIT4INNOMAT (HE-CL4-2022-RES-01-20) (IRI): Monitoring solutions for the design, and validation 
of new material (from demolition wastes) for the building and construction sector.   
-BIO-UPTAKE (HE-CL4-2021-TT-01-05) (AIM, IRI): Solutions for the uptake of bioplastic composites in 
the manufacturing industry (including construction) through boosting a twin green and digital transformation. -
DOMMINIO (H2020-MG-2018-2020) (AIM (co), IRE): Data-driven methodology to manufacture 
multimaterial products combining different AM technologies with advanced simulation and monitoring tools.  -
INPERSO (HE-CL5-D4-01) (ITA (co), COR, IRI, ACC): Building’s lifecycle analysis, from design to the 
EoL, supported by advanced digital technologies.  
Interoperable virtual engineering, modelling and simulation tools and GD strategies  
-ICLIMABUILT (H2020-NMBP-TO-IND) (ITA, IRE): Sustainable materials and processes adoption in the 
construction sector combined with predictive modelling, multi -scale simulations of materials and products.  -
REHOUSE (HE-CL5-2021-D4-02) (RIN): Innovative and flexible solutions for efficient, cost -effective, and 
sustainable renovation processes of buildings based on circularity principles.  
-INEDIT (H2020-SPIRE-08) (AIM): Exploring the potential of explainable AI approaches to support designers 
in extending their capabilities through the use of AI generative tools for sustainable design.  
-NEUTRALPATH (HE-MISS-2021-CIT-02) (RIN): Creation of positive clean energy districts with 
climatefriendly solutions by human-centred and co-design principles.  
-M4ESTRO (HE-CL4-2023-TT-01-07) (COR, AIM): Prediction capabilities, reliable models, DTs, and 
interoperable data and multi-level decision support and recommendation systems for manufacturing.  
Data infrastructure, assets and tools  
-Circular TwAIn (HE-TT-01-07) (AIM, COR): Collaborative AI-based intelligence in production based on the 
use of cognitive DTs, human centric approaches and agile indicators, relying on data spaces technology.  -
LEVEL-UP (H2020 FoF) (AIM (co), COR): Dynamic manufacturing assets DT and circularity protocols for 
high-added value products life-extension.  
-RE4DY (HE-CL4-TT-01-08) (COR): Implementation of digital continuity across digital threads, data spaces, 
DT workflows and AI/ML/data pipelines for unique data-driven and zero-defects European Industry 4.0.   
-PIONEER (HE-RES-01-25) (AIM (co), COR, IRE). Materials modelling and characterisation ontologies 
standardisation and neutral data exchange formats promotion.  
-DACAPO (HE-TT-01-07) (AIM (co), COR). Agile indicators and methodologies for manufacturing circularity 
via digital tools and value chain data exchange.  
1.2.4  Interdisciplinary approach  
BIOGEMSE adopts an interdisciplinary methodological approach from its inception (project, partners and work 
plan). This enhances the generation of compatible hypotheses to structure research at multiple levels of the problem 
(technology and non -technology adoption barriers, such as trustworthiness, skills, etc.), focusing on the overall 
picture to design a solution. The interdisciplinary nature is brought by the mix of disciplines such as: natural sciences 
(biophysics, mathematics or biology), technology (biotechnology, monitoring, control, AI, data interoperability, 
information sciences, etc), engineering (robotics, AM, digitisation), and non-technological disciplines (economics -
business plans definition -, life and social sciences  -lifecycle modelling and assessment or  humanities -ethics or 
design). As presented, advanced manufacturing and bio-based materials have a vast potential and have been 
developed for years, but not under a holistic systemic perspective (which is interdisciplinary by definition, from  
physics to materials, mechanics, software, etc.). BIOGEMSE is built on the need of integrating different knowledge 
areas to deliver viable manufacturing approaches enhancing bio -intelligent products. The interrelation of these 
disciplines is fostered by t he definition of the WPs (tasks interdependencies in S3.1) and the right mix of partners 
(S3.2). As a proof of the interdisciplinary nature, the project objectives tackle different aspects linked to the presented 
disciplines and capture the ambition of the  topic. Beyond the project, this approach ensures the realisation of the 
project outcomes and expected impacts and enables further exploitation of results. An interdisciplinary approach is 
beneficial when overcoming technology -related barriers (speeding up  the process, preventing unforeseen factors, 
etc.), but it becomes crucial when facing those non-technological barriers (the real-world stoppers)59.  
1.2.5  Social sciences and humanities (SSH) perspective   
The interdisciplinary approach of BIOGEMSE’s methodology integrates the contributions of diverse SSH  
 
59 EC, Horizon Europe Work Programme 2023-2024 - Digital, Industry and Space  
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 23 of 41  
  
disciplines. The SSH perspective was fully considered when drafting the project’s objectives (and Associated with document 
Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025derived KPIs) in response to the destination’s ambition and the topic. In this regard, smart 
manufacturing and bio -intelligent products are backed on a strong digitisation and sustainability ambition, being 
essential milestones to enable the green and digi tal transition of the EU production ecosystem. It is also needed to 
consider the relation of digital technologies with workforce skills. Therefore, development of educational and training 
methodologies, design of technologies facilitating human usability, ethics perspective and privacy management, need 
to be carefully handled: i) In the field of Social Sciences, business sciences will be applied for a complete assessment 
of the targeted markets. Sociology will be implemented in the identification of potential early adopters and assess their 
willingness to pay for project results. Marketing knowhow will be employed in sustainable business models definition 
and in the dissemination and communication activities of the project. Educational sciences will be implemented to better 
approach the needs of the manufacturing workforce in the development of training and skilling opportunities. ii) 
Regarding Humanities, legal and ethical aspects will be considered in relation to data compliance, acceptance, AI or 
environmental aspects.  Due to SSH relevance, 3 consortium partners bring relevant expertise on these issues: RIN for 
all exploitation and business models related aspects, smoothing the future exploitation of the projects result, EIT  as 
expert for the dissemination and communication activities and the aspects linked to training, and IRE as relevant expert 
on SSbD methodologies. They will be leading the activities oriented to integrate the SSH perspective on the technology 
and provide relevant outputs to guide the consortium on how to consider them to face technology -oriented work. 
BIOGEMSE highlights SSH and has  defined a pathway to maximise the integration with the “scientific -technology” 
dimension through clear WP interdependencies and management bodies (including a right mix of expertise). Finally, 
SSH perspective not only benefits the execution but also smooths the pathway beyond the project, from TRL boosting 
(including market -oriented actions) to industrial and social acceptance, therefore enhancing spill -over effects and 
enabling the achievement of the expected long-term impacts of the call.  
1.2.6  Technical robustness of AI techniques  
BIOGEMSE will apply several AI -related tools, such as GD algorithms for modular structures with enhanced 
properties (T3.4), or machine and deep learning (ML/DL) for data analysis to identify patterns, defects and adjust 
process parameters (T5.3). The reliability, trustworthiness, technical and social robustness , transparency, and 
resilience of the AI tools will be based on: a) Training, validation, and evaluation of alternative and unbiased AI  
models to identify and select technically robust models: to achieve this, the Cross Industry Standard Process for Data 
Mining (CRISP-DM) methodology will be implemented, which involves the development and evaluation of multiple 
models, using an agile and iterative approach. Moreover, Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) and model analysis will 
be applied, to identify and mitigate potential biases . b) Development and use of transparent white -box models: in 
cases where white-box models achieve satisfactory performance, they will be pref erred over black-box models like 
DL. Nevertheless, when the use of black -box models is necessary, the project will employ Explainable AI (XAI) 
techniques in order to interpret the models and enhance their reliability. c) Use of Data Efficient AI methods: when 
the available datasets are not sufficient to create high performing AI systems, data efficient techniques such as 
zeroshot, one-shot or few shot learning will be used, ensuring acceptable performance with smaller training datasets. 
d) Use cross-validation techniques to evaluate the performance of data-driven models, reserving a portion of the data 
for testing to assess how well the models generalize to unseen data. e) Perform sensitivity analyses to understand the 
impact of input parameters or features on the predictions of AI models, identifying which inputs have the most 
significant influence on the outputs. f) Test the robustness of AI models against perturbations or uncertainties in the 
input data or model parameters , introducing noise or variations in the data and assessing how it affects the model 
predictions. g) Document the development process of AI models, including data preprocessing, model architectures, 
parameters, and validation results, providing the code and instructions to reproduce the models. h) Monitor the 
performance of AI models in real -world applications , incorporating feedback and new data to improve model 
accuracy and robustness over time. i) Compliance with mandatory regulations and the proposal of the European  
Parliament and Counc il Proposal for and AI Regulation : the AI tools will adhere to mandatory frameworks and 
regulations, such as GDPR, and with emerging AI regulations at the European level.  
The use of AI algorithms GD will not raise ethical concerns about human rights and values. The AI-driven activities 
are solely focused on optimizing the geometry and performance of construction products, relying on physics -based 
simulations of their manufacturing process and performance. The use of data-driven models and ML algorithms will 
not raise any ethical concerns either, as the data involved is strictly limited to physical parameters, sourced from 
sensor measurements (e.g., tª, humidity, etc.). Therefore, AI-related activities do not pose any ethical concern.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 24 of 41  
1.2.7  Sex and Gender dimension   
Women in EU manufacturing industry hold 30.7% of the jobs and an even worse figure is found for the construction 
sector60. These figures show a situation far from gender balance, which is rooted in education (only 1/3 of STEM 
graduates are women), lack of awareness of STEM as a growing career option and expectations of feeling less good  
  
in contexts with unfavourable gender balance. BIOGEMSE has considered the gender analysis from the proposal 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 idea preparation and aims to keep paying efforts to integrate gender 
dimension within the project execution and beyond (data collection, analysis and dissemination). Indeed, accounting 
for the gender factors in the design and execution of BIOGEMSE enables the following benefits: i) added value in terms 
of excellence, creativity and business opportunities; ii) an in-depth understanding of all citizens´ needs, behaviours and 
attitudes; iii) products better suited to the needs of all population; and iv) enhanced societal relevance of research and 
innovation. Specifically, BIOGEMSE has identified 2 gender-relevant areas to be considered in the scope of the project: 
-Outcomes of the project:  After a proper check, no gender gaps have been identified in the project’s technical and 
scientific activities, for which no bias shall apply (e.g.: AI gender bias)61. Conversely, the three SLLs will be designed 
accounting for gender intersection. While the manufacturing of BIOGEMSE construction products seem to be gender-
agnostic, their design will be studied with special attention, in order to take into account relev ant factors such as 
aesthetical aspects. Additionally, specific upskilling and reskilling strategies will be considered to reinforce the 
participation of women in training and education programmes set in WP8&9. Any gender -relevant aspect will be 
integrated feeding the technical WPs to timely consider them in the ecosystem features.  
-Public Visibility: BIOGEMSE aims to contribute to the promotion of women participation in R&D activities during 
and beyond the project. In line with Women in STEM Initiative and She Figures 2021 98, participation of female 
scientists and engineers in this project will be promoted. Moreover, involvement of women in any dissemination and 
communication activities will be encouraged to reach all users of the ecosystem and contribute to raise awareness 
among women of career opportunities in construction and manufacturing, avoiding talent shortage in the long term. 
This participation and promotion will be monitored within the project activities and reported under D8.1.  
1.2.8 Open science (OS) Practices 
BIOGEMSE is based on open cooperative work 
and systematic sharing of knowledge and tools 
during the project. BIOGEMSE’s partners are 
committed to apply OS practices (Figure 11) as 
it improves the quality, efficiency and 
responsiveness of research 99, by increasing 
credibility and reproducibility of research 
outputs (transparency and accessibility are 
essential for evaluating the credibility of 
scientific claims). BIOGEMSE’s project 
management bodies (IB and QCG, see S3.2), Figure 11. Open Science practices and expected outputs. procedures (DMP, D8.2) 
and practices (QAP, D1.1) will contribute to ensure OS practices are appropriately followed. -Early and open sharing 
of research: At the very start of the project, the agreed OS practices will be reviewed and clarified to all partners by 
the Dissemination & Exploitation Manager -DEM- [EIT]. Regular monitoring will enable an early detection of 
opportunities (performed by WP Leaders a t WP level and then, informed to the DEM, which will be continuously 
monitoring the implementation of outreach activities), triggering automatic openness assessment (prior to the 
selection of the publication procedure). When considering journals, to ensure earliest publication, preregistration 
and/or registered reports practices will be considered by the project.  
The management of research output generated in BIOGEMSE during the project aims to make research outputs 
findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR). All provisions will be set in the DMP by M6 (D8.2). -
Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs:  Further to practices adopted to ensure early sharing, 
additional efforts will be paid towards full digitalisation of research activities and procedures, namely use of 
standardised digital tools for lab notebooks and definition of workflows and protocols (e.g., protocols.io), as well as 
the use of persistent and unique identifiers and certified repositories aligned with EOSC standards, enabling wide 
sharing and usability of research output. Moreover, when research output (excl. publication) is made openly 
 
60 Eurostat. Employment by sex, age and detailed economic activity.  
61 European Commission. 2020. Gendered Innovation 2: How inclusive analysis contributes to Research and Innovation. 
98 EC; She Figures 2021. 99 EC, Open Science.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 25 of 41  
accessible, such research output will be always accompanied by supporting information such as metadata to ensure 
reproducibility (experimental procedures, data treatment and analyses procedures, processing tools, etc.).  
-Providing open access to research outputs (publications, data, software, models, algorithms, and workflows): The 
consortium will ensure open access to peer reviewed scientific publications and will seek for opportunities to provide 
open access to other scientific publications (monographs, conference proceedings, etc.). In this line, the principle of 
“as open as possible, as closed as necessary” will be applied, when evaluating the process of making research outputs 
accessible. Publication in ORE platform will be prioritised, as in other open journals and publications. In case hybrid 
or subscription field-relevant journals are strategically convenient, the consortium will ensure open access through 
the journal directly or by depositing post-print in a trusted open repository (authors will ensure retaining sufficient  
  
IPR). Provisions to ensure open access to other research output is presented in detail in the following subsection.Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025  
-Participation in open peer -review: By prioritising publication in ORE, open peer -review publications will be 
ensured. When not in ORE, use of open peer -review will be a selection criterion. In addition, participation of 
researchers in open peer-review processes will be encouraged.  
-Involvement of all relevant knowledge actors in the co -creation of R&I agendas and contents: BIOGEMSE will 
foster active participation of potential early adopters outside the consortium in project activities (WP7-9).   
By adopting OS practices, the project will also increase the chances to attain the topic outcomes and progress towards 
the expected impact (S2.1). In this line, monitoring the adoption of OS practices during the project, as well as through 
KPIs defined for monitoring (see S2.2.1: nº of open peer-review articles, researchers in open peer-review, etc.), will 
contribute towards defining and monitoring OS -related altmetrics, creating new incentive structures that reward 
researchers for being transparent and making their research accessible.  
1.2.9  Research data management and management of other research outputs   
BIOGEMSE is expected to generate and manage the research data (process parameters, models, testing results, 
KPIs, etc.) and other research outputs  (e.g., SW, algorithms, protocols, methodologies, etc.), originated from 
experimental work. Use or purpose, management procedures and openness levels (PU, RE or SEN) will be defined 
in the DMP (D8.2). Although the consortium will proactively work to make research outputs open as soon as possible, 
in some cases research output may be categorised as RE or SEN accord ing to the accepted exceptions (protection, 
confidentiality, security, etc.). Nevertheless, those datasets metadata will also be elaborated and released, offering 
readers all needed information about where and how to apply for data access.   
-Research output management: The Dataset will be the data management unit, and the key tool will be the Dataset 
Fiche (comprising all information required for management during and beyond the project, including measures to 
comply with FAIR principles62). The DMP will be coordinated by EIT. Other roles and responsibilities, allocation of 
resources and specific measures to ensure data management and security, ethics compliance or long-term data storage, 
will be clearly defined within D8.2 according to Fig ure 12. Dataset quality will be addressed by QCG. To ensure 
compliance with FAIR principles the following procedures will be implemented:   
1) Data publishing strategy: Datasets will be deposited in a 
trusted repository under a CC BY or CC 0 licences. Deposit 
will be done within 30 days of the dataset being tagged with 
Open level. Metadata will be open under a CC 0 license. Any 
tool, documentation or software needed for reading, 
processing or re-using data will be identified in the metadata, 
enabling reusability and assessment of quality. Partners are 
committed to use open -source options when possible. 2 ) 
Preparation for sharing:  whenever poss ible, open 
sourcebased and/or interoperable formats and tools for data Figure 12. Research Output (excl. publications) management.  
generation and re-use, prior to research output sharing compliance with related discipline standards, will be ensured 
(industry standards like RAMI4.0). Moreover, metadata will be assigned to the datasets, including the mandatory GA 
metadata as well as other relevant metadata (title, creator, date, description, format, Digital Object Identifier-DOI or 
access rights) in an exportable format. The allocation of a DOI will enable to uniquely identify and version track each 
dataset. 3) Sharing the dataset: ZENODO or GitHub as ORE certified and trusted-community-recognised repositories 
have been initially selected, considering the research output nature and relevant discipline, as well as links with the 
EU Data Spaces initiative and other relevant initiatives regarding AI and industrial deployment ( e.g., AIoD or 
 
62 HE official documents: “Data Management Plan Template (HE): V1.1 – 01.04.2022” and “EU Grants: HE Programme Guide: V4.1 – 01.05.2024”  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 26 of 41  
AcumosAI, other options may be included in the DMP). Moreover, to ensure a permanent link between research output 
and related peer -reviewed scientific publications, data availability statements will be included in publications. 
Metadata associated to datasets will  be regularly updated by each dataset manager, ensuring proper links to related 
publications. Each dataset manager will define how to proceed with the dataset in terms of curation and storage, 
considering relevance of retention, period and costs related (information included in the Dataset Fiche).   
Ensuring proper research outputs management practices will contribute towards materialisation of EC´s goals on OS. 
BIOGEMSE envisages to generate the following research outputs (to be updated within the 1st version of the DMP):  
Table 2. BIOGEMSE project envisaged research outputs.  
Dataset/Research Output  Data type  Openness*  Repository*  
Sustainable business model evaluation  Knowledge report  PU  Zenodo  
Bio-intelligent products DTs  Models  SEN  Zenodo  
AI models & algorithms libraries, software  SW, libraries  SEN/PU  AI4EU, AcumosAI  
Dataset with manufacturing & quality data  Data  PU  Zenodo  
BIOGEMSE DPP meta data model  Model  SEN  Zenodo  
* For those RE or SEN the associated metadata will be repository-available. #§CON-MET-CM§# #§COM-PLE-CP§# #§REL-EVA-RE§#  
  
2  IMPACT #@IMP-ACT-IA@#   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025
2.1  Project’s pathways towards impact  
BIOGEMSE’s actions are aligned with the topic expected results in the short/mid -term (Expected Outcomes, EO) 
and the long-term effects (Wider Impacts, WI) contributing to the destination impact, as described in the following.   
2.1.1 BIOGEMSE contributions to the EO and impacts listed under the Topic  
EO#1: “Access to bio-intelligent production technologies and architecture”  
BIOGEMSE will contribute to the development of advanced manufacturing technologies ( AM with robotised 3D 
printing system), expanding the opportunities of bio-based materials in a manufacturing biologisation approach 
towards releasing bio-intelligent products. Therefore, promoting holistic innovations with a systemic approach and 
life cycle perspective, and disrupting the market of construction elements for the build ing sector towards its 
industrialisation. Particularly, BIOGEMSE will carry out innovative ta sks in the framework of “Production 
biologisation” by developing AM technologies and processes supported by a strong digital framework and tools for 
bio-intelligent (bio-based, bio-mimetic and active behaviour) modular construction elements, thus providing access 
to new and advanced forms of value creation in the construction sector. To this aim, complex designs (unveiling the 
potential of novel bio-based materials) derived from advanced generative design (GD) and modelling tools (PILLAR 
2) will demand deve loping new tailored printing HW and SW tools (PILLAR 3) to adequately process bio-based 
materials (PILLAR 1), supported by inline monitoring and quality assessment (PILLAR 3). Besides, an interoperable, 
user-friendly, modular and collaborative digital infrastructure (PILLAR 4) will be developed and deployed, combined 
with a IoT native approach to integrate the physics-based models and Digital Twins, together with the SSbD approach 
and MCDS and DPP tools, which will provide inputs for optimising both manufacturing systems and manufactured 
product functionalities. These sets of technologies will be validated through their implementation and demonstration 
in the 3 different SLLs, which cover different climate regions and buildings typologies with subsequent spe cific 
demands addressed by the BIOGEMSE products customised functionalities ( i.e.  thermal and acoustic insulation, 
flame retardancy, pollutants removal, CO2 capture, self-cleaning, bio-organism fixation, and aesthetics). BIOGEMSE 
will facilitate access to  these innovations to a set of key target groups from different fields ( i.e., manufacturing, 
architecture, construction, biology, technology, economy, environment, legislation, society, and politics) through the 
execution of a robust exploitation plan (EP -D8.3) and D&C strategy (D8.1) during the project, thus fostering the 
access and uptake of bio-intelligent production technologies for the construction sector.  
EO#1 significance63: The solutions delivered in BIOGEMSE will significantly improve the affordability and wide 
applicability of modular bio-intelligent products in the construction field, reinforcing the industrialisation of the sector 
through the use of AM technologies combined with innovative GD methods and digital tools, and its wide 
replicability in massively used architectural elements, such as building envelopes like cladding systems 
(specifically façades and roofs panels), while the approach is easily transferable to other construction elements. Due 
to the implementation of these solutions, important improvements will be accomplished. In this regard, thanks to the 
adoption of circular bio-based materials through BIOGEMSE developed fabrication technology, a reduction of +70% 
 
63 Scale of the contributions to the three expected outcomes has been detailed in Section 2.1.4: Target Groups (TGs).  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 27 of 41  
in the use of raw materials64 will be achieved, thus highly impacting the mining operation for the limestone extraction, 
as well as a huge impact in the associated CO 2 emissions (not only due to the extraction but, mostly, during the 
burning of the limestone to obtain the clinker on fossil-fuelled ovens). Additionally, labour costs reduction of 50-80% 
will be achieved103 with this new production methods compared to traditional in-situ construction works used so far. 
Aligned with this, the overall efficiency in civil infrastructure building will be enhanced, achieving time reduction103 
of 50-70%, and waste reduction of 30-60% for the fabrication of modular elements for residential and non-residential 
buildings (tertiary edification). Moreover, the coupled application of bio-based materials derived potential with the 
design-derived functionalities enabled by the use of AM technology and digital tools will imply significant 
improvements in bio-intelligent performance (i.e. thermal and acoustic insulation, flame retardancy, bioorganisms 
fixation, pollutants adsorption & degradation, aesthetics, self-cleaning, etc.).  
EO#2: “Technological advances and improvements in sustainability (in particular SDGs 11, 12 and 13) arising 
from the integration of bio-intelligent principles, functions, structures and technologies in manufacturing”.  
BIOGEMSE will contribute to improve the sustainability and circularity of the construction sector through the 
development, validation and implementation of the innovative solutions gathered in the 4 Technical Pillars tackled in 
the project (see Figure 1), towards enabling the use of more sustainable and circular bio-based materials to fabricate 
bio-intelligent products outperforming conventional construction solutions. To this aim, the combination of bio-based 
materials processing strategies and virtual modelling tools with computational multi -physics and multiscale 
approaches will be leveraged and validated in the framework of PILLAR 2 . Additionally, a holistic comprehensive 
SSbD framework will be employed (PILLAR 1), ensuring the highest standards in the assessment of  
  
safety, sustainability and circularity (not only during manufacturing Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 but 
also during use and EoL stages). Moreover  
MCDS tools, backed on SSbD results, will establish a traceable and transparent decision-making system that will be 
able to solve non -confluent results in a multi -criteria optimal solution way (PILLAR 4). Novel business models, 
considering both economic viability and environmental s ustainability, will be developed for the new bio -intelligent 
products, thus implementing regulatory, commercial, IPR and market potential inputs in the overall exploitability 
analysis of these outcomes. Finally, this will be complemented by the development of a training and skilling strategy 
for professionals within the construction and manufacturing sectors.  
These innovations will have a direct impact on the strengthening of the use of AM technologies in the building 
industry (PILLAR 3), by: i ) improving its circularity (use of fully recyclable bio-based materials coming from 
industry waste streams – biomass ashes, sludge, etc.); ii) reducing materials extraction (2 nd use of waste streams to 
replace fossil-dependent materials such as OPC) and consumption (through optimal material use due to 3D printing 
capabilities); iii) improving energy efficiency of buildings through the enabled bio -intelligent functionalities 
(increased thermal efficiency and self-conditioning capabilities); iv) reducing GHG emissions from the construction 
sector (OPC causes about 10% of the overall global emissions) due the use of bio-based materials in bio-intelligent 
products able to capture pollutants on urban areas and improve air quality (CO 2 capture using biochar, CO2 fixation 
by organisms, and pollutants degradation using TiO 2), and v) reducing the generation of pollution and noise from 
civil works (cleaner operations through modularity and industrialization). Furthermore, AM is recognized to offer the 
potential to yield numerous sustainability benefits, such as waste, energy, and CO2 emissions reduction65. In addition, 
the employment of AM for an industrialized off -site production of construction elements will imply significant 
improvements in time and cost savings, which will entail the increasing interest on the project results and their 
widespread uptake in the construction sector. Hence , the bio -intelligent manufacturing transition proposed in 
BIOGEMSE will promote a new generation of products, processes and systems that will satisfy demands in terms of 
sustainability, efficiency and industry digitalisation for different applications. Aligned with this transformation, 
BIOGEMSE will contribute to SDG 11-sustainable cities, 12-responsible consumption and 13-climate action.  EO#2 
significance: The European built environment suffers from low renovation rates and a large stock of poorly 
performing buildings and infrastructure. In addition, the construction of residential and non -residential buildings is 
based on inefficient in-situ works and traditional methods which cause significant environmental impacts regarding 
emissions, pollution, noise, among other negative effects. In this context, BIOGEMSE’s disruptive technologies will 
present outstanding improvements in the achievement of a sustainable building sector, contributing to the consecution 
of the SDGs 11, 12 and 13 and their specific targets, through:   
 
64 Heywood, K., et al. Sustainability and 3D concrete printing: identifying a need for a more holistic approach to assessing env. impacts. ARIN 2023 103 
Hui Zhong, Mingzhong Zhang. 3D printing geopolymers: A review. Cement and Concrete Composites, V olume 128, 2022.  
65 Ford, S., Despeisse, M. AM and sustainability: an exploratory study of the advantages and challenges, Journal of Cleaner Production, 137, 2016.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 28 of 41  
-SDG 11 -Sustainable cities : BIOGEMSE will address different specific targets under this SDG 
including: i) Safe and affordable housing (11.1) by reducing the fabrication costs 103 of building 
elements (facades and roofs panels) through mass customized and off -site industrialized production 
(labor costs reduced by 50-80%, total costs could be reduced up to 2.5 times according to sources) and 
enabling safer buildings (air quality improvements through CO2 capturing and pollutants removal)66; 
ii) Inclusive and sustainable urbanization (11.3)  & iii) Reduce the environmental impact of cities (11.6)  by: 1) 
reducing CO2 emissions (up to -80%) of the construction sector due the use of bio-based materials and 3D printing 
technologies in the manufacturing of the components (see SDG 13 ); 2) reducing waste production related to 
infrastructure decommissioning by 100% for targeted components (façade and roof panels) than can be circularized 
in subsequent loops, and; 3) enhancing thermal efficiency of build ings (35%+ increased thermal insulation or 
energyfree demand for +-5ºC shelters conditioning); iv) Provide access to safe and inclusive green and public spaces 
(11.7) by integrating safe functionalities in the bio -intelligent modules (i.e. flame retardancy or air quality 
improvement).  
-SDG 12 -Responsible consumption : the solutions implemented in BIOGEMSE will positively 
impact different targets including: i) Sustainable management and use of natural resources (12.2), by 
achieving a 70% reduction 102 in the use of raw materials in buildings thanks to the development of 
circular bio-based materials, minimizing mining operations for minerals extraction (limestone); ii) 
Substantially reduce waste generation (12.5) by taking advantage of industrial waste (biomass ashes, 
sludge, etc.) as secon dary raw materials and by using advanced manufacturing technologies ( AM) under a ZDM 
approach, reducing manufacturing waste and scrap, as well as defective components through advanced inline 
monitoring and quality control technologies; and iii) Encourage companies to adopt sustainable practices (12.6) by 
defining sustainable BMs for the 3 modular bio-intelligent innovative construction products focused on addressing a 
regenerative building manufacturing approach and engaging 200+ new stakeholders in the bui lding sector for these 
new BMs through the deployment of the EP and D&C strategy and further commercial actions beyond the project 
execution.   
  
-SDG 13 -Climate action : BIOGEMSE will  especially impact the Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025target 13.3 -Build knowledge and capacity to meet climate change through the 
adoption of sustainable materials and technologies in the construction sector, since 20 -25% of the 
lifecycle emissions of the current EU building stock are embedded in building materials 67 . In 
BIOGEMSE, bio-based geopolymer products will replace OPC (currently, the cement industry 
accounts for 8%7 of the total EU CO2 emissions). Besides,  
BIOGEMSE’s products will be fully recyclable and will foster industrial symbiosis approaches, with a great potential 
of reduction of the raw materials consumption. These types of geopolymers could save up to 80% of the CO 2 by 
produced ton. Other benefits in terms of pollutant removal are attributed to incorporating TiO 2 and biochar to the 
BIOGEMSE modules. Research has shown that incorporating 4% biochar into cement can store an additional 0.12 
kg of CO₂ per kilogram of cement, contributing to net carbon -negative concrete 68 . Additionally, enhanced 
bioorganism fixation will be achieved thanks to the increased porosity of the materials employed in cladding elements, 
which will also contribute to mitigate CO 2 emissions. Furthermore, GHG emissions will be saved thanks to the 
production of modular elements by improved AM technologies instead of traditional civil works. Finally, a +35% 
thermal insulation increase is expected (see S1.2.2) in buildings leading to ~25% increase in energy efficiency108 and 
similar reduction in CO 2 emissions thanks to the combination of advanced GD methodologies for structure design 
(AM) as well as the use of PCMs as additives.   
EO#3: “Substitution of raw materials by bio-based materials, or implementation of bio-based or bio-intelligent 
manufacturing operations, and business models leading to regenerative production”.  
BIOGEMSE will carry out innovative tasks in the framework of circular and sustainable bio-based materials 
adoption, by fostering the generation of industrial symbiosis loops where industrial bio -derived wastes (biomass, 
sludge…) can became secondary materials for the bio-based construction materials. This cross -value chain 
cooperation and coordination pave the path toward a regenerative production in the EU manufacturing industry. 
Indeed, those bio-based materials are destined to contribute to the large -scale replacement of traditional cements 
 
66 https://origin-team.com/how-3d-printers-will-change-the-construction-world-3d-printing-ideas/   
67 Röck M, Sørensen A, et al, Embodied Carbon Benchmarks for Buildings in Europe – Facing the data challenge, 2022,  
68 Praneeth et al., Biochar admixtured lightweight, porous and tougher cement mortars: Mechanical, durability and µcomputed tomography analysis, 2021.  108 
Around 65% of the energy consumption is spent in space heating (Ref in link). CO2 emissions are directly related to energy consumption in buildings.   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 29 of 41  
(high fuel-intensive materials in their production) resulting in lower-emissions, more recyclable and circular materials 
in the building and construction products (e.g. cladding systems). Beyond the environmental advantage, 
BIOGEMSE’s materials and design strategies (GD fostering bio-inspired and bio-mimicking designs) empowered by 
the flexibility and efficiency of AM production techniques and digital tools, will result in the manufacturing of bio-
intelligent products (increased functionalities) under a manufacturing biologisation approach.   
Precisely, BIOGEMSE will develop and demonstrate at TRL6 innovative outcomes to allow this substitution, such 
as eco -friendly cements supported by AM methods (PILLAR 1), which will be integrated and upscaled for the 
sustainable construction of specific bio -intelligent products (PILLAR 3) and validated in the SLLs. Other 
advancements in the project will contribute to achieve this EO in relation to tailored performance by generative design 
(PILLAR 2), such as the extrudability and buildability models develope d to effectively adapt the AM processes to 
boost the use of bio-based materials for manufacturing innovative bio -intelligent building components. Moreover, 
the development of monitoring and sensing solutions for ZDM approaches will also facilitate the application of 
efficient AM technologies for building bio-based and bio -intelligent modular elements for the building sector 
(PILLAR 3). Jointly, the sustainable and circular economy business models closely implemented by early adopters 
in the project (ACC and RIN) will foster an enhanced adoption of these innovative developments in the construction 
sector boosting regenerative production of added-value multifunctional modules.   
EO#3 significance: The implementation of BIOGEMSE’s innovations will represent an opportunity for the use of 
bio-based materials (>70 wt. % content of recycled material from industrial bio -derived wastes, fostering the 
connection with those other synergic value chains, such as biomass-energy production, pulp & paper, water treatment, 
etc.) and will also deliver a full recycling potential for subsequent loops. This approach will enable the replacement 
of conventional OPC -cements (fossil fuel -dependant) in bu ilding and construction elements (e.g. façade and roof 
panels). Moreover, AM technology will contribute to reduction in defects by 95% (see S1.2.1) and 10% reduction in 
materials use (through non -defective manufacturing and net -material usage) 103. Furthermore, more complex 
geometries and shapes will be achievable with ensured quality, boosting the use of modular elements in construction.  
BIOGEMSE will strengthen the creation of local industrial hubs symbiotically connecting industry wastes ( i.e. 
biomass, sludge, etc. ) as secondary raw materials for bio -intelligent construction products generating new CE 
approaches in these sectors, pursuing a regenerative manufacturing through its biologisation: i) the thermal and ii) 
noise insulation of the trabecular structure of shells such those of turtles; iii) the evaporative cooling of t he skin of 
mammals such as elephants for temperature self -conditioning; iv) the flame-retardant properties of natural fabrics 
such silk or wool; v) the natural creation of biological soil crust through rough surface patterns to promote organisms 
fixation; vi) the pollutant absorption mechanisms of plants.  
 
  
2.1.2 Substantial WI linked to Made in Europe Partnership SRIA andAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
Work Programme destination In order to attain long -term cumulative effects, BIOGEMSE will build on successful 
D&C&E strategies and activities (including skilling and standardisation), and on other relevant project outputs (SLLs, 
data assets, models, methods…), leveraging the achieve ment of the long -term impact aims of Cluster 4: “Global 
leadership in clean, climate-neutral and resilient industrial value chains, circular economy and climate-neutral and 
human-centric digital systems and infrastructures” . BIOGEMSE’s manufacturing solutions and products are key 
enablers in the transition from a traditional, labour -intensive, fossils-dependant construction sector performing in a 
linear, unsustainable and inefficient way to a bio-based, regenerative, industrialised and circular one. Moreover, the 
project results will contribute to deploy this concept during the whole lifecycle and across complete value chains: from 
the selection of bio-based sources (considering industry wastes), through the design and fabrication of new modular 
products leveraged on AM techniques and digitalisation ( GD strategies, monitoring, AI, etc.) to the application in 
residential and non-residential buildings and infrastructures (also considering their circular management when arriving 
at the EoL). BIOGEMSE will not only promote this circular approach within the E U construction value chains but 
globally, considering different regions with important markets in which our consortium partners also operate (North 
America, East Asia, Oceania). Circularity within a globalised world needs to address those regional specificities and 
needs, enforcing the EU potential for leading  the global circular economy competition. Furthermore, BIOGEMSE 
results will particularly reinforce the resilience of the EU manufacturing sector (primarily) in relation to construction 
products and, the construction sector itself, against potential supply disruption episodes (COVID-19, Ukraine war, etc.). 
Additionally, BIOGEMSE’s sustainable and circular business models will promote the decline of waste generation, an 
efficient use of natural resources, and a more climate-neutral EU economy.   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 30 of 41  
2.1.3  Global scale and significance of the BIOGEMSE contribution to the EO and WI at EU level  
The wide adoption of the BIOGEMSE’s innovations in the medium to long term, specifically AM technologies for 
bio-based materials and bio-intelligent modular products for the construction sector, will derive in the achievement 
of significant positive environmental, societal and economic impacts. With respect to the environment, impacts are 
associated with the generation of  circular and carbon -neutral construction products, which will minimize the 
consumption of resources (reuse of industrial waste streams boosting industrial symbiosis approaches) and the carbon 
footprint of products and processes. Concerning economic savings, actions will result in lowering operating costs, 
since BIOGEMSE is completely focused on industrialised construction operations, deploy ing cost -effective 
technologies and products and reducing material consumption. Regarding social impacts, this project addresses EU’s 
policy priorities and global challenges, such as the New European Bauhaus ( NEB), Green Deal, Circular Economy 
Action Plan and Zero Pollution Action Plan, and is also aligned with the REPowerEU initiative. BIOGEMSE supports 
the strengthening of the uptake of R&I in society and the realisation of the SDGs defined by UN (specifically SDG 
11, 12 & 13). Therefore, in addition to the environmental impact derived from the adoption of geopolymerbased 
materials, BIOGEMSE will contribute to further reduce the CO 2 emissions derived from the construction activity 
itself (currently estimated at 5-12% of total GHG emissions), being able to reach at least an 80% reduction of those 
CO2 emissions in the applications considered as a result of the full adoption of BIOGEMSE’s manufacturing 
methodology for bio-based geopolymer components. Furthermore, advanced  AM techniques could generate up to 
60% less waste69, a reduction in labour costs of up to 80%35, more than 0,92€ billion of annual GDP, and 15,000 
new skilled jobs  by 2035 7071 . Concerning the later, an important building block for successful bio -intelligent 
manufacturing in Europe is education and training. Advanced manufacturing technologies create a need for skilled 
workers and engineers. In this context, BIOGEMSE incorporate s actions to substantially increase skilled workers, 
particularly focused on providing new technical competences in bio-based materials, manufacturing biologisation, 
AM and digital technologies. Currently, the job market is characterized by a high demand for skilled labour that 
outstrips its supply. The manufacturing sector is of vital importance for EU to foster economic growth and job creation 
due its pivotal role on the EU economy.  
Table 3. Global scale and significance of the BIOGEMSE project at EU level.  
Indicator111  Mid-term annual 
projections (2035)  
Long-term annual 
projections (2040)  
GWh saved by bio-intelligent façade and roof panels (up to 46% 
of energy reduction for increased thermal efficiency)  8,150-16,300  26,700-44,500  
Tonnes of CO2eq (up to 80% saving in construction)  85.8-171.6  257.4-429.1  
Million tonnes of waste avoided (up to 60% less in construction)  693-1,386  2,079-3,465  
Skilled jobs  10,000-15,000  25,000-35,000  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
69 How 3D printing in the construction industry works. https://www.cemexventures.com/3d-printing-in-construction/   
70 European Construction Sector Observatory. Integrating digital innovations in the construction sector. 2019  
71 Conservative/Optimistic scenarios: Adoption in 1%/2% (2035) and 3%/5% (2040) of new construction projects for façades & roofs  (est. 15% of elements in 
construction).   
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 31 of 41  
2.1.4 Target Groups (TGs)   
BIOGEMSE will generate impact at different stages of the production of bio -intelligent products, covering the 
extension of bio-based materials use by 3D printing technologies supported by digital tools for the design and 
manufacturing of new bio-intelligent products. BIOGEMSE’s results will bring about benefits for a wide community 
of stakeholders involved during and after the project duration. A preliminary list of relevant TGs has been identified:  
TGs   Strategic Objectives / Expectations  
Policy Makers & 
Regulators   
To evaluate new initiatives for manufacturing and construction methods / Improvement of current 
practices, enhance sustainability, safety & efficiency in building & manufacturing.  
Civil society and 
social partners   
To access to beneficial effects of novel bio -intelligent products and innovative manufacturing 
strategies / Improvement of life expectancy and quality, reduction of the affection of environmental 
and social impacts related to civil infrastructure works.  
Workforce and 
professionals  
To enhance personal & professional skills by training activities educational solutions / 
Improvement in safety, ergonomics, productivity and wellbeing in working places.  
Scientific community 
& academia  
To gain insights from new knowledge created in the project / Expanding opportunities for 
collaborative R&I, network connections and knowledge exchange.  
SH in bio-intelligent 
products value chain  
To increase share in operating markets and open new comm. opportunities by promoting novel 
solutions / Flexibility to incorporate new solutions to improving manufacturing industry.  
Additive Manuf.  
companies   
To develop new techs & solutions for boosting the use of bio -based materials for construction 
purposes / Tailored systems to fabricate customized bio-intelligent products.  
Entrepreneurial 
partnerships   
To foster acceptance of their business goals and interests / Reinforcement and progress of the 
market opportunities through advocacy to promote new legislations and regulations.    
Although all these TGs are directly and indirectly impacted by the solutions addressed in BIOGEMSE, the 
construction sector (including specifically, building and urban infrastructures), globally accounting for 951,187 
companies, around 3.4M employees and a net turnover of 744.7B€ in the EU72, will be the most impacted sector 
by the results achieved. Particularly, the main adopters of BIOGEMSE’s expected outcomes will be construction 
companies dedicated to the subsector of “construction of residential and non -residential buildings ”, and 
specifically those with 50+ employees (scale of BIOGEMSE’s expected outcomes) as they are more willing to acquire 
these solutions since they have more economic and technical resources, even though smaller SMEs (<50 employees) 
will be also benefitted indirectly by the technologies and solutions, as they usually participate as subcontractors of 
building and construction works. In this regard, this subsector represents 5,775 companies of 50+ employees (82.4% 
of the total sector) in the EU, with estimated net turnovers of 245.4B€ (42% of the total sector), and around 832,000 
employees. Additionally, other sectors and subsectors will be also impacted by BIOGEMSE’s solutions, such as 
prefabrication and, specifically, 3D printing services and engineering (addressed in S2.2.2).   
2.1.5  Barrier, obstacles, and framework conditions  
Potential barriers ( B) identified for BIOGEMSE’s innovations and the corresponding mitigation actions  (MA) 
planned are:  Political: B1-EU policies limiting the use of industrial waste -based materials in construction 
applications. MA1-Early revision of industrial bio-waste streams composition for securing the supply chain. B2Lack 
of harmonization between EU member states regarding bio-based materials. MA2- Promote cross -country 
collaborations to advance on an unified regulatory frameworks at the EU level. Economic: B3-Price competition 
with massively deployed/accepted options. MA3-Optimization of resources (material and energy) consumption and 
cost-effective manufacturing technologies. B4-Uncertain market demand for bio-intelligent products. MA4-Conduct 
awareness campaigns showcasing the benefits and long -term cost savings of bio -intelligent products.  Social: 
B5Resistance from established value chains to adopting bio-based synergic loops.  MA5-Initiate outreach and 
collaboration programs with conventional manufacturers to demonstrate the advantages of bio -intelligent methods. 
B6-Lask of workforce specific skills. MA6-Specialized trainings and skilling activities for professionals.  
Technological: B7-Risk aversion to the use of new disruptive technologies. MA7-Educational training focused on 
the new technological principles. B8-Inadequate data availability for optimizing bio -intelligent manufacturing 
processes. MA8-Establish data-sharing frameworks with industry partners and research institutions to improve access 
to relevant data for technological development. Legal: B9-The biological transformation of industrial value creation 
will impact the demand for new and revised regulations and political frameworks. MA9- Standardisation will simplify 
legal regulation and control. Early research on standards and seek collaboration with existing projects. 
Environmental: B10-Lack of sufficient companies working on the recycling of bio-intelligent products at the end of 
their life cycle. MA10-Collaborate with recycling companies and stakeholders to develop circular economy practices 
 
72 Source: Eurostat NACE code F41, EU-27, year 2022.   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 32 of 41  
and ensure the recyclability of bio -intelligent products.  B11-Manipulation of hazardous substances. 
MA11Identification of the appropriate corrective measures for risk mitigation as well as defining production in the 
context of health and safety practices. SSbD criteria embedded in all the BIOGEMSE solutions.
2.2  Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication#@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#  
BIOGEMSE aims a EU-wide, large-scale utilization of its solutions. As a methodological support, BIOGEMSE will 
set out dissemination & communication and exploitation plans (D&CP & EP) that will maximize the project impact. 
1st versions are presented below (EP in S2.2.2. together with the Business Case) and will be further refined (D8.1).  
2.2.1  Dissemination and communication plan   
Dissemination objectives.  O1) awareness, engagement & knowledge sharing among potential users through 
network, multipliers and R&D initiatives; O2) interaction with network, stakeholders (pot. licensees and customers) 
and users (manuf. industry and construction sector) to enhance exploitation; O3) knowledge transfer among partners 
and external entities; O4) addressing of user needs; O5) broad applicability of results; O6) foster wider acceptance.  
Dissemination milestones. Initial activities will be focused on project raising awareness among all target audiences, 
recruiting actors for BIOGEMSE network. Following the generation of results, dissemination actions will be focused 
on presenting them to stakeholders and end users in the construction and other targeted sectors (manufacturing, 
construction, bioeconomy), the scientific community and the project’s network, promoting long -term technology 
scale up and market adoption. These activities will be led by EIT & RIN, supported by all consortium partners.  
Table 4. BIOGEMSE Dissemination Plan (*Month when the expected activities/action will start).  
 Activities73  Audience74  Key message  Time*   KPI  
Branding (logo, flyers, roll-up, poster); Project & 
partners webs & social media (OP); Newsletters  
ALL (O1, 2)  Objectives, activities, 
partners, public doc.  
M6  2500 visits & +150 followers 
Webinars, seminars, courses, online workshops, 
training materials and skilling activities (E)  
PP, IND, CS, 
HLE(O3,4,5) 
 Keys to use project 
results & knowledge,  
 skills development  
M6  
4 webinars, +2 workshops, 
training materials at EIT  
Academy + 80 trainees  
Project Events (E): co-creation workshops, final 
event at EU level to show results  
SC, IND, 
SH, SO (all)  
Project results, 
benefits and techn-  
M30  2 events, ~50 att./event; 30+ 
interviews  
Call to identify & engage Early Adopters (PD)  IND, SH  Validation of KERs  M30  2 EAs per KER (10)  
Online focus groups or interviews with EAs  IND, SH  Feedback from EAs  M36  8 interviews  
Scientific & technical articles in publications115 
(PP), like ORE Platform, journals & proceedings  
SC (O1) 
IND (O1,2,6) 
Project results and  
knowledge  
M12  +9 OA & +6 proceeding 
papers, 3000 readers  
Presentations/lectures/posters and participation 
in conferences and congresses (PD)75  
SC (O1,2)  
IND 
(O1,2,3,5)  
Results, features & 
performance of 
technol.  
M12  
+10 lectures & posters; 
+2000 persons reached  
Trade fairs (E) on manufacturing industries, 
construction and architecture, digital solutions.  
IND, SH 
(O1,2,4)  
Performance of 
solutions in SLLs  
M12  +6 events, +1000 persons 
reached  
Clustering & engagement (E, PD) with EU 
projects (CL4&6, CBE)   
SC (O1,2)  Shared synergies/ 
results  
M12  +3 act., 10 entities  
Collaboration and consultation with SOs (PD): 
CEN, ISO, NSBs of EU and EFTA  
SO (O4,5)  Input from the project.  M19  2+ contributions, 1+ stand. 
workshop.  
EU initiatives & associations events (E): Made in 
Europe, ECTP, B4P, Circular Bio-Based Europe.  
IND, SH 
(O1,2,4)  
Project, developments 
and results.  
M30  +2 collaborations 
~100 contacts  
Open Science early sharing of pre-prints and 
presentations (e.g., arXiv, bioXiv, chemrxiv.org), 
open research outputs (ZENODO) (PD)  
SC, IND 
(O1,2,4)  
Project research 
outputs  M12  
2+pre-prints,1+open 
repository, 1+ articles in  
ORE  
Communication Plan. Communication Objectives. (O1) to raise awareness about the project, its impacts and EU 
funding; (O2) to involve young minds into science, R&I in manufacturing, construction and bio-intelligence; (O3) to 
promote gender equality, gender dimension in R&I and gender -neutral career opportun ities derived from project 
results; (O4) endorsement of society, industry, ERA, Authorities to R&I in manufacturing and construction future 
linked initiatives. Communication Material  (presentations, brochures, didactic materials), regularly updated, 
 
73 Activity type: Project Documentation (PD), Project Publication (PP), Online Presence (OP), Events (E)  
74 Audience: partners (PP), Industry (IND), Sci. Community (SC), Stakeholders (SH), Standard Organisation (SO), High-level education (HLE), Citizens (CS) 
115 Articles in journals: AM, Int. J. of Computer Integrated Manuf., Int. J. of Advanced Manuf., Progress in AM., J. of Cleaner Production, MDPI Technologies, 
J. of Manuf. Sci.&Tech, Frontiers in Manuf. Technology, Automation in Construction, J. of Intelligent Manufacturing.  
75 Events: Digital concrete, BE-AM Symposium, FORMNEXT, World of concrete, Biennale Architettura, Bauma, MANUFUTURE Conferences, Smart City 
Expo, 3D Printing & Additive Manufacturing Event (RAPID + TCT), among others.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 33 of 41  
including a Communication Kit (narrative text, photographs, slides, etc. with copyright licenses). BIOGEMSE will 
be the project brand. The communication plan (activities audience, timing & KPIs) is presented in the following table. 
Dedicated contents will be elaborated for each audience and shared on partners and project´s social media. Table 5. 
BIOGEMSE communication plan (*Month when the expected activities/ action will start).  
Audience   Key message  Activities  Time*  KPIs  
Students  Impact on students opportunities  Visits, media & didactic materials  M12  +100 students  
Public in 
general  
Impact on jobs, energy consumption, 
environ. & life quality  
Press releases, articles, web, social 
media  
M1  +10,000  people 
reached  
Women  Career opport. in manuf., ICT & CE.  Active participation Women in STEM  M12  +2 act./campaigns  
Stakeholders  Impact digital, const. & manuf. ind.  Ind. & standardis.oriented events  M12  +3 presentations  
ERA  BIOGEMSE´s results.   Project info in CORDIS & OA  M18  +3 publications  
Authorities  Industry and societal impact  Presentation in relevant events  M18  +1 presentations  
#§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#  
  
2.2.2  Business cases and exploitation strategy   
This section presents a preliminary version of the project results Exploitation Plan (EP) which will be led by RIN and 
refined by partners throughout T8.2 & T9.2 (D8.3). Exploitable Results in BIOGEMSE  have been identified as 
Key Exploitable Results (KER) and Other Exploitable Results (OER):   
(i) Knowledge and know -how acquired through the development of innovative tasks in the project. In this 
regard, insights related to the use of bio-based and recyclable materials (i.e. geopolymers, PCMs, biochar, TiO2 and 
other additives) will be achieved and applied to improve their processing towards being used in AM processes 
(OER1.1) for the optimization of the process and the functionalization of modular construction products (façades, 
roof panels). Additionally, a holistic SSbD methodological approach, con sidering Hazards, Risks, and LCSA 
indicators will be implemented to ensure circularity and a safety. Furthermore, online training materials and courses 
(KER5) will be developed and launched to enhance workforce skilling for the operation of bio-based materials in 
the novel AM and digital solutions implemented in BIOGEMSE.  
(ii) Digital tools and services supporting manufacturing.  Generative Design strategies  (KER2) will be 
implemented to accomplish modular structures with design -derived functionalities (thermal efficiency, insulation 
capacities, organisms’ fixation, etc.). Furthermore, a digital ecosystem enabled by an IDS-RAM compliant and IoT 
enabled digital infrastructure  (KER3) allows real -time connectivity for secure and trusted data exchange and 
interoperability during the manufacturing stages and guaranteeing traceability throughout the entire supply chain and 
products lifecycle. Moreover, different digital tools will be developed and allocated in this infrastructure: (i) an IoT 
connectivity (OER3.1) based on data connectors and standard communication protocols to ensure data 
interoperability and a secure connection between the digital tools and the platform; (ii) AAS-based DTs (OER3.2) to 
enable the digital representation of products and processes, facilitate real -time monitoring, and preforming 
assessment of different production scenarios (what if, predictive quality, corrective measures definition, etc.); (iii) a 
multi-criteria decision support ( MCDS) and optimization methodology  (OER3.3) based SSbD indicators and a 
specific simulation workflow to optimize the AM methods, through multi -physics models and experimental 
characterization; and (iv) a DPP tool for construction value chains (OER3.4) to ease the access to key product data 
for different value chain stakeholders.   
(iii) Manufacturing technologies and products . A new 3D printing system  (KER1) for zero -defect 
manufacturing (ZDM) of bio -intelligent modular construction components based on bio-based, circular & low -
emission materials. The new AM technology will integrate an advanced NIR-based monitoring system (OER1.2) to 
enable real-time inline quality control and facilitate implementation of smart ZDM control strategies. As a result of 
the full integration of all these innovations developed in BIOGEMSE, new sustainable and circular business models 
will be created for the Modular bio-intelligent construction components (KER4) fabricated through the combination 
of the new AM technologies assisted by the digital tools and services, and the knowledge and know-how generated 
and applied along the project execution.   
Table 6. Key Exploitable Results, Developers and Individual Exploitation Strategies in BIOGEMSE.  
Result  Dev.  Individual Exploitation Strategy (Lead User) & Target Market (TM)  
KER1: New 3D printing system 
(HW & SW) for  bio -intelligent 
construction components ZDM  
VER  
VER (SME):  New products i.e. 3D printers for bio -based, low -emission and 
recyclable materials to increase market share . TM: suppliers of modular 
construction elements, designers and education experts in construction.  

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 
 
Part B - Page 34 of 41  
OER1.1: Bio-based construction 
materials processing for AM 
systems  
AIM  
VER (SME): knowledge & know-how transfer licensed by AIM. Integration and 
joint exploit. in KER1, offering improved solutions, increasing market share. TM: 
suppliers of modular building elements, designers & education experts in constr.  
OER1.2: Integrated advanced 
monitoring system for Zero-Defect  
Manufacturing  
IRI  
IRI (SME): New products i.e. online monitoring tools and quality control solutions 
for fabrication of construction elements, increasing its market share  by offering 
tailored solutions to existing and new sectors. Commercial agreement for 
integration and joint exploit. in KER1  for ZDM. TM: suppliers of industrial 
manufacturing equipment for building and other sectors.  
KER2:  New  bio-inspired  
Generative Design methodology for 
the construction sector  
ITA  
RIN (LE): knowledge and tools licensed by ITA. New engineering and consulting 
service, i.e. GD applied to construction sector, increasing its market share  by 
offering enhanced engineering capacities. TM: construction companies.   
KER3: IDS-RAM compliant and  
IoT enabled digital infrastructure  COR  
COR (SME):  New service  i.e. tailored digital platform for customized 
manufacturing operations, integrated and joint exploit. in KER1, increasing market 
share by offering new services to industry. TM: suppliers of industrial 
manufacturing equipment for building sector.  
OER3.1: IoT devices connectivity 
and gateways  IRI  
IRI (SME): Novel IoT data connectors to access to new manuf. sectors & markets, 
and integration and joint exploit. in KER3. TM: Ind. IoT tools developers, suppliers 
of industrial manufacturing equipment for building and other sectors.  
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 35 of 41  
OER3.2:  AAS-based  DTs  for  
product and processes  COR  
COR (SME):  Integration and joint exploit Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025. in KER3 & other customized manuf. operations, offering 
new digital solutions and increasing market share.  TM: suppliers of industrial 
manufacturing equipment for building and other sectors.  
OER3.3: Multi-criteria 
decisionsupport (MCDS) tool  ITA  
COR (SME): knowledge & tool licensed by ITA. Integration and joint exploit. in 
KER3 as a platform service, & other customized manuf. operations, offering new 
digital solutions and increasing market share.  TM: suppliers of industrial 
manufacturing equipment for building and other sectors.  
OER3.4: DPP for construction  
value chains   COR  
COR (SME): Integration and joint exploit. in KER3 & other value chains . TM: 
companies working in the manufacturing value chain of the construction sector.  
KER4: Modular bio -intelligent 
construction components  VER  
VER (SME): New construction products with enhanced functionalities made from 
bio-based and recycled materials to increase market share. TM: civil infrastructures 
contractors & subcontractors.  
KER5: Online training and 
educational programs for  
BIOGEMSE’s solutions  
EIT  
EIT (ASSOC): New education services and training materials integrated in digital 
learning and training platform hosted by EIT Manufacturing, and associated to 
KER1 purchase. TM: companies in the manufacturing and construction sectors.  
RTOs (ITA & AIM) will license their results to industrial partners when they need to implement the exploitation 
strategies of Table 6. All partners will exploit the IP generated in new R&I activities, while RTOs & EIT  will also 
exploit it in training activities (KER5), post-project diss. and/or by offering innovation related consultancy services.  
Integrated Exploitation Strategy. The exploitation of project results comprises the commercialization of solutions 
and services by addressing the market´s needs (S1.1.2). In addition, a path to deliver innovation to market is included 
in S3.2.2. The new 3D printing ZDM system ( KER1), specifically adapted to be used with bio-based materials for 
the preparation of bio-intelligent building products, is anticipated to be commercialised by VER (leading supplier of 
3D concrete printing solutions at a European and global level) following its usual business model.  In this context, 
VER will establish collaboration agreements for joint exploitation with the IP owners o f the knowledge, know-how 
and solutions developed (solely or jointly, according to the work plan and Table 6), who will act as direct suppliers. 
Agreements between KERs’/OERs’ lead developers will be established for mutual prescription towards non-project 
partners, boosting commercial opportunities and client reach. In this sense, AIM will license its knowledge and 
knowhow for the optimization of the AM process, the circular bio-based materials and their processing parameters 
(OER1.1). In addition, VER will establish an agreement with IRI to include its monitoring and quality control systems 
for ZDM ( OER1.2) in the new 3D printing technology, while IRI will commercialize the solutions as part of its 
portfolio. Moreover, VER and COR will establish an agreement for the integration and joint commercialization of 
the digital platform (KER3) and customizable digital tools as part of the AM technology. Besides, VER and RIN will 
sign an agreement for the mutual prescription of their exploitable results (KER1 & KER2).  
Regarding the new bio-inspired GD methodology for the construction sector (KER2), ITA will license its knowledge 
and guidelines to RIN , for its exploitation in future design and engineering projects for the construction sector. 
Additionally, RIN and IRE will reach an agreement to incorporate the SSbD approach and sustainability assessments 
developed in the project, although IRE will also exploit this knowledge in future R&I and consulting services for 
companies in the construction and additive manufacturing sectors.  
Likewise, COR will exploit the IDS-RAM-compliant and IoT-enabled digital infrastructure (KER3) jointly with AM 
technology in KER1, and including the different digital tools integrated in it, that is, the  IoT connectivity tools 
(OER3.1), the AAS-based DTs for product and processes (OER3.2), the MCDS system tools (OER3.3) and the DPP 
for construction value chains (OER3.4), following a customizable service model tailored to the requirements for the 
different clients in the building and manufacturing segments. To do that, COR will establish an agreement to include 
IoT connectivity solutions developed by IRI, and the MCDS systems tools licensed by ITA, in its infrastructure. 
Furthermore, bio-inspired and bio-intelligent modular construction elements (KER4) will be fabricated through the 
coupled use of KER1 (AM technology), KER2 (GD methodology) and KER3 (digital infrastructure) by VER. 
Moreover, end users, as relevant actors in the construction sector, will act as early adopters for modular construction 
products (RIN for projects engineering , and ACC for the application in building operations), taking preferential 
conditions while also smoothing market uptake. In the same line, they will act as ambassadors of the Sustainable and 
circular Business Models proposed in BIOGEMSE, showing the convenience of these business cases together or 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 36 of 41  
separately in new engineering and construction projects and concessions in residential and nonresidential buildings 
and other urban structures.    
Business model. A draft Business Model Canvas (BMC) (Figure 13) has been developed for the BIOGEMSE main 
exploitable results (KERs1-5) that will be further refined during T8.2 & T9.2. The new 3D printing ZDM system of 
bio-intelligent, bio-based, circular & low-emission construction components will be jointly exploited with the digital 
infrastructure exploited by COR following a B2B model by direct sales via VER current selling channels to the 
expected customers, which will comprise leading companies in the construction industry specialized in manufacturing 
modular components, and renowned educational institutionsAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025 specialized 
in the fields of construction and architecture. In case of the GD methodology, RIN will also follow a B2B model with 
mutual prescription for the joint acquisition of RIN and VER solutions, using its mutual selling channels for the 
similar customer segments. Regarding the modular elements, VER will follow a B2B direct or der-based contract 
depending on the demands of the expected customers, that is, civil works contractors and subcontractors. Finally, the 
training materials developed by EIT will follow a B2B model, using their current training platform as selling channel, 
and it will be also associated to the purchase of the AM technology by VER’s expected customers. In addition, the 
industrial consortium partners will also perform commercial activities for the adoption and commercial uptake of 
their exploitable results achieved in BIOGEMSE (see Table 6). In this regard, the consortium partners will reach and 
engage potential customers through the implementation of the D&C strategy and the EP that will be fully developed 
in WP 8 and 9.  
Key Partners Key Activities Value Propositions Customer Relationships Customer Segments 
 ▪BIOGEMSE partners and  ▪IP protection and periodic  ▪New 3D printing technology  ▪Technical and commercial  ▪Construction: 
affiliated companies. FTO analysis. for construction. support and assistance. -Civil infrastructure ▪Suppliers (raw materials,  ▪Networking and promotion 
 ▪Novel monitoring systems  ▪Engineering and  construction companies cloud, sensors, software) (workshops, webinars,  for AM processes.
 consultancy services. -Engineering and  
 ▪EAs: ACCIONA, RINA. clustering activities, etc.) ▪New bio-inspired generative  ▪Personnel training &  consultancy companies 
▪Policy makers, regulators ▪Roadmap for TRL maturation design methodologies. upskilling Customized sales, -Suppliers of modular and standardization bodies. ▪Continuous 
development, ▪Novel modular bio- personalized construction elements ▪EU initiatives and flagships integration & validation. intelligent elements. services. 
 (BIM, CBE JU, SSBE).  ▪Digital infrastructure for safe  ▪Manufacturing sector: 
Key Resources 
 ▪EU & intern. associations & trusted data comm.,  Channels -AM technology  
 (ManuFUTURE, ECTP,  ▪Previous and generated  storage and exchange. ▪Social media & webpages. developers for  
 Built4People, etc.) knowledge & know-how. ▪Data-driven DTs for products ▪Marketing & sales depts. construction 
 “Call effect” of ACC and  ▪Industry and market  and processes. ▪Demo activities. 
RIN & consortium members  comprehension & agenda. ▪Sustainable and circular  ▪Sectorial events, trade fairs. 
within building, manuf &  ▪Digital & physical research  BMs for construction sector . ▪Press releases, advertising. 
 digital sectors to exploit full  infrastructures and SLLs. ▪Innovative online training for  
potential of Ecosystem and ▪Partners’ facilities and HR. workforce skills development. Multiplier effect through EU initiatives, clusters, materialize first sales. associations, 
related projects and future R&I  
 ACC, RIN, VER, COR, IRI market  actions: engagement of companies globally  
Cost Structure insights and networking to boost  Revenue Streams enhancing spillover effect of BIOGEMSE solutions 
business creation, leveraging  
▪Software and edge-cloud infrastr . and  exploitation of synergies & mutual  ▪Sales & maintenance of 3D printing systems, sales of modular elements, services, raw 
materials, labour costs,  prescription new contracts for construction projects and construction of residential and sensors and accessories, marketing  COR, IRI 
support on digitalization /  non-residential buildings, online training courses) activities, IP protection, legal consultancy. RIN, EIT expertise on innovation &  ▪Revenues for 
maintenance, support & updating of digital infrastructure. ▪Investment on future R&I optimization. D&C for best suited market strategies ▪Engineering and 
consultancy services. 
  
Figure 13. BIOGEMSE Canvas Business Model.  
Financial Projections.   
Sales forecast (beyond the project) Year 0 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 TOTAL 
          
Project exploitable results  Partner Unit price        
KER1: 3D printing ZDM system (sales) VER 450.000 € 0 units 3 units 8 units 16 units 22 units 26 units 75 units 
KER1: 3D printing ZDM system (maintenance) VER 20.000 € 0 units 3 units 11 units 27 units 49 units 75 units 165 units 
KER2: Generative Design methodology RIN 50.000 € 0 units 3 units 8 units 16 units 22 units 26 units 75 units 
KER4: modular bio-intelligent components (m2) VER 100 € 0 units 8.000 units 15.000 units 20.000 units 25.000 units 30.000 units 98.000 units 
KER5: Online training courses EIT 20.000 € 0 units 3 units 8 units 16 units 22 units 26 units 75 units 
Total income   
0 € 2.420.000 € 5.880.000 € 10.860.000 € 14.920.000 € 18.020.000 € 52.100.000 € 
Operating expenses   
0 € -968.000 € -2.352.000 € -4.344.000 € -5.968.000 € -7.208.000 € -20.840.000 € 
Contribution Margin   
0 € 1.452.000 € 3.528.000 € 6.516.000 € 8.952.000 € 10.812.000 € 31.260.000 € 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 37 of 41  
Other operational expenses 
EBITDA   
-400.000 € 
-400.000 € 
-414.800 € 
1.037.200 € 
-207.200 € 
3.320.800 € 
91.600 € 
6.607.600 € 
95.200 € 
9.047.200 € 
281.200 € 
11.093.200 € 
-554.000 € 
30.706.000 € 
Other costs   
853.333 € 1.877.333 € 1.575.933 € 1.545.333 € 3.051.333 € 3.633.333 € 12.536.600 € 
EBT -1.253.333 € -840.133 € 1.744.867 € 5.062.267 € 5.995.867 € 7.459.867 € 18.169.400 € 
Free Cash Flow (FCF) -400.000 € 199.400 € 2.467.000 € 5.330.200 € 7.404.400 € 8.571.400 € 23.572.400 € 
         
Discounted FCF   
-400.000 € 168.983 € 1.771.761 € 3.244.124 € 3.819.107 € 3.746.638 € 12.350.613 € 
 
*K & discount rate 18%        
Investment requirements -5.000.000 € -2.000.000 € 0 € 0 € -3.000.000 € 0 € -10.000.000 €  
Figure 14. BIOGEMSE forecasted economic projections for marketable results.  
A preliminary analysis of economic feasibility has been performed from the potential marketing capacity of the 
exploitable results presented in the project, once these reach TRL9 and can be commercially exploited. To this end, 
an initial estimation of the financial projections that can be achieved in the future (2031+) has been made. Different 
hypotheses have been made to estimate the likely revenue streams for each marketed product and service. A summary 
of robust and conservative hypotheses based on the industry partners’ expertise is shown in Figure 14. Sales forecast 
have been elaborated for a 5 -year period (once commercialization begins) based on foreseen market evolution, 
adoption rate and companies’ market position, reaching a total income of €52.1M and a positive Free-Cash-Flow 
(FCF) of €23.5M , validating the correct definition of the order -to-cash and payment cycles. Prices are set with 
sufficient profit level but remaining competitive ( Net Margin 34.9%), considering we are facing a RIA and a high 
level of uncertainty remain at this stage. FCFs are aligned with sales evolution during the period, demonstrating 
business sustainability. Investment requirements to further develop BIOGEMSE’s solutions have been estimated at 
€5.0M (TRL6 to 9), since different expenses for market uptake are expected, accounted as investment before the first 
exploitation year. BIOGEMSE project returns twice (ROI 207%)  the investment, and a positive payback allows 
attaining a positive Net Present Value (€5.6M)  and a breakAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025-
even-point at the 2nd year, indicating a safe  
investment. Balance sheet shows a good level of working capital from the whole project, keeping sufficient operating 
liquidity. At the forecasted period end, obligations are satisfied by operational profits.  
BIOGEMSE’s Business case. Beyond the business model detailed above, a sustainable and circular business case 
will emerge from the commercialisation of the BIOGEMSE solutions in the construction and manufacturing sectors. 
Particularly, these technologies and methodologies will aim a t searching for market opportunities in the 
construction sector , specifically in the building sector (residential and tertiary) , with commercial solutions 
addressing the fabrication of modular construction elements (initially focused on cladding systems, i.e. roofing 
and façade panels), the commercialisation and maintenance services of 3D printing technology  for construction 
purposes, and services for the engineering and project development for building construction. All these solutions 
will be supported by the optimized design, sustainable manufacturing, efficient production and installation of modular 
bio-intelligent elements, addressing relevant needs76 of the construction and manufacturing sectors, (Figure  
15) facing the advent of the 
new  
breed of ▪NetenforcedZero emissionsby regulationsgoal by 2050and inembracedEU & globallyby ▪ Sustainable materials able to compete New 3D printing technology for construction 
construction based ▪construction sector . with and substitute OPC. of modular elements with biorecycled materials.-based and  
on an enhanced use Constructionemissions, OPCresponsibleand infor -situ5-12works% of EUas COkey2 ▪ sharingModular acrossproductsvalueandchain)digitalisationto 
streamline(data Novel monitoring systems for AM processes based on NIR optical sensors and digital of sustainable and ▪contributorsBuildings responsible. of 36% of EU emissions, 
construction. tools. circular modular ▪energy efficiency as key contributor for reduction. ▪ Increaseenvelope (buildingfaçade, roof)performance,. focus on New bio-inspired AI 
based generative design methodologies. components. This Increasingsitu works asconstructionkey contributorscosts, materials and in- ▪ Competitive manufacturing technologies Novel 
modular bio-intelligent construction new breed will ▪Labour & skills shortage. able to cope with customisation & Digital infrastructure for safe & trusted data elements for cladding systems. 
trigger a global ▪Environmentaldrivers in decisionimpactpurchaandse andenergywillingefficiencyto pay key breeddisruptive. designs in new construction Datacommunication, storage and 
exchang-driven DTs for construction products e. 
opportunity  Decarbonization of construction New methodologies ▪ Newconstructionbusiness. models steaming from green Sustainable and circular BMs for the and 
processes. estimated at a €1.5  o Neutral or negative emissions materials. construction sector. 
 
76 References from needs, trends and challenges: link1, link2, link3, link4, link5, link6, link7, link8, link9, link10, link11, link12, link13   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 38 of 41  
trillion  market  oo IndustrializedECTP & B4P SRIAproductionFirstofnewmodularbreed 2035elements/2040. Innovative online training for workforce skills development 
(breakdown below)  VALUE PROPOSITION CHALLENGES NEEDS 
by  2030,  with  
BIOGEMSE’s Figure 15. Market needs, challenges and value prop. for competitive advantage of BIOGEMSE business case. ecosystem 
allowing the EU construction and manufacturing sectors to harness it.  
To that end, project results will leverage opportunities in the global cladding systems market , with estimated 
worldwide annual sales of avg. ~3.6 billion m 2 of modular cladding systems, accounting for an expected annual 
market size (TAM) at 391.6B€ by 2030, growing at a CAGR of 5.5% 77, with façades and roofs panels as the main 
application. In this regard, EU market share  (SAM) in cladding systems currently represents ~28%, and it is 
expected to keep steady, representing 109.6B€ (~avg. 1.0 billion m2/yr). VER aims to offer annual sales of 30k m2 
of modular cladding systems for façades and roofs with the new design and manuf. strategy, reaching an annual 
income of ~3M€ by 2035 and ~6M€ by 2040 (SOM).  
Similarly, the new 3D printing ZDM system developed in BIOGEMSE will enable the access to huge market 
opportunities in the 3D printing construction market , with an estimated global annual size 78 of 860B€ in 2030, 
growing at a CAGR of 105.8%, with predominance of extrusion systems (est. 62.4% of market, 536B€ - TAM). 
Regarding the EU market, it is estimated to have a ~29% share of the total market, representing 155.6B€ (SAM).  
The expected outstanding growth over the following years in this market is due to several factors, including the 
expected growth in urban population, the need of more efficient (3D printing is expected to save 60% of time in job 
site) and cost-effective construction methods. Moreover, the rise in the adoption of green projects globally is also one 
of the major factors accentuating the market growth. Construction businesses are increasingly using AM and green 
construction methods to reduce costs and build energy-efficient buildings. Furthermore, the current materials used in 
commercial and industrial 3D printers are expensive compared to those used in traditional construction processes. In 
this sense, BIOGEMSE will tackle this need through novel GD methods and new AM technologies enabling the use 
of new eco-friendly and cost-efficient sources of raw materials. In addition, the lack of skilled labor is also another 
major factor challenging the growth prospects of the market. However, BIOGEMSE will disentangle this need 
through the development of training materials and upskilling courses. Due to all these enhanced capabilities, the 3D 
printing technology and maintenance services that will be commercialized by VER is anticipated to obtain annual net 
incomes of 12.2M€ by 2035, and 23.0M€ by 2040 (SOM).     
BIOGEMSE’s solutions will also target market opportunities in the engineering services for the construction  
market, which is forecasted to reach an annual global size of 257.2B€ by 203079 (TAM), growing at a CAGR of  
  
5.9%. In this regard, the EU market will hold a share of ~11%, representing Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 
14/05/202531.7B€ at 2030 (SAM). This market will be mainly driven by the rising urbanization, the increasing population 
growth in many areas, the automation of the construction systems that will generate an important renewal of buildings 
due to more cost -efficient procedures, and the significant government investments that aim to strengthen this market 
sector as one of the most important in terms of job positions and economic growth in many European countries. 
Moreover, the increase in thermal efficiency of the new constru ction products as opposite to traditional buildings is 
being strongly promoted by the EC and the EU governments, as one way to reduce the energy consumption in residential 
and non-residential buildings, thus increasing the overall energy efficiency of the buildings. Therefore, these initiatives 
from different governmental levels will specifically drive the development of this type of engineering projects for the 
construction and installation of cladding systems using innovative methods such as the modular elements developed in 
BIOGEMSE, which will reinforce the commercial viability of these services. To reap this opportunity, RIN will offer 
services dedicated to engineering projects with the Generative Design methodologies developed in BIOGEMSE, 
expecting to achieve annual incomes of 3.2M€ by 2035 and 4.8M€ by 2040 (SOM).  
Finally, it can be pointed out that the business opportunities for VER and RIN detailed above will have a tractor effect 
on the other BIOGEMSE consortium companies (COR, IRI, IRE, EIT) that will  benefit from the adoption of these 
solutions, and will enabl e the European construction sector (ACC and others) to make use of the competitive 
advantage achieved in the sustainable and circular business models implemented in the construction sector.  
 
77 TAM ref. (link). Price estimation: 75-200€/m2 (link). SAM ref. EU share (link)  
78 TAM ref (link). Segmentation by type of technology (extrusion) (link). SAM ref. EU share (link)  
79 TAM ref. engineering services for construction = 23% of total (link). SAM from the figure in the article ~11% for Europe.   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 39 of 41  
2.2.3  Strategy for the management of intellectual property  
Appropriate background and results IP management will be addressed by a dedicated framework before the project 
kick-off, combined with a proactive approach during the project, securing the foreground of the project KERs & 
OERs and assessing the FTO. A Consortium Agreement (CA) will be elaborat ed to manage (amongst other things) 
issues related to IPR (ownership of results, access rights or dissemination), a summary of which is depicted in Figure 
16. This framework will create a dedicated body (Innovation Board, IB) consisting of IP expert staff from project 
partners and chaired by RIN. The IB will meet, online or face -to-face, to facilitate discussion and agreements on IP 
issues. In addition, 
the Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) 
will act as guarantor 
of the adequacy of IP 
management to long -
term project 
objectives, as well as 
decision-making 
body in case of 
conflict. Finally, T8.2 
and T9.2 will be also 
devoted to 
identifying generated 
IP and Figure 16. 
BIOGEMSE IPR 
management.  
elaborating 
protection strategies, 
eliciting agreements 
for its exploitation, 
and defining the 
necessary access 
rights (including 
conditions), all in line with the exploitation strategy set forth in the EP. Open Source will be the prioritized approach 
to foster exploitation and ease access for start-ups and SMEs to BIOGEMSE’s results during project phase.   
2.2.4  Dedicated training, up- and re-upskilling activities   
The consortium is committed to developing a robust framework for training and skilling, based on delivering needed 
materials and activities. These resources aim to address the practical design, engineering, manufacturing and 
application of using these bio-intelligent products in urban environments (even considering their circular management 
when reaching their EoL). By doing so, the project will create awareness about how these innovations can contribute 
to greener cities, aligning with sustainability goals  while overcoming potential obstacles in implementation. These 
materials will be made publicly available to ensure that the knowledge and insights generated during the project have 
a lasting impact . This approach will facilitate the transfer of knowledge not only to the project's immediate target 
groups (industry professionals or city planners), but also including the general public.  Multiple training sessions, 
such as webinars, conferences, and workshops, will be organized throughout the project duration. These events will 
involve participants from key target groups, as well as partner organizations, to foster collaboration and knowledge 
exchange. Furthermore, the materials generated from these training sessions, including video recordings, 
presentations, and other educational content, will be uploaded onto various platforms to maximize accessibility.  
Platforms like the EIT Manufacturing Academy, will serve as a repository where the materials can be freely accessed. 
By ensuring availability of these resources, the project will Associated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025provide both 
learning and teaching opportunities for a wide range of audiences, from students and educators to industry 
professionals.  
In the context of the BIOGEMSE project, specific training needs have been identified that align with the project’s 
core working areas. These include: i) Circular and sustainable bio-based material manufacturing processes, ii) The 
biologisation of production through digital manufacturing, and iii) Bio -intelligent and bio -inspired product 
manufacturing systems. The technical partners involved in these areas will develop specialized materials that reflect 
the latest advancements and best practices in these fields. Through these training initiatives, the project will contribute 
BIOGEMSE IPR Provisions on Background (Access  
Rights) 
BIOGEMSE IPR Provisions on Results 
Framework Art. 16 and related provisions in Annex 5 of the GA 
Framework Art. 16 and related provisions in Annex 
5 of the GA & written agreement on 
background needed in CA Results Protection Strategy 
KER1 3D printing ZDM system Patent + trademark 
Implementation  OER1.1 Fine-tuning of AM process Trade secret (knowledge & know-how) 
By default On a royalty-free basis OER1.2 Monitoring system for 
ZDM 
Copyright + trade secret 
Specific No specific conditions envisaged 
KER2 GD methodology Trade secret (know-how) 
Exploitation of 
project’s results 
To be revised during the project as 
depend on the technologies finally 
implemented in the results, review 
conclusions in the subsequent versions 
of the Exploitation Plan (D8.3) 
KER3 Digital Infrastructure Copyright + trademark 
OER3.1 End-to-endAAS-based 
DTs 
Copyright + trade secret (TBD upon each 
case) 
OER3.2 DPP for construction VCs Copyright + trade secret 
KER4 Sustainable & circular BMs Trade secret (know-how) 
By default On fair and reasonable conditions to be 
detailed in the Exploitation Plan (D8.3) 
KER5 Online training courses Trade secret + trademark 
Joint ownership: agreements signed beforehand to manage protection 
Specific Access Rights conditions to protected  
BG (patents, proprietary SW) or BG 
(co-) owned by 3rd parties. Access 
needed, IP management and terms to be 
revised and agreed in T8.2 & T9.2. 
Dissemination: proactive policy to disseminate project results (see sec. 2.2.1, WP8 
& WP9), fueled by OS practices. Prior notice of any activity to all partners with 
sufficient information on the results to be disseminated. 
Access Rights: For implementation on a royalty -free basis. For exploitation on fair 
and reasonable conditions except for internal research, education or training, to be 
granted on a royalty-free basis. Other provisions in the CA. 

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 40 of 41  
to building a skilled workforce capable of supporting the transition to more sustainable and intelligent manufacturing 
systems and construction technologies, ensuring that the knowledge gained is applied in practical and impactful ways.  
#§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#
2.3  Summary   
SPECIFIC NEEDS   EXPECTED RESULTS  D & E & C MEASURES  
▪ Sustainable materials 
able to compete with 
and substitute OPC.  
▪ Modular products 
and digitalisation 
(data sharing across 
value chain) to  
streamline 
construction.  
▪ Increase building 
performance, focus 
on envelope (façade, 
roof).  
▪ Competitive 
manufacturing  
technologies able to 
cope  with 
customisation & 
disruptive designs in 
new construction 
breed.  
▪ New business models 
steaming from green 
construction.  
▪ KER1: New 3D printing ZDM system 
of bio -intelligent and circular 
construction components  
▪ OER1.1: Fine-tuning of AM process 
adapted to bio-based construction 
materials.  
▪ OER1.2: Integrated advanced 
monitoring system for Zero -Defect 
Manufacturing.  
▪ KER2: New bio -inspired Generative 
Design methodology for the 
construction sector.  
▪ KER3: IDS -RAM compliant and IoT 
enabled digital infrastructure  
▪ OER3.1:  IoT  connectivity 
architecture.  
▪ OER3.2: AAS-based DTs for product 
and processes.  
▪ OER3.3: MCDS system tools.  
▪ OER3.4: DPP for construction value 
chains.  
▪ KER4: Modular bio-intelligent 
construction components.  
▪ KER5: Online training and educational 
programs for BIOGEMSE’s solutions.  
Exploitation: Individual and integrated 
exploitation strategies for KERs and OERs. 
BIOGEMSE’s business case (modular 
construction elements, 3D printing tech., 
engineering services for construction). 
Knowledge management and IPR protection 
strategies (1 patent, trade secret, copyright, and 
trademark). EP activities in WP8 & WP9. 
D&C to ALL through website & social media 
(dedicated contents per audience). 
Dissemination: Transfer (partners, industry, 
education) leveraged on results standardised 
orientation and pursuing data economy 
supporting CE. Training and upskilling, tools, 
courses and events to professionals (EIT 
platform). Outreach to Scientific Community 
& industry through: Sci.& Tech. articles, Open 
Research outputs and presentations and 
lectures in conferences & workshops. 
Activities to reach Industry & stakeholders: 
trade fairs, EU initiatives & Association 
events, project events, clustering & 
engagement, standardisation opportunities 
liaison. Communication: Tailored messages 
of outcomes and impact to specific groups.  
  
TARGET GROUPS   OUTCOMES  IMPACTS  
▪ Policy Makers & 
Regulators.  
▪ Civil society and 
social partners   
▪ Workforce  and 
professionals  
▪ Scientific 
 comm. & 
academia  
▪ SH  in 
 biointelligen
t  
 products  value  
chain  
▪ Additive 
 Manuf. 
companies   
▪ Entrepreneurial 
partnerships  
▪ AM technologies for biologisation 
approach releasing bio -intelligent 
products: ↓70% raw materials, labour costs 
↓50-80%, time ↓50-70%, waste ↓30-60%.  
▪ Enhanced sustainability in construction  
through AM of modular elements, bio-based 
& circular materials, GD and digital tools: 
costs ↓2.5 times, ↓80% CO2 in construction,  
100% recyclability, ↑35% thermal 
insulation, +200 stakeholders engaged for 
sustainable BMs, ↓80% CO 2 in bio -based 
materials compared to OPC, biochar for 
additional 0.12 KgCO2 captured/kg cement, 
↑25% energy efficiency.  
▪ AM ZDM methods, modelling and GD for 
enhanced use of bio -based materials: +70 
wt% content recycled materials, ↓95% 
defects & ↓10% materials through ZDM.  
Environmental: impacts associated with the 
generation of circular and carbon -neutral 
construction products, minimizing the 
consumption of resources and the carbon 
footprint of products and processes. 
Economic: lowering operating costs, 
through industrialization, cost -effective 
technologies and products and reducing 
material consumption. Societal: 
BIOGEMSE addresses EU’s policy priorities 
and global challenges, EGD, CEAP, Zero 
Pollution Action Plan, & SDGs 11, 12 & 13. 
-80% CO 2 emissions in production of 
modular elements, advanced AM techniques 
generating -60% waste, -80% labour costs, 
more than 0,92€ billion of annual GDP, and 
15,000 new skilled jobs by 2035.  
 #§IMP-ACT-IA§#    
Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 41 of 41  
3  QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATIONAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 
14/05/2025#@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@#
3.1  Work plan and resources   
3.1.1  Overall structure of the Work Plan  
BIOGEMSE is structured around 10 Work Packages 
(WPs) executed over 42 months and interrelated as 
shown in Figure 17. WP1 & WP10  cover the project 
coordination and management tasks. Beyond, the project 
will start with WP2, defining in detail the BIOGEMSE 
products requirements as well as agreeing on common 
protocols, standards and approaches for the digital 
infrastructure, data sharing and methodological 
assessment ( SSbD). WP3, 4 & 5  will be devoted 
specifically to the different areas of technology Figure 17.  PERT diagram of BIOGEMSE project.  development (design 
approaches, manufacturing technologies and digital solutions, respectively), running in parallel during the first period 
of the project (M6-M18), while several feedback loops (information and results sharing) among them will occur. WP3 
will leverage on the potential of novel generative approaches to expand the design space of engineers & architects 
enabling novel products to be conceived by bio -inspired concepts. WP4 will focus on extending 3D printing 
technology (novel HW and SW solutions) and developing robust and efficient manufacturing processes (modelling 
& simulation, innovative monitoring, process optimization) to enable the adoption of bio-based materials replacing 
non-sustainable conventional construction materials. WP5 will be oriented to develop the digital infrastructure, tools 
and assets supporting the implementation of agile and efficient (safe, sustainable and circular) manufacturing 
operations employing a standardised and service -oriented modular platform infrastructure, processes and products 
DT, IoT connectivity and sector-oriented DPP tool, based on a standardised and trustworthy information approach. 
On the second half of the project (M19-M36), the technologies will be further developed, integrated and upscaled in 
WP6 to jointly demonstrate the potential of the new manufacturing approaches, focussing on the refinement and 
scaling up of the processes enabled by BIOGEMSE and on the implementation of zero -defect and zero -waste 
production of bio-intelligent products. Those manufactured products will be deployed, validated and benchmarked at 
the Smart Living Labs (SLLs) under WP7 in 3 different environments, representing different climatic conditions, 
demonstration scenarios (residential housing, tertiary building, and urban infrastructures) and targeted functionalities 
within the building and construction sector. Finally, WP8&9 will centralise the dissemination, communication and 
exploitation activities, also considering technology standardisation, outreach and transfer (being skilling and training 
specifically considered), first defining the strategy (WP8 M1 -M18) and secondly (WP9 M19M42) ambitioning the 
refinement and widespread uptake of BIOGEMSE solutions.   

Call: [HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-01] — [Bio-intelligent manufacturing industries]    
EU Grants: Application form (HORIZON-CL4-2024-TWIN-TRANSITION-01): V1.0 – 17.05.2024  
 
Part B - Page 42 of 41  
3.1.2 
 Project Gantt Chart  
BIOGEMSE project Work Packages (WPs) and related Tasks (T) 
T1.1 Financial, legal and administrative management 
T1.2 Technical monitoring and risk management 
T1.3 Strategic management of the project 
T1.4 Ethics 
WP10 Project Coordination and Innovation management II 
T10.1 Financial, legal and administrative management 
T10.2 Technical monitoring and risk management 
T10.3 Strategic management of the project 
T10.4 Ethics 
WP2 Bio-inspired product requirements definition and living labs specifications 
T2.1 Detailed definition of bio-intelligent products for SLLs validation  
Figure 18. BIOGEMSE project Gantt Chart.