3.2  Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole#@CON-SOR-CS@# #@PRJ-MGT-PM@#   
3.2.1 Adequacy of the consortium for the implementation of the project The 
multidisciplinary BIOGEMSE consortium covers the whole value chain 
through the research and development of innovative digital and circular 
solutions to be implemented in 3 SLLs. Formed by 2 RTOs (ITA, AIM), 5 
SMEs (COR, IRI, IRE, VER, EIT), and 2 large companies (ACC, RIN), from 
6 different countries (Figure 19), the consortium presents a clearly 
industrydriven configuration towards solving the needs of the contruction sector 
industrialisation through a value chain approach. The 9 partners have been 
carefully sele cted from R&D leading groups, high quality technology 
developers, highlighted end users (2 of the biggest EU -and worlwide- private 
companies in the sector) and experts in impact -oriented features (data 
management, D&C&E, education, training and skilling, standardisation). Their 
complementary research and technical capabilities, know -how and expertise 
ensure the achievement of the ambitious goals of the project and will contribute 
to keep pushing the EU scientific and technical knowledge to global leading 
position. In this regard, LEs and SMEs in the consortium have already shown 
the needed capabilities to exploit the expected project results in their fields in 
the short and medium terms. BIOGEMSE partners have already collaborated in  
previous EU R&D projects ( see S1.2.3) and have proved their commitment to an efficient cooperation and to the 
generation, preservation and exploitation of common IP. On top of that, all partners have a strategic interest in the 
project.  
BIOGEMSE Technology Providers (TPs) are relevant players in the EU manufacturing and digital environment as 
developers and providers of 3D concrete printing technologies ( VER), digital solutions and tools ( COR), and 
monitoring and quality analysis tools (IRI) and they have the necessary Figure 19. Geographical distribution of background 
and infrastructure to perform their project tasks (see part A). BIOGEMSE partners.  
Moreover, End-Users (ACC and RIN) not only perform as tech. adopters but as value chain solutioAssociated with document 
Ref. Ares(2025)3881152 - 14/05/2025n providers  
(specific engineering and construction products and services). They will ensure the industrial relevance of the project 
results, and their validation in the construction sector at EU level. Furthermore, RTOs (AIM, ITA), complementary 
in competences, will put their knowledge on additive manufacturing, process simulations, bio-based materials, 
digitisation and generative AI -enhanced digital tools for product design at the service of the TPs & End -Users to 
develop advanced manufacturing technologies, digital tools and services under a common and systemic approach. In 
addition, the different partners provide not only valuable technical expertise but also bring value and experience into 
more transversal aspects that are needed to complement the technology development regarding: i) sustainability and 
circularity impact (IRE); ii) exploitation issues and dissemination, communication, engagement and standardisation 
(EIT, RIN); and iii) training activities and connection with EU training ecosystem ( EIT). Finally, it is worth 
highlighting the commitment of BIOGEMSE with the RRI principles, OS practices and gender dimension inclusion 
in the project to contribute to release higher quality science with the supervision of the project management bodies 
(see S1.2. 4 to 1.2.8).   
Further, BIOGEMSE brings project management expertise based on a strong track of successful EU projects, with 
ITA as Project Coordinator (+59 executed projects -13 coordinated- under H2020 and HE),  RIN as Exploitation 
manager and EIT as Dissemination Manager . ITA will designate the Project, Technical and Administrative 
Managers (Management Team). Project structure, procedures and decision-making have been clearly defined for the 
project management (Figure 20) and will be further detailed in the Consortium Agreement (CA).   

 
 
  
Figure 20. a) Project management structure; b) Management procedures; c) Decision-making management.  
3.2.2  Adequacy of the consortium for the pathway to successful exploitation  
In the project, solutions will be 
demonstrated and assessed in a 
relevant environment (TRL6), 
assuring the compliance of the 
enabled manufacturing value 
chains with the End-Users’ EUs- 
(early adopters) requirements 
(WP7). Once this phase is 
fulfilled (beyo nd the project), 
the evolution path is devised 
based on Figure 21, including 
the evolution of results beyond 
BIOGEMSE project 
timeframe and the role played 
by the partners, as well as their 
complementarity, to reach Figure 21. Evolution pathway beyond BIOGEMSE project.  
TRL market ready status. At initial stages, contribution of RTOs (ITA, AIM) will be required in combination with 
the effort of the Technology Providers (TPs) and support of early engaged EUs. In close-to-market stages, the main 
role will be given to TPs and the EUs where the BIOGEMSE products, solutions and tools will be demonstrated in 
the real-world (SLLs) during long periods regarding targeted applica tions. Involved companies ( IRI, COR, VER) 
have a deep understanding of the innovation and commercialisati on processes and networking connections, as they 
are regularly involved in the innovation pipeline, designing and developing new products and services. Indeed, they 
are market leaders within their segments (see partners description on part A). Moreover, involvement of top leading 
EUs as early adopters  (ACC, RIN), ensure a strong position for wide market uptake on the EU building & 
construction sector, and globally. In this line, the collaboration of these and other leading companies in the definition 
of industrial needs, through the participation in co-creation processes from the early stages and through the execution 
of the project, will strengthen the future market deployment of the project outcomes. Complementarily, the presence 
of transversal partners  (EIT, IRE ) will further ease overcoming detected adoption barriers. Apart from that, 

 
 
necessary funding to undertake follow up activities for the robustness, up -scaling and completion of the 
manufacturing systems and digital tools will be sought, comprehending the participation of the project members and 
other potential future partners in f unding opportunities. Among others, we will assess the request of funding from 
future EU calls included in the next EU FPs and the participation in accelerating programs under the EIT and other 
Knowledge and Innovation Communities in which the BIOGEMSE sol utions could be aligned with. The seek of 
funding from innovation clusters, and the application of other EU programs such as CBE will also be analysed in 
final stages of product readiness to guarantee the achievement of market-ready solutions.  
Beyond the consortium, contribution and collaboration from external relevant actors is envisaged from the project 
start to smooth/accelerate market uptake. Namely, through the execution of engaging activities as part of the D&C&E, 
stakeholders within the construction value chains will participate in the market assessment of the project r esults. 
Links with standardization bodies and reference stakeholders will be fostered to smooth the market acceptance of 
project results and explore other relevant potential end-users adopting the results. BIOGEMSE will bring all needed 
and committed parties covering the entire value chain (Figure 22).  
  
Figure 22. BIOGEMSE consortium-covered value chain. #§CON-SOR-CS§# #§PRJ-MGT-PM§#  
  
    
4