3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................................................................................................................................... 65
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED ............................................................................................................................................ 67 
 
 
  
lProposal Title: European Sustainable Bio-based nanoMAterials Community  
 Proposal Acronym: BIOMAC 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [2 of 68] 
1. Excellence
1.0 Introduction and rational to BIOMAC 
Renewable resources are important driving alternatives of economic growth in many industrial sectors holding 
promises for sustainable development, unlike conventional petroleum-based ones. Bio-based products derived from 
biomass can pass through their entire life cycle alleviating obstacles associated with solid waste disposals, supporting 
at the same time the integration with a circular economy-based material loop. Yet, technical performance, economic 
feasibility and environmental sustainability should be further enhanced to meet new market requirements.  [1] 
Especially the nano structured bio-based materials (NBM) are expected to become highly innovative materials with 
a great impact on European markets. Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) , cellulose nanocrystals (CNC),  bacteria 
nanocellulose (BNC) and nanolignin (NL), which can be utilized as functional nano -additives of bio -based 
polymers, have pr ogressively attracted considerable interest due to their abundance and potential application in 
multiple industrial sectors. The markets addressed embrace a wide spectrum of industrial fields such as packaging,  
automotive, printed electronics (PE), construction, coatings and products for 
agriculture, covering strategic sectors of growing industry.  A characteristic 
example is that of nanocellulose where the market is projected to register a 
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of more than 18% during the period 
of 2019-2024. [2] Further to this, the global lignin market size was valued at 
793.7 million Euros in 2018 and is projected to expand at a CAGR of 1.9% 
from 2019 to 2025. [3] Constant technological development integrating lignin 
with nanotechnology are expected to drive the industry further, resulting lignin 
nanomaterials to be utilized as a foundation for the production of enhanced 
high added value end products. To sustain a viable plan, meeting the market’s 
demands, it is necessary to upscale the supply chain of biopolymers 
production. In order to further enhance the quality and performance of these 
polymeric matrices the incorporation of nanoparticles  (NPs) is essential to 
achieve advanced properties thanks to their functionalities. It is worth  
 
Figure 1.1: BIOMAC Ecosystem 
mentioning that the major challenge in the area lays at the fact that new product concepts are restricted to enter the 
market because end user applications remain at small lab scale tests  having limited exploitation capacity for 
industrial deployment. To launch innovation within this growing sector, BIOMAC proposes the establishment of a 
self-sustainable ecosystem (Open Innovation Test Bed (OITB)) for upscaling of processes incorporating major 
developments in this area based on two pillars: to generate know ledge and to capture business value. Offering an 
open ecosystem BIOMAC focuses on the creation and demonstration of novel manufacturing supply and value chains 
where technologies that have been developed up to TRL 4-5, will be upscaled and validated to TRL 7, accelerating 
the process towards the market entrance. At the same time, it targets to tackle obstacles that hinder the evolution of 
concept development in the field of nano-enabled bio-based materials and products providing a unique opportunity 
of testing ideas in a well -structured open environment.  The BIOMAC ecosystem will act as a cluster of parallel 
actions that will be assembled in a structured manner deploying the classification of actions in four major groups of 
hubs. The core of the ecosystem consists of four Hubs (H). (1H) Pilot Plant Supreme Hub (PPSH) that includes 
three Pilot Lines Clusters (PLCs) covering the whole value chain, from biomass fractionation (Biomass Fractionation 
& Pre -treatment Cluster - BFPC) to intermediate chemi cals and polymers (Intermediate Material and 
Nanocomposite Cluster  – IMNC) and final nano -enabled biopolymers (Final Products & Formulation Cluster - 
FPFC). Subsequently three more hubs surround the supreme hub, with the aim of assessing the feasibility and 
sustainability of the developed concepts:  (2H) Validation Services Hub (VSH) where the services justify the 
feedstock, the technologies and the products (Quality Control Hub and Process Validation Hub), the (3H) Market 
Uptake Hub (MUH) that targets to support business perspective and legalization issues accompanied by the 
maintenance of the test cases, and finally the (4H) Value Chain assessment Hub (VCH) where the developed value 
chains will be assessed against economic and environmental cr iteria within the circular economy frameworks. The  
goal of BIOMAC is to provide open access PLs and services that will lower the cost of upscaling and accelerate the 
time-to-market for nano -enabled biomaterials, enhancing industrial sustainability and redu cing waste following a 
circular model. To reach these targets the ecosystem will function as a One-Stop-Shop (OSS) accessible at fair 
conditions and costs through the collaboration of the multidisciplinary consortium. This will be achieved through a 
Single Entry Point (SEP) which will be represented by the well-known and recognized European Association EUBP 
(European Bioplastics), handling all the business opportunities occurring at the BIOMAC ecosystem and leading 
the communication towards the clients. Additionally, EUBP has access to a significant network of decision makers 
in the world of bioplastics and a contact database for the association’s dissemination activities comprising over 8,000 
contacts which will facilitate the awareness of BIOMAC. An internally mechanism to set workflows will be handled 
by the core partners and a single offer will be defined to serve sustainably the clients’ requests.  
 
1 Can Nanotechnology Improve the Sustainability of Bio-based Products? Journal of Industrial Ecology, Volume 12, Issue 3  
2 https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/4745453/nano-cellulose-market-growth-trends-and 
3 https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/lignin-market 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [3 of 68]
1.1 Objectives  
A. Objectives related to the set-up and upgrade of the pilot line Hubs  
OA1: To set up an OITB consisting of three Clusters of PLs offering services in the field of nano-enabled bio-based 
materials. (PPSH – BFPC, IMNC & FPFC) 
OA2: To setup and build a transversal supporting service mechanism that will ensure a fast, reliable and cost-effective 
upscaling of bio-based material concepts. (VSH, MUH, VCH) 
OA3: To upgrade and appropriately modify the existing Pilot Lines through integration of monitoring and process 
control systems to cope with the biomass variability and to offer continuous and stable conversion of biomass towards 
the targeted bio-based monomers, biopolymers and nano-additives. (17 PL owners & VSH) 
OA4: To develop a holistic model of the proposed processes by demonstrating the link between characterization data 
and modelling/simulation approaches. (VSH, MUH) 
OA5: To validate the operation of the OITB through 5 selected TeCs (DIAD, NVMT, EVER, ACC & OHMAT – see 
Table 1.1.), and 5 more that will be introduced to the OITB thro ugh and open call. All TeCs will provide feedback 
and recommendations on the services provided by the OITB. 
B. Objectives related to the operation & sustainability of the ecosystem 
OB1 To establish a Single Entry Point (SEP) platform consistently with an One -Stop-Shop framework. Launch and 
operate an easily accessible platform in order to attract business cases entering the ecosystem as clients, during and 
post project. (MUH, VCH)  
OB2: To deliver key exploitable results (KER) and organize the IPR protection strategy (e.g. patents, industrial 
secrets, trademarks). Develop an IPR protection plan and a Data Management Plan (DMP) for the ecosystem. (VCH) 
OB3: To tap into niche markets, based on R&D expenditures and CAGR. Identify and penetrate industrial markets, 
by customer outreach (e.g. advertising, communication, participation in forums and fairs etc.). (All Partners) 
OB4: To continuously update the OITB business plan during  the project. Overview of EU Research Policy, 
technology transfer/offer to stakeholders in both directions (technology push, and/or demand pull, stakeholder 
access). (VSH, MUH, VCH) 
OB5: To ensure the post-project sustainability of the ecosystem and create a sustainability plan attracting post project 
turnover of five times the EU investment within the first five years after the completion. (28 Core Partners) 
C. Objectives for the assessment of environmental, economic sustainability & circularity of the ecosystem  
OC1: To deliver production processes and products based on highest efficiency and lowest possible environmental 
impact and energy requirements throughout their life cycle by means of Social-LCA /LCA/LCC. (VSH, MUH, VCH) 
OC2: To develop a Decision Support Tool (DST) for the assessment of the value chain developed within the frames 
of the ecosystem prioritizing options and optimizing processes simultaneously against different criteria. (VCH) 
OC3: To validate the circularity of value chains of the ecosystem providing alternative solutions to shift towards 
circular business models, including End of Life (EoL). (VCH) 
OC4: To demonstrate the incorporation and update of nanosa fety, regulatory, standardization, and training in the 
ecosystem, following EU (CEN, REACH) and international regulations and standards (ISO, ASTM). (MUH, VCH) 
OC5: To ensure long -term compliance with monitoring and nanosafety procedures. Establish communi cation 
networks with the nanosafety cluster (NSC), the European Materials Modelling Council (EMMC) and the European 
Materials Characterization Council (EMCC) (by developing personal contacts, on-line tools, and joint events) (All) 
OC6: To define technical and managerial guidelines that will allow the functioning of the nano enabled bio-based 
materials for the EoL management chains within a circular network through a closed loop system. (MUH, VCH)
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
Specific challenge: Nano-enabled bio-based materials can contribute to a stronger circular economy. nano …. 
The exploitation of biomass towards a spectrum of bio -based products is not new . However, the concept is facing 
many challenges such as heterogeneity of the biomass feedstock, design of sustainable conversion (bio)chemical 
processes, as well as compatibility of conventional inorganic nanomaterials with bio-based polymeric matrices, thus 
offering many possibilities for further development and upscaling. BIOMAC addresses the production of biopolymers 
as well as nanomaterials, across the entire Value Chain , which will enable optimized design of wide range of 
nanostructured materials with the goal to improve the overall circularity of the end products. Nanomaterials such as 
NFC, CNC, BNC and NL will be obtained from the earliest stages of the value chain of biomass processing  and 
fractionation to cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin, followed by production of sugar-and aromatic- derived building 
blocks for the synthesis of biopolymers and their nanocomposites reaching the formulation of the final marketable 
products. BIOMAC starts with the pre-treatment and fractioning of biomass in a semi continuous mode that can use 
multiple raw materials simulating an industrial environment . At first it will be concentrated on lignocellulosic crop 
(Miscanthus) biomass (BEECO), securing the availability of feedstock and continue processing paths without 
seasoning dependence. However, the processes are agnostic so both agricultural and forest residues are potential to 
be used, the European Biomass Industry Association (EUBIA) will contribute to open channels with existing value 
chains. Nano-cellulose (NC), Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC), Nanolignin (NL) and Bacterial nano-cellulose (BNC) 
will be used in the biopolymeric matrices in order to incorporate new functionalities with the ultimate goal to achieve 
bio-based materials with enhanced performance in terms of fu nctional (e.g. thermal stability, flame retardancy, 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [4 of 68] 
antioxidant properties, smart sensing PE, antibacterial/microbial) and mechanical behaviour in the medium to long -
term. Sustainable precursor monomers such as lactic acid (LA), succinic acid (SA) as well as different saccharides, 
polyols (such as oligosaccharides from hemicellulose, sorbitol, xylitol, ethylene glycol (EG), 1,3-Propanediol (PDO), 
1,4-butanediol (1,4-BDO), depending on the targeted resins) will be produced in order to obtain biopolymer matrices 
such as PLA and its copolymers, succinate based polyesters and resins such as isocyanate free thermoplastic 
polyurethanes (TPU) and polyurethanes (PU).  Closing, it is wo rth mentioning that around 9% percent of plastics 
entering the waste stream are recovered for recycling, though recovery rate is not necessarily indicative of a final 
recycling rate. BIOMAC will take into high consideration the environmental impacts by promoting the use of green 
technologies to meet the increasing demand for these materials without compromise to Product Quality, Durability 
& Performance or Economics. Also, end-of-life of the final products will be consistently addressed, for example 
agricultural applications biodegradable in soil are themselves a perfect case-study of the circular economy, as all the 
products originating from biomass will be incorporated into biomaterials designed to fully biodegrade in soil 
providing fertile carbon and also closing the carbon loop back into the soil. 
Scope: Establish Open Innovation Test Beds (OITB) by upgrading existing or developing new materials …. 
BIOMAC aims to create a self-sustainable open access ecosystem consisting of 17 open access PLs across the entire 
bio-based value chain comprising of the production and incorporation of bio-based nanoparticles (NC, NL & BNC) in 
the final products. Within the Pilot Plant Supreme Hub (PPSH) 3 Clusters of Pilot Lines (BFPC, IMNC and FPFC)  
will be subjected to modifications such as process control, larger scale application, batch to continuous mode, 
nanomaterial compatibility mixing and integration, process & material simulation together with monitoring systems 
ensuring more efficient process control and optimization. Supported by c haracterisation facilities, modelling tools, 
regulatory and standardization consultancy and H&S, all cooperating within the framework of innovative business 
models, that will be implem ented internally and provided as services. The assessment services include the 
consideration of s-LCA / LCA and LCC along with the development of DST towards the screening of all the possible 
options using simultaneously environmental, economic and energy criteria. To provide sustainable and holistic 
production paths, BIOMAC will offer dedicated services examining the circularity and EoL advancing towards circular 
approaches and business models. Regulatory, safety and environmental barriers will be confront ed through an 
active involvement in standardization and regulatory committees at national and European level. 
The focus is on new nano-enabled bio-based materials' functions, features  nano-enabled bio-based … 
The network of PLs in BIOMAC aims at developing tailor -made solutions for producing and integrating 
nanomaterials across the bio-based value chain that will accelerate smart functionalities and enhanced properties of 
biopolymers, as aforementioned. Depending on the final application a number of novel biopolymers, inks, coatings 
and resin materials will be developed and validated within the PL Hubs. Each material will provide a number of 
tailored properties suitable for the supply chain targeting end applications and associated Test Cases (TeC) see 1.3.1.1. 
Furthermore, EUBP is licensor of the Seedling® logo , an EN 13432 -based conformity mark of industrial 
compostability for biodegradable plastic packaging. EUBP has created and owns the Seedling® mark of conformity 
for compostability of plastic packaging. EUBP continues to be involved in the supervision of the EN 13432 standard 
upon which European certificates of biodegradability of plastic packaging are based. 
Proposals should assess regulatory, safety, economic and technical barriers and should develop and validate …. 
BIOMAC will confront the main barriers for the biomass processing and nano reinforcement offering therefore to fill 
the gap between development and market penetration readiness. Two main barriers have been identified: Quality 
control (QC) and Process Validation (PV) barriers become a crucial factor for the upgrade of the PL Hubs. Technical 
Barriers consist of limited access to large scale pilot lines for biomass pre-treatment and processing as well as lack of 
capacity to evaluate products in large scale. These will be surpassed by the overall structure of the ecosystem that has 
addressed a multidisciplinary field. The Exploitation barriers such as the high risk for investors to adopt non -
validated and non-standardized technologies etc., and low profit margins leading to limited resources to invest in R&D, 
will be overcome via continuous innovation management and securing the Freedom to Opera te (FTO), meeting real 
market needs. EUBP is a member of several CEN and ISO committees dealing with plastics and packaging, providing 
authoritative input for all relevant standards on the European level which will help to the full scale exploitation of the 
new industrial products. 
Open access at fair conditions and cost as well as outreach and dissemination across Europe, based on ….. 
BIOMAC will provide open access through a SEP to clients, particularly SMEs, giving them the opportunity to design, 
upscale and test biomaterials at a fair cost, without investing beforehand huge budgets for the upgrade of PL Cs. 
Industrial requirements will be clearly defined and stated, technology road mapping will help dealing with the 
increasingly competitive markets, followed by business planning and market mapping, while competitive strategies 
and Intellectual Property (IP) tracking will also be established. To facilitate these actions, a web platform, acting as a 
virtual SEP will developed. The platform wil l be dedicated to clients to support their involvement in the OITB with 
the submission of their test cases (RDC). BIOMAC will liaise with SMEs, MidCaps, Stakeholders, and investors 
community to commercialize products deriving from the multiple supply chain s through its dissemination channels 
(website, fairs/workshops, communication material & training). The Innovation and Exploitation will facilitate SMEs 
access to funding opportunities and access to additional funding (VCs and/or Angel investors). 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [5 of 68] 
Materials should be demonstrated in relevant industrial environments. 
Test and Demonstration activities in an industrial environment will validate the proper Value Chain and Product 
development operation. In particular, 5 TeC covering different industrial fields relevant in the European market, such 
as that of packaging, automotive, printed electronics, construction and agriculture will be addressed and demonstrated. 
A detailed presentation of the end products is included in Table 1.1. These TeC will be used as lighthouse case studies 
to attract additional clients . Moreover, through an open call for access, five more TeCs  will enter at Month 33 the 
OITB. All 10 TeCs will lead to prototypes that will be demonstrated and validated in TRL7 (operational environment) 
by the End Users in collaboration with the OTB members.  
… to facilitate cooperation across Europe, with other projects … in the course of the project. 
The BIOMAC OITB consist of 3 3 partners from 1 2 countries across Europe represented by technological 
organisations with important contribution of industrial players (11 SMEs, 3 Associations and 3 LE). Further to this, 
there are similar initiatives (previously funded OITB & BBI) and established European/National clusters that partners 
of the BIOMAC consortium are already involved in (e.g., EPPN, Nanosafety, TireMat- IPBG, Luxembourg, Flagship 
graphene, AFTERLIFE, NanoFutures). BIOMAC will further promote and facilitate cooperation. 
Activities should start at TRL 4 and achieve TRL 7 at the end of the … proposals requesting other amounts 
BIOMAC has been built around new technological solutions of the entire supply and value chain. TRL4 PLs has been 
already reached and demonstrated by work conducted previously by the partners and a total funding of 14.807.314€ 
is required to reach TRL7.
1.3 Concept and methodology 
1.3.1 Concept of BIOMAC OITB 
BIOMAC intends to build a sustainable OITB consisting of 
17 Pilot Plants and supported by various technical and 
non technical services for the upscaling of new bio -based 
materials concepts.  The PLs have been selected based on 
their versatility and complementarity to deliver nano-enabled 
biomaterials based on alternative types of biomass, leading to 
products addressing a large variety of industrial sectors of 
prominent relevance in the growing market. The ecosystem 
will secure its proper operation based on an already developed 
business plan and marketability strategy. A supporting 
mechanism in te rms of Services Hub  has been set up 
following a holistic approach that includes process control, 
validation, QA/QC, innovation management, circularity, 
standardization, certification, nanomaterials handling safety 
and regulatory aspects that will support the smooth transition 
of product ideas to the market. (Figure 1.2) After the 
completion of the project, the OITB will operate via its SEP 
EUBP promoting the collaboration and knowledge transfer to 
SMEs, levelling the deployment and commercialisation of the 
results. BIOMAC will be implemented in three phases: 
 
Figure 1.2: BIOMAC OITB Structure 
Phase 1 : Set up of the structural and organizational aspects of  BIOMAC. The first phase relates to the 
organization of the four Hubs, the development of workflows and the definition of internal and external operational 
procedures. The focus will be given to the proper operation of the Hubs highlighting the tracking of the value chain 
and streamlining the synergies between stakeholders. The ability of innovators to engage with end user community 
to understand their needs, motivations and issues is critical to develop products that meet the market needs. Based 
on this fact th e u ser-driven ecosystem will  focus on the interaction with the potential customers (upstream and 
downstream) as well as on bridging producers with end users. A SEP mechanism will be set up to simplify the access 
of the end users to the OITB. EUBP SEP will have the mandate to sign contracts with clients on behalf of the OITB 
members. During this phase, all administrative, organizational and operational aspects will be defined.  
Phase 2: Validation of the ecosystem . During the second phase, the ecosystem will  be validated in relation to the 
services that provides. At first, internal Test Cases (interTeCs) will validate the proper operation (the 5 TeCs already 
existing in the consortium DIAD, NVMT, EVER, ACC & OHMA) and second, an open call for expression of interest 
for industry and particular SMEs will be launched inviting 5 more intra Test Cases (intraTeCs) accessing the OITB. 
Both upstream (materials producers, service providers) and downstream (end users, integrators) industries will access 
the ecosystem through the SEP and specific cases will be created based on the needs, specifications and requirements 
of each case. During the validation process a variety of case studies will be examined focusing on new value chains. 
Phase 3: Ecosystem sustainability. The BIOMAC ecosystem will be set up in order to ensure its future financial 
sustainability. During the project appropriate activities will be undertaken towards this direction with special 
emphasis to the promotion of extroversion. A dissemination and communication plan will be implemented including 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [6 of 68] 
workshops, marketing activities, and open access of the ecosystem during the Phase 2. Ecosystem business plans will 
be developed targeting in the acquisition of clients and the creation of additional turnovers and jobs. [4] This all will 
create progressively OITB business model and will create opportunities and commercial contracts. 
 
1.3.1.1 Hubs of the BIOMAC OITB  
A. Pilot Plant Supreme Hub (PPSH): This hub includes three clusters of PLs for the upscaling of multifunctional 
nanostructured materials that will be available for open access by the clients of the ecosystem. In particular, the OITB 
starts from the biomass pre-treatment, followed by the  production of nano materials and intermediate platform 
chemicals, towards the development of end bio -products offering multiple advantages such as shorter processing 
time, better selectivity, lower energy and footprint, less production steps and reduction of by-products. The ecosystem 
is based on three cluster of PL, along the overall value chain:  
(i) Biomass Fractionation & Nanocomposite Production Cluster (BFNC): This group consists of 2 Pilot Lines (PL) 
(a) Advanced semi continuous Organosolv - Steam Explosion Fractionation (LTU) and (b) hydrothermal treatment 
(BBEPP). Based on these innovative processes, the Ecosystem will be able to cover  the pre-treatment of the most 
common type of lignocellulosic biomass available in Europe, while intending to addi tionally validate relevant 
fractions of biomass. The pre-treatment lines are devoted to fractionating the feedstock allowing the extraction of the 
most profitable fractions of biomass (i.e., cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin) to be fully valorised across  the value 
chains. These main fractions are serving either as precursors towards the production of intermediate monomers or 
for producing nanocellulose/nanolignin/biochar [5] 
(ii) Intermediate Materials and Nanocomposite Production Cluster  (IMNC): produce state -of-the-art platform 
chemicals such as LA, SA and different polyols/diols (BBEPP, ATB, AUTH) that will be employed as biomass -
derived monomers and building blocks to finally produce bio -based polymers and related nanocomposites. Further 
to these technologies this cluster of PLs involves the production of nano-based materials, such as NFC, CNC, BNC, 
NL and Biochar. [6,7;8] (ITENE, RISE, UEdin, LIST, Cnano). These nanomaterials will be applied along the value 
chain with a scope of enhancing the properties and functionalities of the bio-based polymers for the targeted end user 
applications. [9] In addition, the isolated lignin as well as suitable oligosaccharides and small molecular weight lignin 
fractions generated during the biomass pre-treatment will be incorporated as components with other building blocks 
for the production of fully biobased and isocyanate free TPU with tailored properties (LIST, FH, AUTH).  
(iii) Final Products Production & Formulation Hub  (Cluster): Thermoplastic polymers such as PLA and its 
copolymers, TPU, polyesters and PU/resins will be processed through reactive extrusion REX (LIST, AIMP), [10] 
additive manufacturing (AIMEN), inkjet printing (DTI), coating (ITE , AIMP) and R2R Nanoimprint lithography  
(NNT). These will cover end user applications for automotive (DIAD), biodegradable in soil agricultural applications 
(NVMT) food packaging (EVER), construction (ACC) and printed electronics in textile/wearables sector (OHMA). 
The choice of the applications has not only been based on the wide market but also based on their end-of-life in the 
automotive, food, framer of circular economy and to produce eco-friendly products. 
 
PL descriptions, Upgrade & Modification Plan : In order to achieve an efficient exploitation of the PPSHs and 
accommodate a customized approach each PL has foreseen necessary modifications and upgrades that will take place 
where necessary (e.g. integration of auxiliary and peripheral systems, upscaling and continuous operation) in order to 
provide flexibility on the adoption of a variety of bio-based monomers, polymers and nanoparticles. PLs Orange stand 
for Pre -Treatment, Green for Nanomaterials production and Blue for monomers and nano-enabled bio -based 
materials. The upgrades scheme is presented: 
PL1 (LTU, SE): Semi-continuous organosolv-steam explosion pre-treatment PL  
The semi-continuous organosolv-steam explosion pre-treatment PL is capable 
of fractionating lignocellulosic biomass (e.g. agricultural  and forest residues) 
to its three main polymer components, i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. 
It offers unique advantages by com bining the effects of steam explosion with 
that of hemicellulose and lignin solubilization (organosolv) in ethanol/water 
mixtures under pressure and temperatures up to 200 oC. The Semi-continuous 
PL of LTU provides the additional benefit of solid/liquid sep aration that can 
take place during operation at high temperature and pressure, simulating the 
continuous organosolv operation mode. This process offers unique advantages 
when compared with the conventional batch process, such as reduction of the 
specific energy consumption by almost 50%, significant reduction of the   
lignin content in the extracted cellulose fraction and increased recovery of un-degraded lignin. 
 
4 [EUBP] Bioplastic market data 2019 – Global production capacities of bioplastics 2019 – 2024” 
5 [LTU] P. Christakopoulos et.all. Technoeconomic Assessment of Hybrid Organosolv–Steam Explosion Pretreatment of Woody Biomass 2019, 12, 4206 
6 [LIST] Y. Habibi. Cellulose NC: Chemistry, Self-Assembly, and Applications, Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 6, 3479-3500 
7 [LIST] Y. Habibi. Key advances in the chemical modification of nanocelluloses, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 5, 1519-1542 
8 [PoliMi] G. Griffini. NL by ultrasonication and their incorporation in waterborne polymer nanocomposites, https://doi.org/10.1002/app.45318 
9 [AUTH] D Bikiaris, Can NP enhance thermal stability of polymers? an overview on thermal decomposition of addition polymers, Therm Acta 523 (1-2), 1-24 
10 [LIST] Y. Habibi, et.all. Polylactide (PLA)-based nanocomposites Progress in Polymer Science, 2013, 38 (10-11), 1504-1542 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [7 of 68] 
Upgrade & Modification Plan: The current semi-continuous set-up will be upgraded to a fully continuous system by 
adding a continuous biomass feeder with a capacity of 1-3 kg/h of wood chips, which will be continuously introduced 
to the main reactor while in operation (50-60% w/w ethanol/water as solvent, up to 200°C and up to 30 bar), producing 
a solid fraction as a press cake, containing mainly cellulose, a liquid fraction (the press juice) containing the 
solubilized hemicellulose, and lignin. 
 
PL2 (RISE, SE): Hydrolysis of fibre sludge and BNC production.  
Fibre sludge (FS), a side stream from the pulp and paper industry will 
be used as the raw material for Bacterial nanocellulose (BNC) 
production. FS will be enzymatically hydrolysed, and the released 
sugars will be converted to BNC by a Komagataeibacter. strain isolated 
in house. Both Hydrolysis and fermentation stages will be carried out 
in the Pilot park of RISE equipped with fermenters with capacities from 
50L to 600L. RISE manages also demonstration scale  equipment (M3 
scale) (Biorefinery Demonstration Plant) which is available for 
enzymatic hydrolysis of FS during the project. Optimisation of 
operational parameters such as the feeding rate and stirring speed will 
be performed, targeting increased productivities, yields and titres of 
BNC. Optimization to define the crucial factors (endogenous or   
exogenous) for BNC production by will be performed. The factor(s) defined will be used as the target of an 
evolutionary engineering strategy to be applied in parallel with process optimization, targeting an improved 
fermentative performance at certain process conditions. 
Upgrade & Modification Plan:  An upgrade of downstream processing will also be performed wi th regard to the 
continuous mode of operation . The fermenters will be upgraded with all necessary instruments for continuous, fed 
batch or batch production of BNC. 
 
PL3 (AUTH, GR):  Sugar derived polyols and diols by catalytic hydrogenation/hydrogenolysis  
The pilot line will comprise of high-pressure, continuous flow, two packed-
bed reactors that can operate in separate or in cascade mode for the initial 
selective production of polyols/sugar alcohols (sorbitol, xylitol) and the 
controlled downstream hydrogenolysis to glycols/diols (glycerol, EG, 1,2 -
PDO), using state-of-the-art commercial or in-house catalysts. This pilot line 
configuration offers the flexibility to simultaneously operate both processes 
which require different conditions, e.g. 100-120oC, 40 -80 bar H 2 for 
hydrogenation vs. 180-240oC, 40-80 bar H2 for hydrogenolysis.  Similarly, 
when sugar derived di -acids (e.g. succinic acid) will be used as feed stock, 
the production of α,ω -diols (e.g. 1,4 -BDO) will be performed via lactone 
(GBL) intermediate formation. The polyols/diols product streams will  
be used as received in the various polymerization reactions in comparison to pure single compounds towards 
minimizing the need of separation/purification and increasing the economics of the whole value chain. Still, 
separation/purification of polyols/diols from the product mixtures will be also developed in PL 6. 
Upgrade & Modification Plan: The PL will be upgraded by adding a second high pressure, continuous flow stirred 
reactor (with a process capacity of 1 -20 L/day of 10-20wt.% sugar feed solution, depending on the required WSHV) 
with the necessary peripherals, such as catalyst packed -bed holding device, furnace, tubing, mass flow controllers, 
feeding pumps, high pressure gas/liquid separators and product collectors, alarm shut off valves, control and data 
acquisition systems. The existing high pressure, continuous flow packed-bed reactor, operating under trickle-bed mode 
will be also upgraded with a larger tube reactor (processing capacity 1-20 L/day of 10-20wt.% sugar feed solution).  
 
PL4 (Cnano, GR) US assisted PL reactor for the production of NL  
This PL will allow to obtain stable colloidal suspensions of NL particles in 
the range of 10 to 50 nm by physical treatment avoiding the need of 
hazardous chemical pre‐ or post‐treatments. In the current PL configuration, 
the US treatment will enhance the exploitability of lignin as nanostructured 
functional filler (enhanced thermal stability, antibacterial properties, 
biocide action) in bio-based polymer formulations and compounds at a 50L 
batch scale reactor. The flow cell throughput rate will be around 100 L/h – 
with main variables being viscosity of the dispersion (solids concentration) 
and desired degree of processing (US frequency and amplitude, power, 
treatment time, temperature), to selectively control size, size -distribution 
and chemical characteristics of the resulting NL particles.  

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [8 of 68] 
Upgrade & Modification Plan: Upscale of US reactor at a frequency higher than 20 kHz, 1500 W power. When used 
with a flow cell it can run larger sample volumes in recirculation to establish the correlation between process 
parameters, such as amplitude, temperature and residence time, and the process results (NL particle yield, size and 
size distribution, chemical functionality). Investments will be done in order to upscale the material throughput and 
adapt the process conditions of the PL by installing a higher power US probe and by integrating an in-line temperature 
monitoring system. The process monitoring will be connected to CPI units to remotely finetune the process.  
 
PL5 (BBEPP, BE): Hydrothermal pre-treatment of biomass  
Pre-treatment of biomass will be performed in order to obtain lignin, 
hemicellulose or cellulose rich fractions. These fractions or the related monomer 
sugar streams after enzymatic hydrolysis will be further processed in PL7 and 10. 
Pure sugar streams (i.e. glucose or xylose) in combination with PL6, will serve as 
substrate to PL3 for catalytic hydrogenation/hydrogenolysis to sugar alcohols 
(polyols) and diols. Each pre-treatment method works differently in the physico-
chemical deconstruction of lignocellu losic structures thus resulting in different 
oligomeric and monomeric enriched fractions. Two main methods will be applied, 
both leading to efficient separation of the biomass fractions and increased 
enzymatic hydrolysis towards monomer sugars. 1st Approach: Weak acid and 
hydrothermal pre-treatment which increases the solubility of the hemicellulose, 
resulting in a hemicellulose rich liquid fraction. The remaining solid fraction 
contains cellulose and lignin that can be further processed by enzymatic 
hydrolysis resulting in a glucose rich liquid fraction. 2nd Approach: Alkaline pre-
treatment which increases the solubility of the lignin fraction, resulting in a solid   
fraction enriched in cellulose and hemicellulose, which can be easily enzymatically hydrolysed to monomeric sugars. 
For the different biomasses, parameter optimization will be required in order to achieve the desired monomeric 
characteristics, while limiting the formation of unwanted by-products (inhibitors) such as furfural and hydroxy methyl 
furfural. All these processes will be performed in batch reactor vessels up to 4 x 8 m³, stem, up to 6 bars. The liquid 
fraction will be separated from the remaining solid fraction using centrifugal technology, such as decantation, or size 
exclusion technology (filter press, membrane cross flow filtration, etc.). 
Upgrade & Modification Plan:  In order to improve biomass fractionation capabilities implementation of grinding 
and milling steps before pre-treatment will take place or an improvement of the pre-treatment capacities will be 
applied to be able to reach higher temperature during pre-treatment. 
 
PL6: (BBEPP, BE): Recovery / Separation   
The different liquid fractions from different pilot lines, such as PL5 and 
PL3, will be further purified in PL 6 when needed. This pilot line comprises 
filtration equipment (microfiltration, ultrafiltration, nanofiltration and 
reversed osmosis), ion exchange equipment, solvent extraction technology 
and crystallization to obtain monomeric fractions that then can be further 
processed in other process lines. Pure monomer sugar streams (i.e. glucose 
or xylose) will be recovered from the liquids of PL5, while sugar alcohols 
(i.e. sorbitol) will be separated and recovered from smaller glycols, e.g. EG 
and PG, from the liquid products of PL3. The pure compounds will be used 
in the va lue chain for hydrogenations or polymerizations and will be 
compared to the performance of using mixed streams, i.e. mixed 
polyols/diols.  
Upgrade & Modification Plan: In order to ensure the purity and recovery of the biomass fractions and materials 
optimization tools for simulations and mathematical optimisation will be applied for the optimisation of the processes. 
 
PL7 (ATB, DE) Enzymatic Hydrolysis & Microbial Fermentation for SA and LA.  
Succinic & lactic acid (SA/LA) from several feedstock streams will be produced 
by ATB at laboratory and pilot-scale using several fermentation approaches. (1) 
Enzymatic hydrolysis depolymerizing biopolymers like starch, cellulose to 
fermentative sugars glucose (C6) and xylose (C5), by m eans of hydrolytic 
enzymes; (2) Fermentation metabolizing sugars to LA and SA; (3) Separation 
and purification of lactic/succinic acid purification to meet the standards of 
commercial applications; (4) Up -scaling of the entire process chain including 
downstream processing for the provision of product samples in kg -scale and 
high quality. Fermentation and biomass composition can be followed 
conveniently by NIR as done by IRIS in prior PERCAL and AgriMax projects.  
Upgrade & Modification Plan : A stable cont inuous process improves the entire productivity, online measurement 
devices to get quicker results of different steps especially for DSP will be evaluated.  At line measurement devices to 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [9 of 68] 
get quicker results of the different steps from the upstream (hydrolysis) via bioconversion (fermentation) up to 
downstream processing (separation and purification of LA & SA) will be needed across with process optimization  to 
attain high productivities of the main products (LA, SA) by changing parameters such as carbon source feeding regime 
to avoid substrate inhibition, the optimum dry matter content and the best nutrient supplementation for several bacteria.   
 
PL8 (UEdin, UK) Pyrolysis and carbonisation of biomass  
This PL will process biomass fractions up to 50kg/h of input material at 
temperatures up to 8500C, producing porous solid carbons, liquids rich in phenolic 
compounds, and combustible gases. Solid carbons with high porosity and tuneable 
surface functionality, and controllable electrical conductivity, suitable for 
additives for packaging polymers, printed electronics, building materials, animal 
feed additives and agricultural products (fertilisers and s oil amendment) can be 
produced by this facility. The PL control and monitoring system will be upgraded, 
an improved feed preparation and feeding system will be added to enable handling 
of diverse feedstock materials including nanomaterials. In addition, se nsors for 
feedstock composition monitoring and product quality monitoring will be added 
as well as environmental emissions monitoring system.  
Upgrade & Modification Plan : the pilot scale facility will be upgraded to allow higher feedstock flexibility (size, 
density, shape, etc.) so that difficult to handle materials, e.g. lignin or nanoparticle containing materials, can be 
processed, advanced process monitoring and control (feedstock composition, material flows, T, gas, etc.), improved 
product recovery and separation (phenolic compounds, organic acids, etc.), and improved environmental performance 
(effluent and product gas handling and monitoring) will be implemented. The ai m is to enable reliable, efficient and 
safe processing into selected final, such as porous solid carbons and phenol-rich liquids up to TRL7. 
 
PL9 (LIST, LU) Continuous Reactive Extrusion for TPU  
Reactive Extrusion of TPU will be carried out in a twin-screw extruder 18 mm 
equipped with 6 gravimetric solid feeders which allow a continuous processing. 
Such process offers many advantages over standard polymerisation processes 
which are batch and not very flexible in terms of conditions. Indeed, while 
being e asy to control, our continuous reactive extrusion process allows 
polymers/monomers out-puts from up to 10 kg/h under a variety of specific 
energy conditions: temperatures up to 450 °C, - screw speed up to 1200 rpm, - 
large diversity of complementary screw profiles, - length of extrusion from 44 
to >100 L/D when combining extruders together in tandem. Besides, when   
combined to simulation software, it is possible to simulate any scale of the developed twin-screw extruder. At first, it is 
expected to use a UV/Vis spectrophotometer in the feeder of the lignocellulosic biomass to track phenolic compounds 
and adjust the process accordingly. A spectrometer equipped with optical probes (expectedly in the NIR range) will 
be connected to several ports along the extruder to follow in situ the evolution of the degree of polymerization of the 
non-isocyanate thermoplastic polyurethanes (e.g. tracking the esterification and/or amine conversion).   
Upgrade & Modification Plan : Besides the quality of the dispersion of the nanoparticles in the thermoplastic, the 
online determination of the progress of polymerization is also of interest. Indeed, a FT -NIR spectrometer will be 
installed inline to determine in situ the degree of polymerizatio n of the non -isocyanate thermoplastic PU, it is 
envisaged to set different inline monitoring points along the REX line leveraging the potential of photonic techniques 
in tailored spectral ranges. A FT -NIR equipped with optical probes will be connected to s everal ports along the 
extruder to follow in situ the evolution of the degree of polymerization of the non -isocyanate thermoplastic 
polyurethanes. Optionally, UV-Vis spectrophotometer will be installed in the feeder to track phenolic compounds and 
adjust the process accordingly. 
 
PL10 (LIST, LU): Mechanical milling and  Production of different grades of nanofibrillated cellulose NFCs  
Nanocellulose substrates in the form of nanofibrillated cellulose (NCFs) will be 
produced through mechanical shearing of pure cellulosic fibres or cellulose fibers with 
different compositions particularly different content of residual lignin; all of them 
produced from LTU PL. A SuperMassColloider Grinder from Masuka with treatment 
capacity of 100 kg/h of cellulose slurries (up to 5% of cellulose content) will be used. 
This technology allows treatment of different cellulose fibres (short and long) with 
various compositions at lowest energy consump tion and without clogging issues 
encountered with the other technologies. The treatment can be adjusted to produce 
NFCs with desired aspect ratio (Length/Diameter). Chemical pre-treatment based on 
oxidative agents will be used when needed to soften the fibers prior to the mechanical 
treatment. Post chemical modifications of the resulting NFCs to meet better 
compatibilsation with the polymeric matrices and/or introduce additional desired 
functionalities can be also realised. The final NFCs will be incorporated in the  

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [10 of 68] 
polymeric (nano)materials for the targeted applications owing their properties. 
Upgrade & Modification Plan : a continuous set -up will be integrated allowing treatment of different amounts 
enabling thus the screening of different conditions to adapt to different end-use applications and a monitoring system 
in order to produce constant quality. 
 
PL11 (AIMP, ES) Reactive extrusion (REX) for PLA and PLA copolymer based nanocomposites. 
The core of the REX pilot line consists in a twin screw extruder with 27 
mm of screw diameter and L/D ratio of 56, equipped with several side 
feeders, vacuum venting and liquid injection ports , that will be used as a 
continuous reactor for polymerization of PLA and its copolymers by Ring 
Opening Polymerization (ROP) of lactide. The main advantages of the 
REX process compared to standard batch approaches is a faster 
polymerization (from hours to a few min), [ 11] the ability to work in a 
continuous mode, showing better mixing/dispersion capacity, and 
making easier to handle high viscosity materials in a free or almost free 
solvent process. The polymerization of PLA and its copolymers will be 
carried out in presen ce of NPs obtained in other PLs, thus allowing the 
in-situ polymerization of PLA nanocomposites to be extruded into 
pellets. The production capacity will range up to 10 kg/h. REX conditions 
will be applied in a co -rotating twin screw extruder where the fin al 
process parameters (screw and extruder configuration, T profile, 
throughput and residence time) will be optimized. 
 
 
Upgrade & Modification Plan : Different twin screw extruders are available (L/D ratio 44 -56) with several side 
feeders, vacuum venting, injection ports for liquids/gases, feeders. Software tools to screw simulation will support the 
process design to achieve productions of 4-8 kg/h. In terms of in line monitoring of REX, a similar approach will be 
followed as for LIST, adjusting the monitoring points and spectral range to the specificity of the PLA reaction process 
(e.g. FT-MIR could be needed to obtain a fine tracking of the extent of the reaction 
 
PL12 (FH-WKI, DE) Resins Pilot Line  
In this PL, monomers from PL3, such as succinic acid, glycerol, EG, 1,2 -PDO and 
sugar alcohols will be used as starting materials for bio -based polyester and 
polyurethane resins. For UV -curing applications, bio -based itaconic acid or acrylic 
acid will be incorporated into the polymers. The resi ns will be synthesized by 
azeotropic polycondensation or polyaddition reactions. Reactors on lab-scale (up to 2 
kg) and small pilot scale (up to 4 kg) in a double -walled steel reactor and computer-
monitored temperature control for the synthesis of polymer resins will be upscaled. 
These polymer resins will be used as starting materials for additive manufacturing and 
printing inks. In addition, the resins can be formulated for coatings and additive 
manufacturing purposes and applied on different substrates. UV-curing of samples, as 
well as SLA-machine for additive manufacturing is available. 
 Upgrade & Modification Plan: Investment for a bigger reactor (up to 50 kg) to be able  
to provide bigger polymer resins volumes necessary for additive manufacturing, coating and printing ink applications 
envisaged. This will also allow for larger volumes for industrial clients, interested in the services of this during and 
after the funding period of this project. 
 
PL13 (ITE, ES) Mechanical treatment to produce NFC and / or CNC 
Cellulose will be mechanically disintegrated in a grinder. This grinder will work in 
continuous mode and viscosity will be inline monitored. It will reduce working times, 
reagents and material losses, in or der to supply particles in the proper format to the 
companies. It is expected the production of 1 kg dry MFC, NFC or CNC / day. Surface 
modification of nanocellulose to enhance its dispersion in polymers, coatings and /or 
inks will be carried out in vessel s (from 20 to 150 litres) equipped with temperature 
heaters. Where needed, different stirring systems (ultrasounds and turrax) from PL14 
will be used. 2kg of dried modified nanocellulose per day will be produced. Finally, 
for those final applications which  would require nanocellulose in dry form, the pilot 
Spray-drier (GEA) will be used to obtain different particle sizes (50g/day).   
Upgrade & Modification Plan: The grinder will be modified to with an automatic feeding system for continuous flow 
and inline monitoring, increasing the production of NFC to 2 kg dry NFC/day. On the other hand, acquisition of new 
disintegration stones will be needed to obtain smaller fibre sizes.  The surface modification system will be upgraded 
 
11 Jérôme, Robert. et.all. (2000). New developments on the ring opening polymerisation of polylactide. Industrial Crops a nd Products. 11. 265 -275. 
10.1016/S0926-6690(99)00053-9. 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [11 of 68] 
through the acquisition of n ew equipment to improve the dispersion and mixing, increasing the reaction yields. 
Upscaling of the pilot spray drier to increase the dry nanocellulose production capacity will be done via the 
modification of its cellulose inlet nozzle.  
 
PL14 (ITE, ES) Coating Formulation PL  
The nanocellulose obtained in the PL13, as well as other 
bio-based materials from the others PLs will be used in this 
PL to formulate nano based coatings and inks. This PL will 
be based in a previous step for mixing and dispersing bio-
based material with the other compounds needed in the 
formulation. equipped with tempera ture heaters and 
Different stirring systems equipped with temperature 
heaters will be used. In case it will be needed, vessels (from   
20 to 150 litres) from PL13 will be used. For milling, 2 different equipment will be available according to the viscosity 
of the product to be processed. For those products with a lower viscosity which will be used to the formulation of 
liquid inks, a Labstar horizontal bead mill will be used. For those products with a higher viscosity, such as coatings 
or paste inks, a three-roll mill will be used. 
Upgrade & Modification Plan : The mixing and dispersion system will be upgraded through the acquisition of new 
modules and accessories to improve the dispersion and mixing, increasing the reaction yields. 
 
PL15 (AIMEN, ES) Additive manufacturing (AM)  
PL15 will cover the value chain from product engineering to the final 
product manufacturing related to two 3D printing technologies for bio -
based materials processing: Fused Filament Fabrication (FFF) for 
thermoplastic TPU (LIST) polymers and photopolymeri zation (SPP & 
MPP) for bio -based resins  (FH-WKI). PL15 consists of a prototype 
composed by physical infrastructure and a digital process pipeline. 
Infrastructure for FFF process integrates: 1) Filament extruder for 
creation of thermoplastic FFF filaments, with customized percentage of 
nano-additives (including cooling and filament winding); 2) a FFF multi-
nozzle and high temperature printing machine enabling a part 
manufacturing (up to 420 x 590 x 400 mm), and temperatures monitoring; 
3) a robotized FFF printing head to extend the building volume and   
freedom for manufacturing complex geometries.  Infrastructure for photopolymerization process implemented in 
isolated pulsed lasers from picosecond to femtosecond pulse -width, with wavelength in the UV -Vis-NIR, including 
the optics to focus the laser beam, the mechanical axes to manufacture parts up to 10 cm x 10 cm, specific illumination 
and equipment for post-curing process. The digital pipeline available will transform the parts design into a 3D printing. 
Upgrade & Modification Plan : New extruders will enable the multimaterial robotized printing in case of FFF 
technology, extending the number of materials that can be processed for one part manufacturing. Hardware and 
software control will be developed to implement quality control systems during filament manufacturing, and process 
control based on thermal cameras will be incorporated to the FFF process. For SPP and MPP, the modification 
optimization of the resins obtained in other BIOMAC -PLs will studied to add the specific photoinitiati or (PI). A 
system made of a laboratory cuvette, semiautomatic resin dispenser and substrate gripper, synchronized with the laser 
microfabrication workstation will be set for the SPP experiments. A new set of microscope objectives will be 
incorporated to SPP/MPP setup for fast fabrication of 3D precise structures.  
 
PL16 (DTI, DK) Printed electronics.  
The PE pilot line consist of an ink formulation line and an 
inkjet printing pilot line. The main focus will be to increase 
automation, throughput and flexibility of each pilot line, in 
order to bring idea to prototypes below 3 months. The ink 
formulation pilot lines will consist of rapid screening 
capabilities, with embedded artificial intelligence, in order 
to make optimized Design of Experiments (DoE). Print 
lines will be expanded with high throughput printing 
increasing flexibility. Bio based TPU and PU resins will be 
screen printed using ink based on CNC / NFC where 
viscosity and rheology will be optimized.   
Upgrade & Modification Plan: Dispersing and mixing robots will be implemented into the ink formulation screening 
pilot lines, for full automation. Implementation of AI for fully automated experiments to testing procedures. 
Upgrading print lines to include a manual dispensing /pick and place system for placing SMDs on flexible substrates 
using bio-based adhesives developed in BIOMAC.   

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [12 of 68] 
 
PL17 (NNT, GR) R2R Nanopatterning and thermoforming.  
Topographical nanotexturing and 3D forming by means of nanoimprint 
& vacuum thermoforming methods on BNC will permit tailored 
antimicrobial surface functionalisation. NNT PL will be upgraded to 
accommodate 300mm wide web PLA films while inspection tools for 
quality control will be encompassed. NNT micro/nano structuring pilot 
line will be modified and upgraded to meet the specification of the 
targeted objectives, such as antimicrobial food packaging materials. The 
R2R micro-nano structured foils will be converted to sheets with the 
desired sizes/formats and processed to a post thermoforming step. The 
replicated and formed micro/nano textured surfaces with complex and 
highly curved 3D shapes will be assessed to assure the desired properties.     
Upgrade & Modification Plan : The synchronisation of all steps within the manufacturing value chain will be 
adjusted to fit the requirements established in TeC3 food packaging industrial applications. In this context, the 
fabrication steps for of large area (500mm x 500mm) master moulds necessary for the R2R embossing step will be 
suitable adapted, while the existing R2R imprinting pilot line will be upgraded to accommodate up to 500 mm wide 
web films of thickness up to 3 mm. Further to the dimensional (web) upgrade of the R2R pilot lin e processing 
variables such as speed, tension, coating, and film surface cleaning/passivation treatment will be adjusted.  
 
Transversal Services: The hub of pilots is accompanied with a series of services that are grouped in three hubs 
depending on the nature of the service. Next to the PPSH, a transversal service mechanism Hub will be mobilized in 
order to provide services across the supply and value chain serving at the same the needs of TeC in order to ensure 
market replication.  
 
B. Validation Services Hub (VSH) : This group of services examines the feedstock, the technologies and the 
products from chemical, environmental and economical perspective and will consists of: (i) Quality Control , 
Characterization: the validation of the novel materials will take place utilizing advanced characterization techniques 
evaluating functional properties (e.g. mechanical, physical and chemical performance). (PoliMi, UBU) Promoting 
the bridging of materials developments with end users and real market applications, BIOMAC will enable end users 
in various fields that will facilitate real field tests of novel materials. (ii) Standardization: Compliance with standards 
of all results and defining the specific actions to direct the  development activities toward existing standards and 
regulatory frameworks for the adoption of new technologies by the industry. Proposition of new standards for the 
nano bio-based materials industry will arise based on the results of the project.  (EUBIA) (iii) Process Validation: 
Modelling: In order to optimize the reliability of complex systems in the micro/nano range and their performance in 
real conditions. Simulation and modelling are powerful universal tools by providing suitable failure criteria and  
models for the evaluation of the reliability of real components. Experimental results from Characterization 
subsections and the combination of methods will serve to validate the simulations. (IDE, ISQ, IRIS, ABIS, STAM) 
 
C. Market Uptake Hub (MUH): The second group of services is structured to support business, legalization and 
data handling issues: (i) Innovation Management: These activities will ensure the effective deployment of the 
exploitation plan provided by the clients of the ecosystem. (EX E) The innovation margins of each result will be 
identified in market terms. (UNIPD) BIOMAC will provide a variety of innovation management tools that will ensure 
the prerequisite actions to be taken in order to reinforce the Exploitation Strategy with qualitat ive and quantitative 
measures. Innovation management will work in parallel with all other activities of the ecosystem and will indicate 
the customer segments and which value propositions they require/need.  (EXE) (ii) Health and safety : A safe-by-
design approach will be applied across the value chains to reduce potential health, safety and environmental risks at 
an early phase in the innovation process, allowing the identification and management of uncertainties and potential 
risks Health & Safety (H&S). (UBU) Of special importance is also the use of nanomaterials which should comply to 
Nanosafety issues in terms of handling however as well as on release from the biopolymer’s matrix. (ISQ, UBU) (iii) 
Regulation: an assessment of regulation to ensure partnering in the commercialization phase of a technologies, 
securing compatibility and reducing market uncertainties. (EUBIA, EUBP) (iv) Data Management will carry out the 
Data governance, Analysis and Design, Database Management, Security, and quality assurance. (RDC, IDE)  
 
D. Value Chain assessment Hub (VCH) : The third group of services is dedicated to the assessment of the value 
chain: (i) Sustainability Assessment: To demonstrate the final processes and products’ environmental and economic 
sustainability an a S -LCA, LCA and LCC will be performed on the develop processes and resulting materials to 
highlight the environmental impact versus petroleum based benchmarks. (UBU, ISQ) (ii) Supply management : 
Further to this, to enhance the assessment of the overall value chain a Decision Support Tool (AXIA, RDC) will be 
developed to simultaneously assess the products against environmental and economic criteria. (optimization model). 
The tool will be further developed in the form of online user -friendly platform to secure the use from non -

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [13 of 68] 
optimization experts  (iii) Circular Economy: To stimulate further implementation towards the direction of circular 
economy a circular overvie w of the value chain will be undertaken that will allow the development of efficient 
networks identifying opportunities to foster the transition from linear to circular model evaluating the sustainability 
and economic feasibility. These means of assessment will confirm the future commercial viability and improvement 
conveying environmental and circular sourcing in consistency with the Green EU Policy. (PoliMi, AXIA, UNIPD) 
 
1.3.1.2 Validation of the OITB through the TeCs  
BIOMAC has been built on the basis of a two -stages validation and proof of operation capacity. Initially , 5 Test 
Cases (interTeCs mentioned at Table 1.1) will validate the proper operation of the OITB and wi ll provide feedback 
on their experience (e.g. communication with SEP, workflows development, validity of results, times of delivery 
etc). During the second stage an open call for expression of interest  for industry and particular SMEs will be 
launched at Month 30 for intra Test Cases (intraTeCs) accessing the OITB. BIOMAC intends to provide to external 
companies and stakeholders free of charge access in order to develop their TeCs. Again, the selected companies will 
provide their feedback and thus, the OITB members will have the opportunity to further improve their services. The 
below table provides briefly the 5 selected interTeCs (the first validation stage of OITB). These interTeCs have been 
selected based on their complexity in order to involve all the 1 7 PLs as well as the supporting services and thus 
provide a holistic feedback for the operation of the OITB as a whole. 
 
Table 1.1: BIOMAC Test Cases (interTeCs) and nano-enabled bio-based material Value Chains 
TeC Description and involved PLs TeCs 
TeC1: Automotive (DIAD) 
Biomass (BEECO, EUBIA). Bio -based resins (LTU, BBEPP, AUTH, ATB, 
FH) reinforced with NFC (LIST) . Purification/separation mixed polyols/diols 
product streams will be also conducted in PL6. In parallel, the PL7 of ATB will 
produce succinic acid (SA) monomers via fermentation of glucose. SA which will 
be used in PL12 FH-WKI to produce succinate esters oligomers via reaction of SA 
with the polyols/diols provided by PL3 (AUTH).  UV-curing materials for AM 
(AIMEN). Properties to be achieved high Temp. stability, low weight and high 
ductility for interior applications. (PL1, PL3, PL6, PL7, PL10, PL12, PL15). 
The polymer matrix will consist of UV-curable Polyurethane (PU) resins fully 
suitable for additive manufacturing (AM).   
Unique Selling Points of TeC1 
• Biomass/sugar-derived LA and SA reacting with the polyol/diol monomers provided by hydrogenation of 
sugars, towards highly reactive oligomers that will serve as the basis for the production of P U resins, with 
exceptional physical properties including toughness, flexibility, and resistance to abrasion  
• PU resins, exhibiting elevated temperature resistance (30 °C to 105 °C; 90%+ RH for interiors) 
• NFC as reactive reinforcing towards enhanced dispersion and interfacial interaction with the resins. optimizing 
the NFC loading of around 3-5 wt.%.  
• 15% longer product lifetime and UV resistance through the PU Matrix  
• Biochar increasing 30% the UV and fire resistance, as well as 20% the thermal conductivity (ASTM E 119) 
• Fast cycle times and manufacturing of complex geometries (rapid AM prototyping) 
• Increase and improve the quality of composite structures, reduce rework and wastages, reduce lead-time etc. 
TeC2: Agricultural applications (NVMT) 
Biomass (BEECO, EUBIA). Succinic acid as a bio -monomer (ATB  PL7, 
AUTH PL3, BBEPP PL5&6) will be used as a monomer of the development of 
biopolymers. NFC (ITENE  PL13) and Nanolignin (Cnano  PL4) will be 
incorporated in the formulation of bioplastic materials biodegradable in soil 
lending improved mechanical and barrier properties during their use and fertile 
carbon to the soil in their after-life. Nanobiochar (Uedin, PL8) will be validated 
as an additive in the formulations to enhance optical properties and UV/thermal 
resistance while helping soil quality enhancement following bioplastic 
biodegradation in soil. AIM  will produce in PL11 the nanoreinforced PLA 
pellets. (PL3, PL5, PL6, PL7, PL8, PL11, PL13, PL14)  
Unique Selling Points of TeC2 
• 100% biodegradable in soil according to standards such as EN17033  standard contributing to reduction of 
microplastics dispersion in soil (white pollution)  
• Nanolignin (1 -3%) incorporated in the bioplastics formulation, provides antioxidant properties to soil 
biodegradable mulch films and rigid articles used in biological  agriculture in substitution to synthetic 
antioxidant additives  
• Biochar produced via lignin pyrolysis that will be used as additive in the bio -plastics in order to contribute to 
soil amendment and remediation after biodegradation in the soil 
• Nanocellulose will contribute to enhanced mechanical strength (ASTM D638) of the biobased polymers as well 
as to decreased water vapor transmission rates of agricultural applications (ASTM F1249) 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [14 of 68] 
TeC3: Food packaging (EVERSIA) 
Biomass (BEECO, EUBIA) surface nanotexturing employed for tailored nano-
structuring. (NNT) Vacuum thermoforming will be post utilized for the 
production of food containers, bio -based PLA (LUL, BBEPP, AIMPLAS, 
ATB) foils reinforced with NL and BNC (Cnano, RISE, PoliMi , LIST) will 
pass the thermoforming PL of NNT. PLA & NFC based inks and coating will 
be formulated by ITENE (PL14), the barrier and mechanical properties of 
flexible packaging materials. (PL1, PL2, PL4, PL6, PL11, PL14, PL17) 
 
Unique Selling Points of TeC3 
• Film made of PLA, Biocompostable and Biodegradable Reel, transparent colour. This product will be produced 
with material 100% biodegradable and compostable according to EN 13432 standard.  
• BNC to reach excellent oxygen barrier, high sealing strength, high tear resistance, high stiffness, exceptional 
surface gloss, high transparency, fully compostable. 
• NL to increase its storage and life cycle 15%, to maintain life of biodegradable-compostable products  
• Nanoimprint Lithography (NIL) increase 20% the self-cleaning and antibacterial activity.  >90% inrease in 
bacteria repellence, Water contact angle > 160, Hysterisis angle <10 
• Thickness based ISO 4593:2010, µm 20-120, Width, mm 100-1500, ISO 7765-1: 1988 g > 50 
• Oxygen Permeability, ASTM D3985, cc/m2x24h <1 
• Water Vapour Permeability, ASTM F1249 (38°C & 90%rh), g/m2x24h <5 
TeC4: Construction (ACC) 
Biomass (BEECO, EUBIA). Footbridge module 2mx0.45mx0.65m., 
biomaterial functionalities are UV and fire resistance >80ºC, anti -fouling & 
easy-cleaning c apability. Manufactured by multimaterial AM (AIMEN) 
modified by NFC and Biochar (UEdin, LIST) embedded in thermoplastic 
isocyanate free TPU biopolymers (BBEPP, ATB, LIST).  BIOMAC 
technology, as an alternate to bridges build using conventional technology and 
materials like steel and concrete, with low cost, easy of transportation, fast to 
install, light weight, high strength, corrosion resistant & defect free properties 
(PL5, PL7, PL8, PL9, PL10, PL13, PL15).  
Unique Selling Points of TeC4 
• Produce more sustainable composites (circular economy model) providing a competitive edge and helping to 
meet future legislative demands and reduce manufacturing cost of composites structures. 
• Build large all-composite modular structures and minimize the life cost (installation and maintenance). 
• Enhance safety during manufacturing and installation of large composite structures. 
• Biochar increasing 30% the UV and fire resistance, as well as the thermal conductivity which are key attributes 
towards the bridge module to be produced 
• Mechanical performance: a) Flexural Strength ≥ 100 MPa, b) Flexural Modulus ≥ 8Gpa, c) Bearing strength ≥ 
15 MPa (ASTM D790 and ASTM E238) 
• Thermal and fire resistance performance: a) Tg ≥ 80ºC, b) Reaction to fire Class B ASTM D648, ISO 75. 
• Thermal conductivity: At least 15-20% lower than current FRP composite 0.3 w/m K at 25ºC, ASTM C51817 
TeC5: Printed Electronics (OHMA) 
Biomass (BEECO, EUBIA). Bio-based inks will be developed reinforced by 
functionalized CNC (ITENE) and BNC (RISE) using bioresins (LTU, AUTH, 
FH). TPU produced by REX (LIST) will be used and flexible substrate and 
nano copper for stretchable electrical prints integrated directly into textiles. 
(DTI). Bio based conductive ink for printing onto textiles as stretchable 
circuitry between sensors and electronics (for stretch and pressure sensing). 
Conductive bio based which can withstand up to 50-80% stretching in the fabric 
will be thus developed. The sock will last at least 3 months with washing every 
other day. (PL1, PL2, PL3, PL8, PL9 PL12, PL16).  
Unique Selling Points of TeC5 
• The overall specification of the materials will be modified with which bio-based polymers and nano-additives 
on the basis to withstand up to 80% searchability, similar elastic properties as the textiles, sheet resistance 
below 10 Ohm sq. as well as washability (50 wash cycles) 
• Final conductive material specs: (Stretchability up to 80%, without damage, Similar elastic properties to textile) 
• Screen printing ink based on CNC / NFC to protect printed circuits from water and other ambient conditions.  
• Ink specs: (Screen printable, Viscosity 10-30 Pa s, Dry temp 100oC, Cure/sintering temp below 150oC  
• Final conductive material specs: (Stretchability up to 80%, without damage, Similar elastic properties to textile, 
Sheet resistance below 10 Ohm sq. Strain sensitive (not essential)  
 
Clustering Activities 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [15 of 68] 
BIOMAC will empower the cooperation with other ex isting test beds NMBP-01-2018, NMBP-03-2019 & NMBP-
07-2018 and initiatives in order to benefit from existing knowledge in the framework of competitive models [ 12]. 
Clustering activities can be generally described as a group of interconnected organizations that compete and 
cooperate within the same market and are thus facing similar challenges and opportunities. In relation to the BIOMAC 
ecosystem clustering activities will take place on three levels, with (i) research and innovation SMEs (ii) European 
test beds, and (iii) European or international clusters.  
i) The test bed ecosystem seeks not to compete with companies already providing similar services, especially 
innovative SMEs, but rather cooperate and establish new value chains. Thus, the BIOMAC consortium will establish 
communications with research and innovative SMEs offering services  in the fields of cross sectorial industries in 
general. This communication will aim at addressing common problems and sharing best practices between the 
ecosystem and SMEs.  
(ii) and Cooperation between the test beds funded  under the Foundations for Tomor row’s Industry call for 
proposals (H2020 -NMBP-TO-IND-2018-2020) will be a critical aspect for the economic and technological 
advancement of Europe and the achievement of the goals set forth by the call. Various partners are already involved 
at the core shell of the test beds funded in the last years and will become liaison to collaboration (e.g. IRIS, AIMPL, 
FH, RISE, PoliMi, EXE, ITENE, AXIA). This will be achieved by scheduling regular meetings between the 
coordinators, meetings where all participants of the test beds may participate, and organization of conferences and 
exhibitions where test beds may disseminate their results and attract new customers. Further collaboration will allow 
the test beds to expand their services portfolio through cooperation. Competition between the test beds will be avoided 
on the basis of clear business plans and IPR strategies. 
(iii) Finally, the ecosystem will establish communications  with European and international clusters, such as 
standardization and scientific organizations (e.g. CEN, ISO, AISC, EMMC, EMCC, EuMat, the Nano-safety cluster). 
Communications will aim to enhance dissemination of novel technologies and practices, stakeholder awareness, and 
advancement of standards in the relevant industries. 
 
1.3.2 Positioning of main BIOMAC activities and relation with R&D&I activities 
Partners providing the PLs have vast experience in biomass processing and valorisation as well as in nano and 
biomaterials production (TRL4-5) and they will expand their business portfolio in ter ms of moving towards a more 
holistic approach that includes the upgrades summarized beforehand intending to deliver new supply and value chain 
business models. The proper operation of the ecosystem will lead to a holistic demonstration reaching a TRL 7. 
Transversal monitoring techniques that have been validated in laboratory settings (TRL4) will be tested in workflows 
designed to address TeCs. New and adapted test methods will be developed in parallel with the requirements resulting 
from the different materials (nano scale accuracy needed for the materials involved). The BIOMAC ecosystem will 
be established with the collaboration of the involved entities, and organisational aspects will be determined for its 
sustainable operation. Attracting industrial stakeholders will become invaluable due to future replication and market 
penetration. Conferences, workshops, fairs, seminars and clustering events will be organized to target a wide 
stakeholders’ audience this will be further facilitated by EUBIA and EUBP. An initial patent search has been 
conducted by the consortium, no overlaps with the technologies have been noticed. Pilot Line holders’ own patents 
related to mainly processes providing the freedom to operate. The most important patents surrounding the nano bio-
based material sector are: EP13001565.2013, ES2398274 B1, ES2398274, EP 2631061 A1.  
 
Table 1.2: Current and Target TRL of BIOMAC technologies.  
Technolo- 
gy Activities for increasing the TRL Final 
TRL 
Technologi
es 
developed 
in the PLs 
Hub 
Partners leading the PLs  have vast experience and processes validated at TRL4 -5 covering 
the overall value from the Biomass Fractionation & Pre-treatment Cluster – BFP through the 
production of nanomaterial and Intermediate Material and Nanocomposite Cluster – IMNC 
to Final Products & Formulation Cluster - FPFC that will lead to an actual system 
development and demonstration. All PL owners have the most experienced personnel with a 
very big amount of publications (Secti on 4) merged together, where value chain 
collaborations will lead to the delivery of the holistic approach. See upgrade scheme in 1.3.1.1. 
7 
Innovation 
Ecosystem 
The BIOMAC ecosystem will be established with the collaboration of the involved entities, 
and organisational aspects will be determined for its sustainable operation. EUBP is a leading 
industry association representing the bioplastics industry in Europe across the entire 
bioplastics value chain, established over 20 years ago has the right position in the sector to act 
as an SEP managing during as well as post project this Ecosystem Business opportunity on 
behalf of the 2 8 Core members of BIOMAC strongly supported by Innovation experts of 
AXIA, EXE and UNIPD. After the PLs are modified, the ecosystem will be validated through 
7 
 
[12] Shahla G.et. all (2012) Knowledge Sharing in Cross-Functional Teams: A Coopetitive Model, J. Knowledge Management, 16:285-301.  
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [16 of 68] 
the selected TCs reaching a TRL 7 and operate after the finalization of the project in a self -
sustainable way post project. 
Modelling 
All PLs are fully operative and have been verified at TRL4 producing the according products 
thought modelling they will further validate and upgrade their target products and operations. 
UBU, ISQ and IDENER have been involved in R&D projects acquiring a huge knowledge in 
materials and process modelling and process optimization. They will correlate their 
background knowledge and serve test cases to better identify crucial performance parameters 
and process conditions IRIS also provides tailored artificial intelligence models to use the data 
from the process monitoring to optimize the process. 
7 
Process 
monitoring/
Control 
IRIS commercializes NIR-based systems especially targeted at inline monitoring, with high 
applicability to organic materials such as biomas s and biopolymers, but also customized 
systems working on with ISQ  in LightMe OITB project for the automation and process 
optimization of 6 PLs for the production of nanocomposite materials. Abis has similar 
experience in Hypersol (FP7) and Finesol (H2020)  where they have built a complex high -
pressure atomization reactor combined with Process monitoring/Control. The partner’s role 
in BIOMAC will be to develop innovative solutions for monitoring and automation of the 
project PLs. STAM has a vast experience from PL upgrades from their already involvement 
in the LightMe and LightCoce OITB  
7 
DST  
AXIA has experience in the development of DST capable of assessing circular paths building 
sustainable distribution networks. Similar models are developed for plastic recycling 
(MultiCycle H2020) and algal biorefineries (Profuture H2020) that will work as a basis for 
the biomass value chains of BIOMAC. 
7 
 
Most of the partners are already involved in relevant National or European projects. The following table de scribes 
other R&D initiative related to BIOMAC where for running one synergy with these initiatives will be developed.   
 
Table 1.3: National and International projects correlating with BIOMAC  
Projects Correlation with BIOMAC 
LightMe OITB 
LightCoce OITB 
LEE-BED OITB 
OASIS OITB 
NMBP-01-2019  
Most of the partners have collaborated in running or completed projects with PoliMi, IRIS, IDE, 
ISQ, DTI, ITENE, IDE, AIMEN, AXIA, EXE, Cnano, RDC, STAM, ACC they share common 
ground and experience towards the development of OITBs. DTI leads and ITEN, AXIA & ACC 
participate in LEE-BED Test Bed for development and production of nanomaterials for 
lightweight embedded electronics in sectors such as packaging and automotive. 
EXPEDA 
National 
AUTH coordinated bio-based polypropylene/surface treated SiO2 and CNT nanocomposites and 
poly(butylene succinate) hemp nanofibers for the development of bionanocomposites. 
AQUACOMBINE, 
RUR-10-2019  
The semi-continuous reactor of LTU will be used to fractionate halophyte (aquatic) biomass in 
this project a similar method will be deployed as a baseline. 
GOLdJET FUEL, 
Swedish Agency 
The organosolv reactor of LTU is used to fractionate wood sawdust with the aim to deliver high 
quality lignin to be used as feedstock for the production of aviation fuels. 
OptiNanoPro, 
(H2020, NMP-) 
IRIS and ITENE work on PLs in the fields of nanenhanced bio-based materials for injected and 
laminated packaging, automotive and OPVs in terms of the control systems. 
AgriMax (H2020-
BBI, ID 720719) 
IRIS, ITENE, AIMPLAS: Set up of 2 large PL based on flexible multi-feedstocks biorefinery 
processing, enhancement of NC fibres of NIR systems for monitoring biomass composition.  
BIONTOP 
(H2020-837761) 
AIMPLAS coordinates and collaborates with IRIS and EUBP addressing packaging films and 
textiles with tailored end of life based on bio-based copolymers and PLA through REX.  
PERCAL (H2020 
-BBI, 745828 ) 
AIMPLAS and IRIS in PERCAL develop chemical building blocks from versatile biorefinery. 
PLA and polyols from SA are addressed. Rex is one of the technologies also applied. 
APPOLO FP7- 
FOF-2012 609355 
NNT was involved in the Hub of Application Laboratories for Equipment Assessment in Laser 
Based Manufacturing. Providing micro/nano molds for targeted applications (self-cleaning). 
NanoUptake (ID 
86219, H2020) 
ITENE leads Computing infrastructure for testing and implementation of safe -by-design 
approaches in nanotechnology supply chains matching BIOMAC packaging, automotive & AM.  
FIBEREUSE (ID 
H2020-730323-1) 
POLIMI in the FIBEREUSE project developing bio -based thermoplastic and thermosetting 
resins for use in fiber reinforced polymer composites improving circular economy approach.  
SALTGAE 
(H2020-WATER-
2015, 689785)  
POLIMI was involved in the development and chara cterization of bio -based membranes and 
coatings incorporating algae obtained from saline wastewater treatment plants, for use in the field 
of composite and nanocomposite materials. 
NEWPACK (ID 
792261, H2020) 
BBEPP works on validation in industrial setting PHB- PLA blends with improved sustainability 
performance, natural extracts with antioxidant/antibacterial properties and nano additives.  
AFTERLIFE: (ID 
745737, BBI) 
IDENER leads the development of the unified mathematical model regarding the experimental 
data of the plants, to optimise the operational conditions of the process.  BBEPP as a partner 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [17 of 68] 
improves the recovery step by developing a cost -effective process for the purification of PHAs 
from fermentation broths to be competitive as a bioplastic in some applications. 
3DPrintInn: m-
era-net 
LIST coordinate and contribute  to this project aiming to develop UV -3D printable fully bio-
based inks using components (nanocellulose, lignin, hemicelluloses) from non-woody biomass. 
CatBiose: INTER 
ANR-FNR 
LIST develops biopolymers based on renewable building blocks from catalytic deoxygenation 
of low MW hemicelluloses recovered from black liquor for linear and branched polyesters.  
GreenCarbon: 
(I721991, H2020) 
UEdin leads development of new biocha r and composite materials and their sequential use in 
engineering and environmental applications. 
 
1.3.3 Consideration of gender aspects 
The BIOMAC consortium supports the objectives of the European Commission to promote gender equality in 
research and innovation, as outlined in Article 16 of Horizon 2020. [13] Women’ under-representation in science due 
to the lack of attention to gender aspects cons titute a major concern in the EU as stated within the Commission’s 
Action Plan on Science and Society, adopted in 2001 (last modification at 2013). [ 14] Gender aspects have been 
carefully considered within the consortium in order to ascertain that the promotion of gender equality is present in as 
many aspects of the project as possible. Equal opportunities are provisioned for all project activities. In t his sense, 
BIOMAC has promoted a series of actions to promote the participation of women and to provide equal opportunities 
based on gender equality or positive discrimination. [15] 
 
1.3.4 Overall approach and methodology 
The project will have a duration  of 48 months and will comprise of ten work packages (WPs). Overall the project 
consists of four phases: pre -population, population, strategic partnership, and growth. During the pre -population 
phase (WP1 and WP2), collaboration between all the Hubs will be established to develop the first concepts and TeCs 
and define requirements for services offered as OSS. WP2 will deal with the upgrades of the PL developing thus the 
necessary infrastructure for the implementation of WP3 “Pilot Plant Supreme Hubs Services”. In WP3 existing inter 
TeCs will be upscaled in order to be validated in operational environment reaching TRL7. In parallel to this the other 
three WPs will start their operation where Validation (WP4), Market Uptake and Value chain Hub services will be  
developed. Following, the population phase (WP 3-4) will create an initial portfolio of pilot clusters and innovation 
services in order to support the ecosystem. Below, is a summarizing table presenting the Value Chains and 
collaboration scheme of the OITB in order to deliver TRL7 demonstrators. 
 
 
Figure 1.3: BIOMAC Value Chains immobilization  
 
The strategic partnership phase (WP 5 -7), aims to continue the growth of the ecosystem, further than the existing 
network. This phase will also focus on creating additional circular business models and appropriate strategies that 
will bring post project revenue streams to the ecosystem. Finally, the growth phase (WP 8 -9) is intended to create 
substantial returns to the ecosystem. This phase will be expanded post project proving BIOMACs sustainability. 
 
13 DIRECTIVE 2004/113/EC  
14 SEC(2001)771, “Women and science, the gender dimension as a leverage for reforming science” 
15 http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/promoting-gender-equality-research-and-innovation   

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [18 of 68] 
Thus, in parallel to all WPs developing services (WP3-6) EUBP in collaboration with EXE and UNPD will start with 
a strategic way to build its post project sustainability where key tools for the proper operation will be organized, 
established and improved throughout the entire duration of the project (WP1, WP8, WP9). In M20 starting WP7 
tenders for the open call will launch selecting external intra TeCs (M30) that will use the OITB and the ecosystem 
services OITBs. In parallel these cases will be examined from the business and innovation perspective (WP8 & WP9). 
All necessary activities for sustainability (WP8), dissemination, communication, and clustering (WP9) have been 
projected. All this will be governed under coherent managerial and organizational structure (WP10).
1.4 Ambition 
1.4.1. Advancement beyond the state of the art  
The overall ambition of BIOMAC is to boost and sustain innovation in the field of European bio-economy industries, 
by reducing the time-to-market of novel nanotechnologies, thus reducing costs and risks. The BIOMAC ecosystem 
after the implementation of the project will act in a sustainable way by the core group of the ecosystem (PL owners 
and service providers). The exploitation strategy an d dissemination actions foreseen will ensure that potential 
customers will be informed about the test beds existence, services, and access conditions. 
  
Innovation #1 - Enhanced and new material functionalities through the production and use of nanomaterials: 
BIOMAC involves the complete value chain, including: pre-treatment and conversion of biomass , biopolymer 
production pilot lines, process monitoring and scale up industrialization services. The objective of B IOMAC is the 
production of nanomaterials from biomass through a holistic and integrated approach by maximizing the use all 
components and the improvement of conversion technologies and finally the integration of nanomaterials across the 
manufacturing throu gh the development of reliable and sustainable production of functional nano enabled 
biomaterials. Linking properties and process conditions with the quality of the final product is of utmost importance 
and the basis for accurate process control. While f or SMEs and innovative industries it is often unclear which 
technologies might be most suitable for later process monitoring due to budget constraints and business deviation. 
The 17 PLs of the Ecosystem will be ready to be customized and accessible to the Ecosystem’s clients. Thus, clients 
of the Ecosystem will come in contact with multiple or single step processes, based on a  holistic supply chain 
management approach. 
 
Innovation #2 - A single entry point ecosystem for nano based biomaterials 
Already from the first month of the project the SEP, represented by EUBP, will be organized. The SEP will be 
coordinated by the Management Board (MB) where each one of the 28 core partners will have one vote. It should be 
mentioned that all entities will involve d ecision makers who have the capacity to represent their business. All 
necessary legal documents (NDAs, contracts etc) will be developed. The Business and Exploitation Plan of the 
BIOMAC SEP will include, mission and Vision, the governance structure, the se lection procedure of the BIOMAC 
representative and additional articles as it will be agreed between the partners. The Management Board will be also 
responsible to monitor the progress of the SEP and the performance of the general manager based on achieving  
quantifiable Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). The structure and the interactions between the 4 different Hubs of  
the ecosystem is shown in (Figure 1.4). The MB of 
the BIOMAC ecosystem will include the following 
roles: (a) the Ecosystem Manager that wil l be the 
President of the MB, (b) the Innovation Manager, 
and (c) the Pilot Hubs Manager that will be 
supported by the Data Manager, the Regulatory and 
Safety Manager, the Validation Manager and the 
Value Chain Manager. The persons that will be 
cover this role will be elected by the MB for a 
service of 3 years. The MB will be in charge of 
defining the ecosystem strategy, including 
exploitation plans, the IPRs, the pricing of services, 
the data handling, standardization and Safety 
Assessment, and the marketi ng activities of the 
ecosystem. The MB will also ensure the 
cooperation among other existing related 
ecosystems and Innovation Communities with an  
 
Figure 1.4: Organisational and operational structure of SEP 
aim to make the cooperation systematic and sustainable at the end of the project. The MB will also ensure the 
cooperation among other existing related clusters and will also communicate with an Advisory board (AB consisting 
of well-established entities in the field of nanotechnology and metal processing industry). 
 
Innovation #3 - Ecosystem advantages: Enhanced performance: BIOMAC will target material modifications at 
the nano scale, promising to deliver the optimization of material behaviour and performance needed to significantly 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [19 of 68] 
improve the mechanical performance, durability, multifunctionality and sustainability, while resulting to nano 
modified biopolymer structures and products . Fast screening: Through the database that will be developed under 
BIOMAC, based on the TeCs and new clients brought in the Ecosystem, fast screening of TeCs will be achieved. Fast 
characterisation: Predictive modelling of materials, (IDE) elements and co mponents within BIOMAC will aim to 
optimize products based on market requirements and to ensure their proper functionality. Expertise: In particular, 
tacit knowledge will help organizational activities and functions by creating new knowledge, targeted to new product 
development, novel business concepts, and procedures. Recognise next actors: The following steps will be followed: 
i. identify technology change and contact relevant stakeholders, ii. take into consideration research insights, iii. follow 
changes in customer demand, iv. identify competitors, v. consider policies and legal environment. 
 
Innovation #4 - Establishment of an open innovation ecosystem in the biomaterials field: The BIOMAC 
ecosystem will form a pan-European network of experts in the field of biomaterials and will provide open access to 
17 PLs as well as complementary services along the entire value chain, meeting the needs of industry. The network 
will be based on the open innovation philosophy and thus, inside the Ecosystem knowledge t ransfer and efficient 
combination of resources will take place. The network will outreach new users’ “clients” across different regions of 
EC, sharing best practices and experiences, identifying new innovative technologies that can benefit, brokering 
between users and suppliers; leveraging further investment by creating linkages with regional/national initiatives and 
by stimulating business growth. Increased profitability will result from the collaboration of experts in different 
technology and service fields, while a shortened time -to-market, especially for SMEs that have a lack of resources 
will reduce their financial asset commitment and enhance their flexibility. Moreover, through transferring their know-
how and resources, the participants will be able t o expand their knowledge bases and competences, enhancing 
innovation and learning.  To this intend EUBP will also decisively contribute being the largest association and 
network within the European bioplastics industry, drawing an extensive close -knit netwo rk of key personnel in 
organisations involved in bioplastics research, sourcing, production, distribution, consumption, as well as 
stakeholders (BASF, DuPon, Ferrero, Lavazza, Mitsubishi Chemical Europe and many more) contacts involved in 
the pertinent pol itical processes, associations, NGOs, and civil society organisations , through this extensive 
stakeholders network and the high amount of contacts the OITB will reach its fullest potential.   
 
Innovation #5 - Integrated Innovation Management: The BIOMAC ecosystem business model will use a 
Commercial driven impact model addressing its client’s needs. This model comprises 3 synergistic tasks to help 
accelerate economic outputs , namely– a) IP protection (patent filings at EUPO and USPTO) to protect the strategic 
and commercial sensitive innovation thus keeping competitive advantages “within Europe” and giving the 
ecosystem’s clients an important competitive advantage on a global level,  b) business and go -to-market plans 
comprising key enablement essentials such as market feasibility, opportunity analysis, client segmentation, risk 
analyses, ultimately delivering a fully substantiated business plan, and  c) a dedicated Platform as part of pan -
European Network Innovation Networks in order to maximise the impact of the project, incorporating domain 
relevant commercial actors, prospective industry partners, international contacts and VCs and/or Angel investors. 
This new Platform will be initiated through the Innovation Strategy Forum to include, beyond the consortium 
members, over domain -relevant stakeholders, thus acting as an acceleration vehicle towards incentivizing 
commercial and economic outputs from the project. BIOMAC will also reach out to previou sly funded H2020 and 
BBI projects including OITB for EC investment multiplication and will link up with relevant networks. 
 
Innovation #6 – Sustainability of Value chain and EoL management: The BIOMAC ecosystem will build the 
business model and the solid foundation of the circular economy to maintain an effective plan towards sustainable 
reuse and recycling practices that will allow the demonstration of effective and suitable per case EoL management. 
Based on the analysis of the sustainability of the value chain, the LCA and LCC assessments, a Decision Support 
Tool (DST) will be developed in the form of optimization model, materializing all the critical factors (cost, efficiency, 
environmental restrictions, recyclability) recommending an optimal network of connections supporting the creation 
of circular processing paths and material’s use.    
 
1.4.2  Patent search 
The consortium has additionally carried out an extended patent search in available patent libraries (European Patent 
Office, USPTO, FPO) in order to specify possible opportunities not only to achieve knowledge advancements but 
also to proceed in technologi cal advancements in terms of patenting. Thus, the patent search was conducted in the 
spirit of investigating and detecting unexplored areas and approaches of the field and to avoid possible overlapping 
with existed protected intellectual knowledge. The dec ision of the consortium is that although a number of patents 
exist in individual fields covering all processes and materials. In the following table the results of the internal 
consortium patent mapping are presented, it is evident that the partners will benefit out of joining forces and creating 
vast Value Chains through the demonstration of TRL7 user cases. This would allow to exploit the business lines 
without infringing any IP as well as giving competitive value to the enabled products. 
 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [20 of 68] 
Table 1.4: Patent mapping of partners  
Patents Overlapping’s 
WO2009018834A1 
WO/2004/085529 
[AUTH] owns more than 15 international patents in biotechnology and 1 in nanotechnology, 
“Composite compositions with barrier properties and methods for the preparation thereof” 
FR 2854161 
[LIST] Crystalline polysaccharide derivatives in the form of water -insoluble aggregates of 
microcrystals for use as viscosity modifiers or super-absorbers, manufactured by controlled 
oxidation of primary alcohol groups. 
ES2364831 [AIMPLAS] Procedure to obtain thermoplastic starch and thermoplastic starch obtained by 
this procedure 
EP 2784114 A1 [AIMPLAS] Bio-based and biodegradable polymer to be used in the manufacture of films 
for different applications 
EP13382126 [ITENE] Composition for the Preparation of a Nanostructured Biodegradable Polymeric. 
Material, the Material Obtained and its Applications 
EP18198458 [IRIS] integrated optical system for the examination of sample materials 
 
Additionally, it has been conducted a more detailed and specific technology Landscape through the licensed PatSnap 
and Discovery (Market and Competitors) software, and from this preliminary analysis the End User demonstrators 
are unique, this is also due to the fact that the PLs are based on rather innovative and upgraded processes allowing 
advanced functionalities. The patent search followed a multi levels approach on the s ector starting by available 
patents using key words as following: Bio -based Polymers -- > Nanomaterials Nanoparticles -- > NL, NFC, BNC, 
CNC. This refinement leads us to the specific market and indicates us the “ freedom to operate ” since by this 
procedure we conclude on the presence of very few patents that are mainly filed in China. 
 
Key Word Simple Total 
Bio-based Polymers 4.307 13.249 
Nano-enabled bio-based materials 532 1.605 
Fibrillated nanocellulose 421 1.582 
Bio-based Polymers nanocellulose 79 265 
Bacteria nanocellulose polymers 70 178 
Bio-based Polymers nano lignin 10 36 
  
Figure 1.5: FTO PatSnap (Patents, left) and Discovery (Market players, right) software 
 
1.4.2 Existing innovation test beds/HUBS  
BIOMAC covers the entire value chain from raw materials crossing versatile Pilot Lines reaching out towards the 
Test Cases which compliments this with tailored services in order to rationalise concept to pilot production  of 
prototypes and accessing protocols. The Open Innovation environment did his first steps in H2020 and a limited 
number or similar initiative can be identified, these that are related to BIOMAC are shown in Figure 1.9. In general, 
all these HUBS are very strong technically or for networking, however, are lacking the support services foreseen in 
BIOMAC. BIOMAC will offer a full holistic approach, providing services and pilot lines that will allow companies 
to go from idea to prototype to full production. In the table below some national ecosystems have been found and 
reported. Although they create business cases and examples which are very promising BIOMAC is advancing above 
the state of the art by presenting: (A) Single Entry Point (SEP), (B) Pan European ecosystem, OSS and (C) 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [21 of 68] 
Multidisciplinary approach bridging different Pilots and sectors. In Georgia (US) is the IDEAS:MD3, which is the 
latest centre in Georgia Tech’s continued expansion of its Materials Innovation Ecosystem. Its mission is to develop 
the initial data engineering and science foundation in that ecosystem, a key to unleashing new potential in solving 
grand challenges. [16] This ecosystem will become a point of reference which BIOMAC will use as a good example. 
Again, in the US the Michigan Translational Research & Commercialization Hub (MTRAC) consists an   
Innovation Hub for Advanced Applied Materials, 
sponsored by the 21 st Century Jobs Fund through the 
Michigan Strategic Fund and administered by the 
Michigan Economic Development Corporation (MEDC) 
to support collaborative translational research projects led 
by teams of researchers, and business advisors. [ 17] The 
mission of  the MTRAC Innovation Hub is to advance 
materials-based technologies that address poorly met 
market needs into commercial development.  
 
 
Figure 1.6: Other global test beds and innovation 
ecosystems 
In Switzerland a Center of Excellence in Characterisation (CSEM) exists mainly offering Excellence in 
Characterization, bringing together experts and methods from CSEM, the Haute Ecole Arc (HE -Arc) and the Paul 
Scherrer Institute (PSI) in order to meet industrial requirements, offering easy access to the instruments used for 
materials characterization. [18] BIOMAC will become a pan European network thus will seek collaboration benefiting 
its clients, mainly located and serving the European market  through a virtual platform. Nano for Production is an 
innovation hub located in Fraunhofer (FH), Germany , it is adjusting structures smaller than 100 nanometers  using 
them in industrial applications. BIOMAC is complementary since its industrial scope is to use and utilize 
nanomaterials in new nano-enabled bio-based materials end user applications, BIOMAC will seek links with the 
innovation hub of FH during and after its operation. 
 
1.4.3  BIOMAC Value Chain position in the market 
Today, there are multiple types of biopolymers based on different raw materials, and new products or processes 
across the Value Chain are regularly appearing. However, joint marketing activities by manufacturers, the 
development of new biopolymer materials and products, and the increased availability of bio -based products will 
contribute to promote new Supply and Value Chains as it has been planned in BIOMAC. BIOMAC, creating an Open 
Innovation Test Bed intends to reach Technological advances as well as to raise social messages at Regional and 
European Level underlining the importance of sustainable development providing the bioplastics industry a holistic 
materials OSS approach that would lead to highest innovation rates, faster prototyping and lower the market entry 
time. Considering that biopolymer prices are also expected to fall in coming years, as economies of scale, increased 
experience levels as well as technological innovations help to lower the costs of producing and processing them, 
BIOMAC identifies a huge market as it will be analyzed in the Business Plan of Section 2. The increase in prices of 
fossil resources will also contribute to reducing the price differentials. Through the wide and interdisciplinary network 
of BIOMAC team members, the OITB will provide access to technological infrastructures and expertise of End User 
industries to produce innovations and deliver nano-enabled bio-based materials. It also will offer business support for 
industries to implement digital technologies, where needed across their value chain, and reduce discrepancies between 
industrial sectors. EUBP, UNIPD and EXE are skilful in working with exploitable results from technological research 
projects and can design business plans for ensuring market acceptance and long -term viability of technological 
solutions. BIOMAC will deliver costumer-based sustainability plans for its clients and undertake the implementation 
of feasibility studies for novel market strategies. The aim is to develop economic self -sufficiency business models 
understanding the dynamics of business development and innovation.  Prices for biopolymers vary and will be used 
as baseline, starch polymers cost from €1/kg; starch blends, €3 -3.50/kg; cellulose polymers, €3.40 -4.50/ kg; and 
polylactic acid (PLA), €2.30 -3.50/kg. For example, DuPont and Tate & Lyle have jointly developed a proprietary 
fermentation and purifcation process to produce bio-based 1,3-propanediol (PDO). BASF produce Ecovio® a blend 
of PLA and the fossilbased polyester EcoFlex®. Starch-PLA blends (e.g. Cereplast HybridTM) are available and 
PLA/PHA blends are being investigated.  DuPont produce two additives specifically designed to enhance the 
properties of PLA; Biomax® Strong enhances impact strength, flexibility and viscosity. Purac is world’s largest 
supplier of lactic acid (100,000 tonnes per annum), derived from cane sugar or  tapioca starch. Natureworks LLC 
also manufacture lactic acid, from corn starch, and are the world’s only large volume producer of PLA (150,000 tn 
per annum), their PLA costs €1.90 per kg. Demand for PLA is increasing rapidly, and it is expected to be the largest 
bioplastic produced in the US by 2011 at > 300 million lbs. For these reasons both polymers encounter hurdles which 
are avoided by using alternative feed stocks and through key PL processes of BIOMAC.   
 
[16] www.materialsdev.gatech.edu/ideas-md3   
[17] https://cfe.umich.edu/mtrac/   
[18] https://www.csem.ch/Page.aspx?pid=47739   

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [22 of 68] 
2. Impact
2.0 BIOMAC Impact at the level of operation 
BIOMAC promotes a one-stop- shop offering all the services needed to make commercial applications, based on 
open technological infrastructures, crucial to the technology maturation. It has been decided that the Ecosystem will 
be represented by EUBP which is a well-known and established association in the field of bioplastics acting as 
the Single Entry Point (SEP) for the OITB. As EUBP will be acting as SEP, its organizational structure is following 
to the German association law, providing association autonomy according to § 21 BGB (German  Civil Code). As 
such a non -economic association (so -called ideal association), BIOMAC’s SEP unit receives the status of a legal 
entity and thus becomes a legally responsible corporation. Acting as non-economic association will also ensure cost-
reduction f or the whole consortium. EUBP will start from the early stages of the project to work towards the 
formalities for the BIOMAC OITB and the SEP operation. This includes communication with the clients, set up of 
special contracts between the SEP and the core partners so as to have the power to represent the ecosystem by closing 
agreements and signing contracts with the potential customers, in accordance with national & EC regulations.  
1. BIOMAC Value proposition: The BIOMAC Ecosystem will provide open access to the physical facilities ( 17 
Pilot Lines) and services required for the development, testing and upscaling of materials and products in the field of 
nano-enabled bio-based products and materials . Open Access in this context means that any interested user (e.g. 
SMEs, Industry, Start-ups, Universities, Research Institutes and other stakeholders) from Europe and beyond, can 
have a non-discriminative access to OIT facilities, capabilities and services. under fair conditions and prices and 
with transparent and mutual obligation with regards to, for instance, security  and safety of IPRs. The BIOMAC 
Ecosystem will be self-sustainable after the project end and thus its operation will target on the creation of revenues 
from its different activities. The administrative burden for the customers will be minimum as they will come in 
contact only with the SEP structure) for setting up the service agreement . The main services that will boost the 
innovation capacity of the ecosystem are:  
(A) technological services: providing access to expertise, technology, and infrastructures, including manufacturing 
and product development. This includes for instance: collaborative RD&I, technical support on scale-up, commercial  
infrastructure, testing and validation, etc.,  
(B) ecosystem services: developing and 
driving open innovation ecosystems with 
strong cooperation between research and 
industry and good connections between users 
and suppliers of innovations across the bio -
based value-chain. This includes for instance: 
dissemination of informati on, innovation 
strategy development, brokerage, inter - 
collaboration, etc. and  
(C) business-oriented services: supporting  
 
Figure 2.1: SEP Operation & Access 
businesses to commercially apply these innovations and transform their business, including access to financing and 
investors. This includes for instance: technology transfer, IPR exploitation incubator/accelerator support, access to 
finance, business/market intelligence, etc. Innovation management in the open innovation environment will enhance 
information sharing and diffusion of expertise for all actors involved to increase the chances of success, lower risks, 
and reduce costs.  
2. SEP structure, management and procedures:  
✓ A framework agreement between the EUBP (SEP) and the other core partners will be defined. Based on this 
agreement the offer of each core partner will be defined, while the SEP will be given the mandate to sign 
contracts on behalf of the OITB with the clients. The SEP will remunerate the involved partner based on their 
effort for the implementation of each new test case brought by a client.   
✓ Pricing policy - payments for the services, obligations of the core partners t owards the SEP, liability (if any), 
confidentiality issues and IPRs will govern the multi actor relationship. 
✓ An agreement template between the SEP and the potential clients covering issues related to the cost of service, 
access conditions, confidentiality and IPRs.  
✓ In order to ensure sustainability of the Ecosystem, the above agreements will be based on the business plans that 
the core partners have already developed which will constantly be updated. 
3. OITB & SEP operation & Advisory Board: The SEP (EUBP) will be operating under the guidance of the OITB 
MB. The MB will define the operational strategy and the relations of the OITB with its client. It is estimated that the 
SEP will initially need 2 -3 employees in order to carry out its tasks. The OITB MB wi ll communicate with an 
Advisory board (AB) consisting of recognized persons in the field of bio -based technologies and innovation 
management. The Advisory board members’ will come from associations, stakeholders, and clusters that are willing 
to act as advisors and supporting mechanism of the BIOMAC ecosystem. Already 15 entities confirmed to become 
members of the AB will be Giulia Gregori (Cluster SPRING), Dr. Monica Normark (Sekab E -Technology), Ulf 
Westerberg (Pitea Science Park-Bothnia BioIndustries Cluster), Evangelos Karavas (Pharmathen), Goerge Koliakos 
(Biohellenika), Anastasios Rizopoulos (Interplast), Joseba Bilbatua (MANU -KET), Miguel Angel Rodiel Moros 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [23 of 68] 
(MATERPLAT), Sergio Sáez (SECPHO), Dr. Antonio Manrique, (CEO KIRAM), Carmine Pagnozzi 
(ASSOBIOPLASTICHE) which will offer professional advice and expertise on the field of automotive, construction, 
food packaging and printed electronics. Based on their knowledge and market experience they can contribute towards 
this end, while having access to the publishable results of the project and through their participation in Ecosystem 
events. A draft business plan of the Ecosystem is presented in paragraph 2.2.
2.1 Expected impacts  
Realisation of open and upgraded facilities at the EU level for the design, development, testing, safety 
BIOMAC aims to set up a SEP through which a holistic portfolio of versatile PLs and transversal services open to 
European midcaps and industries will be offered. The BIOMAC will take advantage of upgraded facilities and 
expertise in various locations across the EU (GR, BE, HR, SE, LU, DE, UK, ES, IT, DK and PO). It is planned to 
upgrade all PLs at TRL 7 and setup a transversal service mechanism. The OITB and its SEP will work towards an 
open innovation environment in which the clients will develop, co -develop and share knowledge and expertise 
with the OITB and thus promoting innovation in the field of bio bases materials. The application for access in the 
OITB will be done through a special designed web -platform that will be supported by the members of the OITB 
providing fast and reliable assessment to clients and setting up dedicated workflows. 
KPIs: 
• 17 Upgraded Pilot Lines across the value chain (BFPH, IMNPH and FPFH) 
• 5 selected cases accessing the OITB as first validators (DIAD, NVMT, EVER, ACC and OHMA) 
• 5 additional cases accessing the OITB via an open call 
At least a 20% increase in the number of new SME users for existing test beds; 
BIOMAC will be open to related companies to access at fair conditions and costs. Already during the setup, 
BIOMAC has sought the market potential through the existing customers list of the RTOs and through SMEs 
within their innovation cycle. Thus, the netw ork already accumulated a list of multiple industrial stakeholders 
which expressed interest to become the first potential client users validating it. It has been scheduled to launch an 
open call the second year of the project targeting an open SEP approach . Effective access to finance and uptake 
by industry will be facilitated through the digital interface and the dissemination and business exploitation plans. 
The digital interface will have two operations: (i) a platform  of RDC where customers can apply to  make use of 
the ecosystem’s services and (ii) a lighthouse, of new technologies, where crowdfunding can be initiated, and 
technology investors can express interest on entering the OITB. Further SMEs entering BIOMAC will raise 
additional funding and revenu es from services provided to TeCs that will enter by the Open Call. On the other 
hand, besides the general dissemination activities, specific actions are projected targeting to facilitate the access 
of SMEs. For example, Task 8.3 is dedicated to the provision of additional funding for possible clients, while the 
WP07 for the open call will allow the OITB to come in contact with a large number of potential clients. 
KPIs: 
• 50 potential clients contacted during proposal preparation phase 
• 40 have already provided a letter of intent 
• 1,000 industrial partners (~70% of them SMEs) will be reached during the project 
• At least 50 stakeholders to become members of the BIOMAC community by the project end 
At least 15% improved industrial process parameters and 20% faster verification of materials performance: 
This impact heavily depends on process validation and cost control, for example pre -treatment offers unique 
advantages when compared to conventional batch process, such as reduction of the energy consumption up to 
almost 50%, significant reduction of the lignin content in the cellulose fraction and increased recovery of 
hemicelluloses and lignin fractions. A process control approach will be developed, which can largely improve the 
process efficiency, allowing to find complex, non -linear patterns in data, and transform them into models, which 
can be applied to fine -tune the process parameters, improving them by at least 15%. Process modelling and 
simulation will firstly help to identify the ke y parameters of each of the industrial processes involved in the PLs 
and set the basis for the process optimization, that will be performed in combination with the monitoring and closed-
loop control of the process. By means of predictive modelling and simulation, materials targeting highly promising 
applications will find a preferential route of performance verification through the Validation Services Hub, leading 
to an at least 20% faster verification process. 
KPIs: • BIOMAC will reduce bio concepts development by a factor of 2 compared to the current status  
• BIOMAC will reduce concept to prototype component to under eight months (e.g. 3M for PE) 
At least 20% improvement in industrial productivity, reliability, environmental performance, durability… 
BIOMAC will enable the cost -effective production of high -value nano -enabled biomaterials that can address 
performance challenges. In addition, further development of energy -efficient, low environmental impact, and 
lower cost production can have significant  impacts within the European bioeconomic sector. An at least 20% 
improvement in different levels will be achieved due to the tools and equipment used in processing that uses less 
energy (per unit) for a much shorter duration relative to conventional pre-treatment and synthesis approaches. 
Additionally, there will be a reduction in embodied energy and GHG emissions for polymers. Finally, process 
monitoring, combined with fast characterization methods, will increase productivity and equipment lifetime, and 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [24 of 68] 
reduce production costs, increasing production capacity by 20%, while lowering material consumption rates by 
4% and downtime by 20%.  
KPIs: 
• Eliminate the use of fossil based monomers thus produce bio-based polymers and derived NPs from 
all fraction of the biomass to produce BNC, Biochar, NC, NFC and CNC. 
• Increase of components life time by 35% even for the most demanding applications (e.g. construction 
and automotive), reducing thus maintenance costs. 
• Decrease raw materials usage by a factor of 25% for both NIL, PE and AM technologies due to the 
upgrades on the PLs (e.g. in -line monitoring systems, preventing the production of fault batches, re -
use of scrap and non-printed material). 
Facilitating access to finance (for SMEs in particular) for investing in materials or in applications using… 
Having access to BIOMAC will eliminate the barrier of potential stakeholders (large enterprises, SMEs and 
midcaps) to realise new ideas accessing new and unexplored markets and creating new ones. The Market Uptake 
& Inn ovation Cluster will be established in order to support industry on compliance with regulatory and 
standardization requirements, since the early stages possible of product and/or process development, to validate 
the performance and to guarantee both proces s and product quality and safety. In order to achieve the specific 
objectives related to “C” that are to secure the operation and sustainability of the ecosystem various activities have 
been foreseen such as to attaining funding through national/regional, Venture capitalists and business angels, 
public and private funding sources (Crowd-funding platforms such as FundedByMe (Sweden), Spreds (Belgium), 
Ulule (France), Booomerang (Denmark) and Seedmatch (Germany), EU research and innovation funds, European 
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) , InnovationRadar, Dealflow.eu, VentureEU, InvestEU, European 
Investment Fund (EIF) e.t.c.). Recognizing the importance of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) for the 
European economy, BIOMAC aims to enhancement the traditional corporate strategy perspective with a number 
of cases, mainly driven by the biomass and biomaterials processing sector. Innovation management strategies 
based on the identification of technological benefits and thorough business planning are developed on the unique 
characteristics of each case, with clear understanding and agreement between stakeholders on relevant intellectual 
property rights. Additionally, BIOMAC will contact investors, interesting to monitor the progress of the 
technology and the market uptake thus use financial support for pilot projects and their market absorption. Further 
to this, DIAD, NVMT, EVER , ACC  and OHMA through BIOMAC, intend s to establish  some collaboration 
agreement with SMEs to share IP and costs which would facilitate SMEs access to BIOMAC. 
KPIs: • Organization of 3 events with participation of investors and funding groups for showcasing of novel 
concepts by SMEs during the project  
• Demonstrate funding of test cases for SMEs during the open call phase using BIOMAC funding service 
Identification of regulatory requirements and regulatory barriers to market introduction; 
The European Bioplastics Association (EUBP) is partner of the consortium and will contribute to aspects to 
regulatory and policy framework for new bioplastics. Special attention will be given to nanomaterials regulations 
(nano-safety), guidelines and procedures in order to achieve a smoother market introduction by ensuring safety 
work conditions and utilization of the developed products. Special certifications for Nano -enabled materials can 
facilitate the choice of the products by the consumers. Regulations and Standards for early detection of possible 
conflicts related to BIOMAC developments will be done, assisted by existing tools and agencies as the EU 
Observatory for Nanomaterials ( EUON), considering of industry standards (such as EN13432), EU Agency for 
Safety and Health at Work (EU-OSHA) and OECD. 
KPIs: • Participation in more than 50 EU consultation & other worldwide regulatory in the field of interest  
• Transfer of the BIOMAC safety assessment to the standardization committee 
 
2.1.1 Other expected impacts  
A. Release of the European Union from dependence on fossil-based materials 
The use of fossil-based materials is reflected into a dependence on fossil oil producers and their countries. Indeed, 
due to limited extraction of fossil oils in the EU, the EU industry (and employment) is strongly depended on extra 
imports, mainly from Russia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and OPEC. [19] It is well known that some of these countries 
may be critical for political or social reasons, therefore the price of the fossil-based materials risk not to be stable. 
Moreover, the countries extracting the fossil oil may produce (or may decide to produce in the future) fossil-based 
materials (e.g. plastics) at lower cost compared to the EU industries. Therefore, the EU occupation in the sector of 
fossil-based materials and products risk to be fragile, as it depends on extra EU purchases of raw materials and extra 
EU industrial strategies. [ 20]The production of bio -based materials doesn’t require extra EU imports since it is 
based on regional EU value chains in close cooperation with primary sector and is mana ged entirely at EU level , 
given the extensively developed European BBI industry and the subsequent wide availability of feedstock. This 
may consist in a more stable occupation, product price and material availability.  
 
19 https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/imports-and-secure-supplies/supplier-countries  
20 https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/2016_07_Briefing_Europe_increasingly_dependent_risky_oil_FINAL_0.pdf  
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [25 of 68] 
B. Socio-Economic impact – Jobs creation: 
The chemical industry is of huge importance to the EC. The European bio-economy in the food, feed, beverage and 
primary sectors, has an annual turnover of € 2.1 trillion. Bio -based industries (relevant chemicals, plastics, paper 
and paper products, forest-based industries, textile sector, biofuels and bioenergy) account for € 600 bn of this total. 
Moreover, the European bio -economy provides jobs for 18.3 million Europeans, over half of them in primary 
biomass production (agriculture forestry). Bio -based industries employ 3.2 million people. [ 21] BIOMAC will 
promote the bio -based valu e chain that will create a multidisciplinary technology driven partnership strongly 
contributing to the creation of new jobs in the area of bio -based materials and processing. European industry 
adopting the new products and procedures will maintain the EU market and claim the global market, based on the 
knowledge obtained during the project, a fact that will strengthen their competitiveness. Ecosystems need 
appropriate staffing to become sustainable. The process of opening up and further developing access to existing and 
new industrial infrastructures requires careful management, investments and high expertise stuff. Integrated 
successful Ecosystem activities will lead to the creation of job vacancies of high level technical, scientific, 
managerial, organisational and marketing personnel in the members of the Ecosystem and the SEP. On the other 
hand, successful outcome of the test cases accessing the Ecosystem services will lead to a significant growth of the 
corresponding companies (including SMEs) as they will bring to the market novel and sustainable Bio based nano 
materials. Being established on the market with innovative nanomaterials will allowing the SMEs to also diversify 
their revenues, enhancing the exploitation chances. Based on the preliminary busi ness plans carried out for the 
Ecosystem and the selected test cases it is evident that an important revenue will be created, leading to the creation 
of new high expertise jobs. More specifically it is projected that 5 years after the conclusion of the project, 380 new 
jobs, will be created for the members of the Ecosystem  and 63 new jobs will be for the end users. Taking into 
account the jobs that will be created on the end users for a period of 5 years after the project end,  the BIOMAC 
project, will lead to more than ~1650 new jobs in total.  
C. Steps towards meeting the Paris agreement goals 
BIOMAC will be developed around using biomass as raw material for nano reinforced plastics production and 
create a complete supply and value chain around the creation of nano-enabled bio-based materials. After the project 
completion, these technologies will be applied to biomass that is produced from other sources. Further on, the use 
of biomass will be evaluated based on the needs for process adjustments and possible additional treatment. 
Expansion to these sources of biomass will exponentially increase the number of materials that can be used for the 
production of bio-based plastics in a global scale. These applications will significantly expand the impact on the 
global economy. BIOMAC will reduce the overall CO 2 footprint from human activities [ 22] and push the global 
economy towards renewable resources. For example, the enhancement of the properties of agricultural products 
biodegradable in soil will contribute to avoid the use of non -biodegradable plastics in agriculture, today the 
principal cause for soil depletion, in particular by contributing to (i) avoid microplastics dispersion in soil and (ii) 
restoring carbon in the soil by supplying fertile carbon to improve the Soil Organic Matter. These factors heavily 
affect the health and quality of the soil which is a key player not only for the productivity of agricultural soils, 
which is constantly decreasing, but also for the fixation and storage of atmospheric CO2 into the soil. 
D. Increased growth of Start-ups and SMEs 
BIOMAC will ultimately contribute to: (A) encourage owners of Pilot Lines and material suppliers/end -users to 
work closely together by means of a structured and scalable approach enabled by a platform which connect 
stakeholders up to the execution of real scale trials – with the  goal to implement solutions in real application 
scenarios and reduce market barriers; (B) enable different users (companies, public bodies, research organisations) 
to get easy access to advanced Pilot Lines and scientific expertise for know-how transfer enabled by the availability 
of these infrastructures; enable research institutions, SMEs and large companies to explore new application fields 
and start R&D work for markets that would otherwise not be addressed, by means of the funding programme to be 
launched in the second part of the project; (4) raise awareness and provide a solid marketing and Decision Support 
platform to extract, consolidate and broadcast the actual progress achieved in the different application streams to 
the community of material and product suppliers and research organisations in EU and beyond. 
E. Public acceptance 
Products carrying the BIOMAC brand will be defined as ecofriendly and will thus be widely accepted by the public. 
Currently, plastics undergo very slow degradation and m ay persist in the environment for decades. Thus, plastic 
products have been under scrutiny, due to associated environmental impacts and in particular marine pollution [23]. 
Plastics are currently associated with the drilling, transport, refinement, and use of petrochemicals, procedures with 
significant environmental impacts. Plastics produced with the BIOMAC ecosystem will circumvent the whole 
petrochemical value chain, using biomass as the raw material, which will further establish BIOMAC as an 
ecofriendly brand. The role in agriculture as well as the biodegradable in soil biomaterials for agricultural 
applications are designed not only to be ecofriendly but also to give added value to the soil, providing fertile carbon 
 
21 Jobs and growth generated by industrial biotechnology in Europe, EuropaBio 2016. 
22 http://www.reverdia.com/wp-content/uploads/Biosuccinium-PESP-Thermo-PU-Data-Sheet-R1003.14-EMAIL.pdf 
23 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/marine/good-environmental-status/descriptor-10/index_en.htm  
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [26 of 68] 
and ingredients that can improve the soil, e.g. biochar and antioxidants . Through a detailed dissemination and 
communication plan (outlined below) the public will be informed about the significant advantages of plastics 
produced with the BIOMAC technology, which will ensure wide public acceptance. Furthermore, customers 
concern about the nature of the materials, their functionality and applicability, performance, sustainability, and cost 
will be addressed through the dissemination plan. The BIOMAC project will work in the direction of public 
acceptance, focusing on activities tha t will lift safety concerns and demonstrate their functionality trough 
prototyping and other activities. By communicating distinctively to public that alternative feedstocks are used, 
which are in no competition to food, it is expected that polymers from BIOMAC will meet a higher acceptance than 
currently biopolymers made of food or feed-grade feedstocks. 
 
2.1.2 Barriers that might affect the achievement of the expected impacts  
The project partners have asked for EU funding being aware of the commercial risks such an investment has and 
have adequately tried to examine and mitigate the relevant risk factors. Indicatively, possible barriers and obstacles 
are presented in Table 2.1. It is evident that although in the last two decades a high number of research projects have 
been dedicated to the development of new nano-enabled bio-based materials, however only a very limited number of 
such cases has been finally commercialized and reached the market. There are many reasons that these concepts have 
not been adopted by the market and this phenomenon is usually described as ‘valley of death’. 
 
Table 2.1: Mitigation plans of BIOMAC for overcoming barriers for upscaling of materials concept 
Barrier How the project will help on its reduction 
Barrier 1: Lack of available infrastructures 
Pilot Lines are essential for upscaling materials concepts. Through them, laboratory results can be transferred to pre-
industrial level by developing robust production technologies. However, such lines are not always available to 
companies since their acquisition cost is high, needs extra expertise in monitoring and control of lines, and SMEs are 
not eager to proceed in such investments unless they can decrease the risk. On the other hand, large industries, are 
not eager to stop their production lines to ca rry out tests for upscaling of new bio-based materials and products. 
BIOMAC ecosystem will provide a variety of flexible upscaling processes for testing, monitoring and process 
optimization of production of the new nanoreinforced biomaterials. This will su pport the rapid position of new 
materials in the market with a lower CAPEX due to the existing open access pilot lines that will be created through 
the BIOMAC Value Chain approach. 
Barrier 2: Industry acceptance – Investment interest 
A lot of highly prom ising innovative ideas often remain at Lab scale as they are not linked ether to standards and 
regulatory frameworks or remain disclosed ownership of RTDs. Especially, when it comes to materials containing 
NPs issues such as nanosafety are becoming a major barrier as the regulatory framework has not been yet assimilated 
by the industry. Indeed, end users, especially in the fields of packaging and automotive industry ignore products that 
are not harmonized with the standards. BIOMAC ecosystem will provide al l the necessary services related to 
standardization, compliance with existing regulatory framework and nanosafety/standardization aspects of upscaling. 
Barrier 3: Industry needs characterization, standardized and validated solutions including Regulatory 
Characterization of materials and evaluation of the corresponding results is essential for the product development 
and upscaling. However, it is a common remark that this expertise exists mainly in universities and research centres. 
BIOMAC will provide tec hnological, scientific and manufacturing expertise; through advance, accurate and fast 
characterization methods, combined with advanced modelling linking the crucial parameters of production steps with 
the final properties, lifetime and environmental impac t of the new bio-based materials. A lot of highly promising 
innovative ideas often remain at Lab scale as they are not linked to standards and regulatory frameworks. REACH, 
SVHC list: Substances that may have serious and often irreversible effects on human  health and the environment. 
OECD Safety of manufactured bio-based nanomaterials. The safety of Manufactured Nanomaterials is an important 
concern impacting regulatory bodies throughout the world. Due to their size, Manufactured Nanomaterials may 
require additional testing beyond the standard suite of tests used for other chemicals, to ensure that the impact on 
human health and the environment is fully understood. BIOMAC will give a special focus in the nanosafety, ISQ & 
UBU have experience in this field due to their participation in related actions (e.g NanoReg). During the project all 
necessary measurements for materials handling and use will be undertaken while the project will cluster with other 
corresponding initiatives (e.g NanoSafey Cluster). 
Barrier 4 High perceived risk for investors 
Even the most promising ideas and concepts will probably need extra funding until they come to the market. Most 
often, SMEs cannot afford to invest on their own additional funds, while investors are reluctant to invest without 
securing the previous mentioned aspects (e.g. compliance with standards of the new materials, lifetime, performance). 
Inside the BIOMAC ecosystem proper conditions for bridging investors with SMEs will be provided. Thus, activities, 
such as translation of knowledge of discoveries deve loped usually in the academic community, in a context that is 
relevant to the industry investors will take place.  
Barrier 5: Public acceptance 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [27 of 68] 
Enterprises are aware of their customers’ scepticism about adoption of new technologies and more specifically nano 
containing products. Main concerns of customers are on the nature of the materials, their functionality and 
applicability, their performance, their sustainability and naturally, on their cost. BIOMAC Ecosystem will work on 
the direction o f public acceptance focusing on activities that they will lift nano -safety concerns, prove their 
functionality and appliance trough demonstration activities, certify their high performance and enhanced properties 
through standard testing results, explain t he high sustainability achieved for both materials and products through 
LCA, contrast their high performance and multifunctionality to their initial production cost, etc. Planned 
dissemination and communication activities (see next paragraphs) will be focu sed on spreading awareness and 
explain the sector advances. As an example, the Construction industry is highly conservative, competitive, and price 
conscious with low profit margins. In order to create a defensible position, penetrate this market, and gain competitive 
edge.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
BIOMAC project will address all issues related to exploitation, business development, innovation management, 
management of IP, data management as well as dissemination and communication activities. The dissemination and 
exploitation of the project’s results as well as the management of knowledge and intellectual property are considered 
critical issues for the success of the project. A Dissemination and Exploitation plan, including a business strategy, 
plan and model, has been already developed and will be constantly updated so that it encompasses all the progress 
that is made during the project. Finally, a communication strategy has already been projected with input from all 
partners and will be updated during the project. Further analysis is provided in the following subsections. 
 
2.2.1 Plan for the Dissemination and Exploitation of the project results 
A. Dissemination activities 
The dissemination activities will begin with the initiation of the project already at month 1 , all partners will have 
PMs which will ensure a high added value dissemination approach. The dissemination plan is designed to reach the 
largest audience possible, to inform EU stakeholders about the BIOMAC project’s objectives and results as well as 
to build the basis of the sustainability phase post project. Dissemination activities aim at paving the way towards the 
future market penetration of BIOMAC solution and to ensure the successful exploitation of the project outputs 
Figure 2.2:BIOMAC Dissemination Road Map. 
 (see 2.2.1). Moreover, 
they will promote the 
project’s approach and 
encourage interested 
stakeholders and 
investors to adopt the 
solution developed 
and provide all 
serviced offered. The  
major aim is to ensure 
that the  project’s 
outcomes are widely 
disseminated to the 
appropriate target 
groups, at appropriate 
times (respecting the 
proposed project  
timeline), via appropriate methods (means of information disclosure, intensity, etc.). For a successful dissemination 
all BIOMAC beneficiaries will cooperate in order to create higher added values at the market. In order to achieve 
this a precise Ecosystem Dissemination Plan (EDP) has been structured and will become the basis to achieve all 
actions set and to operate post project. With such an approach, BIOMAC PEDR (Plan for Exploitation & 
Dissemination of Results) will foster cross -border and cross -sectorial cooperation between the  members of the 
consortium with the final goal to attract new customers to the BIOMAC ecosystem. All along with the project 
duration tactical, strategic and operative elements of promotion, exploitation of results and awareness raising will be 
actively employed and will ensure capturing of a large audience, in an appropriate manner and hence ensure long -
term sustainability of the project results and the established One Stop Shop. For an effective public outreach both 
standard dissemination activities, dedicated to public information, and more targeted engagement activities, where 
dialogue (communication) and alliances are created, will dynamically co -exist. The effectiveness of the proposed  
approach will be guaranteed also by the presence in the consortium of important players representing BIOMAC value 
chain that can take advantage of their network of contacts to raise awareness. The dissemination strategic steps are 
depictured in the figure below. Step by step the methodology will include (a) the definition of the subject to be 
disseminated, (b) the identification of the target audience that will be interested about project results and findings, 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [28 of 68] 
(c) the definition of the most effective ways(methods and tools) to reach the audience, (d) the appropriate timing to 
disseminate and (e) the dissemination policy and rules. In line with the EC Guidelines the dissemination activities  
will include all the best practices 
successfully tested by the partners in  
other projects: (1) The results and/or 
reports will be review ed and sent to the 
relevant partners of the project before 
being published or disseminated. (2) On 
two months basis there will be an 
informative file to present to the partners 
the forthcoming events that are targeted 
to the particular partner. (3) All the  
consortium members will contribute to 
the project activities and will be 
informed about the final outcomes and  
 
Figure 2.3: Ecosystem Dissemination Plan (EDP) 
the implication stemming from project results. All public results will be accessible from the project website and 
usable from all parties who may benefit Target Audiences: The BIOMAC consortium has identified 11 groups of 
target audiences that would benefit out of the ecosystem: 
 
Table 2.2: Targeted audience groups. 
Category Target group 
European Start-ups SME, and Midcap communities: Companies (tech and non -tech) interested in 
understanding the potential of nanoreinforced biomaterials 
Industry 
Providers of materials and process solutions (e.g. chemical companies, equipment), 
Companies involved End users in the fields of automotive, food packaging  and other 
associated sectors were technologies can be applied, High technology SMEs interested in 
adopting new technologies/knowledge and starting new business models. 
Regional innovation 
networks/accelerators 
Existing innovation hubs interested in expanding existing local support to European cross-
border support. Ecosystems that operate and are related to polymers and PE. 
Design stakeholders Owners of products and services, platform providers, inventors, R&D entities 
Cross border 
community 
Participants in other projects in the call. Policy makers: Entities in charge of funding 
programmes. 
Broader innovation 
community 
Interested in the best practices for the advance of the EU sector. High technology SMEs 
interested in upscaling new materials and starting new business models.  
Investor VC, Angels, Crowd funding platforms, Bank looking for innovative companies interested 
in embedding new innovative components in their products and services.   
End users in the fields of automotive, construction, food packaging and printed electronics sector and 
other associated sectors were technologies can be applied, replicating results 
General public Individuals including youth  
R&D communities Universities and research centres, participants in related EU projects, research societies, 
interested in the bio-based materials sector 
Regulatory 
authorities 
Ministries, organisations, associations, regulatory authorities, NGOs, non -profit organizations, 
public initiatives, Standardization and certification bodies 
 
Dissemination channels: General and specific dissemination channels will be utilized throughout the project 
execution, that also includes the respective schedule for the development of these activities. The EC financial support 
to the project will be always highlighted in the dissemination activities and the logo of the EC will be included in all 
activities. All relevant online and offline dissemination activities shall be reported to the Dissemination WP leader 
(EUBIA), in order to ensure and integrated an d cohesive communication. This will true especially in the case of 
partners attending fairs, exhibitions, conferences or other public events. A draft Dissemination Roadmap  has 
already been developed (Table 2.3), this will lay the ground for the project’s dissemination plan which will be updated 
on a yearly basis. Table 2.3 also shows a set of adequate indicators (Dissemination KPIs) to measure the impact of 
dissemination activities.  
 
Table 2.3: BIOMAC Dissemination & Communication Roadmap and relevant KPIs (Conferences and targeted journals List) 
Disseminatio
n activity 
Target 
audience* Expected Impact Measure/Target (KPIs) 
Consortium activities 
Project 
Website 
GP HT, EU, 
RNA, BIC, RC 
Awareness of the BIOMAC project 
and its scope 
- 50 visits per day after year 3 
- Receive 5 emails via website per week 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [29 of 68] 
Printed 
material 
HT, TC, EU, 
BIC, GP, RC 
Attract interest of industry, including 
SME in the Ecosystem 
- Development of 10 printed concepts 
- Distribution of 5.000 leaflets in events 
- Express of interest from 250 stakeholders 
Presence in 
social media 
(SM) 
HT, TC, EU, 
BIC, 
Attract interest of industry and 
connect with stakeholder pages and 
accounts in SM 
- 1000 connections in LinkedIn account by 
the end of the project 
- 5 posts per month in SM accounts 
Videos posted 
in website, 
YouTube 
GP, IN, AN, HT, 
TC, EU, RC 
Attract interest of industry (mainly 
SMEs) and investors by showcasing 
BIOMAC 
- 2 videos presenting the PLs  
- 2 videos presenting the services 
- 5 videos of success test cases 
Press Releases GP, RC, IN, AN, 
RC, PM 
Awareness of the BIOMAC 
Ecosystem and capacities of it 
- 2 issues per year in printed publications 
- 2 releases in TV in 3 different countries 
Participation in 
events 
RC, BIC, IN, 
AN, HT, TC, 
EU, RNA, PM 
Liaison with stakeholders and present 
the BIOMAC Ecosystem 
- Participation if 30 events (fairs, 
conferences, etc) during the project, 
having booths is at least 5 of them 
LeE activities 
Ecosystem 
Web platform 
HT, TC, EU, 
RNA, IN, AN, 
PM, BIC, RC 
Presentation of Ecosystem Services 
and terms, acceptance of requests as 
SEP 
- 150 visits per day by the end of project 
- 10 request during the 4th year  
- Presentation of 5 success stories 
BIOMAC 
conference 
RNA, BIC, IN, 
AN, HT, TC, 
EU, RC, PM 
Establishment of a biannual 
conference in the field of bio-based 
nanomaterials 
- 1 international conference at year 5 
- 10 invited speakers, 60 presentations 
- 300 attendees in the 1st conference 
Workshops/ 
training/Stakeh
older events 
HT, TC, RC, 
BIC 
Awareness of BIOMAC technologies 
and success stories 
- 3 workshops in international events 
- 50 attendees/workshop 
- 3 Stakeholder meetings showcasing the 
successful Test Cases (GR, IT, DE) 
Online Journal HT, RNA, IN, 
AN, PM RC 
Presentation of new technologies, 
success stories to stakeholders 
- 6 issues per year after Year 4 of the 
project 
Conferences and other related events to BIOMAC  
Conferences 
on technology 
development 
Congress on Materials Science & Engineering, ENERGY in BUILDINGS & TRANSPORTATION, 
Biopolymers, The Plastics Show, Manufacturing & technology tradeshow, EuroNanoForum and 
Industrial Technologies . (e.g. ISGC series, La Rochelle, France), JEC Paris , MRS, ACS Green 
Chemistry Conference, Gordon Research Conference. Polymer processing Society, BioEnviromental 
Polymer Society, BioFor & PaperWeek Canada. European Bioplastic Conference, AMI conference 
Conferences 
on innovation 
management 
Innovation Roundtable® Summit, Academy for Design Innovation Management Conference, 
Innovation, Management and Technology Conference, Innovation Events and Open Innovation 
Conferences, R&D Global Innovation Forum, Angel Investment Day – HunBAN. 
Trade fairs 
Global Automotive Materials Congress, Intelligent Traffic and Transportation (ICITT), Industrial 
Technologies, HANNOVER MESSE, European Trade Fair and Forum for Composites, JEC WORLD 
the Leading International Composite Show, BIOFACH, K- Fair, 
Journals related with BIOMAC 
Journal Imp. Fact. Journal Imp. Fact. 
Journals on (Nano)Materials and Biomass Valorisation 
ACS Nano 13.709 Green Chemistry (RSC) 9.405 
Journal of Nanomaterials (OA) 2.504 ChemSusChem (Wiley) 7.804 
Bioresource Technology (OA) 5.807 ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 6.97 
- Journal of Cleaner Production  6.395 Enviromental Science and Technology 7.149 
Business Management related Journals 
Creativity & Innovation Management 2.015 Journal Of Entrepreneurship Innovation 3.905 
Journal Of Innovation Management 2.305 European Journal Of Innovation Management 1.385 
Journal Of Product IM 4.305 Innovation-Management Policy & Practice 0.955 
*HT: High-tech companies, TC: Tech companies, EU: End Users, RNA: Regional networks and accelerators, IN: Investors, 
VCs, AN: Angels, PM: Policy makers, BIC: Broader innovation community, GP: General Public, RC: Research Community  
 
Knowledge Management and IPR Protection 
Consortium Agreement: A Consortium Agreement (CA) will be agreed and signed prior to project commencement 
in order to define the important points necessary to obtain the best possible management (financial conditions, IPR, 
planning). The DESCA H2020 template will be used as reference. Prior to the CA definition, the main guidelines for 
IPR management will be defined. Being one of the keys for the project success, background knowledge of each of 
the partners that may be used to achieve the project objectives will be identified and measures will be taken in order 
to deal with the use of Intellectual Property. Moreover, the consortium agreement will include any key steps that 
need to be taken for the best management and exploitation of the project. The IPR mana ger will be responsible for 
the management and exploitation of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). The  DEC Committee (IEM, IPRM, DCM)  
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [30 of 68] 
will evaluate under the innovation management plan actions related to technology transfer promoting all technologies 
validated to existing customers/clients of the consortium members and also identifying additional related 
stakeholders. Following a recent search, it is the consortium’s opinion that the proposed technology does not 
contravene any existing patents (see section 1.4). During the project meetings the internal results will be reviewed 
with the goal of identifying important ideas and defining an individual strategy for the positioning of these ideas in 
the standardization, training and commercialization processes.  
Management of knowledge and foreground IPR:  The consortium agreement will ensure the protection of the 
Intellectual Property of all partners. The IPR arising from the results of the project will be the property of the partner 
that has developed it. However, knowledge needed for the completion of the project will be made accessible among 
partners. During the project, scientific articles and case studies that are produced will be published whenever sensitive 
information is not included upon agreements of clien ts and the ecosystem. Due to the different policies of each 
member of the consortium, Gold and Green model will be considered for open access to maximise public and 
researcher access. Consequently, open access will be granted to all scientific publications  resulting from the 
BIOMAC project however, protected by copyright statements. On the other hand, procedures and tools that will be 
produced will remain on their respective owners for exploitation. If the results of the project are eligible for patenting, 
actions will be taken at the earliest possible date. In cases of joint inventions, the ownership will be shared in 
accordance with a notified agreement.  
Background IPR: The Background knowledge of the partners, as stated before will be identified prior to the writing 
of the Consortium Agreement. Background IPR will remain the property of the Originator Company or organisation. 
However, where needed, during the period of the project, all “background” knowledge, necessary for carrying out 
the project, of the partners is going to be available for use by any other partner of the consortium. Access rights will 
be granted, royalty-free by the owning partner. In terms of post-project exploitation, access will be once again granted 
by the owning partner, either royalty-free or by charging a license fee under reasonable terms, promoting in that way 
the collaboration among nations and the advancements of the research and innovation. For better protection of the 
knowledge shared, a Non -Disclosure Agr eement could be signed between the involving partners.  Finally, all 
knowledge will be managed in accordance with the Grant Agreement and a Consortium Agreement that will be timely 
prepared and signed by all consortium members. 
Patents and Knowledge Sharing : If considered appropriate the “results” IP on new prototypes developed will be 
patented in Europe and in any relevant region of the world. Rules for governing access rights for the jointly executed 
research: Partners working together for achieving specif ic objectives of the project will enjoy access rights to:  (A) 
The knowledge arising from work carried out under the joint activities  and (B) The pre-existing know-how of the 
other participants when it is necessary for the project implementation. 
 
Data management plan (DMP) 
The partners have considered issues related to management of research data as they want to ensure data security, 
accessibility and validation of results. A Data Management Plan (DMP) will be conducted as part of a concrete 
research data management strategy which will minimize possible duplication of effort and the risk of data loss and 
will offer integrity to the data  (month 06, and updated by month 48) . Furthermore, the research efficiency will 
increase, time and resources will be saved in long term and compliance with practices conducted in industry and 
commerce will be achieved. The DMP will describe plans for creating, organising, documenting, storing and sharing 
data. It will take into account issues such as data protect ion and confidentiality, data preservation and curation and 
will provide a framework that will support researchers and their data throughout the course of their research and 
beyond. It will be constantly updated describing what kind of research data will be generated, what policies apply to 
the data. Funding and legal policies and data management practices as backups, storage, access control, archiving 
will be determined. It will be clear who will own and have access to what data and who will be responsible for each  
aspect of the plan. Moreover, partners will try to 
clearly describe which data will retain value after the 
end of the project and how its reuse will be enabled 
and how the long-term preservation ensured after the 
original research is completed. Partners will share 
research data generated allowing others to replicate, 
validate, or correct their results, thereby improving 
the scientific record. This will increase the 
research’s integrity and replication as those who 
make use of their data and cite it in their own 
research will disseminate the results possibly in 
other disciplines, sectors, and countries. Moreover, 
in the future partners will be able to identify, 
retrieve, and understand the data themselves after 
they have lost familiarity with it, perhaps several  
 
Figure 2.4: Data management plan strategy of the project 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [31 of 68] 
Years hence. Partners will not share specific parts of their research data if the achievement of the project’s main 
objectives would be jeopardized by making those specific parts of the research data openly accessible. They will not 
also share data that they may not have the legal right to share maybe because the parts of them belong to other authors 
or entities. The methodology and standards, whether and how these data will be shared and/or made open, and how 
it will be curated and preserved will be decide d by the consortium during project implementation. The DMP will 
follow the template demonstrated below for each of the datasets generated: 
✓ Data set reference and name: identifier for the produced data. 
✓   Data set description: description, nature, scale, information about integration and reuse etc. 
✓   Standards and metadata: reference to the standards that will be used and how the metadata will be created. 
✓  Data sharing: access procedures, software or other tools needed for access, repository, reasons for confidential 
data Archiving and preservation: procedures for the long-term preservation of the data, estimated end volume. 
 
B. Exploitation activities (Exploitation plan for the BIOMAC Ecosystem & End Users) 
The exploitation activities of the project concerns two main directions. On one hand there is the exploitation of the 
main result of the project that is the BIOMAC OITB itself that will be elaborated at WP8 and on the other hand the 
exploitation of the end  users that will be elaborated at WP5. The consortium has worked on the exploitation plans 
for both cases. Initially the Business Plan of OITB is presented B1-B5 and then a brief description of the exploitation 
routes of the end users is following.  
 
B1. Value proposition and role of the BIOMAC Ecosystem  
The value proposition of BIOMAC OITB is the operation of a new, open innovation ecosystem targeting in the 
upscaling of nano-enabled bio-based materials. This will be achieved via the collaboration of high expertise groups 
across Europe in the field of biomass pre -treatment, value platform chemicals extraction, processing and 
manufacturing, monitoring, testing, characterization, modelling, environmental assessment, standardization, 
nanosafety, innovation management and training. BIOMAC Ecosystem will provide its services to SMEs, midcaps, 
large industries and R&D entities interested in developing new applications and products based nano-reinforced 
bio-based polymers. Besides this main function the BIOMAC OITB will offer additional business opportunities to 
its clients through the developed open innovation environment. On one hand it will act as a Pan-European 
association (BIOMAC Community), serving the interests of its members regarding the field of nano -enabled bio-
based materials and products offering opportunities of networking, technology transfer, reduced fees to training 
workshops and events etc. Finally, the OITB will serve as a facilitator of IPR and technology transfer services, 
focusing on the technologies that will be developed inside the Ecosystem. All three activities it is expected to 
contribute to the revenues of the OITB as a whole.  
 
B1.1) SWOT & PEST analysis: 
The consortium has discussed about the venture of the BIOMAC ecosystem and analysed internal and external factors 
that can have effect on the BIOMAC ecosystem as well as the external macro environment in which the ecosystem 
will be positioned. The following table presents the SWOT and PEST analysis. Based on this  the concept of the 
BIOMAC ecosystem is aligned positively with forces of change affecting its positioning environment.  
 
Table 2.4: SWOT and PEST analysis of the BIOMAC concept 
The SWOT-PEST analysis 
Strengths 
- Single Entry Point (SEP) 
- Cross sectoral market approach 
Value Chain 
- Unique combination of EU 
SoA PLs  
- Reduce time, cost risk to 
market through the use of 
BIOMAC ecosystem 
- New smart biomaterials value 
chains 
- Cross sectoral market approach 
(biomass, chemicals, packaging) 
- New bio-based value chains 
Weaknesses 
- New concept with 
uncertain customer 
acceptance 
- Necessity of strong IPR 
policy within the 
ecosystem - Maintain 
collaboration between the 
ecosystem key partners 
- Establishment of partner 
agreements and liability 
obstacles  
Political 
- European strategic goals for 
global competition in KETs 
[24] 
- EU policy and legislation 
for nanomaterials [25] 
- Bio Based Industries (BBI) 
roadmaps 
-  European strategy for 
plastics [26]  
- EU policy for circular 
economy 
- EU policy for reducing 
agricultural waste burning 
Economic 
- Financial support for clients 
to use BIOMAC services 
- Cost of raw 
materials/biomass 
- Costs involved in the life 
cycle  
- Financial support for 
clients to use BIOMAC 
services 
- Seed funding for product 
commercialization  
Opportunities 
-High growth industrial sectors 
selected 
Threats Social 
-  Public awareness on 
economic and environmental 
Technological 
 
24  https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/key-enabling-technologies/european-strategy_en 
25  https://publications.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/be32dfc7-1499-4328-b54f-a9f024805f59/language-en 
26 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/plastic_waste.htm  
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [32 of 68] 
-Develop products and supply 
chains to capture immediate 
market needs 
- Enhance productivity and 
efficiency of bio-based solutions 
making them more affordable in 
mass production 
- Cooperation with existing 
companies offering niche 
services 
- Extremely high market 
potential 
- Threat of new entrance of 
competitors in the EU 
market 
- Fuzzy compliance with 
regulations on bio-based 
nanomaterials 
- Customer reaction to 
pricing policies 
- End users are relatively 
reluctant to accept new 
technologies 
- Open Innovation 
- Need of strong IPR policy 
- Target markets to re -learn 
“value selling” 
benefits of the BIOMAC 
technologies 
- Reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions by using no 
fossil-based materials 
- Reduction of farmer 
exposure to harmful fumes 
from burning agricultural 
waste 
- Transition towards circular 
economy 
 
- Better use of raw materials 
and resources with reduced 
environmental impact 
- Upscaling of 
manufacturing lines of 
nanomaterials and bio-based 
polymers 
- Knowledge transfer from 
pilot lines to industrial 
processes 
- Materials and processes 
logistics 
- Waste treatment 
technologies 
 
B1.2) Canvas Business Model: 
An initial approach based on the Business Model Canvas, operating as a basis for the business plan full development, 
is presented below trying to demonstrate the factors that explain how the BIOMAC project results will successfully 
penetrate the targeted markets. 
 
Table 2.5: BIOMAC Canvas Business Model 
 
B2. Management and organization of Ecosystem 
The members of the BIOMAC ecosystem have already decided that the most efficient way for the proper 
representation and operation of the Ecosystem is to use a EUBP that will undertake the whole administrative, financial 
and legal issues of the SEP with the assistance of the OITB members (AUTH, EUBIA, BEECO, LTU, BBEPP, LIST, 
RISE, ATB, UEdin, AIMP, FH-WKI, CNano, ITEN, AIMEN, PoliMi, DTI, NNT, IDEN, AXIA, UBU, Abis, EXEL, 
EUBP, UPD, IRIS, RDC, ISQ & STAM). The management and organizational structure of the O ITB and SEP has 
been described at paragraphs 1.4.1 and 2.0.   
 
B3. Legal & Operational Plan 
The major aspects governing the operation of the EUBP as a SEP and all individual relationships with the members 
of the BIOMAC ecosystem as well as the clients are presented below and will be finalized in WP1, WP5 and WP8. 
Access to the BIOMAC Pilot/services by the end users will be based on an agreement which the EUBP will conclude 
with each individual customer. The End Users Agreement: 
Key 
partners 
Key activities Value 
 proposition 
Customer 
relationship  
Customer   
segments 
- Other OTIBs 
- EU Pilots 
- Investors 
- Venture Capitals 
- EEN 
- Biomass providers  
- Data repositories 
- European Clusters 
and Associations 
- EPPN, Nanosafety, 
EMMC Public 
stakeholders (EU , 
governments, 
Industrial 
Associations etc.) 
- Banks/Financial 
Institutions 
- EUBP acting as SEP 
- Technology scale up, upgrade 
and validation 
- Commercialization support 
- Monitoring and modelling  
- Clustering activities 
- Design and development of 
PILOT technology 
- Value chain management 
✓ Open Access to 17 
Pilot Lines 
✓ Offer and 
commercialization of 
transversal Support 
services 
✓ Upgrades and 
monitoring of PLs 
✓ Training activities 
✓ Feasibility studies 
✓ Prototypes 
✓ Brokerage events 
✓ Funding landscaping  
✓ Open Innovation 
Community 
- Single entry point 
SEP  
- Co-creation 
- Dealers agreements 
Primary:  
Automotive 
Construction 
Agriculture  
Food packaging 
Printed 
Electronics 
 
Secondary 
Plastics 
manufacturers 
(packaging, 
piping, etc.) 
Materials 
manufacturers 
Chemical 
industries 
Key resources Channels 
- Experience in process 
engineering 
- Existing Pilot Lines 
- IPR 
- Infrastructures 
- Web platform 
- Collaboration with 
other OITBs  
Cost structure Revenue Streams 
- Costs for maintenance and upgrading of Pilot facilities 
and infrastructures 
- Consumables and fixed costs (materials, salaries) 
- Cost for experienced staff 
- Marketing costs 
- Large scope of operation 
- Fees of access to PLs and services  
- Community membership fees 
- Innovation consulting 
- Conference and pitching event fees 
- IPR protection-patents-licensing of processes to companies 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [33 of 68] 
✓ The SEP provides access to Pilots and services to properly registered users via an online platform within the scope 
of a technology services solution. 
✓ The services are provided to the User against payment of a fee, agreed with the actual service provider members 
of the BIOMAC Ecosystem, for the duration of its use (“pay-per-use” business model). 
✓ The SEP reserves the right to improve, adapt or modify t he online platform in terms of content and/or structure. 
For example, the SEP may modify or discontinue some services, make available new ones, and modify or extend the 
user interface of the online platform. In doing so, the SEP will consider the User’s legitimate interests. 
✓ The SEP will also offer a customer support service thought the web platform. Also options for “after sales” services 
will be projected on the End-User Agreement. 
The SEP shall ensure that all end users intending to have access to the Pilot/services accept the End-user Agreement.  
Concerning the relationships of the SEP and the core members of the OITB, these will be defined by the Framework 
Agreement. The Framework Agreement (FA) will be established between the core members of the ΟΙΤΒ and 
the SEP and will form the contractual framework for the provision of the BIOMAC services via the SEP. In the FA, 
it will be described in detail the services that each core member will provide (e.g. access to Pilot Lines, modelling, 
characterization, consultancy etc) as well as other general terms (e.g. legal aspects, confidentiality terms, organization 
of work, pricing policy etc). Each Party of the FA may – with the mutual agreement of the respective other party – 
amend or add information to the pilot/services covered by the FA. New pilot/services will be welcome, provided that 
the terms and conditions set forth in each new Pilot/service sheet do not contradict those of the Agreement. The FA 
will include a Statement of Work (SoW) that will be activated each time a new customer will require the services 
of the OITB. In the SoW that will be signed between the SEP and separately by each involved member of the OITB 
will provide the deta ils of the required service for the specific end user (analytical tasks, costs, persons involved, 
resources required). 
 
B4. Market segmentation, size & needs 
BIOMAC has conducted already a Discovery market search per End User Sub market where the CAGR, the market 
size and value has been defined (See also 1.4). [27]  
 
Table 2.6: BIOMAC Targeted Market size and value 
Mar
ket 
Sub 
markets CAGR Market Sub markets Market size and value 
Automotive 
Interior 
furniture 
component  
7.0% 
The global polyurethane market size is expected to reach 105.2 bn by 2025, 
according to the report by Grand View Research. Rising awareness regarding 
resource conservation and optimum manufacturing processes and low labour costs 
in developing countries are factors estimated to fuel overall market demand through 
2025. Growing demand for bio -based polyurethane (PU) as well as demand for 
innovation and sustainability are key factors driving the industry. Rising 
government interferences in order to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are 
also estimated to have a positive impact on overall market growth. [28] 
Food Packaging 
Food 
packaging 
flexible 
films 
20,9% 
PLA has the second largest production volume of any bioplastic. PLA represents 
the alternative to cost-efficient, non-petroleum plastic. A significant benefit of PLA 
as a bioplastic is its versatility and the fact that it naturally degrades when exposed 
to the environment. [29] The global polylactic acid is projected to reach 5.16 Billion 
EUR by 2020, growing at a CAGR of 20.9% during the forecast period 2015-2020. 
The last 5 years the PLA Market size was above 500 kilo tons and is poised to grow 
at significant growth rate. Packaging segment accounted for the maximum volume 
share 16 owing to rising adoption of green packaging among consumers. 
Construction Modular 
pedestrian 
bridge 
Civil 
Engineeri
ng 
10.6% 
The global construction market reached a value of nearly 12bn in 2018, having 
grown at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8.3% since 2014, and is 
expected to grow at a CAGR of 10.6% to nearly 18 bn by 2022. Growth in the 
historic period resulted from strong economic growth in emerging markets, low 
interest rates, and technological advances. Factors that negatively affected growth 
in the historic period were geo-political tensions that hampered construction activity 
globally. C ivil engineering construct ion market is segmented into utility system 
construction and bridge construction and civil engineering construction.  
 
27  https://discovery.patsnap.com 
28 https://www.grandviewresearch.com/press-release/global-polyurethane-pu-market 
29 https://www.creativemechanisms.com/blog/learn-about-polylactic-acid-pla-prototypes  
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [34 of 68] 
Agriculture 
Agricultur
al films  7% 
The global market size of plastics for agricultural use is 5.6 MT, with an average 
annual growth of 7  % with peaks of growth in Asian areas where the demand of 
increase in food production is stronger. [ 30] Total agriculture plastics market in 
Europe is 674 ktons, 46 % used for vegetable productions. [ 31] Mulch films 
amounts for 86 kton/year, only the 3,5%  is biodegradable and the 9,4% oxo -
degradable. Mulch films are mainly used in Italy, France, Germany, Benelux and 
Spain. [32] Among biodegradable biopolymers PBAT and starch blends are as the 
most relevant. 
Printed 
Electronics 
Flexible 
wearable 
sensors  
18.8% 
Wearable sensors are expected to gain traction over the forecast period. The 
application of these sensors in fitness bands is estimated to hold largest market share 
in 2016. Global Flexible Electronics market accounted for $5.53 billion in 2017 and 
is expected to reach 24.78 b by 2026 growing at a CAGR of 18.1%. Wearable 
sensors are a vital aspect of wearable devices owing to growing focus on health and 
fitness monitoring activities. Wearable sensors are emerging as a revolution in 
monitoring healthcare and fitness and reduce hospital cost for patients. [33] 
 
B5. Sustainability of the Ecosystem & Financial projections and KERs 
The 28 core members of the BIOMAC Ecosystem will provide their services to customers in the field for many years. 
The partners have agreed that it will be beneficial for them to join forces through the formation of an Ecosystem as 
on one hand they will share administrative costs (will be undertaken by EUBP) on the other hand they will develop 
synergies that will result in  better and faster services provision to their clients. Moreover, the members of the 
Ecosystem will shift from a regional activity to a Pan-European market through the SEP. This is expected to have a 
significant increase in their revenues. On the other hand, based on their current experience, BIOMAC partners have 
identified also the three most crucial risks for the successful accomplishment of the Ecosystem’s creation.  
 
B5.1) Main Risks to sustainability and contingency plans: 
A) Access to finance: The BIOMAC project aims at proposing an integrated access to a large diversified ecosystem 
of actors through a SEP. Considering the potential barriers in the access to finance in order to guarantee the 
sustainability of the outcomes of the project – specifically the SEP and related services carried out through partners 
– we mention the potential risks for funding providers connected to the positioning of the offering of the BIOMAC 
solutions in the competitive scenario and the commercial features of the offe ring. The value proposition of the 
offering could be underestimated by funders or their perception of the risks associated with the new technological 
processes proposed – within the open innovation paradigm – could be particularly high. These barriers coul d be 
overcome with an appropriate and detailed business plan, also based on interaction and feedbacks obtained 
throughout the project (WP5 and WP8). Another barrier could be related to the scale of the financial resources, that 
is access to a more limited amount of resources than the necessary one or in the timeframe requested. To overcome 
this issue the project could foresee communication activities and promotion of the OITB and its services at wider 
international scale towards appropriate funding actors.  
B) Pricing Policy: The definition of the pricing policy is specifically one of the activities and related deliverable of 
the project. One barrier in fully define an appropriate pricing policy is connected to the need of balancing accessibility 
to the services offered through the SEP towards the OITB (and SEP) and economic sustainability of the ecosystem. 
More precisely, the barrier is related to the organizational effort (and coordination activity) required to overcome any 
bargaining power of actors within  the ecosystems, to aligning price definition with value creation and distribution 
among partners. This is connected to the barrier related to the variety of actors involved in the ecosystem with 
different cost structures that should be considered in the SEP. From this point of view, within the project (WP1, WP5, 
WP6, and WP8) specific attention will be given to promote information exchange among producers in relation to 
cost structures. Another barrier is related to the need of develop a differentiation pricing policy based on customers 
(large vs. SMEs) and link to IPR regime that the project will outline. This issue will be overcome by exploiting the 
open call within WP7 to fine-tune the scheme of the pricing policy through interaction with potential customers.   
C) Internal Conflicts: Internal conflicts may rise in relation to a shared IPR strategy able to guarantee innovation but 
also appropriability of the results of innovation and related production activities. Within the project in the 
development of S EP, IPR definition will be crucial to avoid problems ex-post where unclear IPR policy could 
generate conflicts within the ecosystem on knowledge protection or economic appropriability of the results developed 
through the OITB. The possibility to articulate IPR strategy according to multiple commercial and technolog ical 
scenarios by involving directly the partners should reduce such barrier to sustainability. Internal conflicts could also 
be related to the access to market through the SEP and eventually the priority among partners within the ecosystems 
in relation to promising commercial opportunities (i.e. large demand). From this point of view, activities of related 
 
30 Reynolds A., Trends in the agriculture film business, AMI Agriculture Film 2018, Oral presentation, 2018 
31 Plasticulture, N°135, 2016, B. Figuier 
32 European Bioplastics - EuropaBIo, Fertliser regulation: biodegradable mulch film, 2018 
33 The "Flexible Electronics - Global Market Outlook (2017-2026)" report has been added to ResearchAndMarkets.com's offering.  
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [35 of 68] 
to different WPs (1, 5, 6 and 8) should be directly oriented to share information and promote discussion and 
collaboration among the partners on their perspectives and expectations concerning market opportunities in order to 
validate a clear, agreed and approved process of distribution of product development across pilot lines. This will help 
reducing competitive behaviours internally. 
  
B5.2) Financial projections: 
BIOMAC targets clients across the supply chain , starting from producers of biomass, chemical companies 
processing biomass or derivatives and end users  (e.g. food packaging, automotive, construction, agriculture or 
printed electronics) as well as R&D entities eager to further investigate innovative concepts at a larger scale. It should 
be highlighted that as the global bio-based materials market is going to witness a heavy demand the next decade due 
to growing concerns regarding environment, the services of BIOMAC will be extremely attractive to the industry. 
According to recent market reports the global market for bio-based materials was estimated at 9.9b € at 2017 and is 
expected to reach 85b € at 2026 growing at a CAGR of 27.1%. Main consumers are the markets of rigid & flexible 
packaging, automotive & transport, consumer goods, building & construction, electrics & electronics and textiles. 
[34]. Based on this fact, BIOMAC is positioned in a fast -growing sector with increased R&D expenditures [ 35]. 
Already during the proposal preparation, a significant number of LoI from potential clients have been collected (a 
total of 30) proving the interest of the industry in the BIOMAC offers. The Innovation Management team of 
BIOMAC in collaboration with the other partners have worked on a draft estimation of the financial projections that 
the BIOMAC project will have during the 5 first years of its sustainabi lity phase. The presented costs are the real 
costs provided by the core partners for the provision of similar services. The revenue model of the OITB include the 
following sources: 
 
A. Fees for accessing the PLs and services. The average cost for a test case will be ~200.000€. This cost concerns 
the access to PLs and the supporting services for a duration of 6 months. The cost breakdown (in percentages) in the 
various services of the OITB for a test case is: 
 
Percentage of cost Cost  
45% for the use of the Pilot Line, adjustment of monitoring systems and raw materials 
32% for the evaluation of the materials and products (characterization, testing and field tests) 
10% for conduction of simulation and materials/process modelling 
5% for the H&S issues (including nano-safety) as well as environmental assessment  
8% or the industrial implementation issues (e.g. business planning, marketing etc). 
 
These percentages may vary depending on the clients preference on the services of the OIT B (for example a client 
might have already proceeded in-house to an environmental assessment or a preliminary business plan and thus will 
not be interested in the relevant services). 
 
B. Fees for the BIOMAC community participation. The members of the community will pay an annual fee in order 
to enjoy the benefits that the community will offer. The exact amount of fee will be determined during the project 
but it is expected to be in the range of 3.000€ per year per partner. 
 
C. IPR & technology transfer facilitator. The open innovation environment that will be created around the BIOMAC 
OITB will provide a prosperous ground for collaboration between the clients. The OITB will provide consultancy 
services facilitating such interactions and agreements, charging a fee to each success case. It is expected that the 
OITB will have a profit of ~150.000€ per contract for these services. 
 
Based on the interest of stakeholders already expressed through the LoI, as well as the targeted dissemination and 
marketing activities that will be undertaken during the project duration, the partners estimate that for the first year of 
the operation of the Ecosystem, close to 25 test cases will be introduced and there will be an increase of interest for 
the next year, reaching more than 100 test cases by the fifth year. The below table shows the preliminary financial 
projections for the members of the Eco system. A 2.5% inflation rate per year has been taken into account for the 
calculations. Based on Table 2.7 it is expected that by the fifth year after the project end, the BIOMAC OITB will 
have a cumulative revenue of 76.093.462 that is 5 times the EC funding for the project, reaching thus the targets 
set by the work program. Taking into account a new job for every 200.000€ of additional revenue it is expected that 
~380 new jobs will be created within the 28 Core partners of the Ecosystem. However, the impact on jobs creation 
will be much higher by including also the new jobs positions concerning the clients that will enter the ecosystem 
during these 5 years period, that is estimated to reach the 300. With a moderate estimation of creation of ~4 new jobs 
 
34 “Global bio-based materials market” Zion Market Research, August 2018 
35 D. VIaggi, “The bioeconomy, delivery sustainable green growth”, CAB International, 2018 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [36 of 68] 
for each of the clients entering the Ecosystem (due to their business growth attributed in novel and competitive 
products they will develop) a total of ~1200 new jobs will be created.  
 
Table 2.7: BIOMAC sustainability and business plan of Core partners 
 
 
 
 
Individual Exploitation plans for Core partners and End Users of the Ecosystem 
Besides the business plan for the EUBP (BIOMAC SEP ecosystem), the partners have also worked on their 
preliminary individual exploitation plans. All partners of BIOMAC project expect to have significant advantages by 
exploiting the results of the project. The following table present briefly the individual exploitation routes for the 
BIOMAC partners. For simplicity reasons we have proceed in groupings of partners with common or similar 
exploitation routes. In Table 2. 8 the individual exploitation routes for the core members of the ecosystem are 
presented.  
 
Table 2.8: Individual exploitation routes of core members of Ecosystem 
Exploitable results and new 
knowledge/expertise Partner (s) Exploitation plan/route 
-  Upgraded pilot lines, capable to produce nano -
enabled bio-based materials 
-  Methods for production of nanomaterials from 
biomass 
PL owners 
 Open access to PL, rent of equipment for upscaling 
and testing via the SEP agreement 
 Licensing fees 
 Further upgrade of PLs 
Methodologies for developing protocols for nano -
enabled bio-based materials PL owners Services for characterization of nano enabled 
surfaces and products via the SEP agreement 
Materials Characterization protocols validated in 
real scale scenarios PoliMi Services for characterization of bio-based materials 
and products via the SEP agreement 
Knowledge and Expertise in applying monitoring 
and process control systems in Pilot Lines PL owners Installation of monitoring systems in lines via the 
SEP agreement, Licensing of technologies 
Expertise in application of monitoring methods for 
materials  
IRIS, Abis, 
ISQ, STAM 
Provision of services to clients of the Ecosystem via 
the SEP agreement 
New simulation models, MODA workflows and 
ROMs for PL processes including NPs 
IDE, UBU, 
RDC, ISQ 
Provision of services to clients of the Ecosystem via 
the SEP agreement. Licensing of developed software  
Knowledge in monitoring and risk assessment of 
H&S of PL, including nanosafety 
UBU, 
UEdin 
Assessment of H&S risk assessment to clients of 
pilot lines via the SEP agreement 
Data Management and Platform for storage and 
acquisition IDE, RDC Provision of services to clients of the Ecosystem via 
the SEP platform  
Knowledge on LCA/LCC and Nanosafety ISQ/UBU Service provision via the SEP agreement  
Development of Value chain Decision Support tool AXIA, 
UNIPD 
Provision of services to clients of the Ecosystem via 
the SEP platform  

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [37 of 68] 
Knowledge on standardization and regulatory of 
bio-based materials and NP at various VC levels  
EUBP, 
UBU 
Consultancy services via the SEP agreement 
Knowledge of end user markets including nano -
enabled bio-based materials 
UNIPD, 
EXE 
Provision of innovation management services to 
clients of Ecosystem via the SEP agreement  
 
Based on the Joint Agreement of the core partners with the SEP they will have significant revenue streams due to the 
service provision, as already analyzed in the business plan. SMEs such as RDC, IRIS, ABIS, STAM, IDE, AXIA,  
and EXE being members of the Ec osystem will also create revenues providing supporting services to the SEP and 
the other partners based on the Joint Agreement in the field of data management, IT solutions, LCA/LCC and Safety 
IPR issues and legal advocacy. In addition, End Users (DIAD, NVMT, EVER, ACC and OHMA) will Exploit their 
results in parallel as indicated in Table 2.9 the individual exploitation routes of the End Users (TeCs) of the BIOMAC 
project are also presented. The five companies will have access to the PL of BIOMAC and the other services and 
thus will be able to upscale their materials concept up to TRL 7. Through their participation they expect to strengthen 
their market pos ition and provide to their client’s advance biomaterials with enhanced properties. Preliminary 
business plans and financial projections have been already developed concerning a period of 5 years after the 
finalization of the project. The business plans and exploitation routes will be further updated within the Ecosystem 
during the project in WP5 by UNIPR. 
 
Table 2.9: Individual KERs and exploitation routes of BIOMAC End Users 
Partne
r Core business Key Exploitable Result (KER) Exploitation plan/route Expected 
turnovers 
DIAD Automotive 
3D printed Seat leverage 
Automotive components for 
interior applications  
Sales of new parts to Tier 1 and OEM customers. 
Expand technology to other components. Product 
development, sales and licensing of technology.
0.5 M € 
3 jobs 
NVMT 
Biodegradable 
and 
compostable 
biomaterials 
Nanoreinforced bioplastic 
materials biodegradable in soil 
for agricultural applications  
Product development and sales of innovative 
advanced nanoreinforced bio -based materials 
biodegradable in soil for agricultural applications 
to converters. (mulch films, seeds coating, coated 
fertilizers granules for controlled release, etc.) 
2 M € 
10 new 
jobs 
EVER Food Packaging 
films 
Nanopatterned PLA 
nanoreinforced composite 
Flexible food packaging  
Product sales providing bio -based 
nanoreinforced improvement options  to food 
packaging consumers 
5 M € 
25 jobs 
ACC 
Construction, 
Civil 
Engineering 
Modular composite 
pedestrian bridge 
Sell around 1 -2 units in the first year after the 
completion of the project. ACCIONA also 
estimates that this figure could grow to 10-12 
units per year after 5 years of the project 
completion. This means a market share of 10% 
in its bridge manufacturing segment. 
4 M € 
20 jobs 
OHMA Printed 
Electronics 
Bio based printed Electronics 
for wearable socks  
Direct sales of integrated Printed Electrics to 
textile industries   
1 M € 
5 jobs 
Totals 12.5 M 
(63 jobs) 
 
Based on the above analysis the end users will generate a total revenue of 12.500.000€. Similar to the case of the 
members of the Ecosystem, by assuming a new job for every 200.000€ of generated revenue, a total of 63 new 
employees will be hired by the end users. When it comes to the manufacturing industry, every new job in the sector, 
creates 2.5 additional jobs across the supply chain. Thus, it is expected also that 160 indirect jobs will be created 
across Europe.  
 
2.2.3  Communication activities 
A comprehensive communication plan is developed with the aim of providing targeted information to multiple 
audiences so that awareness is created around the BIOMAC ecosystem, results and impacts at business, scientific, 
industrial and societal level. Whenever relevant, two-way exchange engagement will be used so to collect valuable 
feedback from different target audiences. Since communication addresses also audiences that are outside the 
BIOMAC community, activities will be differentiated in term s of message to be conveyed, medium, means and 
frequency of interaction. A broader general public will be reached by top level messages that reflect the project’s 
achievements and particular segments of society where isolated actions would not be as effective as possible engaging 
and informing the society. The campaign will use multiple channels to deliver a clear and consistent message to a 
variety of audiences in a way that they can be understood by non-specialists and it will have to actively engage with 
citizens, seeking their views and promoting a permanent dialogue. The campaign will be evaluated by using 
evaluation and measurement techniques including repeat of any pre -campaign research to review opinions and 
attitudes, as well as media analysis to ex amine the coverage received. Like for the dissemination measures, all the 
consortium partners will be involved in communication activities, whilst expertise of EUBP, RDC and EUBIA will 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [38 of 68] 
ensure that the quality of the material used to support these activitie s are of a professional level. The current 
dissemination and communication strategy will be updated every six months, in Table 2.3 there is summarized a 
concrete Dissemination and Communication Strategy and in the Table 2.10 the diversity between the two activities 
is split including scope and means of verification. First, in order to increase the communication efficacy, supporting 
material will be developed to raise awareness about concepts, results, expected impacts that the BIOMAC project is 
expected to generate other than keeping the public informed about the BIOMAC news. This material mainly allows 
to reach the general audience, but it is also useful to easier the relationships with audiences who requires a more 
focused engagement plan. Following a stakeholder analysis, the target audience of our communication activities has 
been defined as policy makers, training institutes, mass media (TV, radio and the written press) and multipliers for 
addressing the general publi c, as well as others. These requirements are in line with the legal basis for the 
Communication Strategies described in the European regulation (EC) 1828 /2006 (art.2-10) [36] 
 
Table 2.10: Communication plan 
Dissemination activities Communication activities  
Dialogues, face-to-face conversation, Group discussions, 
Brokerage events, Business to Clients (B2C), Round tables, 
Exhibitions, trade fairs, Open days, Demonstrations and 
prototypes, E-mail information 
Newspapers and magazines, Press releases, 
newsletters, Manuals, Brochures, booklets, flyers 
Letters, Radio, Television, Video, Posters, Stickers, 
Banners, Billboards, Website, Policy briefs 
Smaller audience, lower costs, more effort. Interactive, good 
for acquiring input Flexible 
Potentially large audience, Uses the credibility of the 
mass media 
Scope  Communication Means of verification 
Identify key 
objectives 
-- Designing the project graphical identity, to ensure consistency throughout the project duration 
and trademark Ecosystem to become a European reference point. -- Producing project 
documentation, which will stress the actual benefits of the solutions, along with incentives. -- 
Organising project events, to raise awareness among a targeted public, analyse project activities, 
establish personalised interactions and provide project partners with useful inputs. 
Key message 
The key message will be derived by the Innovation activities that will take place during the 
project and will be co-decided by the consortium during the project implementation. It may also 
be followed by supplemental and supporting messages that will enhance the central point, 
highlighting the project’s advantages. 
Campaign’s 
communications 
channels 
In order to reach a large audience, the consortium will try to have strong online presence. For 
example, the utilization of social media for the dissemination of information, and thus create 
Facebook, LinkedIn, Youtube and Twitter acco unts from where public important information 
will include informative and demonstration videos.  
Releasing project 
publications 
Target is to raise awareness among relevant target audience and highlight project achievements 
and excellence. Resources will a lso be taken into consideration for the campaign ‘s 
implementation for services as advertising, photography, printing, design, copywriting, editing, 
web and media relations management. 
Releasing results to 
wider public 
Communicating short articles in nati onal & international newspapers, magazines, TV and on 
Internet platforms directed towards a general audience in mid-term, and at the end of the project.  
Evaluation and 
redesign 
During each project’s progress meeting, there will be a dedicated section, where partners will 
attempt to review the existing communication strategy, evaluate the succeeded results and 
identify threats or opportunities in the area of nanotechnology.  
 
  
 
36 Commission Regulation (EC) 1828/2006 of 8 December 2006   
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [39 of 68] 
3. Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables 
In line with the technological objectives that BIOMAC has to overcome in this 48 months project the work to be 
accomplished has been structured with the following work packages ( Figure 3.1), each WP has been sub -divided 
into a number of tasks, which are listed in detail in Figure 3.2 (Gantt chart). Each WP will be led and managed by a 
project partner who is expert in the relevant field. The WP structure aims to set the basis for new bio -based value 
chains with a focus on creating new cross sector interconnections in bio-based economy clusters. The objectives will 
address issues raised by the NMBP-04-2020 topic and will be implemented in a reasonable and cost-effective manner. 
WP objectives are built on integrated production methods, delivery of added value polymers, cost effective accurate 
characterizations and variability of product evaluatio n through LCA approach. Partners will generate knowledge, 
develop novel bioprocessing technologies and industrial concepts transferrable to upscale testing. All 33 partners will 
collaborate between them in order to successfully deliver and achieve the BIOMAC objectives.  
 
 
Figure 3.1: Work package structure of BIOMAC OITB. 
 
 
Table 3.1: List of work packages 
WP 
No Work Package Title  Lead 
Participant  
Participan
t Nr 
Person -
Months  
Start 
M 
End  
M 
1 Ecosystem organization, tools and procedures EUBP 23 131 1 48 
2 Upgrade of Pilot Lines Abis 21 283 1 18 
3 Pilot Plant Supreme Hub (PPSH) Services LIST 6 471 1 36 
4 Validation Services Hub (VSH)  IDE 18 164 1 48 
5 Market Uptake Hub (MUH)  UNIPD 24 159 1 48 
6 Value Chain assessment Hub (VCH)  UBU 20 175 1 48 
7 BIOMAC Open call & Intra TeCs  EUBP  23 306 20 48 
8 Exploitation & Sustainability of OITB EXE 22 127 1 48 
9 Dissemination Communication and clustering EUBIA 2 160 1 48 
10 Management and Coordination AUTH 1 119 1 48 
Total PMs 2094  
 
 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
    [40 of 68] 
 
Figure 3.2: Gantt chart of BIOMAC project. 
 
 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [41 of 68] 
Table 3.2: Work package description  
WP No  1 Start Date or Starting Event 1-48 
WP title Ecosystem organization, tools and procedures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
In WP1 the organization al structure and operational procedures of the BIOMAC OITB will be specified. The ecosystem will 
provide a unique upscaling/development environment for treatment and processing solutions across the value chain of nano -
enabled bio-based materials and intents to provide to end users holistic solutions by testing all relevant aspects including properties, 
regulatory aspects, safety and dedicated business, all in one place. For this purpose, a concrete administrative structure is needed 
with well-defined procedures and tools.  
 
WP-1 has the following specific objectives: 
1. To define the legal aspects and the management structure of the Ecosystem . 
2. To determine internal operational procedures and communication channels including the building blocks, their elements and  
the interactions between them. 
3. To develop methodologies for translation of industrial needs to workflows of the Ecosystem . 
4. To arrange legal aspects governing the relationship of the SEP with the Ecosystem’s members . 
5. To determine external operational procedures with clients (legal aspects, pricing policies, and access conditions). 
6. To provide the final input for the fine tuning of the ecosystem based on the experience of the open call . 
 
The WP 1 will be led by EUBP and will operate till M48 
Description of Work 
Task 1.1: Administrative organization of the OITB (Task Leader: EUBP), M01-18 
Supported by: all core partners 
During this task the administrative structure of the Ecosystem and all legal aspects will be concluded. The consortium has 
already worked and presented the draft administrative structure for the Ecosystem in Section 2. The target is to work towards 
the organization of a SEP structure that will act as a central One -Stop-Shop (OSS) of the Ecosystem undertaking the 
administrative and secretarial tasks. Main part of this task will be to implement the proposed organizational structure of the 
OITB and SEP as shown in Figure 1.4 of section 1, including the connection of the advisory board with the OITB. Moreover, 
EXE and UNIPD will be in close collaboration with EUBP in order to  define and implement all necessary activities and 
draft legal documents that will govern the relationships of SEP with the other OITB members including the agreements that 
will have to be signed officially by all core partners of the ecosystem (e.g. the Framework Agreement as described in 
section 2) as well as the agreements to be signed with the future clients of the Ecosystem that will place commercial requests 
to ether access the PL Supreme Hub or the other three transversal Service Hubs  (e.g. the End User Agreement , also 
described in section 2).   
 
Task 1.2 OITB operation procedures (Task Leader: EUBP), M01-18 
Supported by: all core partners 
In parallel to the arrangement of the SEP structure the internal operating procedures and protocols that will govern the 
operation of the SEP and the members of the Ecosystem as well as the collaboration procedures between all the elements 
will be arranged. Based on the two agreements of OITB ( Framework Agreement and End User Agreement) the terms of 
collaboration between the Hubs will be defined . Specific procedures will define the internal communication between the 
Hubs (e.g. transfer of sample, data, sequence of activities etc). Communication channels between the Hubs will be established 
for transfer of common readable  data. An additional i mportant output of the task will be the d evelopment of the 
methodology for the translation of the concepts received through the SEP into work flows. The methodology will be 
developed by the hubs and will be based on a hierarchical classification of the needs starting from the corresponding 
upscaling unit(s), followed by monitoring, modelling, characterization and other services. The methodology developed will 
lead to workflows without unnecessary or replicated tasks that will increase both cost and delivery time.  
 
Task 1.3 Data management & IT tools of OITB (Task Leader: RDC), M01-48 
Supported by: IDE and all core partners 
The Data Management Plan (DMP) developed by IDE will describe the data management life cycle for all data sets that will 
be collected, processed and generated by the project. This DMP will indicate how this consortium will handle the research 
data during and after the project. It be submitted by month 6 and will be updated when important changes occur, such as 
inclusion of new data sets. The main goal of the DMP is to ensure that research data is easily discoverable, accessible, 
assessable and intelligible and useable beyond the original purpose for it which it was collected and interoperable to specific 
quality standards. The document will contain the following information for each dataset: (1) Data set reference and name –
Unique identifier for the produced data.  (2) Data set description – description, origin, nature, scale, reuse, integration, 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [42 of 68] 
publishability, etc. (3) Standards and metadata – reference to standards, how metadata will be created, etc. (4) Data sharing 
access procedures, dissemination  strategies, range of open data, embargo periods, etc. (5) Archiving and preservation 
(including storage and backup) long -term preservation of the data and ways to achieve it, approximated end volume and 
plans to be covered. Deliverable Data Management Plan (M6): the plan will describe the data management life cycle for all 
data sets and open the road for the Open Innovation Environment (OIE), where partners will be able to have access to all 
previous data generated in the project and thus hold valuable inf ormation about their own test cases. The DMP will be 
annually updated until the end of the curses of the project. Activities for efficient organization and arranging of data produced, 
will be performed in order to provide accessibility to well documented information and thus reducing costs and time. Finally, 
Data Security and Privacy  will be considered , since working together with all partners’ accessibility level for each 
beneficiary. In terms of Data Security, the DMP will ensure data protection from brea ches or cyber -attacks. As key data 
security technology measure, encryption will be applied on digital data, software/hardware, and hard drives in order data to 
be rendered unreadable to unauthorized users. All the above will be harmonized with the GDPR guideline. Deliverables 1.1 
and 1.5 will be updated the implementation of the project when necessary.  
 
Task 1.4: Fine tuning of OITB procedures (Task Leader: EUBP), M19-48 
Supported by: all core partners 
During the first period of the project the main administrative and operational procedures and structures will be defined. These 
procedures will be set to action during the initiation of the implementation of the test cases that is the validation phase. As 
already discussed, the validation phase consists of selected test cases and new test cases will have access in the ecosystem 
through the open call. These test cases will provide the necessary feedback on the ecosystem and thus, possible issues 
concerning these procedures (e.g. deficient communication be tween the partners, delays in responses, legal documents, 
contracts, NDA etc) will be improved and fixed. The target is that by the end of the project, the ecosystem will have identified 
all deficient procedures and fix/replace them with more efficient ones. 
Deliverables 
D1.1 Data Management Plan Strategy (M06, Task 1.3, IDE)  
D1.2 Report on the organizational structure of the Ecosystem (M12, Task 1.1, EUBP) 
D1.3 Draft Contracts (Framework Agreement & End Users Agreement (M18, Task 1.1, EUBP) 
D1.4 Report on the operational procedures of SEP (M18, Task 1.2, EUBP) 
D1.5 Delivery of beta version of OITB communication platform (M18, Task 1.3 RDC)  
D1.6 OITB validation report by selected end users (M36, Task 1.4 EUBP) 
D1.7 OITB validation report by selected open call end users (M48, Task 1.4 EUBP) 
D1.8 Final update of DMP (M48, Task 1.3, IDE) 
 
WP No  2 Start Date or Starting Event 1-18 
WP title Upgrade of Pilot Lines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
The main objective of WP2 is to upgrade the existing pilot lines and equip them with suitable components, monitoring 
systems and control functions in order to enhance their capacity of delivering nano-enabled bio-based materials, and to 
increase their productivity and their environmental footprint in terms of energy consumption and raw materials use. The 
selected end users will provide significant feedback to the pilot owners for better understanding of their needs in order to 
secure the successful implementation of the selected 5 test cases.  
 
WP-2 has the following specific objectives: 
1. To upgrade three PLC (BFPC, IMNC and FPFC) 
2. Upgrading and/or modifying the existing 17 pilot lines (as described in Section 1) 
3. To develop and apply monitoring systems and close loop control systems, based in AI is specific cases, that will lead 
in improvement of quality and yields, shortening the run-in periods. 
 
The WP2 will be led by ABIS and will operate till M18 
Description of work 
Task 2.1: Upgrades and Modifications of equipment on PL (Task Leader: STAM), M01-18 
Supported by: AUTH, LTU, RISE, Cnano, UEdin, AIMEN, BBEPP, FH-WKI, ITENE, PoliMi, ISQ 
The approach to be adopted in Task 2.1 implies an iterative process starting from a preliminary Pilot Lines needs assessment, 
evolving, in the final stage, into a detailed framework, necessary to upgrade the pilots and correctly carry out the test cas es 
assigned. The first step is a sound analysis of collected info, followed by the preparation of a detailed online questionnaire 
to collect all critical parameters and upgrades. Technical sessions will be organized to revise the questionnaires and draft the 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [43 of 68] 
upgrades roadmap. The road map includes: inventory of existing equipment and sensors; specifications and requirements 
definitions for the test case preparation and running; p reliminary design of modifications required, namely: block schemes 
of lines and modification options; market analysis and quotations of necessary equipment and interventions; final definitions 
of actions and equipment (fit for pilots’ allocated budget and time schedule); follow up of interventions and technical 
assistance. PLs needing these types of upgrades as described in Sect 1 are PL1 (LTU), PL2 (RISE), PL3 (AUTH), PL4 
(Cnano), PL5 (BBEPP), PL8 (UEdin), PL11 (AIMP), PL12 (FH-WKI), PL14 (ITE) & PL15 (AIMEN). The upgrades can 
be grouped into 5 main categories: Semi- continuous to continuous operation mode (PL1, PL2); Increase production capacity 
per hour and production parameters (PL1, PL3, PL4, PL11, PL12, PL15); Increase sample dimensions (PL4, PL14); Increase 
feedstock flexibility and materials to be processed (PL8, PL15); Improve environmental performance (PL8). PL1 will achieve 
the upgrade objectives including an additional feeder in the line, allowing also an increase in the production capacity. PL2 
will shift the production of BNC towards a continuous flow manufacturing which will increase the operation and the higher 
scale production of BNC. PL3 will increase the production capacity adding a new high -pressure continuous flow stirred 
reactor; PL4 will manage to increase samples dimensions upscaling the US reactor. Furthermore, the production capacity 
will be enlarged adding a higher power US probe and in -line monitoring. PL5 will improve its biomass fractionation 
capabilities either by implementing grinding and milling steps before pretreatment or by improving hydrothermal 
pretreatment facility to achieve higher temperature. ATB PL7 is working on continuous mode (fermentation) processes with 
cell recycle. On-line measurement devices will be utilized for the intermediate (hydrolysis) and final product streams 
(fermentation) towards increased productivities of LA and SA. PL 8 will be upgraded to allow higher feedstock flexibi lity 
biomass/lignin size, density, shape, etc.), advanced process monitoring and control (feedstock composition, product quality, 
etc.), improved product recovery and separation (porous carbons, phenolic compounds, etc.), and improved environmental 
performance. PL11 will increase production capacity by upscaling the Reactive extrusion process (REX) in a co -rotating 
twin screw extruder, with final production parameters optimized. PL12 will increase production capacity investing on a 
bigger reactor. For AIMEN PL15 a new extruder will be considered to enable multimaterial robotized printing in case of FFF 
technology, extending the number of materials that can be processed for one-part manufacturing, resulting in a multimaterial 
printed solutions. On the other h and, hardware development will be carried out both for customizing the thermoplastic 
formulation with nanoadditives directly into the extruder equipment, and to directly feed the FFF equipment (conventional 
printer or robotized arm) with the extruded filam ent, thus avoiding the filament winding step. Moreover, for the 
photopolymerization process, a system made of a laboratory cuvette, semiautomatic resin dispenser and substrate gripper, 
synchronized with the laser microfabrication workstation should be set for the SPP experiments.  
 
Task 2.2:  Inline monitoring and AI of PLs (Task Leader: IRIS), M01-18 
Supported by: ISQ, AUTH, LTU, LIST, RISE, ATB, UEdin, AIMP, FH-WKI, ITENE, AIMEN, PoliMi, DTI 
Monitoring systems are generally made of a measurement device or sensor hardware and a software  for gathering in real-
time data from the process and present it via a computer program HMI (human machine interface). The data will be store in 
database and can be utilized for optimization. Monitoring a pplications can work in read -only mode, and can also support 
remote control, switch on/off, setup parameters to CPU. A correct data architecture is crucial to link the data acquisition 
systems to the right information enabling to monitoring and controlling  the systems. This is usually performed by 
implementing a wide range of sensors in the system (commercial or TaylorMade), and specific connectivity frameworks that 
connect machines and humans interactively in the system. ISQ has been involved in R&D projects applying sensor layers to 
industrial systems and managing IoT data within specific platforms to improve monitoring and control of processes. The data 
collected is processed with analytics and machine learning algorithms to find patterns that characterize the behaviour of 
systems, identify malfunctions, losses, or parameters to optimize control. Real -time monitoring of such parameters is 
crucial.  Augmented reality equipment’s can improve the information monitoring, as well as, information sharing. Beyond 
standard sensors and above described software, different NIR devices will be set up by IRIS to obtain materials information 
in real time during the process. Beyond standard sensors and above described software, different NIR devices will be set up 
by IRIS to obtain materials information in real time during the process. ATB PL7 depending on the used raw materials and 
their composition, at line NIR measurement devices will bring information on the different steps from the upstream 
(hydrolysis) via bioconversion (fermentati on) up to downstream processing (separation and purification of LA & SA). A 
similar approach will be followed for LTU PL1. AIMP PL11 and LIST PL09 REX process will be inline monitored by NIR 
in terms of evolution of the reaction in the extruders. AIMEN PL15: will incorporate quality control systems during filament 
manufacturing (e.g. on-line filament diameter monitoring). Furthermore, monitoring systems will be applied to ensure the 
quality of large -size printed parts. For FFF technology, a thermal camera w ill be incorporated to monitor the thermal 
distribution over the part while manufacturing (thus avoiding warping and shrinkage effects on the final parts based on 
thermal measurements). For MPP, laser parameters are controlled with an integrated software, which also control the scanner 
mirrors and the positioning axes, so new integration will be needed if extra components are included in the upgraded system. 
Regarding the upgrade of the optical SPP/MPP setup, a new set of microscope objectives with high mag nifications, long 
working distance and high numerical apertures would be needed for fast fabrication of 3D structures with submicron 
resolution.  
 
Task 2.3: Process Control of PLs (Task Leader: Abis), M01-18 
Supported by: AUTH, LTU, LIST, RISE, ATB, UEdin, AIMP, FH-WKI, ITENE, AIMEN, PoliMi, DTI, ISQ 
Process control system is main system to control the process. It is responsible to connect every sensor, devices, actuators, 
motors etc. to CPU built in electrical cabinet. The CPU will be connected on-line with Monitoring application from previous 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [44 of 68] 
task. CPU configuration will be design in Task 2.1.  Process control systems will be customized for each PL and will be 
integrated expending a user-friendly control system, assuring th e remotely supervised control and the continuous and safe 
run of the processes. Quality control and monitoring processes will be firstly demonstrated in lab environment, then subjected 
to a step -by-step validation protocol, to be developed within the proje ct, to ensure reliable and repeatable on -line quality 
measurements. PL2 (RISE), PL3 (AUTH), PL5 (BBEPP), PL7 (ATB), P12  (FH-WKI) and PL1 3 (ITEN) will also be 
subjected to modifications, targeting to enhance the process efficiency, allowing to find complex, non-linear patterns in data, 
and transform them into models, which can be applied to fine -tune the process parameters, improving them. Process 
modelling and simulation will help to identify the key parameters of each of the processes and thus set the basis for the 
process optimisation, that will be performed in combination with the monitoring and closed-loop control of the process. The 
PL3 (AUTH) process optimization will be based on defining the appropriate sugar solution feed flow rate and concentration 
in combination with the catalyst amount and operating reactor volume, in order to tune WSHV and contact time, which are 
crucial for achieving max imum productivity of the desired polyols/diols. Other parameters, such as type of catalyst, 
temperature, H2 pressure, etc. have been already optimized and will be tuned for the upscale production. To increase the 
efficiency of PL13, it will be modified with an automatic feeding system for continuous flow and inline monitoring of its 
viscosity. According to this viscosity value, grinded cellulose will be automatically pass through the grinder again until it  
reaches the desired viscosity. Once the desired val ue of viscosity is reached, the grinding process will automatically stop. 
This modification will increase the production of NFC to 2 kg dry NFC/day . In addition, a new the surface modification 
system will be upgraded through the acquisition of new equipment (reactor) to improve the dispersion and mixing, increasing 
the reaction yields.  
 
Task 2.4: Process Optimization (Task Leader: IDE), M01-18 
Supported by: AUTH, LTU, LIST, RISE, ATB, UEdin, AIMP, FH-WKI, ITENE, AIMEN, PoliMi, DTI, ISQ 
Engineering strategies and IT tools (simulations, mathematical optimisation) will be applied for the optimisation of the 
systems. The output information from these tools will be provided to the pilots for each  application. PLs involved in this 
Task will be PL2 (RISE), PL3 (AUTH), PL5 & PL6 (BBEPP), PL7 (ATB), PL8 (UEdin) and PL12 (FH -WKI). The 
optimisation will be performed at different levels, considering the specific requirements and adjustments associated to each 
pilot. Such levels will include: (1) design level: different options for the equipment sizing and layout will be assessed through 
simulations, such as in the study of  different strategies in PL7 such as separate hydrolysis and fermentation compared to 
simultaneous hydrolysis and fermentation and cell recycling systems for continuous cultivation will be tested. Further 
improvements can be achieved by integration of single process steps, e.g. integrated product separation. As a proof of concept 
for the  continuous operation of the reactor, at least 2 runs of 24 hours without stop using selected feedstocks will be 
conducted; (2) operational level: the model of, e.g., the fermentation in PL7 will be the basis for the optimisation of the 
process parameter such as carbon source feeding regime to avoid substrate inhibition, the optimum dry matter content and 
the best nutrient supplementation for several bacteria; Simulations will also be applied for the optimisation of process 
parameters of the coupled LTU rea ctor system (solvent concentration, solvent to product ratio, reactor retention time, 
temperature) as well as yields, purity, and productivity during the continuous mode for the cellulosic and lignin -converted 
fractions. The additive manufacturing processes parameters will be optimized in PL15 in terms of processing temperatures, 
extrusion speed, printing geometric parameters and robot trajectories for robotized FDM, based on the rheological and 
thermal behaviour of the developed materials to be processed within BIOMAC and similar bio-based commercial materials. 
(3) strain design level: the improvement of the bacterial strains in PL2 would be accompanied and supported by the 
development of genome-driven mathematical models. Such models will allow the predict ion of the context -based growth 
and by-products kinetics as well as knock -in and knock -out simulations. For photopolymerization process, laser power, 
process speed and printing strategy depending on the final geometry of the uses cases to be built will be studied, for its 
implementation in WP3. ISQ: PL Process optimization is crucial in improving the system efficiency, and can be done real-
time, off-line, or at the design stage. The system design 1stage is the first step to take. Knowing the required equipm ent’s 
and operations, it is important to project the system with the most appropriate features and layout design. For this matter 
some examples of potential approaches are operational research methods or LEAN methods. In a production system, knowing 
a priori the demand, it is possible to find a potential operational planning and scheduling, that optimizes the system operation; 
i.e. an operation scenario that minimizes energy consumption, costs, minimizes losses, or minimizes environmental impact. 
A real-time approach is an optimization method that may be engaged during the system operation, by using optimal control 
or adaptive control techniques, and trying to bring the system to the best operational point of efficiency.  
Deliverables 
D2.1 Delivery of designs and upgrading plans of pilot lines (M8, Task 2.1, STAM) 
D2.2 Progress on the upgrade and modification of pilot lines (M14, Task 2.1, ISQ) 
D2.3 Report on monitoring and control systems established in the pilot lines (M18, Task 2.2, IRIS) 
D2.4 Report on process optimisation (M18, Task 2.3&4, IDE) 
D2.5 Full description of the ecosystem pilot lines (M18, Task 2.1-4, ABIS) 
 
WP No  3 Start Date or Starting Event 1-36 
WP title Pilot Plant Supreme Hub (PPSH) Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [45 of 68] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
This WP mainly deals with the cluster of parallel actions that will be assembled on serving the internal TeCs of the ecosystem 
which will create the main lightening cases and based on the mechanism build within the Value Chain will validate the 
proper collaboration chains. The core of the ecosystem consists of the Pilot plant supreme hub that includes (PLs) covering 
the overall valorisation of Biomass Fractionation & Pre -treatment Cluster - BFPC to intermediate chemicals Intermediate 
Material and Nanocomposite Cluster (IMNC) and final nano-enabled biopolymers Final Products & Formulation Cluster 
- FPFC. The main objective is primarily to demonstrate, not only the potential of all PLs to produce a wide range of products 
across the supply chain but also, in collaboration with other transversal services, to showcase the ecosystem’s capability in 
providing a holistic solution  for potential clients. A secondary target is the performance evaluation of the pilot lines, the 
identification of bottlenecks in the process and of the weak spots in the pilot systems so as to optimize the pilot plant operation 
alone and in conjunction with all the other ecosystem services.  
 
WP-3 has the following specific objectives: 
1. Pilot production, definition of production requirements adjusted to the client’s needs, Assistance in the implementation 
at client’s production facility, Production handbook, training, Quality assurance routines 
2. To validate the ecosystem through the existing test cases  
3. End users to provide the necessary inputs and feedback during the upgrading of the pilot lines in order to secure the 
successful implementation of the selected 5 test cases.   
 
The WP3 will be led by LIST and will operate till M36 
Description of work 
Task 3.1: Preparation of TeC specifications and protocols (Task Leader: LIST), M01-18 
Supported by: all PL owners and End Users  
This task involves all preparatory activities  starting mapping of selected biomass supply a nd the mapping a r eport of the 
complete supply chain and logistics solutions of selected cases  will be completed before the biomass will be used for pre -
treatment.  related to the five test cases that are already scheduled to access the ecosystem and work towards its validation. 
End users will collaborate with core partners and especially Value Chain related PLs in order to prepare specification 
protocols which will be used of activitie s to be run, as well as provide requirements and define any characterisation 
techniques and cross sectorial services that will be accessed. Moreover, under this task raw materials provision and pre-
treatment, and consumables will also be dealt with. The test cases will set the desirable specifications for the products, and 
the pilot lines will apply the necessary conditions (quality of materials, formulations and processing conditions) for their 
production to the definition of the specific requirement related to definition of quantities and specification of materials to be 
used for each Value and Supply Chain. 
 
Task 3.2: DIAD (Automotive) (Task Leader: DIAD), M18-36 
Supported by: LTU, AUTH, BBEPP, ATB, LIST, FH-WKI, AIMEN, DIAD 
The Automotive Industry is one of many with exacting standards of performance and quality. In order to meet this demand, 
various components based on Polyurethane (PU) resins are formulated with a wide range of physical properties to suit the 
specific performance requirements. BIOMAC intends to outperform state of the art PU-based components for interior use of 
the vehicle providing a bio-based nanoreinforced solution to the sector ((e.g. seat leverage for position control or jacket 
hook, curved shape, 3 x 1 cm). In order to achieve this, the Automotive value chain will combine 7 different PLs from the 
three different hubs, i.e. from the BFP C, IMNC and FPFC. Starting by the PL1 of LTU of the BFPC, the pre-treatment of 
the biomass will offer the different fractions, i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, for downstream utilization. First, the 
hydrolysis of cellulose and hemicellulose towards monomer (i.e. glucose, xylose, etc.) sugar rich streams , which will be 
further purified in PL6 of BBEPP. The pure sugars stream will be subjected to catalytic hydrogenation/hydrogenolysis  in 
PL3 of AUTH towards monomers of polyols (sugars alcohols) and glycols/diols, that will be utilized in the production line 
of succinate based polyester and polyurethane resins. Purification/separation mixed polyols/diols product streams will be 
also conducted in PL6. In parallel, the PL7 of ATB will produce succinic acid (SA) monomers via fermentation of glucose 
(derived from cellulose hydrolysis). SA which will be used in PL12 FH -WKI to produce succinate esters oligomers via 
reaction of SA with the polyols/diols provided by PL3 (AUTH). These oligomers will serve as the basis for the production 
of resins, with exceptional physical properties including toughness, flexibility, and resistance to abrasion and temperature. 
The hemicellulose oligomers provided by LTU will also be utilized as polyols in the formation of the above polyester 
oligomers. Overall, PL12 (FH-WKI) will produce UV-curable resins suitable for additive manufacturing (AM). With regard 
to the nano-additives, PL10 of LIST will produce the NFC (10-20nm) through mechanical treatment to be integrated in the 
bio-based resins and final polymers aimed for automotive components. NFC (with or without modification/functionalization) 
as reinforcing filler of resins will be added in the resin, optimizing the loading of around 3-5 wt.%. The last PL will be PL15 
of AIMEN which will produce the final automotive components for int erior applications through a Photopolymerization 
Additive Manufacturing process.  UL94 flammability ratings of V-0 and 5VA and resins with elevated temperature resistance 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [46 of 68] 
(up to 110°C) will be possible to get manufactured through the rapid AM prototyping. Finally, the parts will be primed, 
painted or surface treated with graphics to simulate various textures based on demand and application. 
 
Task 3.3: NOVAMONT Agricultural Applications (Task Leader: NVMT), M18-36 
Supported by: AUTH, BBEPP, Cnano, PoliMi, ATB, UEdin, AIMP, ITENE, NVMT 
In this task, NVMT will validate the use of different nanomaterials and biomaterials in agricultural applications. In order to 
deliver this TeC eight PLs will get mobilized forming a complete Value Chain approach. At first access of PL5 of BBEPP 
for the biomass pre-treatment/fractionation will be operated providing lignin and cellulose. PL4 of Cnano will receive the 
lignin to produce through a US process nanolignin that will be incorporated in the biopolymers formulation stage of pellets, 
with aim to provide antioxidant properties to soil biodegradable mulch films and rigid articles used in biological agriculture 
in substitution to synthetic antioxidant additives. Complementary, nanobiochar will be produced via lignin p yrolysis by 
UEdin (PL8) that will be used as additive in the bioplastics in order to contribute to soil amendment (e.g. moisture retention 
and nutrient release management) and remediation after soil biodegradation of the bio-plastics. Addition of biochar will also 
improve UV blocking and protect the biopolymer from unwanted degradation. The glucose rich streams delivered from PL5 
& 6 will be for further converted to monomer polyols and diols by the PL3 of AUTH that will be used for the production of 
succinate based polyesters. The fractions of cellulose will be processed through mechanical grinding at PL13 of ITENE to 
produce nanocellulose, which will be modified in order to improve the compatibility between the nanocellulose and the bio-
based polymers. These nanoparticles will contribute to enhanced mechanical strength of the bio-based polymers as well as 
to decreased water vapor transmission rates of agricultural mulch films (thus helping to prevent water loss from the soil) and 
to controlled release of fertilizers (thus helping to tune the release of micronutrients in the soil). PL7 of ATB will work on 
the enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose and fermentation of glucose towards the production of lactic acid (LA) and succinic 
acid (SA). The bio-based LA will be delivered to PL11 of AIMP in order to work on the production of nanocomposite PLA 
pellets via the incorporation of NL, NC and nanobiochar during the reactive extrusion REX. The SA will be used by AUTH 
and by NVMT to produce different formula tions of soil biodegradable and bio-based polyester materials. Nanomaterials, 
polymers and nanoreinforced materials (i.e., PLA masterbatches, AIMP or succinate based polyesters, AUTH) will be 
validated by NVMT in reactive extrusion in combination with NVMT’s biopolymers. The final biomaterials will be designed 
to be biodegradable in soil and fully characterized in their properties for validating their applicability as low impact and 
biodegradable in soil solutions in agriculture (e.g., mulch films, injectio n-moulded clips, thermoformed/injection moulded 
pots, seeds coating, coating for controlled -release fertilization, etc.) where nanomaterials can improve technical 
performances while increasing soil health and quality. 
 
Task 3.4: EVERSIA (Food packaging) (Task Leader: EVER), M18-36 
Supported by: LTU, RISE, CNano, BBEPP, PoliMi, ATB, AIMP, ITENE, NNT 
In this task EVERSIA TeC will be validating the use of novel custom configured packaging films based on bio-based PLA 
film reinforced with BNC and NL. PL1 of LTU will be the first operating PL for the pre-treatment of the biomass delivering 
pure fractions of cellulose, hemicellulose and (Organosolv) lignin. RISE PL12 at parallel will treat fibre sludge (FS), a side 
stream from the pulp and paper industry, via h ydrolysis and fermentation towards the production of BNC. Lignin will be 
processed by PL4 of Cnano for the production of NL. PL6 BBEPP will improve the purity of carbohydrate fractions in order 
to feed the fermentation of sugars in PL7 ATB that will produce lactic acid (LA). PL11 of AIMP will provide nanoreinforced 
PLA pellets aimed for the final production and formulation of biocompostable and biodegradable films made of PLA. The 
LA will be converted to Lactide for the PLA polymerization (premix before the  REX) or compounding afterwards (pellets 
or films). Reinforced PLA films will be coated with CNF coatings to improve its permeability to gaseous compounds (water 
and oxygen). In addition to BNC production and utilization, cellulose from PL1 will be used in  PL13 to produce NCF via 
appropriate mechanical treatment. This NCF will be further modified to enhance its dispersion in polymers and coatings   in 
order to facilitate its incorporation in the coatings produced  
in PL14. Coatings with a 3 -4% of load of NP s will be 
produced in PL14. In addition to the intrinsic properties of 
the bio-based film, surface micro/nano texturing (NNT) will 
be employed to facilitate surface functionality. The 
produced films will be either used as are or will be further 
processes b y means of printing, vertical flow packaging, 
which includes cutting and sealing, to meet the end user 
final product requirements. Taking into consideration the 
anticipated functionalities, specific micro/nano textured 
geometries will be designed, fabricated and replicated using 
nanoimprint replication processes. Based on the outputs 
from the validation test, and in the light of customised 
functionality, geometrical, mechanical and material requirements defined for our demonstration case, a high throughput 
replication process namely roll to roll nanoimprint lithography (R2R NIL) will be accessed for mass replication. For 
optimising the transfer of the mould geometries (micro/nano patterns) into the PLA film surface, small -scale trials will be 
performed to co rrect process variables, such as: i) speed and tension of the web, adjusted according to the material 
configuration used; ii) temperature, speed and pressure time applied. High volume production of the micro/nano textured 
film will be performed according to the following steps production rate up to 250m/h, film thickness up to 50 μm, additives 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [47 of 68] 
up to 3% and production rate up to 500m/h, film thickness up to 50 μm, additives up to target. Production quality in terms 
of process stability and reliability will be demonstrated by processing and benchmarking 1000 m of the film at high speed 
rates (>500m/h). Taking into consideration the web (film) width of 200 mm - 400 mm and a web speed of 10m/min a >90% 
yield is targeted.  
 
Task 3.5: ACCIONA (Construction) (Task Leader: ACC), M18-36 
Supported by: BBEPP, UEdin, LIST, AIMEN 
The validation of the construction TeC will occur through the access of five different PLs across the Value Chain where 
isocyanate free polyurethanes will be developed. BBEPP PL5 will start with the Pre-treatment of biomass delivering Lignin 
that will be used as received for the Reactive Extrusion . The second fraction will be Cellulose which will be converted to 
nanocellulose. The pyrolysis of lignin will be conducted by PL8 of UEdin and will produce Biochar to be integrated in the 
matrix; the integration of biochar will enhance essentially the  UV resistance, fire resistance as well as reduce the  thermal 
conductivity which are key attributes towards the bridge module to be produced. At parallel PL9 of LIST will work on the 
production of isocyanate free TPU using Lignin reinforced with biochar and NFC. Additional fractions of cellulose will be 
treated through a mechanical milling at PL10 of LIST, to produce the NFC that be integrated in the matrix through the REX 
extrusion. The nanofibrils obtained will be of around 20-25nm diameter and length of few microns and will contribute to the 
mechanical strength of the module (hydrogen bonding and percolation theory). In order to achieve this, a fine tuning during 
the extrusion process will be needed defining the loading which is estimated to be 3- 5%. The TPU pellets will be delivered 
to the Additive Manufacturing PL 15 of AIMEN to produce FFF filaments by melting extrusion. For the filament production, 
extrusion process parameter (temperatures profile, rotational speed) and conditioning process for the filament (cooling, 
spooling speed) will be optimized to obtain the desirable Øfilaments and morphology. Simple printing tests of the novel filament 
will be performed by using conventional FDM equipment to detect lack of quality in the filaments that will be solved 
modifying the filament manufacturing route and/or composition. Furthermore, AIMEN will be able to d evelop additional 
thermoplastic filaments, including the nanoparticles (NFC & Biochar) obtained from previous PLs, to combine them for 
a multimaterial solution. To validate the BIOMAC thermoplastic and nano-based materials in the construction industry, a 
representative section of a footbridge module (omega -shaped pedestrian module, 2m x 0.45mx0.65m) will be printed. 
ACCIONA will define specific requirements for the demo in terms of mechanical performance, fire resistance, UV-resistance 
and abrasion, as well as will define the validation test to be performed. In PL15 (AIMEN) will define the printing strategy 
for the footbridge manufacturing, from a CAD design provided by ACCIONA. Printing orientation (to maximize mechanical 
performance on the main load direct ion for in -service conditions), extrusion and printing speed, nozzles / printing bed / 
environmental temperatures will be tested and evaluated to minimize the residual stress, shrinkage and warpage within the 
manufactured bridge module.  
 
Task 3.6: OHMATEX (Printed Electronics) (Task Leader: OHMA), M18-36 
Supported by: LTU, RISE, AUTH, UEdin, LIST, FH-WKI, ITENE, DTI 
The main objective will be to develop embed stretchable conductive layers into textiles (sock with integrated conductors) 
using a bio based stretchable substrate an ink and adhesives using printed electronic processes. The test case will access 
similarly multiple PLs across the value chain, starting by the PL1 of Organosolv pre-treatment for the production of fractions 
of Lignin/Hemicellulose to be delivered to the PL9 of LIST that through an isocyanate free REX process will produce flexible 
thermoplastic polyurethanes (TPU) substrates reinforced by biobased nanoparticles. The cellulose fraction derived from pre-
treatment in PL1 will be hydrolysed towards sugar (glucose) streams that will be used by PL3 to produce monomer 
polyols/diols for the production line of succinate based polyester and polyurethane resins. The PE and PU polymer resin will 
be produced by PL12 at FH -WKI, utilizing the monomer polyols/diols from PL3 at AUTH. The main constituents for the 
bio-based formulation will be based on an organic binder system, a carrier solvent and a conductive filler material. Both the 
conductive filler and the binder systems will be developed through the BIOMAC pilot lines. The biochar from PL8 at UEdin 
and BNC derived from PL2 at RISE will be modified by nano -copper and silver to enhance their electrical conductivity; 
PL16 at DTI will be accordingly adapted for the upscale of the conductive filler materials. CNC will be produced by acid 
hydrolysis in the PL13 of ITENE. CNC will be used by DTI as capping/stabilizing materials for the development of 
conductive fillers. The printed electronics process will be based on screen printing one or more layers directly onto the 
textiles, to form stretchable conductive layers using bio-based inks developed and mounting of discrete components using 
bio-based adhesives with SMD pick and place mounting processes. The overall specification of the materials will be modified 
on the basis to withstand up to 80% searchability, similar elastic properties as the textiles, sheet resistance below 10 Ohm 
sq. as well as washability (50 wash cycles). The initial specifications for the inks and adhesives are, viscosity between 10 -
30 Pa s (screen printable), dry temperature below 100degC and curing tempe rature below 150degC. Materials form the 
involved pilot lines will deliver materials to DTI, and formulation work will be carried out at DTI’s printed electronics pilot 
lines, consisting of a formulation PL to develop the inks and adhesives and printing li nes to print, cure and perform initial 
electrical and mechanical tests. PL14 will develop barrier inks based on CNF / CNC to protect printed circuits from water, 
air, etc. this ink will be screen printed by DTI. Final prototypes will be sent to OHMATEX for final validation this will be 
also the scope of entering the WPs of WP4 Validation Hub Services. Aspect related to standardization, safety and business 
plan will be delivered by the Market uptake Hub Services (WP5) and sustainability aspects will be addressed by Value Chain 
Hub Services (WP6). 
Deliverables 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [48 of 68] 
D3.1 Report on Pilot line process operation and specifications for each TeC (M18, Task 3.1, LIST) 
D3.2 Delivery of 3D printed automotive interior components (M36, Task 3.2, DIAD) 
D3.3 Delivery of agricultural applications (M36, Task 3.3, NVMT) 
D3.4 Delivery of food packaging film thickness up to 100 μm, additives up to 3% (M36, Task 3.4, EVER) 
D3.5 Delivery of lightweight beam for construction (M36, Task 3.5, ACC) 
D3.6 Delivery of a smart wearable sock with integrated conductor sensors (M36, Task 3.6, OHMAT) 
 
WP No  4 Start Date or Starting Event 1-48 
WP title Validation Services Hub (VSH) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
A wide range of analytical devices and setups can be used for in -detail characterisation of starting and raw materials and 
final products in terms of their physical, structure and morphological properties. Characterisation infrastructures have been 
separated in different categories and are given below. All measurements are performed under international standard 
procedure guidelines (ASTM, EN ISO standards, and related standards), while most of the partners have accredited labs as 
described in Section 1.  
 
WP-4 has the following specific objectives: 
1. Consultation, research strategy, quotation for test cases. Validation of workflows  
2. To test the material characteristics of all BIOMAC materials, components and structures 
3. To perform Design Verification Tests and validation measurements on the pilot lines and on integrated 
characterisation equipment to ensure high quality production steering parameters for the pilot production 
 
The WP4 will be led by IDE and will operate till M48 
Description of work 
Task 4.1: Workflow design and Preparatory Validation (Task Leader: IDE), M01-18 
Supported by: AUTH, EUBIA, LTU, LIST, RISE, ATB, UEdin, AIMP, FH-WKI, ITENE, AIMEN, PoliMi, DTI,  
This task involves all preparatory activities related to the five test cases that are already scheduled to access the ecosystem 
and work towards the OITB Ecosystem validation. End users will collaborate with all core partners working within the Hub 
Validation Cycle (WP3, WP4, WP6, WP7) in order to specify workflows of activities to be run, as well as provide 
requirements and define characterisation techniques and how cross sectorial services will be merged to the product 
development. The test cases will set the desirable specifications for the products, and the pilot line will apply the necessary 
conditions (quality of materials, formulations and processing conditions) for their production to the definition of the specific 
requirement related to definition of quantities and specification of materials to be used.  
 
Task 4.2: Characterization of materials and products (Task Leader: PoliMi), M06-48 
Supported by: AUTH, LTU, LIST, RISE, ATB, UEdin, AIMP, FH-WKI, ITENE, AIMEN, PoliMi, DTI 
In this task, all the nano -enabled bio-based materials exiting the PLs described in WP2 and the components and structures 
resulting from the TeCs addressed in WP3 and WP7 will be thoroughly characterized. In particular, techniques such as FTIR, 
1H/13C-NMR, XPS, GPC, DSC, DMA, TGA/dTGA, SEM, TEM, AFM, optical contact angle, calorimetry, micro/nano -
indentation, tensile, compression and flexural tests, single burning item test  will be employed to evaluate their chemical, 
physical, structural and mo rphological characteristics, targeting different geometries and different scales (lab -scale 
specimens, pilot-scale components, demonstrator -scale structures) throughout the whole application level (AUTH, LTU, 
RISE, LIST). Rheological measurements will be u sed to characterize their processability. In addition, the nano -enabled 
functional response of the bio-based materials will be assessed in terms of e.g. self-healing, thermal stability, flame 
retardancy, UV -radiation resistance, smart sensing in the medium  to long -term application range . Assessing the full 
collection of benefits afforded by the addition of nano -structured materials will require the setting up of appropriate test 
methods for comparison with components without nano -additions, as well as suita ble methodologies to validate the new 
functionalities. Furthermore, industrially relevant approaches will also be employed where appropriate, including the 
determination of surface hardness (e.g., by pencil hardness test), abrasion resistance (e.g., Taber test), adhesion strength (e.g., 
pull-off test), determination of the melt flow index of the thermoplastic bio -materials. More targeted characterization 
approaches will be used for specific TeCs. In particular,  for the agriculture TeC (Task 3.3), the analys is will also include 
measurements of the antioxidant, barrier properties (also relevant for the food packaging TeC (Task 3.4)) and 
biodegradability in soil, which will be assessed for the final formulations by laboratory testing in agreement with the updated 
and most relevant standard (EN17033:2018). Additional Filament quality characterization will be performed by AIMEN 
to validate the material to be applied for Construction TeC: i) filler-matrix interaction microstructural SEM analysis ii) 
Rheology: Melt index flow (MFI) measurements (ASTM D1238) for a screening evaluation of the printability. iii) 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [49 of 68] 
Thermal & thermomechanical tests: DSC (ISO 11357 -1) (Tg, Tm, crystallinity measuremen t), TGA, HDT 
(ASTMD648), DMA (ASTM D7028) and iv) mechanical tests to validate the mechanical performance after printing 
through standard specimens printing and testing (tensile (ISO 527), ILSS (ASTM D2344).  The output of this task will 
enable a direct technical validation of the nano-enabled bio-based materials developed in the PPSH for use in the selected 
TeCs. In particular, these characterizations will serve as continuous input for WP2 and WP3 to guide the process optimization 
of material production and  use, so as to comply with the materials/products technical requirements directly related to the 
target applications developed in WP3. Timely feed-back to the research and development units involved in formulation and 
manufacturing will enable further optimization of the performance of the bio-based components.  
 
Task 4.3: Process Validation and Predictive modelling (Task Leader: IDE), M06-48 
Supported by: ISQ, IRIS, STAM 
The objective of this task is to provide a model of the production lines built from the combination of the different pilots with 
the main purpose to produce a simulation tool (or virtual plant of the processes) which provides data for the techno-economic 
and environmental assessment at the desired scale. This purpose is looking for paving a subsequent industrial implementation 
of the processes. The models developed in Task 2.4 will be used for the whole model of the production line. Such model will 
be evolved during the project according to the experimen tal information generated in the pilots. IDE will gather the 
experimental data needed for the parameterization and validation of the model from the information produced in experimental 
tasks. Perfection the unified mathematical model including amendments, updated results from the lab, (physical, 
environmental, technological, and cost) constraints, and further engineering considerations. The processes in BIOMAC are 
flexible in terms of the range of biomasses that can be handled with minor adaptations and in the portfolio of end products 
that can be produced. Thanks to the developed virtual plant, the application of the technology will be evaluated for other 
biomasses using their available characterization. IDE will not only investigate which other biomasses c ould also be 
potentially suited as feedstock but will also propose the hot spots and the corresponding potential adaptations to enable a 
suitable application of the technology. The aforementioned investigations will be accompanied by tentative business model 
approximations so as to guide the future project post -exploitation in other replication scenarios. ISQ: Predictive modelling 
is a process that uses data analysis and probability to forecast outcomes or the behaviour of a system. Depending on the 
datasets several methods can be explored in predictive modelling. Classification unsupervised methods may be useful to find 
patterns in data that indicate to us specific system parameters cluster. System anomalies can be found this method for 
example. On the other hand, supervised methods, i.e. knowing data a priory, can be trained to predict the behaviour of the 
system and its reaction to specific inputs. 
Deliverables 
D4.1 Deliverable of the methodology for validation workflows (M14, Task 4.1-3, IDE) 
D4.2 Report on characterisation facilities and validation testing (M22 & 48 update, Task 4.2, PoliMi) 
D4.3 Delivery of Virtual plant (M42, Task 4.3, IDE) 
D4.4 Replication to other landscapes (M48, Task 4.3, IDE) 
 
WP No  5 Start Date or Starting Event 1-48 
WP title Market Uptake Hub (MUH) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
Under this WP detailed business plans will be developed targeting in the assessment of the economic feasibility of the test 
cases. Also this task will be responsible to facilitate the acquisition of capital funding from Regional, National and 
International investors. The economic feasibility study of the new products will determinate the market opportunities. , IPR 
management services will be offered to clients to ensure the preservation of their own IPs.  Finally, aspects related to 
compliance with H&S issues, including nanosafety as well as standards and regulatory will be also tackled. 
 
WP-5 has the following specific objectives: 
1. To develop business plans for the end users (clients) of the OITB, including feasibility study, market search and 
financial projections 
2. To provide the technology landscape in terms of submitted patents across the world 
3. To assist the end users by developing pitches for attracting additional funds from investors 
4. To ensure the compliance with standards and regulatory framework 
5. To tackle H&S issues and nanosafety measurements 
6. To attract additional funding sources that will facilitate the access of SMEs to the OITB 
 
The WP5 will be led by UNIPD and will operate till M48 
Description of work 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [50 of 68] 
Task 5.1: Workflow design and Preparatory Market Uptake (Task Leader: UNIPD), M01-18 
Supported by: all Partners 
In this task the needs of end users in terms of innovation management and market uptake will be estimated and converted to 
the necessary workflows and actions. This will include a preparatory phase for facilitation of the activities of task 5.2. (e.g. 
preparation of questionnaires for definition of the value proposition of end users, interviews with the business development 
departments of the end users etc). In collaboration also with the pilot line owners Task 5.3 will be prepared providing their 
concerns towards the H&S measures that have to be in place assessed in order to provide recommendations, whenever 
needed, to mitigate potential risks by UBU . Special emphasis will be given to PLs that will handle nanomaterials. 
Additionally, the regulatory and standardization services will be updated with the latest changes concerning their field while 
in collaboration with the end users’ strategies on the corre sponding services will be defined. Timelines and internal 
collaboration procedures will be delivered, based on a two step implementation where at first the workflows will be applied 
to serve the interTeC and secondly will be validated thought the open call serving the intraTeCs.  
 
Task 5.2: Innovation Management and Business plans (Task Leader: UNIPD), M18-48 
Supported by: EUBIA, EUBP, EXE all industrial partners and PLs 
An innovative project, such as BIOMAC, is not enough, if it’s not complemented with a correct Innovation Management, 
that allows its services to reach the market. Innovation management will work in parallel to the technical advances of the 
project which will indicate the customer segments and which value propositions they require/need. Hence, will encompass 
the Dissemination actions to increase the awareness of the public through social media, and focus on the communication 
channels, i.e. how customers are being reached, to effectively exploit the produced results and technologies. For this reason, 
UNIPD will coordinate the management of innovation processes, business process, marketing and organizational innovation; 
as well as the coordination of investors, regional or national public investors as well as bank funds; pursuing private funding 
(investments), loans or public funding to support the development of BIOMAC. In this task additionally European 
Bioplastics (EUBP) will essentially contribute having a deep knowledge in the European market of bioplastics. for each of 
the end user. At a first stage 5 Business Plan will be delivered for the 5 selected test cases while it is expected that 5 more 
will be introduced during the open call. For all these test cases a dedicated business plan will be developed (a total of 10) 
based on the innovation roadmap of the end users. Thus, in close collaboration with them the OITB will provide feasibility 
analysis and all necessary tools and process in order to ensure a smooth commercialization of the developed processes and 
new materials. This include market and competiti on analysis, SWOT, PESTLE analysis in order to define the external 
environment, financial analysis (cost breakdown, further investment costs, break -even point), proposition of marketing 
activities and seeking of additional funding opportunities, risk assessment).  
 
Task 5.3: Health and safety, nanosafety (Task Leader: UBU), M13-48 
Supported by: ISQ, all PLs and TeCs 
Health & Safety is an essential aspect for the market introduction of new products and industrial processes, as the producer 
is obliged to demonstrate the safety nature and the associated risk level of the product’s fabrication and use (General Product 
Safety Directive).  Considering the legislation in EU, as well as other references (standards, literature, etc) deemed 
appropriate, UBU in collaboration with ISQ will identify the potential risks and uncertainties associated with exposure 
(human and environmental) to the pro posed new solutions. Taking into consideration the risk analysis results, HSE 
specifications and guidelines will be defined aiming risk prevention and control, during product processing and 
nanomaterials handling. Nanosafety & Risk assessment UBU & ISQ: Taking into account the principles of ISO 31000 - Risk 
Management - Guidelines, current regulations and with emphasis on the issues of Nanosafety, UBU & ISQ will perform an 
H&S risk assessment and will provide recommendations to the BIOMAC Pilot Lines, with particular attention to the updates 
or modifications of the existing ones.  The risk assessment will include the identification of new/modified risks (via the 
application of nano-specific RA tools); monitoring activities at distinct industrial scenarios (particle concentration and size 
distribution); and exposure assessment analyses that will determine the release and transfer to receptors of MNs.  As a result 
of this Risk Assessment, control measures will be proposed in order to reduce risks, raise awareness of hazards and promote 
safer practices, especially in activities related to the use and handling of the nanomaterials and substances based on 
regulations and standards (European Regulation on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures CLP, 
REACH). The involvement of all partners, throughout the project, it is crucial for the development of this H&S risk 
assessment to ensure that safety issues are addressed at all stages of BIOMAC's technology development. A safe-by-design 
(SbD) perspective will be introduced, promoting safe practices during production (industrial scale) and installation, and 
supporting test case/clients on the development of safer materials and products, based on identifying the safer final products 
according to information provided by the partners (materials characterizations, composition, physicochemical properties, 
chemical and physical toxicological and ecotoxicological properties, etc.). Current recommendation and guidelines on 
nanosafety will be considered. Multiple PL visits will be arranged and split between UBU & ISQ.  
 
Task 5.4: Standardization and Regulatory (Task Leader: EUBP), M13-48 
Supported by: All PLs and End Users 
The aim of this task is to verify the compliance with standar ds (EU OSHA, ISO, ASTM, ACEA, EMMC, EMCC, etc.) as 
well as associations (e.g. ECN, EEA, WRAP etc.) of all project results and defining the specific actions to direct the 
development activities toward the standards. EUBP will collaborate in gathering all relevant information on standards and 
rules in the field of nano-enabled bio -based materials. This is  a fundamental step to guarantee that all the subsequent 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [51 of 68] 
development and exploitation activities are performed in compliance with the requirements. To fully exploit the potentialities 
of the project outcomes, EUBP will pursue the integration of existing rules with new standards, defined on the basis of the 
project results. Since the introduction of new standards is a delicate issue, close collaboration with the appropriate legislation 
and regulatory bodies will be sought by EUBP acting on a European level. BIOMAC will organize international fora to 
promote discussions and provide suggestions for amendments on current standards or development of new ones. Through 
these networking activities, the ecosystem will contribute in the global advancement of the field of nano-enabled bio-based 
materials. BIOMAC will be in accordance with all European standards and all quality tests during the validation process. 
This will involve testing the best-pre-treatment solution on that and the corresponding testing tested against the required end 
user standard tests. ISQ will support the identification of relevant H&S standards and in the participation in standardization 
committees (e.g. CEN 352).  ISQ has a very active role in the nanotechnologies standardization, being the secr etary of a 
Technical Committee 194 -CT) from IPQ (Portuguese Institute for Quality), which is the national standardization 
body.  CT194 participates actively in the standardization work carried out by CEN 352 and ISO 229.  Raw materials and 
additives used in the production process are according to the following documents: a) EN 13432: Packaging- Requirements 
for packaging recoverable though composting and biodegradation - Test scheme and evaluation criteria for the final 
acceptance of packaging; will include European Community regulation 94/62, and later modifications, establishing that the 
total of Lead (Pb), Cadmium (Cd), Mercury (Hg) and hexavalent Chromium (VI -Cr) existing in packaging products shall 
not exceed 100 parts per million and its correspondent measures established by Law. 
Deliverables 
D5.1 Workflow design and Preparatory Market Uptake actions (M18, Task 5.1, UNIPD) 
D5.2 Delivery of 5 interTeC Business plans (M36, Task 5.2, UNIPD) 
D5.3 Delivery of 5 intraTeC Business plans (M48, Task 5.2, UNIPD) 
D5.4 Guidelines and recommendation for use of NPs in the PLs (M18, Task 5.3, UBU) 
D5.5 Report on H&S of the new processes and technologies (M33, Task 5.3, UBU) 
D5.6 Risk assessment regarding nanomaterials use (M37 update M48, Task 5.4, ISQ) 
D5.7 Report on liaison activities with standardization bodies (M31, Task 5.4, EUBP) 
D5.8 Report on the standardization landscape and applicable standards (M48, Task 5.4, EUBP) 
 
WP No  6 Start Date or Starting Event 1-48 
WP title Value Chain assessment Hub (VCH) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
WP6 is focused on the environmental monitoring, resource efficiency, logistics and cost analysis of the introduction of the 
developed biomaterials and processes during the project.  This will be achieved also in terms of designing collaboration 
workflows between the hubs. LCA studies today adhere to the principles laid out in a series of International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) EN 15804, ILCD Handbook documents known as t he “14040 Series” within the broader ISO 
14000 categories on environmental management.  The overall thus is to assess the sustainability of the revalorization routes 
proposed through the PLs and developing new high-value markets, considering ecological, fi nancial and social aspects. 
Additionally, a Supply Chain Management software will be built for assessing the bio-based polymer chains to demonstrate 
attractive and sustainable production path that vaporizes properly the biomass feed. 
 
WP-6 has the following specific objectives: 
1. To Evaluate the environmental impact of the process and products developed, and the potential uses, thanks to life cycle 
assessment (LCA) tools and methodologies following ISO 14040 and 14044 
2. Quantification and evaluation of the envi ronmental impacts derived from the implementation of the processing 
technologies to obtain high value-added chemicals.  
3. Produce a strategic roadmap and action plan for the promotion of the circular economy in the addressed processing side 
streams. 
4. Follow the current regulations in order to ensure the compliance of final products with them 
 
The WP 6 will be led by UBU and will operate till M48 
Description of Work 
Task 6.1 Workflow design and Preparatory Value Chain (Task Leader: UBU), M01-18 
Supported by: all core partners 
This task involves all preparatory activities related to the sustainability and value chain management of the five test cases  
that are already scheduled to access the ecosystem and work towards the OITB Ecosystem validation as well as their 
correlation to the production procedures and the process related performance. End users as well as PL owners will collaborate 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [52 of 68] 
with the Vale Chain Hub in order to specify workflows of activities to be run, as well as provide requirements and define the 
Life Cycle Assessment and Cost. A set of environmental assessment services including circular economy aspects will be 
communicated and offered to stakeholders during product and process development, as a way to align these developments 
with EU sustainability roadmaps, policies and regulatory framework. The results will be correlated with the Supply Chain 
Management & DST which will offer an additional exploitation approach of the tool replicated to other transversal sectors. 
Thus, appropriate workflow will be prepared on how the collaboration between all the Hubs will be valuably coordinated 
and data will be linked to the needs of each TeC. Having validated the procedure thought the already existing interTeCs a 
similar approach will be followed to offer this service to the intraTeCs entering the Ecosystem during the open call.  
 
Task 6.2 Circular Economy, recycling and EoL management (Task Leader: PoliMi), M13-48 
Supported by: all Partners 
This task starts with a detailed characterization of the current end-of-life management chains for plastic wastes, in order to 
collect relevant and detailed information on the current reuse and recycling processes, in the following aspects:  
organizational, operational, current business models and main actors. This information will allow the definition of technical 
and management guidelines for the extension of BIOMAC products life-cycle, through its reuse and/or recycling, according 
to several factors such as: (1) Technical characteristics and quality requirements downstream the value chain; (2) Regulation 
in force; (3) Functioning of the current end-of-life management chains, (4) identification of relevant actors within the value 
chain and how they interact in order to operate  the reuse and/or recycling (5) necessary actions to over come barriers and 
risks associated to the  reuse and/or recycling of BIOMAC products. The definition of these guidelines for the end -of-life 
management chains also implies the definition of objective specifications which might be used in decision support (e.g. types 
of material with less/higher recycling potential) as well as the characterization of the processes associated with reuse and 
recycling, in a technical (product quality and durability) and economic perspective The above mentioned actions will be used 
as case studies to illustrate effective recycling and EoL management providing  a services for relevant studies within the 
OITB.  
 
Task 6.3 Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) (Task Leader: ISQ), M13-48 
Supported by: all Partners 
The environmental impacts and benefits associated with the BIOMAC TeCs (including selected supporting products and 
processes from the 3 PL Clusters - BFPC, IMNC and FPFC) will be assessed based on Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
methodology: tracing impact throughout the products life cycle. The TeC’s and PL Partners will be actively involved, through 
Task 6.1, and in close collaboration with ISQ to identify, characterize, and select the technological processes to be modelled 
by LCA based on data availability and representativeness. Under this task the LCA methodological framework will follow 
four interrelated steps of ISO 14040 and 14044 standards: 1.Goal and scope definition: the LCA boundaries, functional unit, 
unit processes, and significant environmental im pact categories will be identified. 2.Life Cycle Inventory: this task will 
involve an intensive data collection procedure regarding inputs (raw materials, materials, energy consumption) and outputs 
(emission, wastes, by-products, and products) associated to unit processes included in the manufacturing of the TeCs. This 
data is essential to model the life cycle of the systems under study, allowing to trace impacts and estimate environmental 
benefits of bio-based materials when comparing to fossil alternative s. Foreground data from partners will be required and 
primarily used. 3.Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) will be performed using professional LCA software such as SimaPro 
(or similar dedicated software packages) and well-accepted environmental databases (e.g.: Ecoinvent). LCIA results will be 
calculated for the selected impact categories following well-known LCIA methods; 4. Interpretation of the results: this stage 
will allow to identify key hot spots for environmental improvement, and provide Partners with environmental -based 
recommendations to promote overall lower life cycle impact, this step that may induce modification in the three prior steps.   
 
Task 6.4 Life Cycle Cost (LCC) (Task Leader: UBU), M13-48 
Supported by: all Partners 
The work performed in this task will require constant communication between test case partners, and conversely feed them 
(provide environmental -based recommendations during the Test case activities). Life cycle cost (LCC) of the new 
products/processes will aim to estimate the costs of the different PLs and TCs to help make a more informed decision when 
selecting the most viable processes and products for the scaling up. Regular communication with the other partners will 
ensure that these valuations will follow the track of the development activities, based on the performance results, will not be 
studied. This approach will enable to produce a life cycle cost (LCC) or calculate the whole -life cost of the up -scalable 
processes. Industrial partners will play ma jor role in this task by helping to extrapolate the data based on the inputs of the 
different partners (bench, pilot and demo scales). The End Users will be in close collaboration with UBU and ISQ to assist 
on the perform the LCC analysis related to the va lue chain under its responsibility ( End of Life, nanoreinforced 
biomaterials biodegradable in soil for agricultural applications).  The final assessment should therefore include capital 
expenses for installations, operational costs (materials, manpower, waste treatment, etc.), training, expected down-time and 
operational risks and end of life costs. The idea is to be as close as possible to industrialisation. Regular communication with 
partners is required for cost data collection. LCC analysis will follow the system boundaries of LCA, this will allowing to 
relate the environmental and economic performance of the solutions developed. 
 
Task 6.5: Value Chain assessment and DST (Task Leader: AXIA), M13-48 
Supported by: RDC, ISQ, all Partners 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [53 of 68] 
The objective of a bio-based polymer is to demonstrate attractive and sustainable production path that valorizes properly the 
biomass feed. Integration of different paths can be achieved at feedstock pre -treatment, intermediate stages of biomass 
conversion, or at downstream stages where products get separated and purified. The systematic screening of these options is 
a major challenge. The field of biobased industry is challenging due to the numerous possibilities to reach final products. 
Adding the perspective  of using nanomaterials, leads to a bigger tree of possibilities and options.  To exploit all the 
possibilities, a whole value chains review is required at the same time to maximize value extracted. This Task involves the 
systematic integration of biomass fractions, intermediate monomers, final polymers taking into consideration simultaneously 
all the available finite uses by using optimization models to solve and predict optimal solutions. Using process synthesis and 
optimization of paths, AXIA will undertake a superstructure approach with optimization technology considering mass and 
energy balances that are linked to existing and potential units under consideration. Following, the formulated balances will 
be translated into a mathematical model that will be  optimized prioritizing options against different objectives involving 
economic, environmental and energy aspects. The approach entails collaboration with ISQ that will contribute by sharing 
figures on the environmental cost and the economic attributes of the pilots involved. The General Algebraic Modelling 
System (GAMS) is a possible platform to develop most of these models. The decision support environment will be capable 
of rapidly evaluating sustainability in terms of economic, environmental and energy use aspects, screening and identifying 
opportunities of processing paths to polymers base on non -conventional energy sources. Impelling innovation, RDC will 
prepare a Web-based platform where potential users will be able to access and visualize results from Decision Support Tool 
operation. The platform will be offered as a cloud-based software as a service (SaaS) solution, to any interested party under 
certain user license models. An ingenious user interface will be provided where each user will be able to run multi-variant 
scenarios and get optimal results. User interface will be wizard-driven in order to initiate primary model variables and will 
provide visual results for easy understanding & evaluation.  Each user will be able to save multiple variables pr e-sets for 
future reference, reuse & comparisons. In dependency to optimization model variables, it may be possible to incorporate 
dynamic gauges in platform UI which will enable dynamic monitoring of results according to variables changes. Platform 
UI will be developed based on responsive design principles able to run in various devices and web browsers, with html5 
compatibility. Integration, communication & data exchange between this web -based software platform and optimization 
model will be based on GAMs object-oriented APIs allowing the integration of the modeling system into any application  
Deliverables 
D6.1 Delivery of Workflow procedure of Value Chain protocol (M18, Task 6.1, UBU) 
D6.2 Report on the Circularity and EoL management of the BIOMAC products (M48, Task 6.2, PoliMi) 
D6.3 First report on LCA & LCC (M36, Task 6.3&4, ISQ) 
D6.4 Final report on LCA & LCC (M48, Task 6.3&4, ISQ) 
D6.5 Multicriteria optimization model for the value chain (M44, Task 6.5, AXIA) 
 
WP No  7 Start Date or Starting Event 20-48 
WP title BIOMAC Open call & Intra TeCs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
During the WP7 additional test cases will be introduced in the BIOMAC project. It is estimated that a total of 5 
additional cases will be selected through an open process of evaluation based on the criteria set in this WP. The open 
call will invite end users to access the BIOMAC OITB free of charge, to validate and demonstrate the concept of Open 
Access. Criteria and procedural protocols will be set in order to describe the process to be followed for the selection of 
the intraTeCs and their needs of access to the four Hubs of Services. 
 
WP-7 has the following specific objectives: 
1. To evaluate internal operational procedures and communication channels including the Hubs, their elements and 
the interactions between them through 5 additional test cases 
2. To develop methodologies for translation of industrial needs to workflows of the Ecosystem. 
3. To continuously improve the internal and external operational procedures of the Ecosystem. 
4. To upscale 5 novel concepts in the field of bio based materials. 
5. To provide the final input for the fine tuning of the ecosystem based on the experience of the open call. 
 
The WP 7 will be led by EUBP and will operate till M48 
Description of Work 
Task 7.1: Preparation of the Open Call (Task Leader: EUBP), M20-24 
Supported by: all core partners 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [54 of 68] 
An open call targeted to end users will be launched during the project to validate and demonstrate the concept of Open 
Access and to step forward further collaboration after the end of EU financial support. Prior to the open call the core members 
of the ecosystem will provide analytical reports on the resources spent until that time on the selected test cases and a 
projection until the end of their implementation. Based on this, an open call for 5 new test cases will be launched through 
the web platform of the Ecosystem, each will be handled by the according PL WP leader. The SEP in collaboration with the 
Pilot line owners in and the other service providers will prepare promotional material in order to showcase the potentials 
of the ecosystem, addressing mainly interested clients (SMEs, start -ups, RTDs, Midcaps and other parties interested to try 
BIOMAC services). At first stage a call for Innovation Concepts will be designed based on questionnaires  that should be 
filled in by the applicants. In the formation of these questionnaires all members of the OITB will participate in order to cover 
all aspects of innovation. Finally, during this task the criteria for the selection of the new test cases will be set. The main 
parameters for this will be the proof of TRL 4-5 of the applicants’ cases, the validity of a one page feasibility study that will 
be asked from the applicants and the complexity of the test cases. Another aspect is that all 17 PLs must be utilized during 
the implementation of the open call test cases. 
 
Task 7.2: Launch of the open call (Task Leader: RDC), M24-30 
Supported by: all core partners 
The Open Call will be launched by all possible dissemination means, namely the Project’s website and social media pages, 
partners websites, media, participation in events etc. The open call will  be launched at M24 with a deadline for 
applications until M 30. During this period focused dissemination activities will be undertaken by the whole consortium in 
order to increase the awareness of the call. The target is to receive at least 40 applications for access in the Ecosystem by at 
least 20 European Countries. The applications will consist of a 5 pages proposal in which each applicant will have to provide 
specific data according to the guidelines , including the proof of TRL and a one-page feasibility study. The access will be 
free of charge as the necessary resources are already projected in the budget of the core partners of the ecosystem. The idea 
of this open call is to deploy a set of test cases where companies not included to the Consortium can develop or test their 
early stage product ideas  
 
Task 7.3: Selection of additional test cases (Task Leader: AUTH), M30-33 
Supported by: all core partners 
After the expiring of the open call, the applications will be collected and evaluated by the SEP in collaboration with the 
OITB members. The criteria of the selection of the new test cases will be: 
1. Concepts that fits on the Ecosystem capacities (e.g biomass to processed, platform chemical and polymers, nanomaterials 
to be processed and evaluated etc.). 
2. TRL of the proposed test cases. The Ecosystem will set as entry level the TRL4-5.  
3. Validity of a one-page feasibility study 
4. Preliminary freedom to operate search 
5. Geographical distribution of new test cases (a threshold of maximum 1 test cases per county will be set) 
The selected new test cases will be informed by month 33 of the project. 
 
Task 7.4: Implementation of the additional test cases in the OITB (Task Leader: STAM), M33-48 
Supported by: all core partners providing services 
The implementation of the new test cases will be done in a similar to the already selected test cases:  
(a) Definition of specification and requirements and set up of WorkFlows (M33-36) 
(b) Scaling up of the concepts in the pilot lines (M37-45) 
(c) Provision of technical and non-technical services (M37-47) 
(d) Demonstration activities and feedback from the end users (M46-48)  
It should be mentioned that the open call has two main targets.   On one hand to act as a dissemination activity, via which 
the BIOMAC Ecosystem will become more widely known and new success stories will be generated. On the other hand, 
the entities accessing the Ecosystem will to on the validation of its services and its procedures. These Open Call end users, 
as they are outside of the consortium they will provide valuable unbiased feedback on a real conditions operation of the 
Ecosystem (e.g. running of the open call, time of response, internal and external communication channels, quality of results). 
Based on this feedback, final adjustments will be carried out in the Ecosystem. 
Deliverables 
D7.1 Launch of Open Call at the BIOMAC Platform (M24, Task 7.1 & 2, RDC) 
D7.2 Analytical report on the selection of the test cases (M33, Task 7.3, AUTH)  
D7.3 Analytical report on the results of the open call cases (M48, Task 7.4, STAM)  
 
WP No  8 Start Date or Starting Event 1-48 
WP title Exploitation & Sustainability of OITB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [55 of 68] 
                                  
 
Objectives 
The sustainability of the ecosystem relays on the on the successful dissemination and exploitation of the exploitable results. 
The dissemination material intends to reach a wide audience and communicate the Pilot lines and services, novelties and 
knowledge provided by the ecosystem. Appropriate actions will also be undertaken to identify and secure sources of funding 
and investment into post -project sustainability actions. Appropriate actions will also be carried out to identify and secure 
sources of fundin g and investment into post -project sustainability actions. Finally, exploitation and commercialisation 
strategy based on multifunctional nano materials industry will be implemented targeting to application in automotive, 
aerospace, energy, food and packaging.  
 
WP-8 has the following specific objectives: 
1. To develop a realistic business plan and a market penetration strategy for the OITB 
2. To develop a plan for the management and protection of the foreground knowledge and establish IP strategy. 
3. To validate the baseline business plan for each target market and fine -tune it, as well as the commercial offers to be 
used during the market introduction phase 
4. To take appropriate measurements for facilitation of access to funding for the potential clients  
5. To monitor the market situation and assess the business opportunities.  
6. To take appropriate measurements for facilitation of access to funding for the potential clients  
 
The WP8 will be led by EXE and will operate till M48 
Description of work 
Task 8.1: Exploitation and Business plan of OITB (Task Leader: EXE), M01-48 
Supported by: All core partners 
The ultimate exploitable result of the BIOMAC project is the Open Innovation Ecosystem, offering in fair conditions and 
open access the services to its clients. Thus, this task has as a priority to work towards the exploitation of this result, targeting 
in obtaining a clientele, initially across Europe in the field of nano -enabled bio-based materials. The exploitation strategy 
will comprise different phases such as services identification market analysis and pricing policy of the SEP. A study will be 
carried out of the market landscape and the opportunities for each service included in the Ecosystem. In the process there 
will be the definition of values proposition, the market and competition analysis and the characterization of the configuration 
of the valu e creation (partners, value cha ins, customer relationship, etc.). Based on them, an economic analysis will be 
performed to evaluate the profitability of the revenue model, understand future cash flow and highlight the need for potential 
additional investments. The whole analysis will be summarized in the business plan report. Already the core partners of the 
Ecosystem have worked on an initial business plan, presented in section 2, which will be further updated. The sustainability 
of the Ecosystem is based on the awareness of the European industry for added value offered by accessing the Ecosystem. 
Already an adequate number of SMEs & start -ups, large enterprises and various stakeholders (more than 30 in total) have 
expressed their interest in the BIOMAC ecosystem. OITB Business Plan based on the define 
tion of BIOMAC Ecosystem as well as their potential for exploitation – preliminary list of services, presented in sections 1 
and 2, the innovative business models and business plans for the commercial services will be defined with the support of all 
OITB partners Based on this work we will develop an extensive review of the business models and forecast revenue streams 
and draft a preliminary business plans starting from near to the project ends and for the forthcoming five years. This business 
plan will analyse the different revenues streams (services, membership fee, technology transfer facilitation) and their margin 
levels including direct and indirect costs and major efforts foreseen at early stage to promote the services and business value 
creation. The developed OITB business plan will be included in the PEDR deliverables scheduled for M18, 36 and 48. 
 
Task 8.2 Knowledge Management and IP Protection (Task Leader: UNIPD), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
The management of IPR for the foreground generated during the project will be strictly ruled by the Consortium Agreement 
(CA) which will include all provisions related to the management of IPR including ownership, protection and publication of 
knowledge, access rights to knowledge and pre -existing know-how as well as questions of confidentiality, liability and 
dispute settlement. The knowledge acquired in the course of the project shall be considered as a property of the partner (s) 
generating it, and in this sense the originator is entitled to use and to license such right without any financial compensation 
to the other contributors. If the features of a joint invention are such that it is not possible to separate them, the contributors 
could agree that they may jointly apply to obtain and/or maintain the relevant rights and shall make effort to reach appropriate 
agreements in order to do so. A modular and sustainable IPR strategy will be defined and it will be organised within the 
modular IPR exploitation strategy in the framework of the open innov ation ecosystem. This will enable an adaptable IPR 
strategy that will fit multilateral needs of different stakeholders involved in the test bed. Thus, secure collaboration amon g 
the different players within an open environment will be enabled. The following activities are planned as part of this task: 
• Knowledge management semina r –This activity will comprise the identification, compilation, representation, and 
distribution process of knowledge generated. It will also cover sensitive topics such as sharing, raising awareness and dealing 
with psychological barriers, topics that affect the adoption degree for the new technologies developed in this project. In this 
activity, the customization to special needs and the validation of results will also be conducted. 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [56 of 68] 
• IP - Catalogue IPR resulting from the research actions; carry out exhaustive patent searches; file for patent (or other 
IPR) applications: It is foreseen that in M27, partners will be in a position to file for the relevant patents for the early use and 
exploitation of technologies. 
 • Freedom to Operate - a regular review and assessment of the test cases ‘Freedom to Operate’ (FTO) in the areas of 
exploitable outputs will be conducted. Reviewing FTO throughout the project will ensure that bo th the technologies 
developed for the Pilot Lines as well as for the test cases are safe to be exploited without infringing or violating third pa rty 
intellectual property rights or highlight the need for mitigating actions by the consortium (eg. acquisitio n of license, which 
would impact the exploitation). For this purpose, commercially available software (e.g. Patsnap) will be used as a patent 
search engine and analytics portal. Using such patent search engines an extended patent search in available throug h patent 
libraries such as European Patent Office, USPTO, FPO, covering over 110 countries worldwide, providing trends in user -
defined search areas. The patent search will follow a multi-level approach on the sector starting by available patents using 
various combination of relevant key words. The findings and recommendations for IPR protections will be included in the 
final exploitation plan. Except of publications that are indicative of scientific activity for furthering the knowledge base, 
patents, are i ndicative of technology development for commercial or market potential.  After the initial identification of a 
promising (patentable) idea, external professional support from a patent agent will be sought. It should be mentioned that the 
case of co-development inside the open innovation environment of the BIOMAC OITB will be promoted as the consortium 
strongly believes that this could lead to innovations that will be easily adopted by the marker at lower cost, liming thus th e 
investment risk. 
 
Task 8.3 Access to additional funding sources (Task Leader: EXE), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
The main goal of this tasks is to provide to stakeholders a variety of possible funding solution s, which will allow them to 
ensure the necessary funding for accessing the BIOMAC pilots and services. A cost estimation and pricing policy will be 
performed in order to optimise the strategy of fund raising. Funding will be perused through several mechanisms, including, 
but not limited to national/regional funding, crowd funding, EU funding, i.e. SME instruments, and private funding. EXE 
will collaborate with each partner to produce a full list of regional funding mechanisms. In order to apply for regional/national 
funding, a designated contact person for each EU country will be appointed, which will assist stakeholders in the application 
process. A number of services and willingness to pay by the users and the effectiveness of the services provided will be 
offered towards investors that seek to invest. Based on the assessment and feedbacks from pilot users we will refine the 
costing strategy and marketing campaign to make sure the profit levels are sustainable once the project is over and the overall 
structure must be self -sufficient financially. A number of existing Open Innovation Platforms and Networks will be 
benchmarked, and their value propositions analysed establishing links through interviews and personal contacts exploiting 
the network of the members and their presence in some of these initiatives. Three Stakeholder meetings will be organized in 
order to showcase the successful intraTeCs to a wider investment group. It is planned to have one in Greece co-organized by 
AUTH, Cnano & RDC  (M33), one in It aly co-organized by PoliMi , NVMT, DIAD, STAM, UNIPD  (M39) and one in 
Germany organized by AXIA, EUBP, ATB & FH-WKI (M45). 
Deliverables 
D8.1 First Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (PEDR) (M18, Task 8.1 - 4, EXE) 
D8.2 Updated PEDR (M36, Task 8.1-4, EXE) 
D8.3 Final PEDR (M48, Task 8.1-4, EXE) 
D8.4 Delivery of knowledge Management and IPR roadmap (M24, Task 8.1-2 & 4&5, UNIP) 
D8.5 Investment roadmap and marketplace (M46, Task 8.4, EXE) 
 
WP No  9 Start Date or Starting Event 1-48 
WP title Dissemination Communication and Clustering  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
The sustainability of the ecosystem relays at a large scale on the on the successful dissemination of the communication 
actions. The dissemination material intends to reach a wide audience and communicate the Pilot lines and services, novelties 
and knowledge provided by the ecosystem.  
 
WP-9 has the following specific objectives: 
1. To disseminate the project results to targeted workshops & conferences and sectors  
2. To participate to targeted meetings, workshops and conferences and fairs, promoting the OITB 
3. To design and implement a powerful communication campaign for engagement of sta keholders and clients as well as 
to the wider public.  
4. To cluster with other project, EC initiatives and stakeholders’ organizations 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [57 of 68] 
5. To provide training activities in the members of the consortium as well as on external stakeholders 
 
The WP9 will be led by EUBIA and will operate till M48 
Description of work 
Task 9.1 Dissemination & Communication activities (Task Leader: RDC), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners  
The preliminary D&E plan that is presented in Section 2.2 will be updated frequently during the project. Activities will 
escalate, from basic communication (web platform, brochures, leaflets, social media) to stakeholder engagement (idea 
pitching in events, publications, technical conferences, trade fairs). The open call for test cases will mark the next phase of 
D&E, which will include the organization of an international conference on nano-enabled bio-based materials, a showcase 
of BIOMAC cases, workshops , and webinars, where the final results of the project will be presented. Attendance to 
conferences and further enrichment of previous activities will also take place. The conference, showcase, and webinars 
organization will continue on a regular base (annually or biannually) after the project completion, in addition to maintaining 
the autonomous operation of the SEP portal, the regular attendance to conferences and events, and the enrichment of social 
media profiles. Dissemination channels with appropriate target audiences and key performance indicators are listed in section 
2.2. These activities will build and solidify a business -driven and customer -oriented brand identity for BIOMAC. The 
exploitation of results will be achieved through inbound (e.g. blogs, social media, etc.) and outbound (press releases, direct 
email, etc.) marketing activities targeting relevant industrial sectors and professional associations. Furthermore, the web 
platform will serve as a main exploitation channel for the Ecosystem, wit h dedicated pages for the presentation of the 
Ecosystem (e.g. Pilot Line units, services) and terms of access. Success stories (cases reaching the market) and a showcase 
of potential client test cases will be presented in dedicated pages for attracting investments. 
 
Task 9.2 OITB Clustering activities (Task Leader: EUBIA), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
Clustering activities will increase awareness to stakeholders, achieve wide dissemination of results, and support transnational 
cooperation for better implementation and knowledge exchange through synergies. The Ecosystem will create synergies with 
clustering and networking channels with EPPN (European Pilot Production Network), European Materials Characterization 
and Modelling council and other test beds (upscaling, characterization and modelling). Clustering will be implemented 
through the organization of online and physical meetings with representatives from other test beds and relevant projects to 
share information on good practices and identify ways to optimize use of resources across different projects and test beds. 
In addition, events will be organized that will be open to all stakeholders. Advertising of these events will be targeted to the 
professional network of the project partners in addition to relevant associations. The BIOMAC ecosystem will frequently 
work on projects involving nanomaterials and the production of nano-enabled bio-based materials. In order to ensure safety 
and comply with standards for occupational exposure, health and safety issues, the BIOMAC innovation management group 
will act as a liaison with appropriate initiatives, such as the EU nanosafety cluster (NSC)  and Bio Based Industries (BBI). 
More specifically, members of the innovation management team will cooperate with the NSC working group dedicated to 
materials and standards (WGB) and the one dedicated to safer by design, innovation, and regulation (WGE). The team will 
participate and contribute to NSC general meetings and WG specific telcons, while also utilizing documentation and other 
resources (databases, interactive tools, etc.) available through the NSC and other EU in itiatives (e.g. ,Innovation Radar, 
EMMC-ABSL etc). Additionally, ISQ and UBU will support the clustering activities as focal for the EU Nanosafety Cluster.  
 
Task 9.3 Training activities (Task Leader: EUBIA), M01-48 
Supported by: RDC, EUBP, all partners 
In order to promote the new knowledge generated during the project execution as well as to create new links with the 
interested audiences towards the BIOMAC market, a dual training approach will be carried out. This training will include an 
inter and an intra level, thus both techno managerial as well as stakeholder training. 1) Intra – Ecosystem Training (IET): 
will cover the whole BIOMAC ecosystem spectrum. The ecosystem members will build a communication process whose 
vision will be surrounded by their future needs and requirements in developing curricula training courses, offering training 
opportunities to take traineeships at all levels will boost their competences. Technology Transfer training will focus on the  
core members of the ecosystem th at transfer to and effective uptake of technology produced in BIOMAC by the market, 
particularly targeting SMEs’ access to the ecosystem, developing their innovation capacity and business transformation, 
spurring new competitive products, and accelerating time-to-market, with the objective of boosting their competitiveness at 
global scale. 2) Inter - Stakeholder Training (IST): the target here will be to reach cross-sectorial audiences related to nano-
enabled bio-based materials. Start-ups have different needs in terms of training, as they usually have sufficient skills, and 
they may require training on different topics, such as management, marketing and branding. RDC will essentially contribute 
to this task, they have already IT Training Platforms sold to companies and reductional centres, these will be adapted to 
needs of the OITB. At the same time, innovative services offered by BIOMAC for sure will attract costumers but from the 
other side intellectual property rights concerns could be an obstacle to enter the ecosystem, thus effective training courses  
explaining and showcasing the benefits will be implemented into the IST trainings. Consequently, the training schedule will 
address coaching sessions which aim at knowledge transfer, while typical training courses on e.g. new technologies on bio 
processing will be delivered as part of a training program. Access to funding will be another key training service, BIOMAC 
will help SMEs and start-ups to access regional, national and/or European funding in order to invest on their novel idea and 
intention to upscale new nano-enabled bio-based materials entering the ecosystem. BIOMAC training course intends to help 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [58 of 68] 
and support SMEs to explain their strategies to banks and private investors who often do not understand the need of high-
tech companies. At least six training sessions will be held 3 IET and 3 IST. 
Deliverables 
D9.1 Project Web-portal, Blog and Social Media Groups (M03, Task 9.1, RDC)  
D9.2 Presentation of visual identity (Logo, flyers and brochures) (M4, Task 9.1, EUBIA) 
D9.3 Report on clustering activities with other OITB (M20, Task 9.2, EUBIA) 
D9.4 Report on clustering activities with EC initiatives (M48, Task 9.2, EUBIA) 
D9.5 Report on training activities and training material (M30, Task 9.3, RDC) support of EUBIA 
 
WP No  10 Start Date or Starting Event 1-48 
WP title Management and Coordination  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
Objectives 
The objective of this work package is to ensure the smooth running of the project including communication between the 
consortium and the European Commission (EC), so that the project progresses in a coordinated and coherent manner and 
that all management activities, financial and legal aspects and other issues are managed to a high standard and according to 
the Grant Agreement (GA) terms. Moreover, the aim of this WP is to plan, organise & review all consortium and participant 
financial and administrative activities as well as to report to the EC and the Project Steering Committee, monitor plans and 
operational performance of all financial and administrative activities. It will assist participants and work-package leaders to 
achieve their objectives and it will review, control & report financial information (budget and costs) to the consortium & the 
EC. This WP covers financial and administrative management/coordination activities, in accordance with article II.16 of the 
grant agreement. 
 
WP-10 has the following specific objectives: 
1. Establishment and follow-up of consortium agreement. 
2. Responsibility for the communication within the consortium and with the EC. 
3. Controlling of project advance and time schedules and overview the financial management 
4. Review of milestones and deliverables. 
5. Organization of regular reports and generation of mid-term summary reports or exploitation report. 
 
The WP 10 will be led by AUTH and will operate till M48 
Description of work 
Task 10.1: Administrative and financial project management (Task Leader: AUTH), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
AUTH will be the central contact point for the EC and the partners, and will be responsible for the overall administrative, 
financial, legal and ethical management of the consortium. Prof. Dimitris Bikiaris has a long experience in Project 
Coordination of R&D&I projects and will serve as the chairman for the PSC. He will be responsible for the coordination of 
project activities undertaking individual tasks such as: 
✓ Communicating with consortium & EC, including the provision of legal & financial information about the partners 
during the GA preparation phase, and the resolution of administrative or contractual issues during the project. 
✓ Preparing and updating the Consortium Agreement, including attention to IPR, in collaboration with the Innovation & 
Exploitation as well as the Dissemination Manager. 
✓ Preparation and post-processing of EC reviews from the consortium side, including support in the implementation of 
any recommendations from the EC and reviewers, with the support of the WP leaders 
✓ Coordination of payments (budget distribution) records and financial accounts, collation of financial statements 
✓ Day-to-day administrative management of the project, for example chairing the PSC, organizing meetings (including 
the kick-off meeting) and circulating minutes 
✓ Ensuring gender equality within the project  
✓ Collation of the deliverables and milestone reports, and assistance to the technical coordinator in the preparation of 
progress and periodic reports and the timely submission of Deliverables. 
 
Task 10.2 Technical project management (Task Leader: AUTH), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
Due to the size and complexity of operating and validating an OITB the consortium has decided to apply a multi -level 
management structure. Besides the project Management and the PSC there will two additional management levels that will 
operate at an everyday basis. Technical Management Level will consist of an Ecosystem Technical Manager (ETM) and a 
Validation Technical Manager (VTM).  Dr. Roberto Lando  from STAM and Dr. Youssef Habibi from LIST will 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [59 of 68] 
undertake the task of technical management of the Ecosystem and the Validation accordingly (see sect. 3.2.1). Both will 
work in close collaboration with the technical Work Package leaders. This will also prepare a risk log and milestone progress 
reports, which will be collated by the Project Technical Manager and forwarded to the Project Coordinator. The work package 
leaders will report directly to the project technical managers and will be responsible for: * Dictate workflow scheduling and 
work plan change control procedure, * Coordinate communication between partners within the work package, * Coordinate 
the work package specific technical activities, * Review and manage the impact of economical and societal issues. The 
Technical Managers and the WP leader s will handle technical risk management. Before each stage of the project the 
appropriate manager will complete a full risk assessment. This will follow the process identification, evaluation and response 
planning. The impact of the risk will then be assessed, and contingency resources planned.  
Deliverables 
D10.1 First Technical and Economic Progress Report (M9, Task 10.1&2, AUTH) 
D10.2 Second Technical and Economic Progress Report (M27, Task 10.1&2, AUTH) 
D10.3 Final Technical and Economic Progress Report (M48, Task 10.1&2, AUTH) 
 
Table 3.3: List of major Deliverables 
Deliv. 
Nr. Deliverable name WP 
Nr. 
Lead 
Partner Type Dissem. 
level 
Deliv. 
date 
D1.1 Data Management Plan Strategy 1 IDE R CO 06 
D1.2 Report on the organizational structure of the Ecosystem 1 EUBP R CO 12 
D1.3 Draft Contracts (Framework & End Users Agreement 1 EUBP R CO 18 
D1.4 Report on the operational procedures of SEP  1 EUBP R CO 18 
D1.5 Delivery of beta version of OITB communication platform  1 RDC DEC CO 18 
D1.6 OITB validation report by selected end users  1 EUBP R CO 36 
D1.7 OITB validation report by selected open call end users ( 1 EUBP R CO 48 
D1.8 Final update of DMP 1 IDE R CO 48 
D2.1 Delivery of designs and upgrading plans of pilot lines 2 STAM R CO 08 
D2.2 Progress on the upgrade and modification of pilot lines 2 ISQ R CO 14 
D2.3 Report on monitoring and control systems established in PL  2 IRIS R CO 18 
D2.4 Report on upgrading of characterisation and validation testing  2 IDE R CO 18 
D2.5 Full description of the ecosystem pilot lines  2 ABIS R CO 18 
D3.1 Report on PL process operation and specifications for TeC  3 LIST R CO 18 
D3.2 Delivery of 3D printed automotive interior components 3 DIAD DEM PU 36 
D3.3 Delivery of agricultural applications 3 NVMT DEM PU 36 
D3.4 Delivery of food packaging film thickness  3 EVER DEM PU 36 
D3.5 Delivery of lightweight beam for construction 3 ACC DEM PU 36 
D3.6 Delivery of a smart wearable sock with integrated sensors 3 OHMA DEM PU 36 
D4.1 Deliverable of the methodology for validation workflows  4 IDE R CO 14 
D4.2 Report on characterisation facilities and validation testing  4 PoliMi R CO 22 
D4.3 Delivery of Virtual plant  4 IDE DEM CO 42 
D4.4 Replication to other landscapes 4 IDE DEM CO 48 
D5.1 Workflow design and Preparatory Market Uptake actions 5 UNIPD R CO 18 
D5.2 Delivery of 5 interTeC Business plans 5 UNIPD R CO 36 
D5.3 Delivery of 5 intraTeC Business plans 5 UNIPD R CO 48 
D5.4 Guidelines and recommendation for use of NPs in the PLs 5 UBU R CO 18 
D5.5 Report on H&S of the new processes and technologies  5 UBU R CO 33 
D5.6 Risk Assessment regarding nanomaterials use 5 ISQ R CO 37 
D5.7 Report on liaison activities with standardization bodies  5 EUBP R CO 31 
D5.8 Report on the standardization landscape and standards 5 EUBP R CO 48 
D6.1 Delivery of Workflow procedure of VC protocol  6 UBU R CO 18 
D6.2 Report on the Circularity and EoL management  6 PoliMi R CO 48 
D6.3 First report on LCA & LCC  6 ISQ R CO 36 
D6.4 Final report on LCA & LCC  6 ISQ R CO 48 
D6.5 Multicriteria optimization model for the value chain  6 AXIA R CO 44 
D7.1 Launch of Open Call at the BIOMAC Platform  7 RDC DEC PU 24 
D7.2 Analytical report on the selection of the test cases   7 AUTH R CO 33 
D7.3 Analytical report on the results of the open call cases   7 STAM R CO 48 
D8.1 First PEDR  8 EXE R CO 18 
D8.2 Updated PEDR  8 EXE R CO 36 
D8.3 Final PEDR  8 EXE R CO 48 
D8.4 Delivery of knowledge Management and IPR roadmap 8 UNIPD R CO 24 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [60 of 68] 
Deliv. 
Nr. Deliverable name WP 
Nr. 
Lead 
Partner Type Dissem. 
level 
Deliv. 
date 
D8.5 Investment roadmap and marketplace  8 EXE R CO 46 
D9.1 Project Web-portal, Blog and Social Media Groups   9 RDC DEC PU 03 
D9.2 Presentation of visual identity (Logo, flyers and brochures) 9 EUBIA DEC PU 04 
D9.3 Report on clustering activities with other OITB  9 EUBIA DEC PU 20 
D9.4 Report on clustering activities with EC initiatives  9 EUBIA DEC PU 48 
D9.5 Report on training activities and training material   9 RDC DEC PU 30 
D10.1 First Technical and Economic Progress Report  10 AUTH R CO 09 
D10.2 Second Technical and Economic Progress Report  10 AUTH R CO 27 
D10.3 Final Technical and Economic Progress Report  10 AUTH R CO 48
3.2 Management Structure, Milestones and Procedures  
3.2.1  Organizational Structure 
The management structure and procedures need to be clear and well-defined in order to implement successfully a project 
of this scale and dimensions. Both the core members of the Ecosystem as well as the members representing the ten cases 
are very experienced in collaborative R&D activities and can cope with the overall management and implementation of 
the project. The consortium of BIOMAC project has already established a management structure for the proper 
management and implementation of the project. The coordination of the project will be made by AUTH, while the 
Project Coordinator (PC) will be Prof. Dimitris Bikiaris (AUTH). BIOMAC is structured in four levels (Figure 3.3):  
1. Strategic Level: by Project Steering 
Committee (PSC)  
2. Executive Level: Project Coordinator 
(PC) and coordination team of AUTH 
3. Phases Management Level: consist of 
Ecosystem Technical Manager (ETM), 
Validation Technical Manager (VTM) 
and the Dissemination Exploitation 
Communication (DEC) committee. 
4. Implementation Level: WP leaders 
(WPL) supported by task leaders. The 
consortium will implement full risk 
management and have already knowledge 
of the management plan. The following 
paragraphs describe the project 
management structure and the assigned   
Figure 3.3: BIOMAC Management Structure 
roles, the communication methodology, the decision-making mechanisms, as well as risk and knowledge management. 
The various management levels, roles and responsibilities are briefly explained below:  
 
Level 1 (BIOMAC Strategic Level) 
The project will be strategically directed by the PSC which will be the ultimate decision-making body of the consortium, 
consists of one Delegate per Partner and is chaired by the coordinator. Every PSC member will have 1 vote and decisions 
will be made by majority voting. It has been determined that all PSC Members have been empowered to make decisions 
on behalf of their organization. This means that the majority of the members will be Executives, which will avoid 
unnecessary delays in the decision -making process. It will hav e the overall responsibility of all technical, financial, 
legal, administrative, ethics and dissemination and exploitation issue of the project, and will be also responsible for 
conflicts resolution. The Committee will be regularly informed by the PM about the progress of the project, achievement 
of milestones and critical stop/go decision points in accordance with the risk mitigation and contingency plan. (1) 
Providing input to the development of the project, including the evaluation strategy, (2) Providing advice on the budget, 
(3) Defining and helping to achieve the project outcomes, (4) Identifying the priorities in the project – where the most 
energy should be directed, (5) Providing advice (and sometimes making decisions) about changes to the project a s it 
develops, (6) Identifying potential risks, (7) Monitoring timelines, (8) Monitoring the quality of the project as it 
develops; (9) Monitoring milestones and risks. 
Level 2 (BIOMAC Executive Level) 
Prof. Dimitris Bikiaris from AUTH has a long experience in Project Management and Coordination of R&D&I projects 
and will serve as the chairman for the PSC. He will be responsible for the coordination of project activities. The 
management structure is the guarantee to the proper implementation of activities: it ensures that the project operates at 
the highest standards in both organisational and financial terms. The previous tasks, responsibilities and competencies 
permit an efficient, synergy-boosting and transparent platform for all Partners to concentrate on their different tasks 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [61 of 68] 
needed to achieve the planned objectives of this present research project. The PM and his team coordinate and manage 
those items that affect the contractual terms with the EC, which will be fixed at the outset of the project, as well as the 
technical and scientific activities of the consortium. The PC has the following responsibilities (but not limited):  
 
Project coordinator’s main responsibilities 
✓ Overall responsibility for the project; guarantees 
its continuity and consistency and allocates its resources.  
✓ Handles any conflict resolution within the project, 
which could not be handled at a lower level. 
✓ Keeps the address list of mem bers and other 
contact persons updated and available.  
✓ Collects, reviews and submits information on the 
progress of the project and reports and other deliverables 
(financial statements and related certification) to the 
European Commission. 
✓ Consolidates the  project planning, milestones 
reports, cost statements and budget.  
✓ Communicates with work packages in order to 
guarantee smooth progress and avoid delays in 
deliverables and milestones. The PC will act to mitigate 
the impact caused for these potential del ays. If these 
issues are not resolved satisfactorily, these will be 
raised with the SC.  
✓ Representation of the project and partnership to 
external stakeholders and initiatives.  
 
Level 3 (BIOMAC Phases Management Level) 
The BIOMAC technical management level has been structured in order to handle decisions concerning any important 
operational issue related to the technical issues of the ecosystem setup, its validation as well as dissemination, 
communication and exploitation issues. Due to the complexity of the BIOMAC project a high number of Work Packages 
has been outlined, 10 in total. In order to have an efficient implementation of the project the consortium has decided to 
set at this level three technical management positions:  
A) Ecosystem Technical Manager (ETM): Dr. Roberto Lando from STAM. has been selected to undertake 
the role of ETM. The ETM will be responsible for the smooth execution of WP 3 to WP8. Dr Lando has a 
long experience in managing Commercial as well as European projects. He has been responsible for 
coordinating a significant number of pilot lines in relevant European Projects. His high -level technical 
profile, and 20 years’ experience spent in multidisciplinary research and  development projects makes him suitable to 
undertake the  role as ETM facilitat ing the set-up of the ecosystem concerning both tangible (e.g. pilot lines, 
infrastructures, testing equipment) as well as non -tangible (e.g. procedures, protocols etc) issues t hat are the main 
objectives of the WP1 and 7-9.  
B) Validation Technical Manager (VTM): Dr. Youssef Habibi from LIST has been selected to undertake the 
role of VTM. The VTM will be responsible for the smooth implementation of the test cases selected for the 
Ecosystem as well as for the necessary feedback to be provided for improvement the performance of the 
Ecosystem. He is currently a Lead Scientist at LIST, before he was in  North Carolina State University 
(NCSU, USA) and at French Engineering School of Paper, Printing and Biomaterials (PAGORA, France). His 
background includes the design of new bio-derived polymers, development of high-performance nanocomposites from 
lignocellulosic materials including natural nano-sized fillers. He published over 100 research articles or invited reviews 
in high standard peer review journals, (co)edited and/or (co)authored several books and book chapters  (H-index: 45). 
He is also involved in several organizations such ACS, TAPPI (Standard Nomenclature of Nanocellulose) and also serve 
as active reviewer or member of the editorial broad of several scientific journals. All these makes him the most 
appropriate person to be the TVM lead  together with the staff of the LeE he will be responsible for the launch of the 
open call, the selection of the new test cases and their implementation. He will follow and guide in collaboration with 
the work package leaders the WPs 2-7, due the big size and multidisciplinary of the project a 3 members committee will 
be assigned in the KoM to assist Dr. Habibi at his responsibilities.  
C) DEC-committee: The DEC-committee will consist of three persons: 
i. The Innovation & Exploitation Manag er (IEM)  will be Prof. Eleonora Di Maria  Full Professor of 
Business Management at UNIPD. 
ii. The IPR manager (IPRM)will be Dr. Nikolaos Tsiantis from EXE. 
iii. The Dissemination & Communication Manager (DCM) will be Dr. Giulio Poggiaroni from EUBIA.  
The DEC committee will be chaired by the IEM and will be responsible for the activities undertaken in WP1, WP7 to 
WP09. This position is quite important as Innovation Management requires a unique set of skills, the innovation 
potential of BIOMAC that builds on the SEP with multiple access modes tailored to industry and on the DEC to manage 
all innovative commercial contracts and IPR.  
 
Table 3.4: Innovation Management (IM) actions 
Innovation Management Description/Actions 
Product 
develop-
ment 
Product 
development 
To support Test Case in considering the cost, environmental constraints, regulations and market 
penetration. This will also be connected to technical advances and test case showcasing.  
IP management To adaptive design IP management to generate good value and differentiation for the access 
rights. Further facilitate private investment and customers. 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [62 of 68] 
Supply chain 
development  
To support each Test Case in identifying the suppliers, manufacturers and partners along the 
entire supply chain. 
Business 
support 
Business case 
validation 
To support Test Case in validating the relevance of its innovation opportunity for value creation. 
Market 
validation  
To support Test Case in finding the right approach to gather market feedback early on in its 
product development phase. Validated preindustrial trials will reduce the market risk.  
Unique value 
proposition  
To support Test Case in defining its unique value proposition and business model via a 
mentoring service and community building in Key Enabling markets of nanotechnology. 
Business models BIOMAC is based on open innovation, UNIPD, EXE and EUBP have experience and they are 
deeply involved in other OITB.  
Access to 
finance 
Validation of 
business plans 
Support with good methodology to build and validate business plan that is not only based on 
state-of-the-art technologies but rather towards and open environment marketplace.  
Sourcing public 
funds 
Develop the best financing strategy and introduction support and potential funds that intend to 
invest on Pilot Lines and Test Cases for market driven products.  
 
Level 4 (BIOMAC Implementation Level) 
Each WP leader will be responsible for: (a) resolving day-to-day administrative, technical and resource problems within 
his/her WP, (b) disseminating information relating to all aspects of the work to the other WP leaders ensuring smooth 
coordination of wo rk package activities and (c) reporting to the upper levels of project management. The selected 
management structure offers a good balance of the various elements that affect management design and operation during 
the project and post project (i.e. simplic ity, flexibility, effectiveness, etc.). At the same time, it allows for increased 
flexibility and effectiveness, as it favours the appointment of multiple roles to each partner. WPL organizes the 
production and internal review of the WP deliverables. Each WP group will provide a written technical progress report 
each 6 months to the PM, based on the reports submitted by the concerned personnel involved. The individual WP 
Groups will meet as necessary, convened by each WPL, but at least 4 times during the course of the WP. These meetings 
will concern the progress of the work being done in the WP and deal with any problems that have arisen. The members 
of the WP Groups for each WP will be one representative from each organization participating in the WP. Each of the 
WP Members will be responsible for attending the project and WP meetings to which they are convened, for providing 
individual quarterly internal technical reports to the WPL and ensuring the quality of the work they do within the WP.  
 
3.2.2   Management activities of the project 
Project Management Tools for planning, monitoring and reporting: BIOMAC will use on-line Project Management 
Tools (RDC developed platform) that facilitate project planning, monitoring, and information collection and reporting  
 
thus, ensuring that project information is always 
up-to-date, and can be reported in a timely and 
consistent manner. The respective tools will also 
feed the Periodi c Reporting to the EC. Project 
information flow will be channelled through: (i) 
mainstream electronic communication (e.g. 
emails, phone, Skype, internal web -site, etc.); (ii) 
bi-annually scheduled, and if necessary, ad -hoc 
GA meetings; (iii) ad -hoc virtual  or physical 
technical meetings; (iv) internal semester progress 
reporting (from partners to PC); (iv) project co -
creation workshops and events; and (v) preparation 
context for the official reporting to the EC.  Figure 3.4: Monitoring and reporting 
Consortium meetings: eight (8) consortium meetings are scheduled every six months. These meetings will constitute 
major milestones for planning, exchanging information among partners, assessing project progress and success 
(financial and technical) and for taking major decisions about project execution. (A) 1st Kick-off Meeting (M1): to detail 
project planning, work allocation and initiate project activities, (B) 2nd – 7th Meeting (every six months): progress review 
and planning for next period, (C) Final (8 th) Meeting (close to the end of the project) . Preparations for the final event 
and project review. For reasons of cost -efficiency, consortium meetings will coincide, when possible, with the project 
planned events (workshops, stakeholder events, info days, etc.) or review meetings. Minutes of all meetings will be kept 
and circulated to all partners, followed by Action Lists. The Partners will have a week upon receipt of the minutes to 
comment on them, otherwise they will be considered as approved.  
Financial management and procedures: The Financial Tools used on the project will comprise a set of linked 
spreadsheets which present only the essential information for partner and Coordinator inputs, specifically to reduce the 
financial administrative complexity for all project members. The prim ary financial information will be extracted from 
the agreed EC contract following successful contact negotiations. Periodic entries are essential, and Project Manager 
will ensure that (a) annually, the personnel costs and overheads must be updated and (b) monthly the partners must enter 
their hours and expenses on a simple form. Apart from that, ICT tools will be the day -to-day mechanisms for project 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [63 of 68] 
communication, either internally or externally. These tools include electronic facilities such as email dist ribution lists, 
a collaborative weblog, a wiki site for transparent cooperation and a documentation management system for version 
tracking of documents and updates by project participants. Public Reports and selected Technical Reports will be made 
available on the project site. 
 
MEETING WHEN WHO WHAT 
Project Kick-
off 
Project start -
up(face-to-face) 
All project 
representatives 
To discuss the work plan, the structure of the project organization, 
the flows of information and to promote creativity and cooperation 
WP Meetings Three-monthly 
(telecom) WPLs, TLs, TC To focus the work within the WP. Minutes will be recorded by the 
TC and distributed to all participants. 
General 
Assembly 
(GA) 
Six-monthly 
(face-to-face) 
Coordinator, TC, 
all project 
representatives 
To control the whole project commitment to the final objectives, 
costs and deadlines. Review of achieved and up-coming milestones 
and risk elements. Minutes will be distributed to all participants. 
Scientific & 
Technical  
Six-monthly 
(face-to-face) 
TC, WPLs, and 
additional staff if 
necessary 
To coordinate and monitor the work of the different WPs, discussing 
the project work progress and coordination, outstanding actions and 
ad-hoc issues. Minutes will be distributed to all participants. 
IPR & 
Exploitation 
Six-monthly 
(face-to-face) 
WPL of WP9, 
representatives 
of participants 
To coordinate and control the exploitation, dissemination and 
communication activities. Implementing Business cases & plans. 
Minutes will be distributed. 
 
PC Communication strategy: In terms of the communication strategy followed, the PC will keep all the partners 
informed about the progress of the project, facilitate the ordered flow of information and achieve maximum transparency 
between the partners involved. Five types of communic ation are foreseen: meetings of the partners of the project, 
exchange of visits between different parties, video conference, telephone calls and electronic mail. The main feature of 
this strategy is the establishment of a protocol for the communication between the EC and the Consortium, the Project 
Coordinator and the TM, DM, IEM, WPL and partners, in between members of the different Committees, and finally 
the public with the project.  
 
3.2.3  Decision making and conflict resolution mechanism 
In terms of decision-making mechanisms, when strategic decisions need to be taken, such as action to solve conflicts, 
action to mitigate critical risks to project implementation, action to manage changes in the work plan, decisions in 
relation to IPR and e xploitation, etc., it will be the responsibility of the PM to seek consensus with the PSC, whereby 
each partner will be assigned one vote. Decisions will be taken by simple majority. In the event of a tie situation, the  
PM will have a double vote. Each representative of 
the PSC will be responsible for mobilising and 
coordinating the active and coherent participation 
of the other personnel from their organisation who 
are involved in the project team, and they will also 
ensure that reporting and cost statements from their 
organisation are submitted on time and correctly. In 
the case of conflicts BIOMAC has already set up a 
conflict resolution mechanism that will be followed 
during the BIOMAC project (Figure 3. 5). Should 
any conflict arise requiring a  decision the target is 
to solve the conflict in the lowest possible level 
(Task leader < WPL < TM < PM<PSC). This 
procedure will be also included and described in the 
details in the (CA). If a dispute persists even after 
the meeting of PSC, then the partners will seek the 
advice of an independent external arbitration 
chamber. 
 
Figure 3.5. Conflict resolution mechanism. 
 
3.2.4  Milestones of BIOMAC project  
The Project Milestones have been targeted planned in order to be used as a valuable tool for evaluating critical 
performance and determining whether or not the project is on schedule, these additionally have been projected to cover 
all reporting periods and to be balanced split between them.  Milestone reviews will be held at each meeting of the PSC 
six monthly and a critical review of the outlook for effective exploitation of results will be monitored by the partners. 
Successful achievement of the targets specified in the milestones will ensure a smooth project implementation and the 
on-time planning.  
 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [64 of 68] 
Table 3.5: List of BIOMAC milestones 
MS No Milestone name Related 
WPs 
Estimated 
date Means of verification 
MS01 Kick off Meeting 10 1 Meeting minutes approved by partners 
MS02 Delivery of webpage private area 9 2 Delivering usernames and password to the 
partners for access in the restricted area. 
MS03 Mapping of selected biomass supply and 
Value chain completed 3 5 Report of the complete supply chain and 
logistics solutions of selected cases 
MS04 Approval of core ecosystem partners on 
the agreements document  1 10 
Final comments by partners integrated in the 
Framework Agreement  and End Use 
Agreement 
MS05 First successful run of upgraded 
monitoring systems in PLs 2 14 First runs of upgraded PLs operational trials 
approved by the PL owners 
MS06 Definition of value proposition by the end 
users 5 16 Receive of questionnaires by the end users 
and analysis of them 
MS07 First updated PEDR approved by all 
partners 8 17 Delivery of PEDR and review with all 
partners 
MS08 First document containing environmental, 
economic and risk management  6 18 Evaluation completed and inputs available 
for most sustainable design of the pilot plant 
MS09 First results on materials and 
demonstrators delivered to End Users 3 24 Delivery note to End Users TeCs and 
characterization report 
MS10 First successful demonstration of the 5 
selected test cases  7 26 Videos of the installation process and first 
runs of the units 
MS11 Open Call Launch in the Ecosystem 
website  7 28 First application from end user 
MS12 Receive of at least 40 applications for the 
open call  7 29 Report on the applicant’s cases and 
mobilization of the selection process 
MS13 First demonstration of the DST, validating 
the GAMS models  6 35 Presentation of a user -friendliness tool to 
support decisions across the VC validated.  
MS14 Successful implementation of BIOMAC 
conference 9 44 Registration sheet delivered  
MS15 Include the new test cases as success 
stories in the web page  9 48 Signed agreement between SMEs and the 
coordinator 
 
3.2.5  Risk and mitigation measures 
BIOMAC risks have been split in three main categories: 1) Technology & implementation risks, 2) Management Risks 
and 3) Ecosystem Sustainability risks which cover also transversal risks (related to dissemination and exploitation). 
Given the dynamic nature of any project of this size and complexity, the consortium has set a well -defined risk 
management process and specific procedures to reassure early identification, adequate handling and proper mitigation.  
 
Table 3.6: Critical risks for implementation (P: Probability, I: Impact) 
 Description of risk 
(likelihood) WP Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Ecosystem Sustainability 
Disagreements in consensus 
for SEP. P: l. I: h. 1 The main partners of the Ecosystems have already been committed for the 
operation through the SEP and thus, the probability of this risk is minimum. 
Difficulties in introducing 
TeCs in the market. P:l, I:m 5 Marketing strategies, enhancing the contact with industrial companies will be 
maximized. Open door meetings and a final workshop will be celebrated. 
LCA results are not positive 
vs. industry benchmark P: h. 
I: m 
6 
The relevant task dedicated to LCA includes a cost benefit analysis of the 
proposed technologies, which in turn determine the “boundary conditions” for 
their successful introduction to the market. Strategies will be economically 
compared with current processes information retrieved by the end users. 
Not enough interest from 
stakeholders on the Open 
Call P: l. I: m. 
7 
Promotion of the project and benefits of entering the ecosystem are essential to 
achieve the engagement of all stakeholders along different sectors. A proper 
training to general public about the advantages will be conducted. The 
consortium already collecte d an appropriate amount of LoI these companies 
will be requested additionally to send their applications for the open calls.   
Difficulties in knowledge 
transfer P: m. I: m 8 BIOMAC will share the experiences through Train the Trainer workshops and 
e-Learning materials for key stakeholders from the whole value chain. 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [65 of 68] 
Non-compliance of IRP 
conditions P: l. I: m 8 
This risk has been mitigated by establishing IPR rules as is documented in 
Section 2.2. In addition, before project start all the partners sign the Consortium 
Agreement. IRP clauses are clear and understood by every member, even if a 
dispute occurs a loyal firm will be sought to handle. 
Technology and implementation risks 
Process control system do 
not translate to PLs P: m. I: 
h 
2
&
3 
Understanding of fundamental microwave heating mechanisms by which 
benefits are realized. Ensure associated engineering solution provides process 
feedback to optimize treatment.  
Continuous operation 
with 50-70% ethanol at 
up to 200°C. P: m. I: h 
2&
3 
Even if the design of the pilot plant meets all regulations and safety rules the 
authorities might use long time before they give the start-up permission - simply 
because it is a first case ever. LTU will go into a dialog with the authorities 
already at the conceptual design stage to make them familiar with the organosolv 
process and the corresponding critical risk points.  
Pilot lines not capable to 
achieve the objectives of 
proposed TeC. P:l I:m 
3 
The test cases have been selected considering the technologies available in the 
Ecosystem and their TRL. The expertise and knowhow of PL owners as well as 
the proposed technology upgrades and process optimizations offer flexibility to 
successfully deliver the targeted products according to the Test Cases 
specifications.  
Failure in validation of 
certain TeC in industrial 
environment. P: l. I: m 
3 
Validation will be conducted to minimize the risks of failures in operational 
environment. Combined experience of RTOs and Industrial End -users 
encompassing Bench test available across sectors will avoid failures 
Complex material modelling 
accurately. P:h I:m. 4 
If materials are complex to model and necessary data is lacking from 
experimental activities, information will be taken from previous activities to 
from involved partners. Assumptions will be taken when strictly necessary in 
order to approach accuracy for the modelled system 
Insufficient quality of 
mechanical nanocellulose 
P:l I:m 
3 
If the nanocellulose obtained by a mechanical process does not have the quality 
required for the test cases, enzymatic pre-treatment will be considered in order 
to obtain best quality nanocellulose. 
Cost of certain TeC 
exceeding allocated budget. 
P: m. I: h. 
5 
The budget has been previously carefully evaluated and agreed for all 
showcases; however, an offer for paid service could be launched to continue 
development 
Insufficient compliance as 
food contact material and 
low functional properties P:l 
I:m 
4 
To meet food contact compliance is demanding. In case of failing the materials 
are used for indirect food contact, behind barrier layers, the food classification 
for direct contact is restricted. If properties are insufficient these will be 
improved by functional additives and blending with conventional polymers. 
Difficulties to propose 
standardized 
characterization to the 
market PLs. P: m I: m 
4 
Customization in designing the monitoring systems is required to fully exploit 
the technical potential of the pilot lines. A possible solution to mitigate lack of 
standardization is designing the monitoring systems in a modular way, in order 
to be able to characterize elements and be flexible to the market needs. 
Manage-
ment 
Management issues & 
Financial risks. P:l. I:h. 10 
Management activities will not be limited to reporting, but it will also include a 
close financial monitoring process so as to constantly assess financial progress 
and be able to identify early signs of concern. 
Problems in validation 
activities P: m. I: h. 10 PSC will decide on possible re -allocation of resources for surpassing the 
possible delays, after the agreement of the PO.
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
BIOMAC introduces a network of different and versatile open access Pilot Lines (PLs), which have been selected due 
to the fact that they are representing a wide spectrum of biomass processing and manufacturing of nanoreinforced 
polymers as well as on the fact of their geographical distribution  that demonstrates a trans-national collaboration. The 
OITB Geographical distribution of the participants and especially the Pilot Plants has been critically considered during 
the Consortium preparation phase. The Pilots are distributed across 12 European Countries that are well positioned 
across the value chain of bio based nanomaterials  (Greece, Belgium, Luxemburg, UK, Germany, Spain, Sweden, 
Denmark, Poland, Hungarian, Portugal, Denmark) this has been considered in order to take advantage of the skills and 
experiences generated over the EU, guarantee the widespread dissemination of the project results all over the EU; 
promote feasible exploitation of the project results all over the EU.  
 
A) 3 Associations  
EUBIA is a biomass related association seeking to advance Science and Technology for bio -economy using their 
existing systems designs and developing and standards. BEECO is a provider of biomass valorised for various industries 
such as Biofuels, chemical, pharm aceutical, textile, paper and carpentry industry, they will provide Lignocellulose 
biomass wheat straw to LUL and BBEPP for further fractioning. EUBP is the industry association representing the 
bioplastics industry in Europe across the entire bioplastics value chain. EUBP’s members primarily produce, refine, and 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [66 of 68] 
distribute bioplastics, i.e. plastics that are bio-based, biodegradable, or both. In addition, biomass feedstock producers, 
bioplastics converters and compounders as well as RTDs. 
 
B) 17 PILOT LINES (PPSH): AUTH is one of the most important Technical University in Greece, the specific group 
has a great research experience and will work to connect the individual parts of the value chain to the production of diol-
based monomers. LTU is a Technical University in northern Sweden, which is one of the most forest rich areas and has 
one of the strictest legal frameworks for sustainable forestry in Europe . LTU has extensive experience in the 
development of green technologies for the valorisation of biomass resources. LIST is a Luxembourgish Research 
Institute focusing it research on developing competitive and market-oriented product/service prototypes for public and 
private stakeholders and works across the entire innovation chain: fundamental and applied research, incubation, transfer 
of technologies. RISE is the Swedish Research Institute and innovation partner that offers unique expertise and about 
100 testbeds and demonstration facilities, instrumental in future -proofing technologies, products and services. In 
BIOMAC will be PL owners for BNC applications. ATB is a technological institute that focuses on biological systems 
based on biomass use. ATB will develop PLs for LA & SA monomers production that act as precursors for the 
production of final polymer products. UEdin is ranked 20th in the world by the 2020 QS World University Rankings, 
UK Biochar Research Centre, is an internationally leading research group focused on development of pilot scale biochar 
for a range of environmental, agricultural and engineering applications, with a unique set of experimental and analytical 
research facilities. AIMP is a Technological Institute of Plastics with work related to technological research and 
development on thermoplastic and thermosetting plastic materials & products through AM, its transformation processes 
and their recyclability and sustainability. FH-WKI is a wood research institute located Germany. The Department of 
surface technology has a wide expertise in the synthesis of bio-based polymer resins for printing ink, coating and additive 
manufacturing applications. ITENE provides business solutions with an integrated view of the supply chain, from raw 
materials, design and development of packaging and packaging systems. In BIOMAC will produce nanocellulose with 
different properties and forms, according to end user`s specifications and will formulate inks and coatings based on 
nanocellulose. AIMEN Technology Centre is a Non -Profit Innovation and Technology Centre, highly specialized in 
materials and in advanced manufacturing te chnologies (including laser processing technologies) applied to high 
performance materials development and processing, robotics and automation.  DTI is the largest technological service 
provider in Denmark and one of the biggest in northern Europe focused on development and production of nanomaterials 
for printed electronics applications as well as digital production technologies and energy systems, th ey are already 
coordinating an OITB LEE -BED. Cnano is specialized and works in the field of development, production, sales and 
application of nanomaterials, high performance and advanced surface modifying processes. NNT is a high-tech SME 
pioneering resear ch and technology whose mission is to create, develop and commercialize products such as 
nanomaterials transferring novel ideas and prototype devices. 
 
C) Technical Service Providers  (VSH, MUH & VCH) : STAM is an engineering company applying engineering 
solutions to industry, they will design, fine tune and support the upgrade actions on the pilot lines, including timing, 
budgeting. ISQ is a large Portuguese research institute their business focus on high-tech environmental engineering and 
innovation business development, providing advanced environmental and sustainable solutions for different sectors (i.e., 
eco-friendly products, IoT, bio-industry, LCA, energy and industrial waste). IRIS is an engineering company, expert in 
process monitoring and evaluation through in-line monitoring. UBU that complementary serves the sector and provides 
solutions for the industry they have a deep background on sustainability, modelling, safety, LCA and LCC in the field 
of biomaterials. UNIPD has high experience in research and applied projects related to open innovation, eco-innovation 
and circular economy, environmental sustainability strategies, global value chain analysis and implementation of digital 
technologies at the firm and cluster le vel. PoliMi has a strong expertise in research related to the technological 
development of bio-based materials and nanomaterials from lignocellulosic biomass, their in-depth characterization and 
their use in high -performance thermoplastic and thermosetting  systems & products, in addition to being active in the 
field of bio-based materials recycling, reuse and sustainability. IDE is an SME that investigates in the multidisciplinary 
field of Computational Science and its application to the optimization of systems and processes in several areas of ICT, 
Biotechnology, Energy, and Resource and Raw Materials Efficiency , they will contribute on optimization and on the 
upgrades of the PLs. AXIA is focusing on the transfer of new technologies to industrial applicatio ns and is expert in 
developing Decision Support Tools for the assessment of circular value chains in the fields of developing industrial 
applications. Abis is a company performing activities in different areas focused on monitoring, design and 
manufacturing. EXE will contribute to the business development and exploitation of the OITB, they will identify the 
Unique Selling Points required from new markets and exploit additional applications. RDC IT experts having developed 
big scale online shops, communication platforms and training software’s using big clouds.  
 
D) OITB End User  Validators: DIAD (SME) is a high -tech SME specialized in design, testing and application of 
advanced body parts for the automotive and motorsport sectors, using advanced engineering tools and innovative 
materials. This target is achieved with an integrated approach covering the design and engineering excellency and the 
setup of the related manufacturing technologies always looking at the environmental aspects and the total life cycle 
DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [67 of 68] 
approach. NOVAMONT (LE) is worldwide leader in the development of biomaterials from renewable agro-industrial 
sources and in the promotion of a systemic approach to biodegradable and compostable bioplastics and bioproducts 
designed for their end-of-life (e.g., biodegradable-in-soil bioproducts for agriculture, compostable packaging materials, 
etc.). EVERSIA (LE) is a company specialized in Integral solutions in packaging and big manufacture of bags, waste 
bags and paper bags. Last year EVER closed 2019 with a turnover of 82 M€ (20 M€ in export sales) they produced 
40000 ton of plastics and 5000 of paper which make them highly interested in the BIOMAC OITB scope. ACCIONA 
(LE) is a leading European construction company de signing, constructing and managing buildings and civil 
infrastructures under sustainability principles. It has an international presence in more than 30 countries and its turnover 
in 2019 was about 3430 M€, employing 11220 people. OHMA (SME) is specialized in smart textile development, 
acting as advisors and development partners to textile businesses across the globe. Services include design and 
realization of new products that exploit the latest electronic technologies and fabric integration methods to add  new 
functionality to textiles, and garments in particular seeking to expand their product portfolio through sustainable 
biomaterials.  
 
 
Figure 3.6. BIOMAC Consortium map
3.4 Resources to be committed 
The BIOMAC consortium has been set up by 33 partners across Europe demonstrating a clear vision of its objective 
and therefore is committed to the right allocation  of the financial resources at its disposal. The close nature of 
cooperation in the project is evident b y the coherent program that has a joint focus while distributing tasks among the 
different partners that have complementary expertise and resources. The total budget of the project is 16.727.277,34€ 
and the funding is 14.807.314,84 €.  
 
 
The project financial plan has been designed to cover the partners’ needs for the accomplishment of the project targets. 
A balanced fund distribution has been made. The other goods and services that are needed especially for the upgrades 
of the PLs reach approximately  the 3M€ and have been analytically calculated and included in Table 3.8 for those 
partners whose Other costs exceed 15% of personnel costs.  

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
[BIOMAC]   [68 of 68] 
 
 
 
Figure 3.7: Budget distribution per Country. Figure 3.8: Budget per Type. 
 
These costs are aligned with the scope of Building a sustainable Ecosystem that meets all requirements to demonstrate 
at TRL7 the Pilot Demonstration activities in this IA project, materials and biomass costs have been budgeted to reach 
the Validation and Operation of the OITB serving from one side the interTeCs and from the other the intraTeCs target 
demonstrators for each End User Sector. In the following the distribution of Person Months per partner per work package 
is depicted. In the following tables the other direct costs (travel, equipment and good & services) are depicted where 
these costs surpass the 15% of the personnel costs (according to the budget table in Sec. 3 of the administrative 
proposal forms).