3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables 
In line with the technological objectives that BIOMAC has to overcome in this 48-month project, the work to be 
accomplished has been structured with the following work packages (WP) (Figure 3.1), and each WP has been sub-
divided into a number of tasks, whi ch are listed in detail in Figure 3.2 (Gantt chart). Each WP will be led and 
managed by a project partner who is an expert in the relevant field. The WP structure aims to set the basis for new 
bio-based value chains with a focus on creating new cross secto r interconnections in bio -based economy clusters. 
The objectives will address issues raised by the NMBP-04-2020 topic and will be implemented in a reasonable and 
cost-effective manner. WP objectives are built on integrated production methods, delivery of added value polymers, 
cost effective accurate characterizations and variability of product evaluation through LC A approach. Partners will 
generate knowledge, develop novel bioprocessing technologies and industrial concepts transferrable to upscale 
testing. All 35 partners will collaborate in order to successfully deliver and achieve the BIOMAC objectives.  
 
 
Figure 3.1: Work package structure of BIOMAC OITB. 
 
 
 
 
 

DT-NMBP-04-2020  
    [41 of 164] 
 
Figure 3.2: Gantt chart of BIOMAC project. 
 

DT-NMBP-04-2020                    
[SEP-210659195] [BIOMAC] – Part B   [46 of 164] 
MS No Milestone name Related 
WPs 
Estimated 
date Means of verification 
MS01 Kick off Meeting 10 1 Meeting minutes approved by partners 
MS02 Delivery of webpage private area 9 2 Delivering usernames and password to the 
partners for access in the restricted area. 
MS03 Mapping of selected biomass supply and 
Value chain completed 3 10 Report of the complete supply chain and 
logistics solutions of selected cases 
MS04 Approval of core ecosystem partners on 
the agreements document  1 16 
Final comments by partners integrated in the 
Framework Agreement  and End Use 
Agreement 
MS05 First successful run of upgraded 
monitoring systems in PLs 2 14 First runs of upgraded PLs operational trials 
approved by the PL owners 
MS06 Definition of value proposition by the end 
users 5 16 Receive of questionnaires by the end users 
and analysis of them 
MS07 First updated PEDR approved by all 
partners 8 17 Delivery of PEDR and review with all 
partners 
MS08 First document containing environmental, 
economic and risk management  6 18 Evaluation completed and inputs available 
for most sustainable design of the pilot plant 
MS09 First results on materials and 
demonstrators delivered to End Users 3 24 Delivery note to End Users TeCs and 
characterization report 
MS10 First successful demonstration of the 5 
selected test cases  7 26 Videos of the installation process and first 
runs of the units 
MS11 Open Call Launch in the Ecosystem 
website  7 28 First application from end user 
MS12 Receive of at least 40 applications for the 
open call  7 29 Report on the applicant’s cases and 
mobilization of the selection process 
MS13 First demonstration of the DST, validating 
the GAMS models  6 35 Presentation of a user -friendliness tool to 
support decisions across the VC validated.  
MS14 Successful implementation of BIOMAC 
conference 9 44 Registration sheet delivered  
MS15 Include the new test cases as success 
stories in the web page  9 48 Signed agreement between SMEs and the 
coordinator 
 
3.2.5  Risk and mitigation measures 
BIOMAC risks have been split in three main categories: 1) Technology & implementation risks, 2) Management Risks 
and 3) Ecosystem Sustainability risks which cover also transversal risks (related to dissemination and exploitation). 
Given the dynamic nature of any project of this size and complexity, the consortium has set a well -defined risk 
management process and specific procedures to reassure early identification, adequate handling and proper mitigation.  
 
Table 3.3: Critical risks for implementation (P: Probability, I: Impact) 
 Description of risk 
(likelihood) WP Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Ecosystem Sustainability 
Disagreements in consensus 
for SEP. P: l. I: h. 1 The main partners of the Ecosystems have already committed for the operation 
through the SEP and thus, the probability of this risk is minimum. 
Difficulties in introducing 
TeCs in the market. P: l, I:m 5 Marketing strategies, enhancing the contact with industrial companies will be 
maximized. Open door meetings and a final workshop will be celebrated. 
LCA results are not positive 
vs. industry benchmark P: h. 
I: m 
6 
The relevant task dedicated to LCA includes a cost benefit analysis of the 
proposed technologies, which in turn determine the “boundary conditions” for 
their successful introduction to the market. Strategies will be economically 
compared with current processes information retrieved by the end users. 
Not enough interest from 
stakeholders on the Open Call 
P: l. I: m. 
7 
Promotion of the project and benefits of entering the ecosystem are essential 
to achieve the engagement of all stakeholders along different sectors. A proper 
training to general public ab out the advantages will be conducted. The 
consortium already collected an appropriate amount of LoI these companies 
will be requested additionally to send their applications for the open calls.   
Difficulties in knowledge 
transfer P: m. I: m 8 BIOMAC will share the experiences through Train the Trainer workshops and 
e-Learning materials for key stakeholders from the whole value chain. 
Non-compliance of IRP 
conditions P: l. I: m 8 
This risk has been mitigated by establishing IPR rules as is documented in 
Section 2.2. In addition, before project start all the partners sign the 
Consortium Agreement. IRP clauses are clear and understood by every 
member, even if a dispute occurs a loyal firm will be sought to handle. 
DT-NMBP-04-2020                    
[SEP-210659195] [BIOMAC] – Part B   [47 of 164] 
Technology and implementation risks 
Process control system do not 
translate to PLs P: m. I: h 2&3 
Understanding of fundamental microwave heating mechanisms by which 
benefits are realized. Ensure associated engineering solution provides process 
feedback to optimize treatment.  
Continuous operation with 
50-70% ethanol at up to 
200°C. P: m. I: h 
2&3 
Even if the design of the pilot plant meets all regulations and safety rules the 
authorities might use long time before they give the start -up permission - 
simply because it is a first  case ever. LTU will go into a dialog with the 
authorities already at the conceptual design stage to make them familiar with 
the organosolv process and the corresponding critical risk points.  
Pilot lines not capable to 
achieve the objectives of 
proposed TeC. P: l I:m 
3 
The test cases have been selected considering the technologies available in the 
Ecosystem and their TRL. The expertise and knowhow of PL owners as well 
as the proposed technology  upgrades and process optimizations offer 
flexibility to successfully deliver the targeted products according to the Test 
Cases specifications.  
Failure in validation of certain 
TeC in industrial 
environment. P: l. I: m 
3 
Validation will be conducted to minimize the risks of failures in operational 
environment. Combined experience of RTOs and Industrial End -users 
encompassing Bench test available across sectors will avoid failures 
Complex material modelling 
accurately. P:h I: m. 4 
If materials are complex to model and necessary data is lacking from 
experimental activities, information will be taken from previous activities to 
from involved partners. Assumptions will be taken when strictly necessary in 
order to approach accuracy for the modelled system 
Insufficient quality of 
mechanical nanocellulose P: l 
I:m 
3 
If the nanocellulose obtained by a mechanical process do es not have the 
quality required for the test cases, enzymatic pre-treatment will be considered 
in order to obtain best quality nanocellulose. 
Cost of certain TeC exceeding 
allocated budget. P: m. I: h. 5 
The budget has been previously carefully evaluated and agreed for all 
showcases; however, an offer for paid service could be launched to continue 
development 
Insufficient compliance as 
food contact material and low 
functional properties P: l I:m 4 
To meet food contact compliance is demanding. In case of failing the materials 
are used for indirect food contact, behind barrier layers, the food classification 
for direct contact is restricted. If properties are insufficient these will be 
improved by functional additives and blending with conventional polymers. 
Difficulties to propose 
standardized characterization 
to the market PLs. P: m I: m 4 
Customization in designing the monitoring systems is required to fully exploit 
the technical potential of the pilot lines. A possible solution to mitigate lack 
of standardization is designing the monitoring systems in a modular way, in 
order to be able to characterize elements and be flexible to the market needs. 
Manage-
ment 
Management issues & 
Financial risks. P: l. I: h. 10 
Management activities will not be limited to reporting, but it will also include 
a close financial monitoring process so as to constantly assess financial 
progress and be able to identify early signs of concern. 
Problems in validation 
activities P: m. I: h. 10 PSC will decide on possible re -allocation of resources for surpassing the 
possible delays, after the agreement of the PO.