1.1 Objectives  
Most plastic packaging has deficient end of life (EoL) options leading to a large burden on the environment and depletion of often 
used non-renewable resources. Only 31% of plastic is currently recycled while 41% is incinerated and 27% landfilled1. Indeed, 
on the one hand, many fo od packaging use multilayer structures to meet required performances but those are currently very 
difficult to recycle. On the other hand, polylactic acid (PLA) is currently the most affordable bio-based and biodegradable plastic 
but its biodegradability, and that of many other biodegradable biopolymers, is not granted in every environment: PLA is currently 
only biodegradable under thermophilic conditions in industrial composting or digestion plants at limited thickness. Several 
companies, such as NOVAMONT, BASF, etc., have developed polymers that can meet home compostability requirements. 
Nevertheless, further improvements are needed to provide cost effective solutions with high bio -based contents and suitable 
performances for demanding packaging applications while still achieving compostability in mild conditions. 
Using sustainable sourced comonomers, additives and fillers to formulate novel PLA copolymers and compounds, BIOnTOP 
project will deliver recyclable-by-design cost competitive packaging solutions that can be mechanically recycled or industrially/ 
domestically composted and are even suitable for anaerobic digestion (AD). We will tailor the bioplastic biodegradation through 
copolymerisation with selected diacids, reactive extrusion (REX) with specific additives that enhance the biodegradation 
potential, as well as formulation of blends with natural fillers from agro-wastes to speed up disintegration.  
Furthermore, high permeability often limits the application of bioplastics for packing sensitive food products. In order to solve this 
limitation, the barrier properties of the bioplastics will be enhanced using previously developed protein-based coatings, as well 
as novel fatty acid (FA) grafting (nanometric layers), which, in spite of being applied in multilayer films, can be later removed 
and do not jeopardize their posterior recyclability or their biodegradability. The hydrophobic grafting will further contribute 
to reducing product waste at end of packaging use through a release/easy emptying effect.  
Likewise, in the field of textiles, most used coatings (polyamide, polyurethane...) are not bio -based and of different nature than 
the fibres they are applied on, limiting the properties of the recy cled materials. Here, PLA (or BIOnTOP copolymers) based 
coatings and FA grafting will be developed, allowing reprocessing of the coated fibres without significant loss of properties. 
Tuning the BIOnTOP materials/ packaging structures 2, we will respond to end users’ needs for tailored EoL options. To 
demonstrate the broad potential of our bio-based packaging, we have selected 7 synergistic disposable packaging materials types 
with very broad markets where current waste management situations have to be improved: 
1. Recyclable (material & 
organically), home-
compostable monomaterial 
trays & films  for fruits and 
vegetables (F&V).  
2. Recyclable (material & 
organically) multilayer trays & 
films compatible with MAP  
(modified atmosphere 
packaging) for e.g. dairy and 
personal care products. 
3. Home compostable & 
organically re cyclable nets for 
F&V.