3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables and milestones 
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan 
A competitive work plan has been devised in order to deliver on the objectives of the BIOnTOP project providing bioplastic 
solutions with tailored end of life for a n umber of packaging and textile applications. This will preserve our environment and 
resources but also meet the expectations of green -minded consumers. The project objectives have been used as the starting 
point for planning the work that needs to be implemented within the project (Section 1.1). All the actions that are required to meet 
the objectives of this Research and Innovation project have been collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was 
agreed how best to distribute the workload among the various experts in keeping with their relevant fields of knowledge, capacity, 
infrastructure, resources and in the context of bioplastics supply, packaging textile industry value chains, as well as waste  
management companies. This bottom-up planning process has greatly facilitated the task of arriving at a clear, comprehensive 
and realistic work plan (see Gantt Chart and Pert Diagram below), whereby all partners their ownership. 
To fulfilling the project objectives, our work plan is split into 8 WPs logically distributed along the value chain, each wit h clear 
tasks that will enable the project’s objectives to be fulfilled through a coherent structure that will also facilitate project. To ensure 
the clear focus towards the target application of this Research and Innovation Action building upon past successful research,  
most WPs, except WP2-3 dedicated to initial material development, are led by industrial partners. The first phase (WP1) deals 
with industry-led specification definition to guide the following innovation work to match the market needs. The second phase 
(WP2) deals with the lab scale development and upscaling of the new copolymers and compounds to meet the goals of tailored 
properties and biodegradability for each packaging application. In a third phase (WP3) the development of multifunctional 
barrier coatings will be performed through a first stage of formulation that will be later applied on different substrates. WP4 is a 
transversal stage that will be focus on the environmental aspect including recycling, biodegradation trials with a toll gate at 
midterm to provide inputs to transition from phase 2 to phase 3 and also environmental impact evaluations. Regarding the next 
two phases (WP5 and 6) deals with the pilot production and v alidation of the novel materials designed in WP2 and 3 for the 
different target applications: mono and multilayer films and trays in WP5 and nets and other textile solutions in WP6, whereby 
synergies will be created between those using similar processes (e.g. trays converted by sheet extrusion followed by 
thermoforming as opposed to nets and textiles from extrusion melt spinning) for different food and personal care end uses. WP7 
addresses the economic viability performance  of all the developments as well as the innovation impacts evaluation, 
exploitation and disseminations activities to prepare the market uptake and maximise the project impact. To complement the 
first 7 WPs linked with scientific & technical (S&T) development and validation activities, in the last phase (WP8) will address the 
full management of the project in order to make all the proposed developments in line with defined BIOnTOP objectives. 
The work plan is clearly linked to the objectives set out in Section 1.1 and the consortium is confident that this work plan is robust 
to ensure that the project’s S&T and innovation goals are fulfilled. The research and development work are encapsulated in a 
comprehensive risk assessment and management strategy, sound communication and training to heighten the impact of the 
knowledge generated, as well as knowledge management to pave the way for planning and implementing the project’s exploitation 
and dissemination pa thways, and robust project coordination and ISO certified project management procedures. The work 
packages and tasks form a complex inter -weaved matrix of actions, many interdependent, with very close interaction between 
the WP and task leaders, which is e ssential for the delivery of the full suite of outputs. During the work planning stage, 
consideration has been given to logistical matters, such as the time needed for ordering parts/components, the time needed fo r 
shipping of prototypes from development t o test sites, installation times, the ‘what if’ scenarios of parts not arriving, installation 
work throwing up challenges, delays in samples, delays in necessary inputs/results from feed in tasks or subtasks, etc. The l ink 
between WPs in terms of needed output material/sample quantity required by next activities were also accounted for. As this is a 
highly experienced development team, and in particular with many members of the consortium experienced in applied R&D under 
tight timeframes, as well as experie nce in integration work at industrial sites, the work planning has benefited from this ‘on the 
ground’ pragmatic experience, especially in terms of consideration of interdependencies and timings. The potential risks have  
been identified and contingency plans proposed, which are discussed in Section 3.1 under “Critical risks and mitigation measures”. 
Importantly, the collective planning of the work plan has achieved the ‘buy -in’ of all the project developers and participants and 
an early understanding of the  importance of a team effort, team planning and active communication among all WP and task 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 46 of 105 
 
leaders. Moreover, it is felt that the one-page Gantt itself (which also includes all the deliverables and milestones) will be a very 
effective tool for high level control and obtaining a “helicopter overview” as part of effective project management during the project. 
 
Pert diagram of the components showing their interdependencies 
  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 47 of 105 
 
Gantt chart showing the timing of the different WPs and their components outline  
 
No WPs and Tasks Del. & MS 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
1 #