2.1 Expected impacts 
In a world of finite resources, the transition to a knowledge -based post-petroleum economy  is imperative. To support this 
transformation towards a low -carbon Europe, reducing its heavy dependency on fossil resources, the EC has presented a 
roadmap targetin g the establishment of sustainable and competitive  bio-based industries and value chains 106. The 
Bioeconomy Strategy and its Action Plan pave the way to a more innovative, resource-efficient and competitive EU society.  That 
reconciles food security with the sustainable use of renewable resources for industrial purposes, while generating new incomes 
and ensuring job creation. In this context, the BBI’s SIRA aims to accelerate, among other things, the development of bio-based 
packaging and plastic sector, decoupling economic growth from resource depletion and environmental impact. Perfectly in line 
with this goal, BIOnTOP addresses the need to bridge technology gaps , generating the necessary enabling knowledge and 
technologies to build and boost the new value chain from bio-monomers to end markets. In this vision, the bio-based industries 
play a strategic role in complementing and replacing product streams from fossil oil and providing innovative bioplastic solutions 
for different applications. In the strategic area related to bio-based materials, the BBI contributes to the ambition that the market 
supplied by bio-based polymers and composites will be 5 times higher than today in 2020 and 10 times higher in 2030. 
This goal implies also a comparable quality ratio to fossil alternatives. Moreover, replacing fossil-based materials have proven to 
have an equal or overall better sustainability, in terms of biodegradability recyclability and material efficiency. The bio-based raw 
used in BIOnTOP are locally, renewably and sustainably sourced chemicals and bioplastics. The multifunctional coatings 
developed will further help differentiating the bio-packaging by unique performances complementing their multiple EoL 
compatibility. In addition, increased consumer awareness and acceptance of bio-based products, concerted policy and labelling 
will make an important contribution to improve market penetration. As such, the BIOnTOP packaging constitutes an enormous 
business opportunity helping to nurture the realisation of the EU CE107 that requires also the optimal management of bioplastic 
waste. Nowadays, plastics are used in various sectors with a demand of 48 million tons per year ; packaging makes up for 40% 
of this use, of which food packaging accounts for around 90%. In this sector, the EoL treatment of plastics is underperforming, 
especially when compared to more homogenous materials such as metals or glass, traditionally used in food packaging . 
According to PlasticsEurope1, in 2017, 31% of plastic waste was recycled in Europe; nevertheless,  landfill and incineration are 
still dominant treatments for plastic post-consumer waste. The recently adopted EC’s plastics strategy aims at decoupling plastics 
production from virgin materials, reducing their leakage into the environment, improving the economics and uptake of recyclin g 
to support the transition from a linear to a circular economy model.  
BIOnTOP is a high impact project for the improvement of the  bioeconomy in Europe . Thus, it is hinged on delivering cost 
competitive packaging solutions that can be mechanically recycled or industrially/domestically composted  combining 
different approaches to tailor the bioplastic biodegradation . In this way,  
the sustainability from cradle to cradle of several new bio -based 
high-volume applications  will be maximised . This impact will be 
achieved by performing research work with the objective of making this 
concept commercially viable  in practice, analysing the potential ly 
successful exploitation pathways and assessing and managing any 
related risks. As shown in fig. 10, BIOnTOP significantly contributes to 
the KPIs set out in the overall BBI -JU roadmap and more specifically to 
the expected impacts in the topic BBI.2018.SO3.R10- Develop bio-based 
packaging products that are biodegradable/ compostable and/or 
recyclable, as described below: 
- Creation of at least 1 new cross-sectorial interconnection in bio-based economy clusters (KPI 1) 
The BIOnTOP proposal builds upon the BBI goal of achieving the full potential of the bio -based industries, which requires 
swift and concerted action of today's dispersed stakeholders across various sectors, disciplines, and Member States. Connecting 
different partners, such as researchers, technology developers and producers, through clustering and networking is key to 
developing new value chains and supporting the emergence of new bio -based processes and products. To that end, BIOnTOP 
 
106 COM(2012) 60 final. The Commission Communication of 13 February 2012 entitled "Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A  Bioeconomy for Europe".  
107 COM/2015/0614 final. The Commission Communication of 2 December 2015 entitled “Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the Circular Economy”.  
Fig. 10: BIOnTOP contributions to BBI JU KPIs 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 28 of 105 
 
will define the relevant sustainable circular value chains & cross -sectorial connections in a dedicated task in WP7 . The 
active involvement of all key players along the value chains (including additional sectoral associations in the Advisory Board) 
will allow us to create long-lasting links with related clusters, necessary to fill a clear gap in the marketplace for sustainable 
plastics especially at EoL, safe for human health and the environment but also, and above all, effective in terms of performance.  
With BIONTOP we will establish 1 new bio-cluster connection and further intensify 4 connections, among the sectors of 
bioplastics, packaging, agri-food, personal care and textile sectors as explained below. 
BIOnTOP will create an unprecedented systematic, cross-border and cross-sectorial, connection all actors from ‘cradle’ 
to ‘grave’ for the considered bioplastics-based end use applications. Indeed, our consortium covers the cradle-side, i.e. 
biosourcing, represented through the bio -based feedstock ( e.g. food processors and monomers providers in our AB)  and 
plastics producers associated with EUBP . But, the BIONTOP consortium also covers the  grave-side, i.e. waste 
management aspects, represented by ROMEI, OWS(terminated)/OWS RF and ISWA (in our AB, in particular its working Group 
on Biological Treatment of Waste will contribute). Interconnecting these key organizations means bringing together the missions 
and commitments of their respective industrial members. Their presence in the consortium favours the generation of positive spill 
over effects among their affiliates leading to push-pull effects for the new BIOnTOP technologies.  
While the current recycling of bioplastics is almost inexistent industrially, this new connection will allow launching concerted 
advocating for an improved framework for circular bio-based plastics. Potentially including incentive schemes both at EU 
and national levels (especially while the waste management landscape varies very significantly between the EU Member States) 
and providing valuable input for on-going standardisation efforts at EU level. This will contribute to several legislative initiatives in 
Europe aimed at reducing the use of conventional petrol -derived plastics by promoting the use of bio -based plastics, which are 
required to be biodegradable and compostable. For example, a new packaging law in Germany encourages the use of materials 
from renewable resources or recycled materials for the production of packaging , supports the use of certified bio -based and 
compostable plastic bags for the mandatory separate collection of biowaste. Likewise, in 2016, France adopted its ‘Green Growth 
and Energy Transition law’ and stipulated that bio -based, home-compostable packaging was mandatory for certain applications 
(e.g. thin F&V bags in the supermarket, mail order wrappings, etc.). A Decree specified percentages of bio-based content to be 
reached by defined dates: 30% bio-based content by 2017, 40% by 2018, 50% in 2020, and 60% in 2025. In BIOnTOP, by bringing 
together the producers of bioplastics and key players advocating efficient and sustainable waste management, we expect EUBP 
and ISWA´s (AB member) lobbying towards policy and decision makers to support concrete measures for the transition towards 
a more efficient circular bio-based economy.  
BIOnTOP will further intensify 4 emerging cross-sectorial interconnections in bio-based economy cluster: 
• We will reinforce the bond that the bioplastics sector has with the packaging sector (which is by far the largest consumer 
of biodegradable and bio-based plastics) by providing new demonstrators in food and personal care applications. That will 
be made possible thanks to BIOnTOP solu tions’ unique EoL tailored to their needs. This new link is for example illustrated 
at the level of our Large packaging converter innovation centre, EMSUR/INNOTECH, which so far has only made very 
preliminary tests with commercial biopolymers but does not have yet any bio-based packaging in its associated companies’ 
product portfolio (due to insufficient properties for the main application served). The participation in BIOnTOP will ensure 
EMSUR/INNOTECH to drive the development towards actual market needs. 
• Relying on the transition from linear to circular value chains, we close the loop connecting bioplastics producers 
with biomass generators , which are also end users of compost . This way we will create new upstream links with 
producers of unvalorised and unavoidable processing waste  opening up unprecedented business opportunities for 
actors that conventionally are positioned at the end of the packaging value chain.  BIOnTOP aims to deliver close to 100% 
bio-based formulations using highly sustainable biomass feedstocks. Whenever possible we will use by -products, in 
particular, agro-wastes (e.g. monomers, NF, waxes from oil byproducts as compatibilizers for natural fillers and citrates 
plasticisers from citrus wastes, proteins from cheese byproducts), as well as sustainably sourced FA from oil. In particular, 
third generation malic acid coming from enological sector thanks to the collaboration with OENO, and natural fillers from  
wheat middling by WEAREBIO, will be valorized. These are particularly relevant by-products considering that the EU is the 
world’s largest producer of wheat (156 million MT) and fruits (40 MT108) leading to waste per year of respectively roughly 30% 
and 20% 109. The use of these in BIOnTOP high-value applications will create new incomes for agri -food sectors. These 
biomass fractions will reduce raw material cost vs. currently available pure PLA, increase disintegration rate, and allow 
extending the accessible uses for our bioplastics. As  such, the current waste challenge turns into an enabler for innovation 
allowing a significant decrease in the environmental impact of the agri-food sectors and of the value chains of the BIOnTOP 
solutions. We will have the agri -food processing industry pl aying a strategic polyvalent end user role within the 
packaging value chain. While, as seen, they act as material supplier along the new value chains, they need to be supplied 
with compost to nurture F&V and plastic packaging to package food. Incontrovertibly, this magnifies the strength of the new 
links and the resonance of our solutions in the new circular bio-based value chains. In our consortium, for example, 
this cross -over role is assumed by WEAREBIO, who validates the new packaging solution in organic food application 
especially F&V, but also supplies NF. This strategic role is reinforced by its organic food specialization and related vision that 
 
108 areflh.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=123%3Aleurope-des-fruits-et-legumes&catid=3%3Aterritoires-dintervention&Itemid=74&lang=en 
109 FAO. 2011. Global food losses and food waste – Extent, causes and prevention. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 29 of 105 
 
all steps of the value chain should be environmentally sound. Likewise, ENTREPINARES can supply whey from cheese 
making which in turn is used as oxygen barrier coating for the packaging used to pack the dairy products. 
• Besides using textile as primary packaging, the link between the packaging (as supplier of EoL material) and the textile 
sector will be reinforced. Indeed, while the latter is already using a fair amount of the recycled plastic from e.g. PET bottles, 
with BIOnTOP, new bio -based SRM but also coatings, will allow extending the applications covered (e.g. secondary 
packaging like bags with improved functionalities).   
• Cross-sectorial interdependencies will be created through the synergies among the needs of the sectors considered 
in the demonstrators (e.g. similar materials serve the needs for MAP and personal care). We will build on such synergies 
to reach out to sectors beyond the consortium, like pharma packaging. This sector equally needs barrier properties, especially 
to humidity for thermoformed blisters as well as sachets. Further links with the agriculture sector can also be established 
though the discussion of the post project potential of the new materials with enhanced biodegradability (e.g. mulching films, 
pots and nets). All these links, considered when building our AB, can contribute to the outmost exploitation of our results. 
- Creation of at least 1 new bio-based value chain based on the innovative products developed (KPI 2) 
To contribute to the 
achievement of the 
KPI 2 aimed at 
delivering “10 new bio-
based value chains by 
2020” and maximise 
the potential to deliver 
new bio -based 
products, BIOnTOP 
will successfully 
prepare for the future 
creation of operative new value chains based on extensively tested and validated novel bioplastic solutions. As su ch, BIOnTOP 
consortium leverages partners at every stage of the supply and value chain, as well as additional stakeholders in the AB. The 
development of a suite of novel bioplastic packaging solutions that respond to unmet demands in terms of functionality and EoL 
requires connecting a critical mass of actors that are able to generate value working in a synergistic collaboration. We aim to 
create 3 new stable and effective value chains not only by new players interconnections at the upstream of the chain (to 
obtain the new bio-based raw materials and process polymers) but also remodelling existing value chains (from compounders, 
plastics converters onwards) that will substitute their petrol -derived products with our bioplastics solutions. As illustrated in Fig. 
11, upstream players crossover the three targeted packaging sub-sectors (food, personal care and textile). 
BIOnTOP is uniting expertise in food technology, materials science, plastic processing technology, compostability, recyclability, 
biodegradability, LCA, engineering, as well as industry actors at different levels of the value chain , capable of steering the 
research in tune with their market knowledge. To reach the project impact of the delivery of bio-based packaging which plastics 
match specific EoL requirements that are currently not satisfied by their conventional counterparts, joint actions will be needed 
at different levels of the value chain, e.g. between material producer, final item designer and waste managing body so the recycling 
is actual and not a mere recyclability label. The biodegradation predictive model delivered in WP4 will be a common tool used at 
these different levels facilitating this collaboration. 
Currently almost 40% of all plastic consumed in Europe is used for packaging 1, BIOnTOP is therefore embracing the most  
significant applications for bioplastics in its new value chains. The value chain approach will also guarantee that access to 
selected knowledge occurs among the partners to reach a seamless exploitation. The BIOnTOP actors will work towards similar 
goals and a proportion of Large end users , who will test and validate the new  bio-based solutions in the selected target 
demonstrator applications , are included as early adopters at the end of the value chain to stimulate the demand. This will 
particularly benefit SMEs (IRIS, CMSA, PLANET, OWS(terminated)/OWS RF, WEAREBIO, BIOMI, ROMEI, ARCHA) as it will 
provide them with new up - and down-stream partners. Cooperation among BIOnTOP members will be particularly important in 
the post-project phase, as results of the project are pre -competitive and additional investment will be required before BIOnTOP 
is ready for commercialisation. As addressed through specific tasks in WP7, setting the basis for a robust value chain will be key 
to generate real value on the market. Building on the experience of strong players in the packaging and biopolymers sectors will 
play a massive role in designing promising products and shaping their successful market entry phase. As such, we are confident 
that our developments, meeting true market demand, can convert into a sustainable supply & value chain of bio-based material 
with functionalities that outperform existing plastic materials at a competitive market price.  
- Creation of at least two new demonstrated ‘consumer’ products based on bio-based chemicals and materials that meet 
market requirements (KPI 6) 
The consumer is given an important position in our bio-packaging value chains, as direct user of all BIOnTOP products in single 
or multiple uses . His perception and aspirations will be studied in WP7 to maximise our ability to satisfy his demand for 
environmentally-friendly products.  
BIOnTOP will deliver two main types of biopolymers derived innovations resulting respectively for WP2 and 3:  
Fig. 11: BIOnTOP value chains (New links in KPI1 across the value chains shown by grey arrows)  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 30 of 105 
 
1) Copolymers and compounds with controlled biodegradation profile even in mild conditions; 
2) Whey, PLA and FA coatings with unique functionalities (barrier to oxygen, aroma, humidity, easy emptying, waterproofing, 
low tackiness) still compatible with optimal EoL of derived coated materials. Those can enhance the consumer’s experience, 
facilitating the product release from the packaging, reducing waste and maximising products organoleptic characteristics.  
Those 2 new families will be broken down in a series of tailored compounds and c oatings grades that can be combined in the 
material structures shown in figure 1. From those materials, the following packaging application with tailored EoL will be validated 
with selected packed products as demonstrators (EoL compatibility and preferences in table 7):  
1) Monomaterial trays & films for F&V 
2) Multilayer trays & films compatible with MAP for e.g. dairy product, and multilayer sachet for single serve or flow 
pack for personal care products such as wet wipes 
3) Nets for F&V 
4) Monofilament woven fabric for tea bags 
5) Reusable textile food wraps  
6) Multiple use bags as a secondary packaging solution from SRM 
7) Reusable coated woven carrier bag from SRM 
In terms of market requirements, b eyond the suitability of the properties  of the proposed bio -plastics, also economic 
competitiveness has been given great concern since the proposal set up (see benchmarking table 5 at end of section 1.4 for 
more details on the expected performances of the BIOnTOP solutions for each application). The biopolymers, raw materials and 
additives have been carefully selected to ensure that the BIOnTOP packaging solutions can be cost effective vs. their conventional 
counterparts currently used in the target application sectors but also more affordable than emerging bio-based solutions. Likewise, 
required equipment and processing costs will be given attention to facilitate successful introduction and uptake in the market. In 
WP1, the market costs and performances in comparison with benchmark materials to replace will be considered when establishing 
the specifications of the materials developed while the overall products eco-sustainability will be verified in WP4 by LCA.  
The choice to use of PLA and related copolymers in our packaging innovation is justified by its competitive price vs. 
other biodegradable polymers  (fig. 11110, still representative of the overall comparative situation according to EUBP ), high 
maturity and volume available. In 2016, the price level of the PLA was around €2/Kg (depending on the grade, which is 2.5 to 7-
fold less than PHAs) and  the global production capacity for PLA was 213,847 tonnes, which equals a share of 5.1% of global 
bioplastics production capacity (which stood at 4.12 million tonnes)  and 22.2% of biodegradable polymers . Europe was the 
largest market for PLA demand and is expected to grow at CAGR of 19.2% from 2017 to 2022 in light of regulatory norms on the 
implementation of bioplastics in various end-use sectors including food & beverages111.  
Packaging accounted for 59.6% of the overall PLA market in 2013 and is expected to remain the dominant application segment 
over the next period112. Textiles are expected to be the fastest growing segment for PLA, at a CAGR of 17.5% in terms of revenue 
from 2014 to 2020. In 2021, PLA production capacity is expected to rise to 323,147 tonnes, which is 5.3% of the estimated 2021 
global bioplastics production of 6.11 million tonnes. The growth of PLA greatly outperforms that of other biodegradable materials 
and keeps up with the impressive general bioplastic growth. Nevertheless, in the next 5 years, Europe’s share in PLA production 
is forecast to stagna te at a low level (2016: 4%; 2021: 3%).  In BIOnTOP, tapping upon broad EU demands for products with 
sound EoL, we aim to revert the current deficit in EU production of PLA compounds and related copolymers from local resources. 
To fill such scarcity, TOTAL-CORBION, partner of the project, which has a tenfold production capacity comparing to the first EU 
PLA producer and is fueling the project with a unique PLA know-how and over 25 years of expertise in the field of biodegradable 
biopolymers. TOTAL-CORBION continues evaluating the options of powering up a new industrial plant in EU by himself or through 
future partnership with EU companies for local PLA production as could be triggered by innovations like BIOnTOP. 
Introduction of low cost natural fillers and additives will be a 
key contributor to allow cost-efficiency vs. commodity plastics 
and indeed significant decreases vs. currently available pure PLA. 
That is why we expect to boost the market for the lactic polymers 
family. Indeed, t he initial comparative cost estimation of the 
BIOnTOP solutions provided in section 1 (table 5)  indicates that 
our formulations are expected to cost a moderate premium vs. the 
non-bio-based counterpart s (difference <40%) and significantly 
less than pure PLA . However, the calculated price is positively 
balanced by the extended shelf -life in case of barrier packaging, 
the reduction of relative weight but also in all cases the very high 
bio-based content o f our plastics (close to 100%) and currently 
unmet sustainable EoL options. It is worth specifying that the price 
of fossil-based plastics is depending on oil prices and fluctuates 
 
110 ENDRES, H.-J. & SIEBERT-RATHS, A. 2011. Engineering Biopolymers - Markets, Manufacturing, Properties and Applications, Munich, Hanser-Verlag 
111 https://www.gminsights.com/industry-analysis/lactic-acid-and-polylactic-acid-market 
112http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/lactic-acid-and-poly-lactic-acid-pla-market-worth-43122-million-and-21696-million-respectively-by-2020-grand-view-research-inc-
512033561.html 
 
Fig. 12: PLA cost /kg vs other biopolymers between 2002 - 2010 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 31 of 105 
 
while the prices of PLA, and in general bio -based plastics, depend on biomass prices that exhibit a decreasing trend as further 
feedstocks are grown and refined for diversified purposes. In fact, although greater than that of polyolefins, PLA price is v ery 
close to market prices of general purpose PS and PET 113, so improving its barrier properties and other functionalities to meet 
markets requirements can unlock new applications.  
Validation of at least one new and improved processing technology reflecting the TRL gain since the start of the project 
(KPI 8) 
As discussed with TRL table 3, we will follow a scale up approach of different technologies where the manufacturing readiness 
level MRL gain will follow that of the TRL (at least 5 at project end). To maximise the possible transfer to new applications  with 
tailored EoL, we selected broadly used conversion processes such as extrusion (in its different variants like compounding, flat 
film/sheet extrusion, blown extrusion, welding/sealing filament melt spinning) and further steps like gravure coating, thermoforming 
(e.g. nets and thermoformed pots are also used for agriculture, textiles are also used for carrier bags, etc.). Although we will work 
on optimising any step, those are not expected to be significantly different for the new materials.  
In addition, we will develop 2 novel processes in terms of copolymerisation and FA grafting (considered as our main contribution 
to KPI8). As opposed to the prior art, we will mainly focus on the development of novel bio-copolymers from LA/LD and malic or 
succinic acid in combination with a diol with tailored properties by polycondensation and ROP routes  that will be performed  in 
batch or by a continuous REX process in order to obtain the PLA copolymers. As it was described in the state of the art, REX has 
emerged as a powerful tool with potential to replace chemical batch reactor in which a twin-screw co-rotating extruder is used 
implying several advantages: solvent free melt  (no downstream processing and drying needed, no by -products), low cost 
continuous process, starting from monomers/ prepolymers and control of the chemistry throughout the polymerization. REX can 
enhance the commercial viability and cost -competitiveness of these materials as already demonstrated about biodegradable 
polymers like PLA. In view of the critical mass of very promising lab and pilot scale results using REX, it seems now extreme ly 
timely to deal with its industrialisation for the production of new high added values biopolymers.  The current TRL of these 
technologies is 3 and will be increased until 5. Trials will be subsequently made at AIMPLAS and at the SME partner PLANET. 
As described in the state of the art, within the BIOnTOP project, an innovative approach will improve the water vapour barrier 
properties of bio-based films and coatings by green chemical grafting with fatty acids from renewable resources . This will 
result also in waterproofing and easy emptying behavior 114. Previously developed transfer methods will be adapted for the FA 
application on the materials from the project and then upscaled on a gravure printing/coating line at INNOTECH (pilot in industrial 
environment trials on a machine in fig. 13 at TRL5 to 6 will be made). Since it is solvent free and very low amount of coating (nm 
range) are deposited, the process is very resource efficient both in terms of energy and materials.  
Furthermore, IRIS will bring industry 4.0 paradigm/factory of the future concepts expertise. Wherever applicable, advanced 
processing approaches will be followed to allow speeding up the upscaling and facilitate the future industrialisation of our results: 
that includes the use of tailored monitoring systems for automatic identification of materials to be recycled but also of predictive 
models developed through advanced artificial 
intelligence methodologies for supporting decision 
making e.g. for eco-designing the formulations with 
biodegradation behaviour suited to the specifications 
of the application. Further proce ss modeling will be 
used f or predicting the process  conditions to dry 
protein coatings so they lead to optimal properties 
according to Wheylayer patent.  
 
Reduction of the environmental footprint associated with the end -of-life phase of developed packaging products by at 
least 30 % compared with existing products for similar applications 
Using our novel BIOnTOP compounds and coatings, the target EoL will be the starting point to develop our sustainable-by-
design bio -based packaging solutions, which will suit biodegradability in different conditions  and materials recycling 
requirements. BIOnTOP will ensure that the impact of plastics on the environment is minimised by increasing the share treated 
in waste management facilities or domestically composted to avoid the collection challenges for certain types of packaging. Indeed 
flexible/light packaging, nets and small format items are waste-intensive and, even if they represent 10% of the packaging market 
by weight, such items are very prone to leakage into the environment and are disproportionately present as marine litter . In our 
project, we will also  deliver biodegradation predictive models taking into account the EoL scenario required. This will equip 
plastic manufacturers with a validated tool that permits them to accelerate the selection of the right formulations for eco-designing 
new packaging based on our materials. 
EoL considerations are particularly important for brand owners adopting bio-based plastic solutions115. The project focuses 
on packaging that, as opposed to their synthetic counterparts which are often landfilled or incinerated, can be organically ( i.e. 
industrially or in home-composting conditions) recycled or even suitable for AD. Table 7 shows how BIOnTOP can instil a new 
 
113 Bio-based and biodegradable plastics - Facts and Figures. 2017. Wageningen Food & Bio-based Research number 1722, ISBN- 978-94-6343-121-7 
114 Schmid et al. (2014) Water Repellence and Oxygen and Water Vapor Barrier of PVOH-Coated Substrates before and after Surface Esterification. Polymers 6(11) 2764-2783. 
115 Open-BIO H2020 project, Deliverable 9.2 / A II: Acceptance of Bio-Based Products in the Business-to-Business Market 
 
Fig 13: left to right: REX pilot plant at TRL5, printing line 
at TRL 6 and Nordmeccanica Labo Combi 400 pilot coating line at TRL5 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 32 of 105 
 
bio and circular -by-design ethos in the packaging sector (reinforced by the fact that some virgin materials are in fact by-
products from agri-food processing). Recyclability of post-production wastes will be possible for all our materials. Recycling of 
post-consumer packaging would be technically feasible for all our materials but could be limited by the application (i.e. in presence 
of significant amounts of food leftover in the waste plastic). In such case, organic recycling is more suited, but it of course depends 
on the actual availability of a selective collection system for the organic waste fraction, which still lack in many EU countries. In 
such case home composting gains further relevance, AD is also seen as a valuable organic recycling procedure as also biogas 
is produced. BIOnTOP, as home compostable, will also degrade  in mesophilic AD-plants. Due to the lag phase, it will probably 
be only partly degraded and then it will need to degrade further in compost or soil . Finally, despite incineration is surely not our 
target EoL, as opposed to the fossil-based materials, incineration of bio-based plastics would provide renewable energy with a 
lower greenhouse impact compared to e.g. polyolefins. Large scale recycling and biodegradation tests under different 
environment as well as compostability and recyclability trials will be performed in WP4 to confirm we  meet the target EoL of 
biodegradation under industrial, home composting and anaerobic conditions  and to show the harmlessness of the bio -sourced 
material on soil. Results from the tests on final packaging and textile prototypes will confirm that BIOnTOP solutions meet the 
conditions of Vinçotte’s “OK compost home” among others.  
Table 7: End of life options (x: compatible, X: preferred) of developed BIOnTOP materials vs. market available ones 
Application Solution Material Material recycling Industrial 
composting  AD Home 
composting 
Incineration with 
energy recovery Landfill 
Monolayer 
trays & films 
for F&V 
BIOnTOP copolymers or PLA compounds 
based tray and lid 
X for tray in absence of 
spoiled F&V X X x x  
Benchmark PP tray and PE-lid  Only for tray in absence 
of spoiled F&V 
   X  X 
Multilayer 
tray & film 
(dairy, 
personal 
care) 
BIOnTOP Copolymers or PLA compounds 
based nets, whey and FA coating 
X for tray in absence of 
spoiled F&V X X x x  
Benchmark PS or PE/EVOH tray and 
PE/EVOH/PET film      
X  
X 
Nets for F&V BIOnTOP Copolymers or PLA compounds 
based textiles No (too light & 
contaminated) 
X x X x  
Benchmark PET or PP or PE    X  X 
Monofilament 
fabric for tea 
bag 
BIOnTOP Copolymers or PLA compounds 
based textiles, aroma barrier 
No (too light & 
contaminated) x x X x  
Benchmark PET, PA, PP    X  X 
Textile food 
wrap 
BIOnTOP Copolymers or PLA compounds 
based nonwoven coated textiles X X x x x  
Benchmark Benchmark: PET     X  x 
Secondary 
packaging 
textile bags  
BIOnTOP r- copolymers or PLA compounds 
based nonwoven coated textiles X X x  x  
Benchmark Benchmark: PP, PE (coated)     X  x 
Multiple use 
shopping 
bags  
BIOnTOP r- copolymers or PLA compounds 
based films 
X (if > 50 microns due 
to collecting challenges 
below) 
X x X x  
Benchmark Benchmark: PP, PE    X  x 
As mentioned before, a  very limited share of plastic waste is currently recycled. In fact, several conventional petrol-derived light 
weight packaging (trays, nets, lids) are very difficult to handle by recycling plants and even create troubles for the recycling of the 
main stream rigid packaging and are therefore better considered for organic recycling as in BIOnTOP. Furthermore, as opposed 
to standard PLA, our new materials aim to meet industrial compostability criteria even at high thickness. That will open furt her 
avenues for the use of BIOnTOP materials in thick thermoformed and injection moulded items used in different sectors including 
agriculture and packaging. 
In a holistic approach to mitigate current EoL challenges, besides delivering new materials, BIOnTOP will also develop a 
specific monitoring device that will ensure the right material sorting for either organic or mechanical recycling . Those 
will prevent the landfilling of recoverable post -consumer waste. Although we bring novelty in terms of biodegradation in mild 
conditions, keeping with the waste management hierarchy, we will also show that the recycling of BIOnTOP packaging, post-
industrial wastes and rigid fractions is viable contributing to increase the mechanical recycling rates of plastic in the f uture CE 
(target <10% landfill in municipal solid wastes by 2030). To this aim reprocessing trials will be performed. The need to explore 
the establishment of industrial recycling facilities which are dedicated to non “drop -in” bio-based plastics such as PLA, currently 
very limited in spite of the high value of these materials, will be also discussed.  
Although whenever possible controlled waste management should be favoured, in BIOnTOP we will develop modular 
formulations for home composting which, besides meeting previously discussed national regulations, will be an asset for 
countries with limited composting plants and for domestic valorisation since a fair share of F&V are spoiled while still unpa cked 
at consumer level. Likewise, some food packaging textiles like tea bags require alternative EoL options since the contamination 
of plastic with other (organic) materials hinders the quantitative removal for mechanical recycling or industrial composting.  As 
such, combined home composting will favour the market penetration of bioplastic s for specific applications. Furthermore, apart 
from biodegradation, our solutions will be also suitable for AD. Organic recycling by treatment in industrial biogasification plants 
will be evaluated, by the option of subsequent aerobic composting to represent industrial biogasification plants with additional 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 33 of 105 
 
composting step. Investigating AD as EoL option, BIOnTOP will contribute to the definition of standards that currently do 
not exist. 
In terms of environmental footprint of EoL phase, a ccording to the EC DG ENVI "Plast ic waste in the environment" 116 study 
from 2011, plastic film recycling could potentially save 0.74 kg CO2 eq./kg recycled plastic in comparison to landfill (>50%):  
In case of organic recycling, a drastic reduction of the carbon footprint and GHG emissions is also observed. The captured CO2 
during biomass  growth stays in the material over its whole life -cycle and is set free at the end of its life (by biodegradation 
processes) closing the carbon loop. If controlled home composting is achieved there will be additional environmental benefit due 
to saving of organic waste transport to compost facilities, absence of energy and man work consumption for compost production. 
Table 8 below considers PLA (as the closest material to BIOnTOP) versus others most commonly used packaging materials (e.g. 
PE films and PP trays)  and compares their typical EoL scenario. This shows advantages of managing waste packaging by  
composting vs. incineration greater than 9 0% in greenhouse gases (GHG) emission. All in all, a s mentioned the waste 
management landscape is very variable in different countries so any comparison will have a specific applicability  but we are 
confident that all our target EoL scenario meet the topic target of a 30% reduction in environmental foot print.  
Table 8: Comparative EoL CO2 foot print for relevant packaging materials  117 
EoL CO2 foot print 
PLA collection and industrial 
composting 
0.0612 kg CO2-eq./kg PLA 
PLA home composting Ca. 0 kg CO2-eq./kg PLA (if effective, 
aerobic biodegradation; assume no 
transport and manual composting). 
PE collection and incineration as 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
3.03 kg CO2-eq./kg PE 
PP collection and incineration as PE 
collection and incineration as MSW 
2.55 kg CO2-eq./kg PP 
The improved environmental footprint using bio-packaging with sustainable EoL is not limited to their waste management phase 
but can resonate throughout their li fe cycle. In terms of sourcing, a mong the LCA impact criteria, the main benefits of using 
bioplastics vs. conventional plastics are generally in terms of saving non -renewable resources and low toxicity connected to 
human cancer . According to the BBI JU’s SIRA5, bio -plastic has been identified as a major sector that determine the 
decarbonisation of our economies. In terms of resources, bio-based plastics have the unique potential over conventional plastics 
for reducing GHG emissions or even being carbon neutral (1 metric ton of bioplastic generates between 0.8 and 3.2 fewer metric 
tonnes of CO2 as compared to 1 metric ton of  petroleum-based plastics)118,119, as shown on Fig. 14120. When possible, t he 
project will consider the use  of raw materials from waste ( e.g. MA, NF, etc.). Indeed, by-products are assigned a null impact in 
LCA, which will help minimising our materials’ CO 2 footprint. Also, the use of natural fillers in trays and textiles, will reduce the 
use of biopolymer considerably and will result in a reduction of the environmental impact in accordance to the biofiller cont ent. 
Biofillers have a very low impact on fossil CO2 production: for example, 1 Kg of wheat has just 0.177 Kg fossil CO2 on Ecoinvent 
databases. Furthermore, the overall density of the biocomposite (trays and textiles) packaging will be reduced thanks to the 
NF by an estimated 10%. This will have an impact on the overall use phase of the products and also on its EoL phase that will 
benefit from 10% CO2 footprint reduction. Savings in transport would be even more meaningful for reusable products like carrier 
bag with long use time. 
Finally, in terms of use, the barrier packaging ensuring a longer shelf life will have a hugely positive impact on the food 
chain. Likewise, whereas packed food typically binds much more resources than the packaging itself, the reduction of products 
waste due to easy emptying effects  provided will have a large effect on the LCA results  expected in the project. All in all, i n 
BIOnTOP, the carbon footprint of the considered bio-based products will be decreased along the new value chains as will be 
shown by LCA during the project in WP4. 
Reduce the costs associated with the end-of-life phase of the developed packaging products by at least 30 % compared 
with the disposal costs for existing solutions for similar applications 
In different OECD countries, packaging waste represents a significant, yet increasing, share of total household  waste. This 
represents a significant economic burden too. The applicable EoL options and related fees vary per type of packaging material 
and mainly depends on how easy it is to separate it in the waste management stage. Gate fees for EoL management for similar 
treatment options can vary substantially at national level but  also at regional and local level. Due to the specificities of plastic 
packaging, the costs linked to plastics EoL treatment tend to be significantly higher than the costs related to the treatment of other 
materials. Despite the recycling rate is increasing following a shift towards a CE, currently only 31% of plastic is recycled and in 
excess of 41% incinerated and 27% landfilled1. These latter two EoL options lead to significant resource depletion. Indeed, even 
the energy recovery achieved by incineration plants only has an average efficiency of 35% . Therefore, gate fees at material 
 
116  http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/plastics.pdf  
117 Data source: Ecoinvent 3.4 APOS, specifically the following datasets (APOS, U (of project Ecoinvent  3 - allocation at point of substitution - unit): - 1 kg Biowaste {RoW}| 
treatment of biowaste, industrial composting -  1 kg Waste polyethylene {Europe without Switzerland}| treatment of waste polyethylene, municipal incineration - 1 kg Waste 
polypropylene {RoW}| treatment of waste polypropylene, municipal incineration) 
118 Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Bioplastics and Bioelastomers 
119 www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics 
120  www.lca.plasticseurope.org  www.lca.plasticseurope.org 
 
Fig. 14: Emission from polymers  production 
(further PLA aims to become carbon neutral) 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 34 of 105 
 
recovery facilities are substantially lower than those for incineration  and landfilling. Usually, factors influencing gate fees are 
mainly related to the landfill tax (which enables competing treatments to raise their gate fees as the tax increases); the quality 
and quantity of material being presented; energy costs , etc . Currently, industrial composting is so rarely used  for plastics 
packaging that it is assumed to remains at 0% in the baseline scenario121.  
Based on a EU study showing the example of gate fees in different countries, table 8 reports those for selected representative 
consortium countries 122. Comparing composting to more common incineration and landfill used for e.g. multilayer packaging  
clearly shows that waste treatment average fees would reduce by above 30% in case of applying BIOntTOP new potential EoL. 
Table 8: Comparative EoL costs in €/T (including treatment costs minus revenues from products/energy obtained) 
Gate fees (€/T) Composting  AD Incineration  Landfill 
Germany 62 (40,000 tpa), 56 (60,000 tpa) 109 250 (50 ktpa and below) 105 (200ktpa), 65 (600ktpa) 35-220 
Italy 25-43 (20,000 tpa) -- 41-93 70-75 
Netherlands 80 (10,000 tpa), 30-60 (50,000 tpa) 50-84 70-134 107-164 
According to the EBB, more than 90% of materials currently disposed off  in incinerators and landfills could be reused, recycled 
and composted. According to EPA, a well-run curbside recycling program can cost anywhere from €40 to more than €122 per ton 
whereas trash collection and disposal programs, cost from €57 to more than €160 per ton. Recyclers pay variable amount for 
post consumers and post industrial plastic wastes depending on their cleanliness and purity (e.g. from 0 to 70 € per ton). Then  
they have to separate, clean, grind and reprocess the compounds and subsequent m aterials (e.g. fibres for SILON or bags for 
BioMi). Vs. operative costs involved, a positive balance can be obtained only if such materials can be sold (processed) above  
1.5€ per kg which is totally feasible for materials with the performances planned for BIOnTOP.  
For organic waste (food or yarn), composting activity leads to revenues 2-30€ per T¡Error! Marcador no definido.. Furthermore 1 kg of PLA 
can lead to ca. 0.33 kg of compost123. Finally, while transporting materials to waste treatment and valorisation facilities has a 
significant cost that can range from €16 to €57 per T 124, promoting an EoL based on  home composting allows reducing 
waste management costs for municipalities, as home composting can reduce a significant weight fraction of domestic waste 
(more than 20%). This is even more relevant in case of absence of separate biowaste collection system from households, or 
for countries with very limited amount of AD or composting plants.  
All in all, the cost competitiveness of the proposed packaging and textiles solutions is to be considered in a (multiple use) cradle 
to cradle perspective linked to their mechanical recyclability, industrial compostability or biogasification, which will provide a new 
source of revenues rather than constitute an EoL burden as too often nowadays. 
Other social and environmental impact 
As mentioned, besides addressing unmet demands for specific EoL in controlled waste management context, BIOnTOP will also 
contribute to other environmental and socially important impacts especially in terms of pollution and consumer health.  
Unquestionably, our quality of life  is linked to the quality of our environment and measures are needed for lowering the 
environmental burden of our activities and consumption patterns. According to a report of the Ellen MacArthur foundation 7, only 
a very low amount of plastic materials is recycled (14%) while high amounts end up in landfills (40%). It is important to highlight 
the most alarming figure in this report:  the amount of plastic wastes leaking from our waste management streams shows 
as much as 32% of plastic ending up in our environment (figure 15). This is especially critical for single use ultra lighweight 
bags (e.g. for F&V). If handled at the source by responsible consumers in controlled home composting process, there could also 
be less chances of leak in the environment along the many collection, transport, distribution steps of waste management. 
Long term plastic persistence in the environment is aggravated by a cumulative effect, due to both accidental and intentional 
littering. The slow decomposition of plastic into small pieces leads to damages to the fauna via ingestion and entanglement125,126. 
Recognized as one of the major international environmental challenges by the European Environment Agency (EEA)127, plastics 
account for 89-95% of marine litter (roughly 8 million tons every year), in particular packaging (bags, bottles, lids, etc.) leading 
to irreversible consequences for marine ecosystems.  Besides, 25 MT of plastic waste is accumulated annually in soil 
worldwide, being detrimental to the environment (irreversible soil contamination, degradation of soil quality , pollution of rivers 
and groundwater) and human health ( heavy metals, dioxins and furans released during plastic burning are associated with 
endocrine disruption, heart disease, cognitive and motor disabilities, and human carcinogen) 128. At the EU level, the recent 
BOHEMIA study129 recognises ocean and marine pollution as key priorities to be ta ckled by the EU post-H2020 R&I framework 
programme (FP9). Concerted actions are required to sustainably solve the huge plastic waste accumulation issue.  
 
121 Mudgal et al. “Options to improve the biodegradability requirements in the packaging Directive “ DG Environment-EC, February 2012, Biointelligence Service. 
122 Costs for Municipal Waste Management in the EU , Final Report to Directorate General Environment, European Commission, Ecotec, 2017 
123 Cosate de Andrade et al. LCA of PLA: Comparison Between Chemical Recycling, Mechanical Recycling and Composting, J Polym Environ (2016) 24:372–384 
124 https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/plastic-recycling-market.html 
125  http://www.kimointernational.org/MarineLitter.aspx 
126 http://www.onegreenplanet.org/environment/ways-plastic-pollution-impacts-animals-on-land/ 
127 State of Europe's seas, EEA Report No 2/2015, ISSN 1977-8449 
128 D. Briassoulis et al, Review, mapping and analysis of the agricultural plastic waste generation and consolidation in Europe, Waste Management & Research, 2013, Vol 31, 
Issue 12, pp. 1262 – 1278  
129 Beyond the Horizon: foresight in support of future EU Research and Innovation Policy- Doi: 10.2777/906131 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 35 of 105 
 
Promoting the use of recycled plastics in value 
added application,  BIOnTOP solutions will 
influence the increase of the quantity of plastic 
waste recycled mechanically . Furthermore, 
BIOnTOP biodegradability in mild conditions is a 
step towards the existence of plastic p ackaging 
that can biodegrade also when accidentally 
littered in the environment. As such, 
biodegradation in marine water and soil will be 
tested in WP4. Likewise, while supporting 
greater amount of packaging can actually be 
recycled in controlled waste man agement 
conditions, BIOnTOP will contribute to consumer 
access to healthier soils and possibly seas and 
therefore food that contains less harmful 
substances leaking from plastics or microplastic 
fragments. Health concerns are also relevant to food packaging and since in the past, synthetic substances widely used in plastics 
approved for food contact were finally restricted due to the leaching of harmful compounds, e.g. plasticizers like phthalates, BPA, 
or PVC /DEHA /aluminium used in food wraps, all leading to high health concerns, as discussed section 1.4. In contrastthe project 
will use harmless/innocuous substances which often derive from food (by -products like wheat fibres which are  certified to be 
safely edible, protein, oil derivatives, fruits by products). Also, barrier packaging will provide consumers with healthy food along 
longer shelf life. 
Furthermore, in terms of coated textiles, our new PLA and /or FA coatings will impart durable hydrophobicity enabling industry to 
replace fluorocarbons which are currently used in hydrophobic coatings but are toxic, persistent and bioaccumulative. 
The demand for our consumer products, BIOnTOP packaging, is expected be driven by green- and health- conscious consumers 
concerned about the environment130. Furthermore, societal benefits will be assessed by the active involvement of MC, a consumer 
organisation which will give the alignment of BIOnTOP to the consumers’ needs and perceptions. In particular, BIOnTOP will 
ensure a strong coverage at European level, on consumers attitudes on the issue and their requirements, mainly thanks t o the 
huge network of MC, which will contribute to encourage the knowledge of the positive benefits of bio-based packaging as well as 
raising awareness about economic, societal and environmental challenges. 
Contribution to improving the innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge 
While the generation of new knowledge is positive, it is in its industrial use that innovation capacity is increased, and imp act is 
realised. As such, to allow generating truly market replicable innovation, the BIOnTOP consortium unites the industry value chain 
necessary for market success, and the project has integrated several transversal activities such as environmental, regulatory, 
safety and economic assessments, and finally business planning activities to maximise the post-project exploitation of the results. 
The project gives trans-sectorial industry and transdisciplinary research and technology players an opportunity to collaborate and 
share all required technical knowledge and market expertise . Effective knowledge transfer from the RTDs (AIMPLAS, ASU, 
INSTM, CTB) to the participating enterprises, especially SMEs often lacking own R&D capacities, laying down the basis for 
supporting the industry partners to carry forward the results post -project, is fundamental to increasing the likelihood of market 
uptake. To this end, a dedicated task, T7.5.4 has been included in the work plan to ensure seamless knowledge transfer occurs.  
As discussed in the innovation potential section, unique and potentially patentable bio-packaging solutions relying on novel PLA 
copolymers and coatings formulations will be developed to  achieve optimal functionalities and biodegradation in milder 
conditions than industrial composting. The predictive modeling of the biodegradation is a novelty. Mechanistic models, following 
the approach most researchers would attempt, where the physico -chemical-biological laws behind the biodegradation behavior 
would have to be modelled, are too complex in view of the number of stochastic and deterministic variables. As such, the route 
we propose is a data driven modeling. This knowledge will not only provide new insight for the scientific community who lacks 
systematic studies on biodegradation in mild conditions, as well as also help in the shaping of new related standards, but also be 
used with 2 clear industrial targets: i) support the eco-design of the products meeting target EoL scenario (as will be preliminarily 
tested for WP5-6 demonstrators) and ii) support organic recyclers, together with the composition monitoring system, to ensure 
they sort suitably the new post consumer waste e.g. checking if they meet the conditions for industrial compostability. 
Addressing our societal and environmental chall enges, e.g. the depletion of non -renewable resources and sub -optimal EoL 
compatibility of current materials with existing waste management scenarios, is recognized to be a major catalyst for increas ing 
our innovation capacity, and for the integration of new knowledge generated as a result of research into our practical societal and 
industrial contexts. The global paradigm shift from oil -based towards bio -based materials represents a unique opportunity for 
Europe to kick-start a world leading competitive bioeconomy with significant economic, environmental and societal benefits. The 
CE also unlocks tremendous potential for the development of innovative new materials and products derived from bio -based 
 
130 About 80% of European consumers want to buy products with a minimal impact on the environment (Eurobarometer survey, EC, 2013). 
Fig. 15: Global flows of plastic materials in 2013 
 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 36 of 105 
 
sources, including from agri-food waste. In such context, the project will provide new knowledge on potential applications for fruit 
waste derived monomers, wheat fillers and cheese by-product valorisation.  
Today, the European bioeconomy sectors are worth 2 trillion euros in annual turnover and account for 22 mil lion jobs in the EU, 
which is 9% of the EU’s workforce131. Bioplastics have been designated a lead market by the EC. Bioplastics are experiencing a 
huge growth, but the vast majority of currently produced bioplastics come from Asia (75%)  or Latin America (12%) and Europe 
only represents a 7% share (sources EUBP). Furthermore, bio -sourcing and biodegradability have recently emerged as major 
market drivers especially in the packaging sector. In tune with the current bioplastics growth rate of about 20% per year, our new 
solutions will meet the growing number of brand owners that are seeking solutions with sustainable sourcing and EoL to satisfy 
market demand, as well as to gain product differentiation.  
To increase the innovation capacity of the industry, our approach is to capitalise on a valuable opportunity for the EU bioplastic, 
packaging and the end -user industries to substitute currently used synthetic counterparts with bio -based compounds and 
coatings. BIOnTOP represents a very timely development of new recyclable, cost-efficient and high -performance bio-
based materials with controlled biodegradation, into growing ‘green’ and ‘bio-based’ industries.  
This will result in great business opportunities reinforced by current bioplastics market trends, the growth in our target end 
use sectors, increased visibility, and policy awareness and support for such solutions. Indeed, we tap into the massive EU plastic 
business (€350 billion turnover per annum). Plastics demand in Europe is ca. 50 million tonnes, almost 40%, or ca. 20 million 
tonnes, of this is used for packaging, of which 17.3% is for food trays and films1. Worldwide, over 90 million tons of textile are 
produced, ca. one quarter goes to technical textiles132. Within the technical textiles where EU has a leading position133, so-called 
packtech, represents ca 8%, which means that worldwide around 2 million tonnes of textiles are u sed for packaging 
(assumed at 30% in EU). BIOnTOP is estimated to reach a market penetration of 0.5% of these plastic segments (totalling a 
potential of 4 million T per year)  by 2030 in EU , generating close to  €40 million turnover and ~170 new jobs 134 at the 
biopolymer production upstream level of the value chain. Such figures would be reinforced at the downstream (end users) 
level who benefit from new unique products . Besides direct partners’ exploitation, thes e figures, equivalent for current limited 
European PLA production to increase by a factor over 2 by 2030, correspond to an overall deployment through further licensing, 
business alliances with additional converters. Estimates about how partners respectively expect to grow their business and create 
jobs with the new BIOnTOP solutions are given in section 2.2. Should Europe get a strong foothold in the market here considered 
by being first to market with a strong brand that is scientifically backed (as a results of this RIA), and derived packaging producers 
gain an invaluable head-start in the global competition.  
Barriers/obstacles/framework conditions that may determine if and to what extent expected impacts will be achieved 
In a green economy, growth in income and employment are driven by public and private investments to enhance resource 
efficiency, reduce carbon emissions and pollution, and prevent the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services. These investments 
need to be catalysed and ideally supported by targeted public expenditure, policy reforms, tax breaks and incentives as well as 
regulation changes. Exploitation activities in the project will include addressing standard -making bodies at European and 
international l evels related with the project technologies and fields of application (in subtask T 7.5.2). On -going standard 
developments135 especially in the areas of bio -based content determination and biodegradation in specific environments will be 
monitored and contemp lated under the lead of EUBP (participating in CEN TC 249 - WG 17 - and TC 411) and 
OWS(terminated)/OWS RF (participating is tests definition for such standards). 
Regarding REACH regulation ( EC No 1907/2006),  whereas all polymers are exempt from registratio n and evaluation any 
considered monomers (already market available) and other additives used in the project will be checked in terms of their REACH 
status (WP7) and compliance will be ensured. 
Plastic materials for food contact , e.g. packaging trays and films (lids, pouches) and also  nets, fall within the scope of the 
Framework Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004, which provides the harmonized legal framework by setting out general principles and 
safety requirements for all kinds of food con tact materials (FCM). More specifically, food contact materials and articles made of 
plastics are covered by the Regulation (EU) No 10/2011 (last amendment by Regulation (EU) No 2017/752). It sets out rules on 
the composition of the plastic FCMs by establishing a positive list of substances approved for use in the manufacture of plas tic 
FCMs (‘Union list’) and lays down migration limits (a generic overall migration limit as well as specific migration limits for individual 
substances). Compliance with regulatory demands is essential for putting new packaging materials on the market. Therefore, we 
have decreased the possible impact of the legal requirements on FCMs by selecting materials and starting substances that have 
been previously approved for such purpose (e.g. LA: FCM No 99; SA: FCM No 247; MA: FCM No 499, FA: FCM No 12). As food 
ingredient, whey protein is recognized safe for food contact according to scientific principles and/or can also be used provi ded 
that migration is below ppb levels as used behind a functional barrier that is approved136. 
In addition, BIOnTOP will be a key enabler for imp lementing the Circular Economy Package (CEP). Specifically, BIOnTOP 
contribute to delivering reusable packaging (bags, wraps), to minimize packaging needs (e.g. tea bags with aroma barrier avoiding 
 
131 European Bioplastics 2012; EC-Communication “Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A Bioeconomy for Europe”, 13/02/2012 
132 ECP4 Strategic Research Agenda 2016 
133 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/fashion/textiles-clothing/eu_en 
134 Based on a new job being created for every €230k of growth, taking into account an estimated sales price of ca. 2€/kg  
135 http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/european-standards/policy/benefits/ 
136 http://www.wheylayer.eu/files/2012/08/Safety-compliance-letter.pdf 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 37 of 105 
 
the need of secondary sachets, as well as of industrially and organically recyclable solutions. This will contribute to the 
implementation directive on the packaging and packaging waste, which sets new legally binding targets and fixed deadlines 
for waste recycling and  the reduction of landfilling. Indeed, t he package includes a common EU target for recycling 65% of 
packaging waste by 2025, and 70% by 2030 ; in this context, the plastic sector has a separate target 50% by 2025 and 55% by 
2030. This represents a significant increase from the current target  imposed by the Packaging Directive  94/62/EC, which 
set a 22.5% recycling target. Awareness about the right sorting of the new materials and EoL treatment will be required to foster 
the best practices among waste management bodies, recyclers, and composters to make it happen also in practice. This will be 
greatly facilitated by educative workshops which will be continued in post-project efforts to create adequate policies, demonstrate 
economic viability, and encourage intra and inter value chain cooperations.  
Possible barriers may finally arise from the need for specific knowledge of how to reach the desired and required biodegradation 
profile depending on the formulation to enable its correct selection. We have therefore included in the workplan extensive training 
and knowledge sharing actions, and the easy to use biodegradation modeling tool will support new users of the materials. The 
required investments to produce the new copolymers will also be considered as a potenti al barrier and therefore we will favour 
materials that can be processed  with existing infrastructures, which will be adopted by the potential exploiters of the oligomers 
and copolymers by batch or REX processing, i.e. respectively TOTAL-CORBION and PLANET. 
Additional investments 
In terms of further contributions to maximizing the impact of this BBI action, significant in-kind contributions are planned 
to reflect the industrial context of the action and will definitely contribute to increasing the impact and reaching the proj ect 
objectives. The consortium covers 31% (1.3k€) of the overall project budget. This co-funding, comprising the full budget of 
the large companies as well as a 3% flat rate for all others partners, is justified by the genuine conviction of the partners that they 
will on the long term obtain a return on their investment when the BIOnTOP solutions reach the market. Our success securing in 
the consortium world leaders in the bioplastics, packaging, te xtile, food and personal care fields (e.g. TOTAL-CORBION, 
EMSUR/INNOTECH, SILON SIOEN, ENTREPINARES, UBESOL) who will fully cover their own costs by themselves , and 
members of the AB who will make also significant in-kind contribution (in providing samples, assessment, advice, etc.) shows that 
we have a winning concept. In addition, some partners also provide additional investments towards the BBI-JU’s objectives 
(table 9). 
Table 9: Summary and cost of the additional investments (note: no financial transfer between partners are made) 
Entity Activity Contribution to the BBI JU objectives 
Estimated 
private 
investment (M€) 
Estimated value 
public 
investment (M€) 
Other EU 
funding 
received 
1.AIMPLAS Improve control of recycling steps, adaptation of 
facilities for bioplastics. Synthesis of biopolymers 
(2019-2021) 
KPI1 (polymer processing), KPI2 
(polymer processing), KPI6 (RTD for 
food packaging processing) 
0.55M€ Investments are supported by 
regional authorities via own 
resources and European 
regional funds (50%). 
3 CTB Extension of lab facilities and pilot lines to help the 
reconversion towards a circular bio-based economy 
(2018-2020) 
The equipment being installed will allow 
to perform the filament extrusion 
foreseen in BIOnTOP.
1.5 M € 1.0M€ Belgian 
Province W-
Flanders invests 
in the building & 
infrastructure 
Investments 
supported 
via EU 
regional 
funds (50%) 
4.ASU Innovation Campus – Model Factory and Laboratory 
for sustainable food production and food packaging 
KPI1 (polymer processing), KPI2 
(polymer processing), KPI6 (RTD for 
food packaging processing) 
2 M€ 1.2M€ 0.8M€ 
8. BIOMI Investment in pilot and demo scale lines for 
obtaining new materials and products which are bio-
based. Co-funding in another project activities 
Creation and development of new bio-
materials and sustainable packaging 
products
0.5 M€ 0.7 M € No 
9 / 22 
EMSUR / 
INNOTECH 
Investment in extrusion line to work with 
biopolymers for films and trays, coatings and 
pouches 
Moving forward to obtain sustainable 
packaging products 
€2.5 M€ 0 No 
16.OWS 
(terminated) 
23. OWS 
RF 
Expansion of capacity for disintegration and 
biodegradation testing. 
Disintegration and biodegradation 
testing in biopolymers
0.3 M€ - - 
17 ROMEI Investment between 2019-2022 in: pet/pla recycling 
capacity upgrade, industry 4.0 feeding plants for 3 
extruders, start-up new logistic warehouse, FV 
production upgrade.  
New recycling and compounding 
capacity for PLA, actually processed 
with pet plants