1.3 Concept and methodology 
BIOnTOP is a 4-year RIA project with 21 partners from 8 countries across Europe (including a pan-European association as well 
as global players). The consortium is very strong with mature suppliers pioneering bioplastic & packaging converting companies, 
innovative technology companies and RTDs, as well as large end users. The proposal aims to develop and validate the technical 
and economic feasibility of new eco-designed bio-based packaging films, trays and textile solutions responding to actual market 
needs with sustainable end-of life stages, that will preserve our resources and environment.  
While modern economies highly depend on plastics in Europe, in fact consumes in the range of 50 Million tonnes per year, only 
25-31% of the plastic waste in Europe is currently recycled and the larger share is incinerated or even landfilled1 (high variability 
between countries). In the light of the EU’s policy objective of achieving a resource efficient recycling society it is hard to accept 
that in Europe we still landfill nearly 40-50% of plastic waste 6. This all contributes to the depletion of limited resources. Proving 
renewably sourced solutions in our target sectors is of greatest relevance as they consume more than 40% of all plastic produced 
each year. On the other hand, while growing in market share, bioplas tics still have a very limited share among plastics 
(approximately 1%). They can, however, provide advantages in terms of switching to renewable non -fossil feedstocks and EoL 
modularity, especially for those short terms single use applications which, by nature (e.g. lightweight nets) or due to contamination 
(fouling or leftover products) , are not recyclable (mechanically or organically). To realise this potential, more research and 
development has to be invested in further improving bioplastics’ specific functionalities, and more cost-competitive solutions have 
to be found to ease the eventual large -scale superior performance and market -driven uptake. Besides those often non-optimal 
disposal routes, plastics, in particular packaging (bags, bottles, lids, etc.), account for 89-95% or roughly 8 million tonnes (Mtons) 
of marine litter and 17 Mtons of plastic packaging is irreversibly dispersed on land every year worldwide 7. Thus, the very slow 
rate of degradation of plastics leads to an accumulating pollution persisting hundreds of years.  
The BIOnTOP project will: 
• Develop a range of complementary bio -based material formulations with tailored biodegradability and other 
relevant applicative properties which, if possible, are derived from available agro-food by-products. 
• Validate the use of the resulting bioplastics , coatings and biocomposites in a number of  food & personal care 
packaging as well as of their environmental impacts and economic feasibility in comparison with existing benchmarks.  
• Provide recommendations for suitable business approaches for the new materials from an integrated bio-based value 
chain perspective including, among others, consumers & end users requesting more sustainable solutions  and waste 
management bodies through a series of outreach activities exchanging knowledge between the relevant actors. 
The considered technologies are summarised in Table 2, together with their purpose and materials used. Resulting solutions will 
be industrially compostable or mechanically recyclable in case appropriate collection is feasible, while providing bio -sourcing, 
among other technical assets vs. market benchmarks. 
Table 2: BIOnTOP bio-based materials innovations to achieve project goals in terms of tailored biodegradability & properties 
Technology used Effect Trays & films F&V 
nets 
Tea 
bags 
Coated 
textiles 
Multiuse 
bags Monolayer Multilayer  
Copolymerisation with bio-based 
diacids 
Modulated biodegradation rate and 
temperature triggering 
x x x x x x 
Addition of organic fillers, 
plasticizers, compatibilizers from 
agro-food waste 
Impact on: processability & processing, 
biodegradation, cost reduction 
x x x x x  
Protein coating +FA grafting on films Oxygen and water vapour barrier for MAP 
packaging and easy emptying properties 
 x     
PLA coating or FA grafting on textile PLA textile with PLA based coating: bio-
based mono-material   
    x x 
 
In BIOnTOP, our trans-disciplinary team combines all the relevant skills and organisations needed to address the full extent of 
the challenge of developing and validating innovative sustainable bio-based coatings and new bio-copolymers in plastic packaging 
solutions. The participation of a number of leading industry players proves the actual soundness of the concept to generate large 
impact and will maximize the consortium capability in transferring this know-how to enable post project further demonstration 
and qualification into broadly available market ready solutions. Furthermore, the participating association/NGO, covering not only 
the provision of required biopolymers-based solutions but also the consumers, will also help raising environmental awareness 
and policy outreach that, besides their great performance and competitive cost, could further encourage the adoption of 
our new solutions.  
To complement our consortium, further stakeholders will be involved in an Advisory Board (AB). The AB will consist of Packaging 
Cluster, ISWA, REVERDIA, BIOTREM, FERRER, EU Textile Platform (ETP), Ginegar, Flandersfood, Roll & Eat, Colruyt Group, 
etc. (details and support letters annexed to section 5), number of them from the BIC. They will be consulted as necessary for both 
technical, policy and business-related insights and further AB members may be appointed if needed.  
BIOnTOP will enable know -how transfer through its value chain of actors : from technology institutes & academia (4 RTDs: 
 
6 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/plastic_waste.htm 
7 THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY RETHINKING THE FUTURE OF PLASTICS, Ellen MacArthur foundation, 2016 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 11 of 105 
 
AIMPLAS, INSTM, CTB and ASU) to industry part icipants (9 SMEs, an industry association and 6 Large enterprises leaders in 
their field): monomers and other bio -based raw materials to be used in the new compounds will be supplied by partners 
(WEAREBIO, TOTAL-CORBION) and AB members (REVERDIA), polymer producers ( TOTAL-CORBION, and other blend 
partners producers through EUBP members), plastic/packaging converters (PLANET, EMSUR/INNOTECH, SILON, BIO -MI, 
CMSA, SIOEN), end users packers (WEAREBIO, ENTREPINARES, UBESOL and further ones in AB covering even retail stage), 
recycler, technological solutions H&S and environment assessment providers (ROMEI, IRIS, ARCHA and OWS(terminated)/OWS 
RF) and an innovation specialist (ENCO).  
Positioning of the project  
Most activities performed in BIOnTOP project start at TRL3– experimental proof of concept or technology validation in lab (TRL4). 
To maximise our chances of success for the overall interdependent results, we have selected a number of complementary 
approaches to tailor biodegradation and properties. Most technologies are based on prior research from involved partners for the 
same or other base biopolymers. As certain elements actually start with a more advanced TRL (e.g. whey protein based oxygen 
barrier, converting processes), that will help us focusing the efforts where required, it is deemed realistic to state that all project 
technologies will arrive in at least a consolidated TRL5 by the end of the project when our technologies will be combined in 
the final project demonstrators to be produced first at RTDs pilot scale (extensive validation at TRL5 and production trials at 
MRL5) and some demonstrators will undergo preliminary demonstration tests in semi-industrial environments (TRL6). Table 3 
provides a summary of the TRL advances that will be achieved for the key technological components of the project.  
Table 3: Summary of the TRL advancements that will bring about as result of the BIOnTOP project  
Technology Initial 
TRL 
Final 
TRL 
Comment 
Copolymers from 
bio-based (malic, 
succinic) diacids 
and lactide/ lactid 
acid or PLA 
prepolymers 
3 5 New applications of bio-based diacids for biodegradable polymers have been the subject of extensive literature (see 1.4) but 
generally not for modulating their biodegradation profiles. On the other hand, several LA copolymers are commercially 
available but not meeting home compostability conditions. In BIOnTOP, after initial lab trials to identify best formulations, the 
production of the copolymers will reach a TRL5 in an industrially relevant environment pilot scale (25 kg of copolymers by 
batch process and 75 kg by REX). The systematic understanding of the effect of the copolymer structure on the 
biodegradation together with the derived biodegradation predictive model promises ground breaking innovations. 
PLA reactive 
extrusion 
*resp. for 
copolymers based 
on lactic acid or for 
PLA 
3-4* 5-6* INSTM has a patent licensed to PLANET for production of PLA based transparent films with the use of reactive plasticizers. 
The formula is suitable to obtain films with properties comparable to PP or HDPE, and research is ongoing to achieve 
properties such as LDPE. PLANET has experience with large scale compounding of PLA-based formulations, but the 
process needs to be adapted to the copolymers developed in the project, considering its specific processability and using 
reactive renewable additives to match the suitable performances requirements. In BIOnTOP, the production will reach initial 
trials at TRL6 in PLANET (200 kg of selected compounds). 
Biocomposites with 
renewable 
agricultural filler 4 5-6 
Prototypes (pots, cream jars, sheet for thermoforming) were produced by INSTM on pilot scale with PLA with natural fillers 
such as wood, algae, potato, bran, legumes. In BIOnTOP, wheat fibres will be compounded with the new copolymers, also 
considering REX approaches, to modulate EoL behaviour and cost of the materials for the different applications 
Fatty acid grafting 4 5-6 FA grafting was performed on paper at TRL up to 7. Whey protein coatings were already applied at TRL 7 and above but 
only combined with FA grafting in preliminary trials at TRL3. Tests in pilot printing lines will allow reaching TRL 5. 
Melt spinning of 
BIOnTOP 
compounds for 
production of nets, 
filaments for textiles 
and nonwovens 
4 5-6 Although PLA is already industrially processed to certain textile materials, the processability of the new biodegradable 
formulations needs to be investigated and demonstrated at pilot level. The processing of nets, nonwovens and filaments via 
the melt spinning process will need adjustments (e.g. processing temperature, drawability). In BIOnTOP, nets will be 
produced up to TRL6 in CMSA’s pilot based on their know-how on commercial PLA nets. Likewise, after tests at CTB, 
SIOEN and SILON will respectively test at TRL5-6 textile conversion to filaments and nonwovens.  
PLA Coating for 
textile 
3-4 4-5 PLA coatings in general are poorly developed. The main application where PLA is used in coating processes is cardboard, 
where PLA provide waterproofness to e.g. paper cups. These coatings are however not suited for textiles (too hard and 
incompatible extrusion coating process). There are several initiatives to develop PLA coatings for different textile items in 
laboratory prototypes but they are not mature enough for industrialization (TRL3-4). Moreover, coating of the newly 
developed PLA materials, with improved biodegradability, will need further finetuning. Tests at CTB will prove the feasibility 
at lab scale after which the coatings will be upscaled to pilot scale by SIOEN (TRL4-5).  
Blown extrusion of 
recycled and virgin 
PLA copolymers 
3 5 PLA copolymers as prime materials and PLA copolymers as SRM recycled in the frame of project will be introduced as a 
base for the bag applications at BioMi (currently produced at TRL 9 using PP, PE, PET, Ecoflex and starch based bio-
plastics) in subsequent blowing extrusion trials at TRL 3-5 
 
National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project 
BIOnTOP will build on prior state -of-the-art as well as IP belonging to several project partners. A selection of relevant projects 
that the BIOnTOP partners are/have participated in are listed in Table 4, and derived expertise, methodologies, lab or pilot 
processes that will feed into BIOnTOP (projects ordered along the relevant individual technology components/product life cycle).  
Table 4: Relevant research and innovation activities (additional ones can be found in the respective partner profiles) 
Project (and reference), Description Partners involved Opportunity for carryover to BIOnTOP 
Bread4PLA Demonstration Plan Project to produce Poly-lactic acid (PLA) 
Biopolymer from waste products of bakery (LIFE+) (2011-2014)  
AIMPLAS Proofs of feasibility to obtain LA and derived PLA 
from 3rd generation LA (processed from bread waste). 
BIOREFINE-2G Development of 2nd Generation Biorefineries (FP7-KBBE-
613771) (2013-2017) 
AIMPLAS  Production of Dicarboxylic Acids and Bio-based 
Polymers Derived Thereof. 
WHEYLAYER2 Barrier biopolymers for sustainable packaging. (FP7-315743 
FP7) and WHEYLAYER- Whey protein-coated plastic films to replace expensive 
IRIS, INSTM (via 
UNIPI) 
Developed whey protein based oxygen barrier 
coatings for plastic films (feeds in WP3). 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 12 of 105 
 
polymers and increase recyclability (FP7-218340-2) 
PLASTICISED Innovation in biopolymer applications by the use of optimised 
plasticisers and novel processing techniques (Flanders traject) (2015-2019) 
CTB Plasticisers for PLA to allow application of PLA 
coatings. 
AGRIMAX Agri & food waste valorisation co-ops based on flexible multi-
feedstocks biorefinery processing technologies for new high added value 
applications (H2020-BBI-PPP-720719) (2016-2020) 
IRIS, INSTM, 
OWS (terminated), 
AIMPLAS, ARCHA 
Bio-based blends and composites with PLA, PHAs, 
bio-based additives and natural fibres. 
CITRUSPACK - Revalorization strategies within the circular economy for the use 
of citrus waste in green packaging and cosmetics (LIFE16 ENV/ES/000171) 
OWS (terminated) PLA reinforced with fibers to produce compostable 
packaging 
EFFECTIVE (H2020 BBI) - Advanced Eco-designed Fibres and Films for large 
consumer products from bio-based polyamides and polyesters in a Circular 
Economy perspective 
BIO-MI Developing new monolayer packaging solutions via 
several transformation technologies. 
BIOBOTTLE Biodegradable solutions for packaging of liquid dairy products 
(FP7-SME-606350) (2014-2016) 
AIMPLAS, OWS 
(terminated) 
New biopolymer blends development and processing 
for dairy packaging applications (pouches and bags) 
DIBBIOPACK Development of injection and blow extrusion moulded 
biodegradable and multifunctional packages by nanotechnologies: improvement 
of structural and barrier properties, smart features, and sustainability (FP7-NMP-
280676) (2012-2016) 
INSTM, ARCHA Production of PLA based packaging by injection 
moulding and by calendering (sheets). 
PLA4FOOD Active multilayer packaging based on improved performance PLA 
formulations for 4th range food products (FP7-SME-262557) (2010-2013), 
BIO4MAP Transparent and high barrier biodegradable film and sheet for 
Modified Atmosphere food packaging (FP7-SME-606144) (2013-2016) 
AIMPLAS Multilayer PLA processing for film and sheet 
extrusion and thermoforming for food barrier 
packaging applications. 
ECOBIONET -Industrial implementation of biodegradable and compostable 
packaging nets for agricultural and shellfish products (Eco-innovation) 
AIMPLAS Development of biodegradable material for packaging 
nets. 
BB100 Pure Nature: 100% bio-based (INTERREG, 2018-2020) CTB Use of bio-based additives for the textile sector. 
BIOAGROTEX Development of new agro-textiles from renewable resources and 
with a tailored biodegradability (FP7-NMP-213501) (2008-2012) 
CTB Development of PLA based agrotextiles (at present 
on the market) – Not biodegradable under mild 
conditions. 
BIO4SELF Bio-based self-functionalised self-reinforced composite materials 
based on high performance nanofibrillar PLA fibres (H2020-NMP-685614) (2016-
2019) 
CTB Development of PLA based self-reinforced 
composites with high mechanical properties which 
can be used as basis for BIONTOP textiles. 
POLYBIOSKIN High performance functional bio-based polymers for skin-contact 
products in biomedical, cosmetic and sanitary industry (H2020-BBI-PPP-745839) 
(2017-2020) 
INSTM, EUBP, 
IRIS 
Showcase the usability of biopolymers in other 
sanitary applications like diapers as well as 
biomedical and cosmetic sector. 
SUPERTEX (ECO/10/277225/SI2.596871) Sustainable Flame Retardant 
Technical Textile from Recycled Polyester 
CTB, ROMEI, 
INSTM (UNIPI)  
Recycling of multilayer scraps from packaging 
industry to obtain materials for technical textiles 
BIO-EOL End-of-life possibilities of biopolymer based consumer products 
(ERANET-Cornet) (2014-2015) 
CTB Developing EoL recycling routes for PLA consumer 
products; mechanical and chemical recycling. 
MULTICYCLE (H2020 SPIRE) Advanced & sustainable recycling processes and 
value chains for plastic-based multi-materials, in grant preparation 
IRIS, ISWA, CTB, 
AIMPLAS, SILON 
Use of packaging SRM in textile, optical sorting, etc.). 
Dissemination strategy around a Circular Plastic 
Helix that can help creating synergies. 
OPEN-BIO Opening bio-based markets via standards, labelling and procurement 
(FP7-KBBE-613677) (2013-2016) 
OWS (terminated) Pre-standardisation work on biodegradation in marine 
conditions, soil and organic recycling (industrial and 
home composting, AD). 
In addition to these projects, during Task 7.5, we will build links with numerous other synergistic projects and initiatives from  
H2020 (e.g. BBI, SPIRE, SC2, SFS, SC5, and BIOTEC calls), as well as national and regional schemes (RIS3) for exchange of 
information and best practices. In addition, BIOnTOP will engage with the relevant policy and standardization body to act as 
a catalyst for innovation-related actions but also with selected associations to foster the creations of cross sectorial connections 
with BIOnTOP project results, supporting the tran sition to a post -petroleum society by use of sustainable bio -based materials 
across the whole bio-based value chain. In addition, we will also link to other activities of BBI-JU through project partners (number 
of which are already involved in awarded BBI projects linked to biopolymers applications in packaging and beyond), as well as to 
the SPIRE PPP (that has included in its Roadmap the use of sustainable new raw materials for the European Process Industries, 
etc.), SUSCHEM, CEFIC, Plastics Europe, and other associations from the plastic, packaging, textile sectors e.g. personal care 
and food end users with a primary focus on organic segment. 
Overall approach and methodology 
Our approach and methodology involve two main components: 
1) R&D and validation: Research activities with the main focus to deliver packaging materials with modulated biodegradability 
and compatibility within a number of EoL scenarios. New copolymers will be developed in batch reactor and by REX at lab 
scale and upscaled to a small pilot scale to produce sufficient amount for the validation of 7 demonstrators case studies 
covering the needs of different target applications in terms of properties, format, available waste management and converting 
processes. Besides, biodegradation studies will be performed along the development and the validation work will focus not 
only on the technical performance of the different materials and demonstrators, as well as scalability of their production 
process, but also on their environmental, social and economic sustainability using e-LCA, s-LCA and LCCA methodologies 
among others. The safety and compliance with other applicable standards of the developed products will be studied. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 13 of 105 
 
2) Innovation: This work will accomp any and cross -cut the R&D work with the aim of preparing for post -project further 
development leading to the future replication of the project results. It consists of the following activities: 
a) guidelines and recommendations for future full-scale implementation of the proposed technologies via analysis of 
the new value chains, of the regulatory, social, consumer perception, safety and relevant ethical aspects. 
b) dissemination of the project results, including a series of activities to exchange knowledge between the stakeholders to 
validate their interest in the results of the project. 
c) exploitation and business planning to further increase the TRL of the developed processes and products  beyond an 
expected final TRL5 to carry them over the notorious ‘valley of death’ towards commercial adoption. 
How sex and/or gender analysis is taken into account in the project’s content 
In relation to gender analysis, this concept is relevant to the content of the project in several aspects. To this end, innovation will 
consider the gender dimension and cater for the needs, motivations and differences of females where possible. In the 
development state, taking gender into account will help yielding new research results and spark creativity, opening new avenues 
for future research as recognized in the past for those who give it serious attention 8. Gender analyses will be highly relevant in 
consumer perceptions study (task 7.2) which outcome will be used in the communication and dissemination context to ensure our 
message is appropriate to reach both males and females.  For example, the consideration of environmental factors on material 
selection is likely to vary depending on the gender, as well as the concern on their EoL. Women are predominantly involved both 
in the purchase and waste sorting of packaging at household level. In addition, female inputs to new business models will also be 
considered. Indeed, while the presence of females in the plastic converting sectors is traditionally lower than of males, there is a 
strong presence of females along the value chain of the bioeconomy industries where they play an increasingly prevalent role in 
consumer decision-making. 
The gender dimension of our consortium and our measures to align with the article 16 of the H2020 programme are presented at 
the end of section 3.3. This is important in ensuring the education and training of the next generation of scientists, techno logist 
and others needed in the EU to foster the future of the circular bioeconomy and maximise its creativity and innovation potential.