3.3 Production and characterisation of PLA and FA coatings for textiles ■
4 # ## # ##
4.1 Life cycle sustainability assessment ■ ■
4.2 Material recyclability and reprocessing ■
4.3 Biodegradation under industrial and home composting and anaerobic conditions ■
4.4 Predictive biodegradation modeling as support for eco-design of the new materials applications ■
4.5 Organic recycling of developed packaging by industrial and home composting and anaerobic digestion ■ 
5 # #
5.1 Compounding upscaling for films applications ■
5.2 Development of packaging demonstrator monolayer films and trays ■
5.3 Multilayer films and trays production upscaling ■
5.4 Packaging validation for mono & multilayer solutions ■
5.5 Food packages health & safety assessment  ■
5.6 Films from secondary raw materials ■ 
6 # #
6.1 Compounding upscaling for biobased nets and textile packaging
6.2 Development of packaging demonstrator nets ■
6.3 Development of textile fibres, yarns and fabrics for packaging ■
6.4 Food packaging validation for nets and textile solutions ■
6.5 Food packages health & safety assessment ■
6.6 Textiles from secondary raw materials ■ 
7 # # ##
7.1 Innovation Management
7.2 Study of consumer perception ■
7.3 Roadmap for the set up of BIOnTOP circular value chains and new cross-sector interconnections in 
bioeconomy clusters ■
7.4 Knowledge and IPR management
7.5 Exploitation and Dissemination Planning ■ ■ ■ 
■■
■
7.6 REACH Compliance assessment ■ 
8 Project Management 
Task 8.1: Management of project resources
Task 8.2: Implementation of the management procedures
Task 8.3: Coordination with and Reporting to the EC
D8.1
●ᴥ ¤
●
ᴥ
¤
■ ¤
●
ᴥ 
¤ ¤
●
ᴥ 
¤ ¤
●
ᴥ 
¤ ¤
●
ᴥ 
¤ ¤
●
ᴥ 
¤ ¤
●
ᴥ 
¤ ¤
●
ᴥ 
¤
D6.1-6.5; 
MS 13, 17
D3.1-
D3.3; 
MS8
■ Deliverable / # Milestones ●Steering Committee Meetings / ¤ Technical Committee Meeting  / ᴥ Exploitation Committee Meeting/  # milestone, ■ deliverable
D1.1-
D1.3; 
MS1
D4.1-
D4.6; MS 
6, 9, 10, 
11, 14, 15
Market strategy and innovation impacts
D5.1-5.6; 
MS 12, 16
D7.1-
D7.9; MS 
2, 7, 18, 
19
Definition of specifications for PLA derived products with tailored end of life and properties 
Development of multifunctional  coating solutions with tailored properties 
Recyclability, Biodegradation and  Environmental impact assessment
Pilot production and validation of biobased mono and multilayer films and trays
Pilot production and validation of biobased nets  and  textile packaging 
Development of copolymers and compounds with tailored biodegradability
D2.1-
D2.5; 
MS3-5
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 48 of 105
3.2 Management structure and procedures 
Organisational structure and decision-making  
The Consortium of BIOnTOP will be coordinated by partner AIMPLAS. The project management structure has been conceived to 
ensure the competent industrial, scientific and business management of BIOnTOP project and to enable efficient and effective 
integration and communication along  the managerial chain. BIOnTOP project success will be strongly based on the close 
interaction and partnership of SMEs / Large companies (71% of the partners in number) and the research and other organisations. 
This management structure has been implemente d successfully in similar EU Projects coordinated by Partner AIMPLAS (e.g. 
FP7 BRIGIT, BUGWORKERS and BISIGODOS, and H2020 JOSPEL, URBANREC, NEMOSINE, CARMOF, GRAMOFON, 
RECOTRANS, C -SERVEES and DAFIA), and as such, has been adopted by the BIOnTOP Consortium with the latest 
improvements suggested by H2020. A schematic representation of the management structure of BIOnTOP is shown in Figure 
20. 
The project management structure is driven by an SME partner compounder, BIC member directly involved in the proposal core 
topic, PLANET, who will chair the General Assembly (GA) which consists of 1 member of each organisation. The Executive 
Board (EB) will be driven by the IRIS, while the Technical Management Committee (TMC)  is chaired by AIMPLAS. The 
Innovation Committee (IC) is co-chaired by the IPR manager (ENCO) and the Communication & Dissemination manager 
(EUBP) and also counts with one representative from each partner organisation. An Advisory Board (AB) is also included, which 
consists of a voluntary group of industry actors and stakeholders who will engage with the project at different points along the 
work plan. This body has not voting rights and a confidentiality agreement will be signed with all its members.  
All boards have a majority representation of Industrial Partners as described below. An overview of the governance structure and 
decision-making process is also detailed below. The composition of the boards roles and the decision-making mechanisms 
have been designed to ensure that all decisions are taken in accordance with the Industrial commercial interests, and SME 
and Large Organisation’s interests in particular, and also providing a relevant role to the participating Association and the  
Advisory Board, as a direct way to reach the potential future stakeholders of the BIOnTOP value chain. The structure adopted 
is particularly business like and high end-user/clients focus (as opposed to bureaucratic) to ensure that BIOnTOP runs as a 
“commercially” orientated project with a very clear business focus. Nevertheless, there is the opportunity for all partners to express 
their opinion and canvas support through the General Assembly (GA) who ratifies progress and decisions made by the 
management bodies.  
Decision-making mechanisms: All Boards and Committees will typically meet at least twice per year. Any group will deliberate 
and decide validly provided a majority of its members are present or represented and each member will have one vote with the  
Chairperson having a casting vote if required. Decisions will be taken by a majority of two-thirds of the votes of the members 
present and the members that have delegated their vote. General Assembly meetings, meetings involving industrial demonstration 
or key technical meetings will be face-to-face, conference calls will be also encouraged. All the partners have the responsibilities 
described below as a result of taking part in a specific decision-making body.  
The General Assembly (GA)  consists of 21 rep resentatives (one per partner) and is chaired by PLANET, as previously 
advanced. The GA is the ultimate decision -making and arbitration body of the Consortium (the final and highest authority in the 
project). However, it delegates short-term decisions-making actions to the Executive Board (EB). The GA will decide on matters 
relating to: a) The economic orientation of the Project, its objectives, definition and subsequent modifications, including t he shift 
of budget of the Project. b) Actions towards default ing parties, including their substitution. c) The nomination and election of EB 
members. d) The acceptance & exclusion of new parties or affiliates in the EC -GA and in the Consortium Agreement. e) The 
Consortium Agreement and its Annexes, as well as amendm ents thereof. f) Description of Action, subsequent Project 
Implementation Plan and EC -GA preparation and amendments. g) Ultimate approval of IPR Policies & Exploitation Plans 
proposed by the Innovation Committee (IC). 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 49 of 105 
The Executive Board (EB) is responsible 
for the strategy of the Project development. 
It is composed of one representative of 
each one of the following partners: CTB, 
INSTM, ASU, BioMi, CMSA, WEAREBIO, 
OWS(terminated)/OWS RF, AIMPLAS and 
IRIS (chair), who has an excellent track 
record in EU projects especially in the field 
of bio -based packaging and recycling. 
They represent the core members of the 
consortium, cover all the main knowledge 
areas and have been involved in the 
definition of the objectives since the initial 
project idea. The responsibilities of the EB 
include: Overall guidance & supervision 
over strategic, economic & operational day-
to-day issues regarding the Project. 
Fulfilment and accomplishment of Project 
objectives. Scientific and Technological 
Quality Assessment. Definition and implementation of risk management methodology at all levels (financial, technical and 
administrative). Conflict Resolution. Constitution and administration of the funding. Presentation of the taken decisions to the GA 
periodically. The shift of tasks and responsibilities and budget of the Project (including payment procedures). The validation of 
reports and Project Deliverables to be submitted to the EC. The milestones will be used as KPIs by the EB to monitor the correct 
project progress. 
The Technical Management Committee (TMC) is the body responsible for ensuring the overall technical co -ordination of the 
Project Scientific & technical work (WP1-6), in accordance with the Work Programme, subsequent Implementation Plan, and EB 
decisions, at Scientific, Technical, Financial and Administrative level. The TMC’s main responsibilities also include: ensuring co-
ordination between WPs, facilitating the take-up of research results, supervision of the implementation of the EB decisions, and 
the assessment of Project results. The TMC, chaired by  AIMPLAS will be composed by the WP Leaders: EuBP (WP1), INSTM 
(WP2), ASU (WP3), OWS(terminated)/OWS RF (WP4), INNOTECH (WP5), SIOEN (WP6), ENCO (WP7) and AIMPLAS (WP8). 
The TMC will be responsible for: a) Ensuring the implementation of the decisions taken by the EB at WP level; b) Making proposals 
to the EB for the re-allocation of material, financial and human resources, tasks and responsibilities; c) Preparing deliverables & 
other information requested by  the EB, based on reports by the WP Leaders; d) Validating and seeking EB approval for 
subcontracting; e) Ensuring co-ordination between WPs facilitating the take-up of research results in the demonstration activities, 
f) Assisting WP leaders on day to day management; g) Monitoring the projects technical progress against the identified technical 
risks. 
The TMC will convene meetings with the Work Package Leaders (WPL) at least quarterly (typically 1 conference call meetings 
every two months) and if applicable with the EB, for purposes of co-ordination and management. Where the TMC cannot settle 
decision making disputes, the decision shall be taken in the EB.  
The WPL, as identified above, will report and be accountable to the TMC. The specific WPL will be responsible for their own WP 
organizational arrangements, work procedures, day-to-day management and time schedule, providing that such arrangements, 
work procedures and time schedule do not conflict with the GA, the Consortium Agreement, the description of work, subsequent 
implementation plans, or requests and other provisions made by the appropriate bodies within the Consortium or the EC (BBI -
JU). Meetings of a specific WP will be convened at least quarterly, either face-to-face or by conference/video call. Extraordinary 
Meetings shall be: a) Called in and convened by the corresponding WP Leader; or b) by the TMC Chairperson. 
The Project Coordinator (AIMPLAS) is the intermediate for communication between the Consortium and the EC and shall report 
and be accountable to the EB and the GA. The Coordinator is in charge of the financial and administrative management (WP8) 
of the Project. The Coordinator will submit for EB validation the reports which shall be submitted to EC within the EC report ing 
activity. The reports covering project deliverables, supporting documents and audit certificates will be provided to the Coordinator 
by the TMC. For the avoidance of any doubt, the Co -ordinator has the capacity of representation of the consortium before the 
Commission. Th e Co -ordinator undertakes to keep the Joint Funds allocated by the EU Grant Agreement or by budget in 
accordance with the provisions which will be defined in the Consortium Agreement and in the Grant Agreement and decisions 
from the appropriate bodies. The  main coordinators responsibilities will include: a) Periodic Reporting;  b) Commission 
Questionnaires; c) To ensure the verification and submission of the Project deliverable reports:  all deliverable reports 
have to be verified initially by the EB before submission to the Project Coordinator, who will ensure that they are according to the 
EC requirements and submitted timely. d) Coordination of the Periodic and Review Project Meetings  e) Collection of 
Certificates on Financial Statements f) Reporting and Payment of Project Financing. 
The Project Coordinator, delegating day to day work to the defined Management Bodies, will monitor the overall progress of the 
 
Fig. 14: Overview of BIOnTOP Management Structure 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 50 of 105 
Project in all its aspects, with specific responsibilities in this regard for development of the Technical Report Procedures and the 
Technical Progress Monitoring and templates for technical activities.  
The Innovation Committee (IC) is co-chaired by the IPR manager (ENCO) and the Communication & Dissemination manager 
(EUBP) and a representative of each Partner organisation. The Committee is involved in the innovation and IPR generation and 
protection of key technologies for their companies as well as commercialization. IC will propose the IPR Policy and the Actio n 
Plan for the Exploitation of project resu lts to the EB and GA. The IC will be responsible for the preparation, monitoring and 
updating of the list of KERs and innovations that will be used to monitor the progress and achievements of the project and to  
assess the PEDR (including both the Dissemina tion and Business Plan). The IC will look to increase the IP protection and 
ownership awareness and implementation, supported by training activities given by the IPR helpdesk and other EC support 
services needed. 
In summary, the protection of the interest of the End-users and Industry will be guaranteed as they are the majority represented 
in the various boards, and consequently a commercial industry -driven vote will be guaranteed in all levels of the management 
structure, allowing a day-to-day management as in a processing chain at industrial level, with protection of the interests of SMEs 
and Large entities and innovations. 
Appropriateness to the complexity and scale of the project 
This organisational structure, already replicated in AIMPLAS coordinated FP7 and H2020 projects, is considered appropriate for 
the management of the project, in view of the size and geographic disparity of the consortium, as well as the research ambiti on 
and its expected innovation impacts. With key roles and responsibilities, ea ch body within the structure ensures that there is 
dedicated and qualified management and skills-sets mobilised at the different levels. To this end, there is an integral approach to 
the management of the Project, ensuring:  
• effective management of the day-to-day running of the Project and its resources and appropriate interfacing with the EC 
(Project Coordinator) 
• all participants have a stake in the strategic management of the Project ( General Assembly for strategy decision 
making with delegation to the Executive Board for daily management) 
• effective management of the execution of the interdisciplinary work plan and its ability to deliver impact, whereby two 
executive-level Committees have been planned - the Technical Management Committee  will be responsible for 
ensuring the Project achieves its research objectives through sound management of the overall S&T work and it potential 
risks; the Innovation Committee will be responsible for effective dissemination and management of the knowledge and 
data generated, IPRs, as well as the other innovation-related activities required to deliver market exploitable results and 
to map out the route for further research in order to build on the Project results. 
Innovation management  
A key objective of publicly -funded research is that it should lead to the exploitation of results, which goes one step further than 
the mere production and dissemination of new scientific knowledge138. As such, our project envisages an Innovation Committee 
and an Innovation Manager in its organisation structure (as is discussed above) and we also have a dedicated Task 7.1 for 
Innovation Management, which will be closely linked with the Knowledge Manage ment and IP Protection work in Task 7.4. Our 
Communication & Dissemination Manager organisation, ENCO, will foment the conditions for an innovation eco-system to flourish. 
In addition to IP protection, the Innovation Management activities will pivot around  the implementation of an innovation cycle, 
which is a vital component for ensuring success in market -oriented research projects. Close interaction with the Technical 
Management Committee will be promoted to facilitate co-creation and fluid interaction between the development teams and our 
industry end-users. EUBP will lead the initial phase of the Project aimed at defining the industry specifications for the new bio -
based packaging and as such set the destination for the innovation. Open brainstorming, ide a management, the foundation of 
the project on WP1 with the aim to capture a deep understanding of the market needs, industry constraints and 
regulatory/standards framework. Thereafter, and in particular through WP2 -3 where the processes will be upscaled t o produce 
the new materials in sufficient amount for WP5-6 whereby validation for different case studies will be performed, before their full 
scale (organic) recycling in WP4. The market strive will accompany the entire work plan and the development teams will be guided 
by feedback loops from fellow developers, end -users and market insights to fuel an innovation cycle that leads to exploitable 
project results for a successful project outcome in terms of innovation impacts.  Beyond the purely market drive for the more 
technical development side of our part innovation within the project, we are in fact embedding our innovation strategy in a 
quadruple innovation helix model  by contextualizing it 
within number of inputs from/ and outcome to  the ‘natural 
environments of society’ as well as ‘media-based and culture-
based public’ and ‘civil society’ by involving interactions with 
governmental/policy makers as well as stakeholders including 
consumers again  contributing to a multiplying effect for our 
innovation potential and impact (fig. 21). 
 
138 Innovation. How to convert research into commercial success story? Part 3: Innovation Management for Practitioners. European Commission. Directorate-General for 
Research and Innovation, 2013. Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and New Production Technologies (NMP) 
Fig. 21: The quadruple innovation helix embedding BIOnTOP 
innovation management approach  
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 55 of 105 
 
4. Members of the consortium 
4.1. Participants (applicants) 
 
Participant 
no. 
1 Name (short 
name)/ 
Country 
ASOCIACION DE INVESTIGACION DE MATERIALES PLASTICOS Y CONEXAS  
(AIMPLAS) / Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
AIMPLAS, Plastic Technology Center located in Valencia, is a private, non -profit 
Association with more than 600 associated companies created in 1990. AIMPLAS is 
formed by +140 highly skilled professional, more than 65% with a Masters, Engineering 
or equivalent degree in Chemistry, polymer e ngineering, materials engineering or 
equivalent, including 20 PhD. 
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and thermosetting plastic 
materials & products, its transformation processes and their recycla bility and sustainability. AIMPLAS generates new 
knowledge and technologies that can be transferred to companies in order to help them to increase their effectiveness and 
competitiveness. 
AIMPLAS has a broad expertise in the fields of recycling, compatibil ization, reactive extrusion, biopolymers and renewable 
source materials, special assisted processing technologies and nanocomposites, gained during the last years in the frame of 
EU and national projects. Nowadays, AIMPLAS is involved in more than 2 7 European projects and has participated in 7 9 
projects in FP5, FP6, FP7, LIFE+, CIP -EcoInnovation EU Programmes, among others, coordinating 27 of them. At National 
and Regional levels AIMPLAS participates in around 100 projects yearly. 
AIMPLAS develops tailored R&D projects to meet the needs of companies in the packaging and food  sector. Some of the 
investigation lines which stand out in packaging sector are: 
• Development of biodegradable and bio-based materials.  
• Improved properties: antimicrobial, barrier properties, functional barriers, … 
• Processing of biodegradable materials: extrusion, foaming, injection 
• Active packaging 
 
AIMPLAS commitment to corporate social responsibility policies:  
In AIMPLAS, the Plastics Technology Centre , we develop solutions for the present and we research to contribute to the 
progress. We pre-empt the needs of the industry and the society. For that purpose, one of the premises for the success of our 
project is the sustainable development and the well-being of individuals, an end to which we contribute through the performance 
of our activity and our Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).  
AIMPLAS’ strategy on CSR is based on the commitment to the Global Compact of the United Nations, to which we have joined. 
Regarding equality, a plan has been implemented to allow obtaining an equality seal from the Regional 
Government of Valencia. At the same time, we have implemented a flexibility policy in the work calendar to make possible the 
conciliation of work and family life and we have developed actions aimed at promoting healthy habits among employees.  
For years no w, we are committed to social development through its implementation with the support of AIMPLAS Board of 
Directors.  
Main tasks 
AIMPLAS will have a high contribution in WP2 in terms of synthesis of copolymers of lactic acid/lactide (LA/LD) and biomass 
derived acids. AIMPLAS will have very strong roles in WP5, participating in the upscaling of the packaging (lids, trays and 
multilayer solutions for personal care , with and without coating ) by preliminary trials before industrial tests at INNOTECH, 
BioMi, etc. and packaging validation tests , and also in WP6 supporting CMSA in the production of nets. In WP7, they will 
contribute too in terms of IPR, innovation and knowledge transfer and training activities and will act as Project Coordinator 
(WP8). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
AIMPLAS, as a technologic centre, is focused to help companies in the plastic sector to develop new products and increase 
their competitiveness through innovation, has more than 20 pilot plants representing the most relevant 
polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry nowadays and has state -of-the art test facilities 
for chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical characterisation. These pilot lines and laboratories are used by 
many customer’s every year allowing them to test new materials, optimize production processes and launch new products to 
the market, supported by AIMPLAS technical staff, resulting in more than 5000 assays, 170 technical assessments and 120 
skills training actions to more than 1500 clients  per year. AIMPLAS has state -of-the-art 8500 m 2 facilities, including 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 56 of 105 
thermoplastics and thermoset pilot plants, analysis and testing laboratories (physical -mechanical, chemical, packaging, 
automotive and construction), a synthesis department and training areas.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. BELÉN MONJE  (female), PhD in Organic Chemistry by the University of Valencia, working in AIMPLAS since 2003. 
Currently is  Responsible of the Synthesis Department. She has more than 1 5 years of experience in the field of 
characterization, identification and synthesis of polymer materials . Moreover, she is a reference in REACH Regulation for 
plastic users. During this time, she has been involved in many di fferent national and international research projects. In some 
of them she has been the main technical responsible, as for example in BETAPROTH (CRAFT) (implantable polymers), 
POLYMIX (LIFE + Programme) , HIPERDRY (FP7 SME -2013-2) (fossil -derived vs bio-polymers against drying), DAFIA 
(H2020-NMBP-2016-2017) (biopolymers synthesis from biomass), etc. She has 7 scientific publications in organic chemistry 
and she participates in different Committees of Standardization  and acts as a teacher in several polymer re lated courses as 
well as REACH training. 
Dr. NURIA LOPEZ  (female), PhD in Materials by the Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, working as a researcher in the 
Extrusion Department at AIMPLAS since 2003. Extensive experience in polymer processing field, ana lysis of properties and 
development of new products. Technical advice, evaluation and optimization of materials using extrusion processing 
technology, new developments for private companies and close collaboration with other Research Centres at Regional National 
and International level. Experience in sustainability developments, as the use of biodegradable and compostable materials and 
additives, materials from renewable sources, the use of natural fillers and studies of recyclability of materials. 
Dr. AMADOR GARCÍA (male), PhD in Organic Chemistry by the University of Valencia, working in AIMPLAS as researcher in 
the chemical laboratory since 2009 , he became Technologies Manager . He has been involved in several regional and FP7 
European projects focused in nanotechnology areas, materials from renewable resources and coatings with enhanced 
properties, etc. (SUPIN, TRAINER, NMP INNOREX, RECAN, KBBE BRIGIT, KBBE BISIGODOS, BIOREFINE -2G). Before 
joining to AIMPLAS, he worked as researcher assistant in CIPF (Centro de Investigación Principe Felipe) and in the University 
of Valencia. During 2007 he was in the chemical group of Professor Dennis P. Curran (University of Pittsburgh) as vis iting 
researcher. In 2010 he received the Plastic & Innovation award. 
Ms ITZIAR CARRACEDO (female), has a University Degree in Chemical Engineering by Universidad Complutense de Madrid. 
She works in the International Projects Unit at AIMPLAS since 2007 as International Project Manager. She has been involved 
in international R&D projects funded under, the 6th (PEGASUS, FLOWFREE, INNOFOOT) and 7th (MAC -RTM, 
BUGWORKERS, PLA4FOOD, ESPRIT, NANOONSPECT) H2020 (JOSPEL, PERCAL, REFUCOAT, FIBFAB, GRAMOFON, 
CARMOF, MAT4RAIL, FLEXPOL, ECOBULK, C-SERVEES) Framework Programmes, developing technical management and 
coordination tasks most of them focused on biomaterials/bioplastics, renewable resources and sustainability. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. R.M. González, M.P. Villanueva19 – Starch-based polymers for food packaging, Multifunctional and Nanoreinforced 
Polymers for Food Packaging (2011), 527–570 
2. Procedure to obtain thermoplastic starch and thermoplastic starch obtained by this procedure: ES2364831 
3. Bio-based and biodegradable polymer to be used in the manufacture of films for different applications: EP 2784114 A1 
4. Journal:  Food and Bioproducts Processing Corresponding Author:  Apostolis Koutinas, Co -Authors:  Vasiliki 
Kachrimanidou; Nikolaos Kopsahelis; Anestis Vlysidis; Seraphim Papanikolaou; Ioannis K Kookos; Belén  Monje Martínez; 
Maria Consuelo Escrig Rondán; Title:  Downstream separation of poly(hydroxyalkanoates) using crude enzyme consortia 
produced via solid state fermentation integrated in a biorefinery concept 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. REFUCOAT: Full recyclable food package with enhanced gas barrier properties and new functionalities by the use of high 
performance coatings (BBI-2016) 
2. BIOREFINE 2G - Development of 2nd Generation Biorefineries Production of Dicarboxylic Acids and Bio-based Polymers 
Derived Thereof (KBBE. Completed). 
3. PLA4FOOD- Active Multilayer Packaging based on Optimized PLA formulations for Minimally Processed Vegetables and 
Fruits. (Grant agreement no.: 262557, FP7, R4SME Completed). 
4. ECOBIONET -Industrial implementation of biodegradable and compostable packaging nets for agricultural and shellfish 
products (Eco-innovation programme. Completed) 
5. URBANREC - New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products  
(H2020 – WASTE. On development) 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Equipments for synthesis of materials: Reactors and related complements for batch development and extruders for reactive 
extrusion process. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 57 of 105 
Equipment for mechanical, thermal, rheological and physical tests: Rheometer, Optical and electronic Microscopy, DMA, DSC, 
Thermogravimetry, Infrared Spectroscopy, Universal Testing Machine, Permeability… 
Plastic thermoplastic pilot lines for study the different extrusion technologies.  
Reactor and Buchi 20 l rotavapor (used for initial copolymerization tests TRL3-4, below) 
    
 
 
Participant no. 2 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la 
Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali (INSTM)/Italy 
Description of the legal entity  
The INSTM was established in 1992 as a Consortium of Italian Universities with the goal to promote 
research activities in the field of Chemistry of Materials. Later it was joined by other similar 
Institutions and expanded  its interests to the Science and Technology of Materials. The acronym 
INSTM stands for Consortium of Italian Universities for the Science and Technology of Materials. Nowadays it groups 
48 Italian Universities, in practice all the Universities where research on Materials is carried out. 
INSTM is an original bottom -up aggregation of researchers, which has a minimum of bureaucratic structure, and efficiently 
coordinates the activities, promotes the joint participation of INSTM groups to Italian and European projects, is active in 
technology transfer, also establishing spin -off enterprises, takes care of the training aspects in Materials Science and 
Technology. The INSTM Consortium promotes the research activities of its members (the 47 Universities) in the ar ea of 
Materials Science and Technology through organizational, technical and financial support. 
The participation of individual Universities to INSTM is on a voluntary basis. Once a given University decides to join INSTM,  
all the researchers who may be interested to participate to the activities of the Consortium can do that after their application is 
accepted by the Executive Board. About 2000 professors, researchers, post-docs and PhD students are associated to INSTM 
and the number thereof is continuously increasing.  
A Local Research Unit is formed in each associated University and all the groups join it. 
The INSTM Local Research Unit involved in the present project is the INSTM UdR  of the Department of Civil and Industrial 
Engineering located at the associated University of Pisa, and The National Research Council, Institute of Chemistry Pisa. 
Main tasks 
INSTM will cooperate with in WP2, with AIMPLAS for the production of PLA based copolymers and for their characterization. 
INSTM is principally involved in compounding for setting formulation based on PLA or PLA copolymers developed at AIMPLAS 
and other bio-based biodegradable polymers, and selection of additives (plasticizers, nucleating agents, compatibilizers) for 
improving PLA degradability in home composting conditions, and for valorising natural additives for the production of bio -
composites to be used for rigid packaging. INSTM will be involved in recycling of PLA and other polymers, separated in WP4, 
to assess their recyclability. In the other WP INSTM will participate to characterization and will provide material for test and 
data for analysis. INSTM will contribute to results dissemination by participation in meetings, exhibitions, and publishing 
scientific papers in open aces journals.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
INSTM is very skilled in polymer processing and in tuning material properties by proper selection of additives and processing 
conditions, as attested by papers, patent, and participation in European, National and regional projects but also by the dire ct 
industry cooperation to bring, e.g., their patented r esults to the market. INSTM staff has experience in reactive extrusion, 
copolymerization, selection of plasticizers, nucleating agents, and compatibilisation of natural fibres with polymeric matric es. 
INSTM staff is also expert in studying and quantifying the crystalline and amorphous fractions of a material, whose ratio affects 
many physical properties, as barrier, mechanical, thermal, aging, adhesion, and, consequently, the final performance of a 
material. For materials processing and characterization INS TM cooperates with University of Pisa, Department of Civil and 
Industrial Engineering that is involved as third part of INSTM.  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 58 of 105 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Maria-Beatrice Coltelli (female) (DICI-UNIPI) is researcher in Materials Science at the Department of Civil and Industrial 
Engineering of the University of Pisa. She obtained the graduation in Chemistry on February 2001 and the PhD "Galileo Galilei" 
in Chemical Sciences on 2005. Her researches were focused onto polymer science, in particular polymer blends and 
composites. She is co -author of more than 30 publications and 2 patents. She followed the scientific activity of European 
projects on materials science, bio -based polymer processing and nano -composites. Currently she supports the didactical 
activity of courses for Chemical Engineers and Construction Engineers.  
Dr. Vito Gigante (male) is a Chemical Engineer graduated at University of Pisa on 27 February 2015. His thesis was: 
‘Properties of mixed compounds and base poly (lactic acid) (PLA) / polycarbonate (PC) made from recycled polymers’. He is 
at the first year of PhD course at Pisa University. He studies the processability and mechanical properties of sustainable 
multiphase polymer systems for structural applications. Moreover, he works on the analysis of the mechanical properties of 
polimeric blends and biocomposites.  
Dr. Laura Aliotta (female) graduated in Chemical Engineering on 27 February 2015 at University of Pisa. She discussed the 
thesis with the title: ‘Crystallization kinetics and mechanical properties of polylactic acid: effect of different nucleating agents’. 
She is at the second year of the PhD course at Pisa University. She works mainly on the modulation of the thermo-mechanical 
properties of bio-based polymers materials through the use of nano additives. Moreover, she studies the development of the 
mechanical properties of composite materials through the use of mathematical models. 
Dr. Maria Cristina Righetti (female), PhD in Chemi stry at University of Bologna, has 25 years of experience on materials 
characterization and study of the correlations between molecular structure and physical properties of polymers, biopolymers, 
blends and composites. She is author and co-author of 70 publications in international journals (50% as corresponding author), 
and person in charge of IPCF for the Horizon2020 project AGROCYCLE.  
Mr. Marco Sandroni (male), Master Degree in Chemistry at Pisa University, has over 30 years of experience working in 
polymer processing, extrusion running on several polymeric types.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. M.B. Coltelli, S. Bronco, C. Chinea, The effect of free radical reactions on structure and properties of poly(lactic acid) 
(PLA) based blends, Polymer Degradation and Stability 95 (2010) 332-341  
2. M. C. Righetti, D. Prevosto, E. Tombari, Time and Temperature Evolution of the Rigid Amorphous Fraction and 
Differently Constrained Mobile Amorphous Fractions in PLLA”, Macromol. Chem. Phys. Doi: 10.1002/macp.201600210.  
3. M. C. Righetti, C. Escrig Rondán, S. Bronco, F. Ciardelli, F. Signori, A. Boggioni, Evidences of Transesterification, Chain 
Branching and Cross-Linking in a Biopolyester Commercial Blend upon Reaction with Dicumyl Peroxide in the Melt”, 
Macromol. Mat. Eng., 300(2), 153–160, 2015. 
4. L. Aliotta, P. Cinelli, M. B. Coltelli, M.C. Righetti, M. Gazzano, A. Lazzeri. European Polymer Journal 2017, (Effect of 
nucleating agents on crystallinity phases, and properties o f Poly (lactic acid) (PLA), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2017.04.041  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. NANO-CHITOPACK: Sustainable technologies for the production of  biodegradable materials based on natural chitin -
nanofibrils derived by waste of fish industry, to produce food grade packaging (Grant Agreement no:315233, FP7 -SME, 
completed) 
2. DIBBIOPACK: Development of injection and blow extrusion molded biodegradable and multifunctional packages by 
nanotechnology: improvement of structural and barrier properties, smart features and sustainability (Grant Agreement 
number: 280676, FP7-NMP-2011-LARGE-5, completed) 
3. OLI-PHA: A novel and efficient method for the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate polymer-based packaging from olive 
oil waste water. (Grant Agreement no: 280604-2, completed) * 
4. AGRIMAX: Agri & food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi-feedstocks biorefinery processing technologies 
for new high added value applications (BBI GA 720720, starting date 01.10.2016) 
5. POLYBIOSKIN: High performance functional bio -based polymers for skin -contact products in biomedical, cosmetic and 
sanitary industry” Horizon 2020 / BBI-JU, Call: H2020-BBI-JTI-2016, BBI PPP, GA 745839) 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
• Brabender Plastograph Mixer 
• NGLabtec Coater ZAA 2300 
• Blow extruder Teknomast, 25 mm screw 
• Universal Testing Machine Instron 4302, and Mod. 5966 
• Fourier FT-IR Nicolet 380  
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 59 of 105 
• Charpy Impact Tester CEAST 9050 
• Thermogravimetric Analyser TG/DTA 7200 Seiko EXSTAR. 
• Differential Scanning Calorimeter Perkin Elmer DSC4000 and DSC 8500 equipped with Intracooler III 
• Infrared spectrometer Spectrum Two Perkin Elmer equipped with Diamond ATR 
• Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) Instrument Agilent Technologies 1200 Series equipped with two PLgel 5 µm 
MiniMIX-D columns and a refraction index detector 
• Carver Hot Press 
• X’Pert PRO (PANalytical) Powder Diffractometer -Cu Kα Radiation (1.541874 Å) 
• Sonotrode Hielscher UP200St 
 
 
Participant no. 3 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
Centre Scientifique & Technique de l’Industrie Belge, 
Centexbel (CTB) / Belgium 
Description of the legal entity  
CTB is the Belgian scientific and technical center for the textile industry, located in the heart of the Belgian 
industry with strong links to the majority of the textile and plastic conversion companies. CTB offers a 
complete range of standardized testing , it is a notified body for protective clothing, and can deliver CE 
marking and testing. CTB is also involved in standardization committees and offers technological advice and 
training to companies in Belgium or abroad. Via take -over of the “Flemish Plasti c Centre” its expertise and 
services have been diversified towards the plastic and composite industry.  
The research focus of CTB is on applied research, funded by private contract as well as national and international agencies 
(e.g. H2020, FP7, LIFE, Interreg, Eranet). 
Some well selected subjects for strategic research are: i) intelligent textiles; ii) innovative finishing, coating and laminating 
formulations and technology ; iii) biomedical interactions of textiles; iv) polymer formulation and extrusion pr ocesses 
(incl. biopolymers); v) implementation of nanotechnology, vi) additive manufacturing and vii) textile reinforced composites. 
In the past decennium large expertise was built -up in the domain of processing via formulation and pilot line processing of  a 
range of biopolymers including PLA. The developments resulted in a range of industrial implementations in different textile 
domains. An extended controlled biodegradability could boost the further penetration and implementation of biopolymers in the 
textile market.  
Main tasks 
CTB will have important tasks in WP3 (development of PLA based textile coatings), WP4 (evaluation of recycled PLA based 
materials to staple fibres) and WP6 (filament production and characterisation).  
The main tasks therefore include:  
- Processing of biopolymers into monofilament & multifilament yarns at lab and pilot scale and evaluation of the yarn properties. 
- Application of PLA based (functional) coatings. 
- Evaluation of reprocessability recycled PLA materials to textile materials with SILON. 
- Supporting large companies SIOEN and SILON in material evaluation for specific products (mainly tea bags and staple fibres). 
- Evaluation of the new materials for textile applications. 
CTB can also add their experience in the development of compounds (WP2). Fur thermore, CTB will give input in the 
requirements for textile products (WP1) and support assessments and dissemination tasks (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
CTB, as a technologic centre, is focused to help companies in the textile sector & plastics converting industry to develop new 
materials & products and increase their competitiveness through innovation. CTB is already for several years working on the 
processing of biopolymers to support the industry in the transformation towards innovative and sustainable textile products and 
preparing the shift towards a sustainable bioeconomy. 
CTB has state -of-the art test facilities for chemical, physical, microbiological and burning behaviour testing, as well as pilot  
lines for extrusion, injection molding, coating, knitting & braiding, weaving. This equipment is used for research projects a nd 
direct evaluation of new material & technology possibilities by a variety of companies. 
Due to the growing importance of the bi oeconomy and the industrial request for research and development support on 
implementation of the bioeconomy, Centexbel, supported by regional authorities, is making a major investment in extending 
its laboratory and pilot -line facilities. An Investment pr ogramme with a total value of 2.4 M€ will be performed in the period 
2017-2019. Thanks to this investment the possibilities of the semi -industrial processes required within the BIOnTOP project 
are further extended.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 60 of 105 
Dr Lien Van der Schueren (female), holds a master in Materials Engineering and obtained her PhD in Textile Engineering on 
the subject of chromic textile materials. At CTB she is mainly working on European and private research projects in the field of 
extrusion of thermoplastic polymers and fibre reinforced composites, including biobased materials.  
Dr Ine De Vilder (female), after finishing her studies as industrial chemical engineer, Ine obtained a PhD in chemistry. Since 
her start at CTB more than 7 years ago, she has conducted research i n the field of textile functionalization and surface 
modification. She has been involved in multiple private, regional and European research projects with a broad range of topics 
like flame retardancy, protective clothing, architectural textile, bedding, hotmelt applications etc. She has specific expertise in 
the development of coated or laminated textiles enabling recycling (e.g. coated/laminated textiles in which all components 
consist of the same material, specific design of textiles enabling separation of the different layers). 
Dr Sofie Huysman  (female), Sofie has a master’s degree in materials science and a PhD in sustainable materials 
management. She works at CTB as a research scientist in the group of Functional Thermoplastic Textiles since 2016. Her 
research is focusing on processing of biopolymers (PLA, PBS, lignin) and polymer based additive manufacturing. 
Dr. Luc Ruys  (male), R&D manager of the functional thermoplastic textile department. 30 years of experience in textile 
research especially in the  field of polymer extrusion including biopolymers into textile structures. Coordinator of FP7 project 
BIOAGROTEX and partner in several European research projects. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. L. Van der Schueren et al. - BIO4SELF: Biobased self-functionalised self-reinforced composite materials based on high-
performance nanofibrillar PLA fibres – Bioplastics magazine [04/16] Vol. 11, p. 36-37, 2016. 
2. L. Van der Schueren, Guy Buyle, Luc Ruys – Biobased self-reinforced polymer composites from polylactic acid, Plastics 
are Future congress, Valencia, 2016. 
3. L. Van der Schueren - High Quality PLA yarns for technical applications, Conference on Biobased Textiles and Plastics 
(Elewijt), 2015. 
4. I De Schrijver - Impact of regulation on processing and recycling in the textile and plastic industry, EFRA, general 
assembly meeting, Belgium, 2016. 
5. D De Smet, M. Vanneste - Development and implementation of biomaterials in textile coating and finishing, ICTF 
2015: 17th International Conference on Textiles and Fashion, Paris 2015. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. FIBFAB: Industrialization of Biobased Textile Fabrics for Clothing Applications (H2020 2017-2018). 
2. BIO4SELF: Bio-based self-functionalised self-reinforced composite materials based on high performance nanofibrillar PLA 
fibres (H2020 2016-2019) – Coordinated by CTB. 
3. FuPLATex: Functionalisation of PLA fibers and yarns (ERANET-Cornet 2016-2018). 
4. BIO-EOL: End-of-life possibilities of biopolymer based consumer products (ERANET-Cornet: 2014-2015). 
5. BIOAGROTEX: Development of new agrotextiles from renewable resources and with a tailored biodegradability (FP7 
2008-2012) – Coordinated by CTB. 
6. ECOXY:  Bio-based recyclable, reshapable and repairable (3R) fibr e-reinforced EpOXY composites for automotive and 
construction sectors. (H2020 – BBI 2017-2021) – WP-leader: high tenacity PLA fibre reinforcements. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Micro-compounder & twin-screw compounder for (re)formulating thermoplastics. 
Lab lines for small scale testing of formulations (10 à 200g) in mono- & multifilaments. 
Pilot line for tape & monofilament production; mono- and bicomponent structures. 
Pilot lines for multifilament yarn production: FDY, POY, BCF; mono and bicomponent. 
Fabric coating and finishing equipment, both lab scale (A4-size) and pilot scale (roll-to-roll, 0.5m width). Available techniques 
are knife coating (direct and transfer coating), yarn coating, hotmelt, padding, UV and IR technology, Corona technology, … 
Knitting, weaving, braiding equipment. 
All relevant analytical instruments to characterize polymer properties including, rheological behaviour, stabilit y, thermal 
properties and morphology, mechanical properties of textiles and plastics.   
 
 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 61 of 105 
Participant 
no. 
4 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
Fachhochschule Albstadt Sigmaringen (ASU)/ Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
Food technology & nutrition is the core part of the education programme and the applied 
research in the faculty of Life Sciences of Albstadt -Sigmaringen University (ASU). Its 
activities belong to food product & process innovation (e.g. research projects in  
optimisation of food processing, functional & nutritional properties of food and food 
packaging) and production of cosmetic products with botanical extracts. Business innovation modelling is also a central part in 
the faculty of Business Science & Managem ent of ASU. Advanced materials are the core research and teaching field for the 
faculty of Engineering. ASU is a project partner in the field of safeguarding food quality & sustainable food packaging and i n 
the field of developing new business models. It aims to expose students & scientific staff to real world problems in an EU-scale, 
thus enabling them to interact with other skilled actors in an international environment. 
Main Tasks 
ASU will take lead in WP3 Development of coating solutions with tailored properties. 
The main tasks therefore include: 
-  Processing and formulation of bio-based barrier coatings to reach project targets by green chemistry. 
-  Development, processing and testing of a new water barrier and repellence coating. 
- Processing and testing of the barrier and repellence coatings for films & trays. 
- PLA-based textile grafting for hydrophobisation. 
- Characterisation of multilayer films and textiles produced by coating and grafting. 
They will also support packaging upscaling in WP5 as well as the sensory analysis by trained panellist in WP5 and 6. 
Finally, they lead the state -of-the-art task review (1.1) leading to the publication of review papers (contributing therefore to 
WP7) and they will give input in WP4 for LCA analyses. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
At ASU the faculty of Life Sciences scientific staff is very experienced in the development and characterization of food and 
food packaging. This includes the surface modification of bio -based films a s well as the incorporation of active packaging 
constituents and the full characterisation of packaging relevant properties. They can perform sensory testing of food contact  
materials with respect to their interactive processes and compliance with food reg ulation. The faculty of life sciences has the 
intense know-how about degradation reactions of food during storage trials. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Prof. Dr. Markus Schmid  (male) is a graduate in busine ss administration. He holds a diploma degree in Food Technology 
and a master degree in Food Processing from the University of Applied Sciences Fulda as well as a Doctor´s degree from the 
Technical University of Munich, Germany. As Professor at Albstadt -Sigmaringen University his major research and teaching 
areas are in the field of Process Technology and Process Design in Life Sciences with emphasis on food preservation and 
food packaging technology. He is actively involved in preparing project proposals an d works as project manager in food 
packaging related public founded and industrial projects. He is author and co-author of more than 50 peer-review publications 
in journals of high repute and is regularly invited to speak at workshops and conferences. He was involved in several National 
and European projects dealing with the use of residue derived fractions in food packaging. (e.g. ThermoWhey: EraNet -
ManuNet 02PN2020; Bio4MAP: FP7- 606144, BioBoard: FP7- 315313, ProgRESS: CorNet). 
Prof. Dr. Astrid Klingshirn (female) holds a diploma degree in Home Economics and Nutrition from the Technical University 
of Munich as well as a Doctor´s degree from the University of Bonn, Germany. As Professor at Albstadt-Sigmaringen University 
her major research and teaching areas are in the field of Physical Food Analysis, Sensory Analysis, Food Product Development 
and Innovation Management, Appliance and Food Service Technology, with a special focus on the impact of food preparation 
and storage technologies on physical and sens ory food quality parameters. She is currently actively involved in research 
projects driving the standardization of home appliances and professional catering equipment related to performance 
parameters (e.g.: IEC SC 59 M/WG 4, CENELEC/TC 59X WG18). 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Schmid, M., S. Merzbacher and K. Müller (2018). "Time-dependent crosslinking of whey protein based films during 
storage." Materials Letters 215: 8-10. 
2. Kaiser, K., M. Schmid and M. Schlummer (2018). "Recycling of Polymer -Based Multilayer Packaging: A Review." 
Recycling 3(1): 1. 
3. Klingshirn, A.; Schmid, A. (2016): Assurance of food safety and shelf life in food preparation and consumption areas: A 
basic analysis for the usage potential of Laminar Air Flow Technologies in private homes. In: Herbert, U.; Kreyenschmidt, 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 62 of 105 
 
 
Participant no. 5 Name (short name)/ Country European Bioplastics E.V. (EUBP) / Germany 
Description of the legal entity  
European Bioplastics is the industry association representing the bioplastics industry in 
Europe across the entire bioplastics value chain. Established over 20 years ago, EUBP now 
has 70 member companies from across the globe. EUBP’s members primarily prod uce, 
refine, and distribute bioplastics, i.e. plastics that are bio -based, biodegradable, or both. In 
addition, biomass feedstock producers, bioplastics converters and compounders, and several renowned academic and private 
research institutions are also me mbers of EUBP. The association’s key objectives are to serve as a contact and network 
platform, as a primary resource for information about the bioplastics industry, and as a catalyst for advancing the objectives 
of the growing bioplastics industry as a whole. EUBP coordinates various working groups and product groups focussed on 
these themes, such as the PG Bio -based and PG Biodegradable, and actively supports the introduction and monitoring of 
industry standards (such as EN 13432) and best practices. As part of that commitment, EUBP has introduced the Seedling® 
logo, an EN 13432-based conformity mark of industrial compostability for biodegradable plastic packaging. Increasingly, EUBP 
comments on political processes linked to the advancement of the Circular Economy in Europe and legislation impacting on 
the bioplastics industry’s ability to fully bring to bear its innovative potential. 
Main tasks 
EUBP’s key task is to lead the Project’s innovation and dissemination activities (WP7). EUBP will draw on an extensive 
repertoire of dissemination channels, such as self -organised events, 3 rd party events, publications in relevant indust ry and 
academic publications as well mainstream media, press releases, online and social media channels, and concrete direct verbal 
and written dissemination to potential licensees. The contribution to policy maker recommendations and standard will also be 
part of their role. 
In WP1, EUBP will also be contributing significantly to the identification of suitable bioplastic base materials and their suppliers, 
probing among its members companies for suitable organisations that may be willing to contribute sample materials in return 
for access to relevant information resulting from the project (unless confidential). Overseeing these communication activitie s 
with a considerable number of market participants also feeds back into the dissemination / licensee acquisition part of EUBP’s 
role. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
J. (Ed.): Proceedings of  the 6th International Conference Cold Chain Management: Temperature Controlled Logistics.  
Institute of Nutritional Food Sciences, Bonn. 
4. Löffler, S.; Klingshirn, A. (2017): Bewertungsoptionen der Lagerperformance von Haushaltskältegeräten am Beispiel 
Feldsalat. In: Hauswirtschaft und Wissenschaft 3. 
5. Andrae, J.; Baier, E, Bölts, M.; Klingshirn, A.(2016): Lebensmittelverarbeitung im Haushalt. ISBN/EAN 978-3-8308-1216-
6. 2. Auflage. - Bonn : aid infodienst Ernährung, Landwirtschaft, Verbraucherschutz. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  
1. InnoNetz, Land(auf) Schwung (German Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture): Regional companies and research 
organizations in the area of food production are identified and invited to join a research network. Focus of the activities is 
the sustainable production of food. https://www.bmel.de/EN/RuralAreas/_Texte/LandAufSchwung_2.html?nn=313232 
www.hs-albsig.de/innonetz. 
2. Humidity Loss of Fresh Produce in Refrigerator Storage Compartments: Evaluation of test method options with high 
repetitious accuracy on behalf of the European Committee of Domestic Equipment Manufacturers (APPLiA), 2016. 
3. Scientific evaluation of test methods for Refrigerated Food Storage Quality Performance on behalf of the European 
Committee of Domestic Equipment Manufacturers (APPLiA), 2016. 
4. Coolfresh: Development of internationally applicable test standards to assess th e essential food preservation 
characteristics of household refrigerating appliances (WIPANO-Project, 03TNG001B), running. 
5. AlpBioEco - Valorisation of innovative bio-economical potentials along bio-based food & botanical extract value chains in 
the Alpine Space. WP T1 (walnut value chain - food/cosmetic applications) & WP T2 (Business models in regard to the 
walnut value chain), running project. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
ASU has the capability to coat water-born coatings in different thicknesses on all substrates considered in this project. Different 
polymer coatings can be processed to a multilayer setup with a film width of up to 240 mm. Additionally, the facu lty has the 
analytical equipment for characterizing the mechanical as well as barrier properties of packaging films. The sensory laboratory 
is professionally equipped and the panellists are trained. 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 63 of 105 
EUBP is the largest association and network within the bioplastics industry. It can draw on an extensive close-knit network of 
key personnel in organisations involve d in bioplastics research, sourcing, production, distribution, consumption, as well as 
contacts involved in the pertinent political processes, associations, NGOs, and civil society organisations. As part of EUBP’ s 
commitment to furthering the goals of the bioplastics industry, acting as catalyst for information exchange and distribution, as 
a trusted source of information, and acting as a convener of some of the industry’s key events and working groups is part of 
EUBP’s primary daily activities. EUBP has departments dedicated to policy affairs, member and industry communication and 
PR, and the technical environmental affairs department with a focus on bioplastics, whose blend of expertise provides EUBP 
with the tools to carry out complex dissemination activities and reach a vast number of decision makers across the industry. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Mr CHRISTIAN SCHULZ (male) studied ‘Technology of Renewable Resources’ at the University of Applied Sciences and Arts 
Hanover and worked from 2011 - 2019 as a research associate at the IfBB – Institute for Bioplastics and Biocomposites in 
various third-party funded projects, among others for the development of a database for products made of bioplastics for public 
procurement as well as in the sustainability team for market analysis, calculation of land use and on life cycle assessment o f 
bio-based plastics. He also supported the institute's public relations work, e.g. in the context of the webinar series ‘Biomaterials 
in Focus’ and had been part of a group of young researchers who dealt with the special challenges of biomaterials on a 
technical-industrial level as well as in the field of marketing and communication. Since January 2020, he has been in charge 
of the EU project activities of European Bioplastics. 
Ms CONSTANCE IßBRÜCKER (female) heads European Bioplastics’s Environmental Affairs Department. She is responsible 
for issues regarding the biodegradability, sustainability, and standardisation of bio -based and biodegradability plastics. Her 
role involves leading EUBP’s various Product and Working Groups, such as PG  Biobased and PG Biodegradable, the WG 
Standardisation, and the Seedling® Advisory Committee. She is a member of several standardisation committees on DIN, 
CEN and ISO level. Constance holds a degree in Chemistry from the University of Jena in Germany with  specialisation in 
Bioorganic and Macromolecular Chemistry. Before joining the association, she worked in different research groups at 
universities in Berlin and Jena, with her research focusing on polysaccharide chemistry, and on cellulose dissolution, 
modification and analytics in particular. She also has research experience in biocatalytic production of chiral amines. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. EUBP organises the largest bioplastics industry forum in Europe which can be used for dissemination activities. 
2. EUBP regularly publishes background papers, position papers, and similar documents on bioplastics and related subjects. 
3. In cooperation with academic and private scientific research institutes, EUBP annually publishes a comprehensive 
bioplastics market data study. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  
1. EUBP has created and owns the Seedling® mark of conformity for compostability of plastic packaging. 
2. EUBP continues to be invo lved in the supervision of the EN 13432 standard upon which European certificates of 
biodegradability of plastic packaging are based. Furthermore, EUBP is a member of several CEN and ISO committees 
dealing with plastics and packaging. 
3. EUBP provides authoritative input for all relevant standards on the European level. 
4. PolyBioSkin, High performance functional bio-based polymers for skin-contact products in biomedical, cosmetic and 
sanitary industry – H2020 BBI GA 745839- 2017-2020, WP leader Dissemination and Communication. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
As the key platform for technical knowledge, industry information, contacts, and networking, EUBP has access to a significant 
network of decision makers in the world of bioplastics and a contact database for the association’s dissemination activities 
comprising over 8,000 contacts. 
 
 
Participant no. 6 Name (short name)/ Country Total Corbion PLA B.V. (Total Corbion) / 
Netherlands  
Description of the legal entity  
Total Corbion PLA is a global technology leader in Poly Lactic Acid (PLA) and lactide monomers. PLA is a biobased and 
biodegradable polymer made from annually renewable resources, offering a reduced carbon footprint versus many traditional 
plastics. The Luminy® PLA portfolio, which includes both high heat and standard PLA grades, is an innovative material that is 
used in a wide range of markets from packaging to consumer goods, fibers and automotive. Total Corbion PLA, headquartered 
in the Netherlands, will start up a new production plant in Thailand in the second half of 2018. The company is a 50/50 joint 
venture between Total and Corbion. www.total-corbion.com. 
Main tasks 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 64 of 105 
Total Corbion supply quantities of PLA for WP 2 and 3. They will collaborate in the assessment of the project results in WP5-
6 by comparing BIOnTOP with commercial PLA suitability for the packaging sector and beyond. 
Total corbion will provide unique market knowledge on areas for commercial application (WP7).  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Act as PLA supplier is the main business of TOTAL-CORBION, it fits perfectly with the profile. . 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Mr Kees Joziasse studied at the Faculty of Chemical Technology and Material Science at Delft University. He obtained his 
doctorate at the Polymer Laboratory of the Faculty of Chemistry, University of Groningen. He has worked for Royal Philips 
Electronics and Havells India Ltd in various global roles in different countries. In 2010, Kees joined the Market Unit PLA of 
Corbion, where he was responsible for the global product & application development portfolio, including PLA polymerization 
technology, compounding, injection molding, film blowing, fiber spinning, sheet extrusion and thermoforming. Since the start 
of the joint venture between Corbion and Total in March 2017, he is now Senior Director R&D in Total Corbion PLA bv. 
Ms Jenifer Mitja, has an Industrial Technical Chemical Engineering Degree by University Polytechnic University of Catalonia 
(UPC) and Materials Engineering Degree by Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB). She has worked in different 
companies in the field of packaging and plastics in the roles of application engineer, R&D films responsible, among others. In 
2015, Jenifer joined Corbion as an application engineer for bioplastics. In 2017 when the joint venture Total Corbion PLA bv 
was created, she joined as Application Engineer for PLA, focused in extrusion coating and powder applications. 
Mr Floris Buijzen, studied Life Science & Technology at Leiden University and Delft University of Technology with a masters 
in Cell Factory and Science Bases Business. Floris joined Corbion in 2010 and has held various roles in the company in the 
field of competitive intelligence and market development. In 2015 he joined the Bioplastics team as product market manager 
in 2016 and transferred to the joint venture Total Corbion PLA which was established in March 2017. In th is role, he is 
responsible for the product portfolio, regulatory affairs and market development. 
 
 
Participant no. 7 Name (short name)/ Country Planet Bioplastics S.R.L. (PLANET) / Italy 
Description of the legal entity  
Planet Bioplastics is a new start-up of Pisa University that includes Professor 
of same university and researchers of National Research Council of Pisa. 
Other owners of the company have large experience in production and 
marketing of polymers. The company has license from Pisa University’s patent 
for the production of compostable transparent films based on Polylactic 
acid (PLA) and reactive plasticizers which they are aiming to exploit and will also be further developed in the project. The 
company has acces s to equipments for processing and characterization in Pisa University and in the company Caldara, 
producer of plastics, whose owners are even partly owners of Planet Bioplastics.  
Planet Bioplastics plans to be involved in regional, national and European project with high R&D participation but oriented t o 
obtaining innovative product to propose on the market of bioplastics. Thus, the company is strongly interested in the present  
project for growing and starting a real production and marketing of bio -based and compostable products. In the timeframe of 
the project the company plans to hire 1-2 persons, that will be partly dedicated to the project.  
They recently applied to become a full BIC member. 
Main tasks 
PLANET will be involved in the activities related to setting conditions for plastic processing and will support for the optimisation 
of formulation to be used for production of BIOnTOP demonstrators. They will upscale INSTM results. In particular, in WP2 (for 
coating application in WP3) and 5 (to feed the packaging converting steps), PLANET will take care of pilot and industrial 
production of large quantity of granules to be used for production of items by cast extrusion, blow moulding extrusion, but also 
produce some thermoformable sheets. Processing conditions as thermal profile, screw configuration, feeding of additives etc. 
will be optimized by specific energy study. In case it will be necessary specific processing aids will be introduced in agreement 
with converting partners. In other WPs, for definition of technical requirements, and providing inputs for material optimisation, 
data for LCA and materials for validation and degradation tests. PLANET will also carry on trials on the possibility to internally 
recycle scraps of production, adding the scraps in percentage to virgin materials during processing. PLANET will chair the 
general assembly and have a key role in the exploitation (WP7) of the project results especially compounds by REX.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
PLANET is a startup, with strong scientific background on processing and properties of Polylactic acid. The reference person 
Prof, Andrea Lazzeri has huge experience of National and European project. The company needs to grow and to achieve real 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 65 of 105 
production and marketing in few years, thus is strongly motivated in this project and extremely interested to achieve good 
products for its portfolio.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Prof. Andrea Lazzeri (male) was graduated in Chemical Engineering at University of Pisa in 1982, in 1984 joined UNIPI as 
research associate. In 1991 completed his PhD at Cranfield University. He has been lecturer (1991-2002), Associate Professor 
(2002-2008) and from 1st January 2009 Full Professor of Materials Science and Engineering. He is specialized in preparation 
and use of micro -and nano -particles in polymeric composites, rubber toughening of plastics, defo rmation and fracture of 
materials and in ceramic matrix composites. He is author of 40 publications on international journals and 4 patents. Didactical 
activity in Materials Science and Engineering and Materials Science and Technology for Cultural Heritage. He coordinated two 
European projects on materials science in FP7, and is currently coordinating a project in Horizon 2020, NMP -21-2014-IA, 
Nanocathedral.  
Ms Doriana Morganti (female), will be in charge of reporting, joining the film and sheets extrusion  trials. She graduated in 
industrial chemistry at Milan University in 1986 and has relevant experiences: she was trained on plastic processing and 
characterisation at Brunel University (UK) for 8 months, worked in Versalis in applied research for 2 years, in Shell Research 
laboratories (CRCSL Belgium) for 3 years. She had several experiences in sales, among them 10 years in charge of new 
business and sales for a Japanese trading company, Sojitz Europe which distributes in Europe engineering polymers and food 
packaging specialties. Recently she has been in charge of a compostable compound homologation and development for an 
Italian distributor. 
Dr. Ilaria Canesi (female) is a Chemical Engineer. She graduated at University of Pisa on 3 March 2017 and her thesi s title 
was: “Fracture resistance and plastic behavior of poly (lactic acid) (PLA) toughened with poly (butylene adipate -co-
terephthalate) (PBAT)”. She works in the R&D team for Planet Bioplastics srl, start-up Spin-off of Pisa University. 
Ms Massimilano Caldara, Alessandro Caldara, Attilio Giorgio Caldara (male) are co-owner of Planet Bioplastics, and own 
the company Caldara Plast (www.cldara.it). They have many years of experience in polymer processing and plastic marketing.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. V.T. Phuong, V. Gigante, L. Aliotta, M. B. Coltelli, P. Cinelli, A. Lazzeri. Composite Science and Technology, CSTE 6603, 
2017, 139, 127 –137, Reactively extruded ecocomposites based on poly(lactic acid)/bisphenol A polycarbonate blends 
reinforced with regenerated cellulose microfibers.  
2. MK Fehri, C Mugoni, P Cinelli, I Anguillesi, MB Coltelli, S Fiori, M Montorsi, A. Lazzeri "Composition dependence of the 
synergistic effect of nucleating agent and plasticizer in poly(lactic acid): A Mixture Design study"  eXPREss Polymer Letter 
2016; 10(4): 274-288.  
3. V.T. Phuong, M.B. Coltelli, P. Cinelli, M. Cifelli, S. Verstichel, A. Lazzeri, Compatibilization and property enhancement of 
poly (lactic acid)/polycarbonate blends through triacetin-mediated interchange reactions in the melt, Polymer, 2014, 55, 
4498-4513. 
4. M. A. Rahman, D. De Santis, G. Spagnoli, G. Ramorino, M. Penco, V. T. Phuong, A. Lazzeri, Biocomposites based on 
lignin and plasticized poly(L-lactic acid), J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013, DOI: 10.1002/APP.38705. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
The company is very recently born and has participated in project yet but its internal R&D activities are fully aligned with the 
project goal to tailor PLA properties through compounds they will commercialise.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
• COMAC co-rotating twin screw extruder EBC 25 HT semi-industrial extruder for producing granules  
• 4 gravimetric feeders Ketrion 
• 1 peristaltic pump for liquid additives 
• 2 Spectrophotometers Color quest Hunter Lab n°2 
• 1 MFI (melt flow index) CEAST automatic 
• 1 Dynamometer INSTRON 3366 for tensile/flexural tests 
• 2 Charpy/IZOD equipment 
• 2 CEAST/Instron machines for impact samples notching 
• 1 Oven 
• 1 Precision balance for density measurements 
• 4 Injection moulding machines for testing samples  
• 1 HDT/VICAT thermal testing 
 
 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 66 of 105 
Participant no. 8 Name (short name)/ Country BIO-MI Drustvo S Ogranicenom Odgovornoscu Za 
proizvodnju Istrazivanjei Razvoj. (BIOMI) / Croatia 
Description of the legal entity  
 Bio-mi Ltd. is a small and medium size manufacturer and research and 
development company that is dedicated to the production of final and semi-final 
thermoplastic materials and products used for the production of primary, 
secondary and tertiary packaging but also in agriculture & construction sectors. 
Advanced engineering of new bio -based and sustainable plastic materials and 
solutions are in focus of our activities. Apart from developing new bio-based building blocks and materials, Bio-mi Ltd. provides 
services of consulting, advising and education in the field of tailoring and transformation of plastics and other advanced 
materials into final products in line with bio-economy and circular economy goals. 
Bio-mi Ltd. has expertise and experience in the field of processing and recycling of plastic waste. Our activities are focused on 
a complete substitution of fossil -based materials with biomate rials and recycled materials where one of our priorities is to 
explore biodegradability and recyclability and to evaluate potential of biomaterials, specifically biopolymers and recycled 
plastics streams in current environment. 
Bio-Mi is a full BIC member. 
Main Tasks 
In frame of BIOnTOP Bio-Mi will be responsible for obtaining semi product films and final film applications (WP5). In particular 
they will produce thinner films from virgin BIOnTOP  compounds to be used as films to be coated at INNOTECH, lids and 
flowpack, and thicker films from SMR that they will convert into reusable bags . To ensure smooth running of activities Bio-Mi 
will use several extrusion technologies such as single screw extrusion, co-extrusion and mono-extrusion, blown extrusion and 
cast extrusion. They will be also involved in Tasks 4.1 and 4.2 providing information for LCA tests and recyclability & 
reprocessing and in WP7 too. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Bio-mi aims are perfectly aligning wi th main goals of proposed project. For Bio -mi this idea represents huge step forward 
because this demonstration could prove us use and behaviour of PLA and copolymers which are bio based at pilot scale TRL5 
and in real environment obtaining high value films and products for packaging. Apart of mentioned, this is opportunity to tackle 
some questions and concerns such as bio-based content in bioplastics and of course question of efficiency of organic recycling 
(anaerobic digestion) and question of countries w hich don’t have such facilities and utilization of organic fractions of waste. 
This project is opportunity that we continue to work on new packaging solutions with advanced and/or tuned properties that 
are environment friendly (our work is based on 94/62/E C Directive on packaging and packaging waste) where project aims 
perfectly fits with Bio-mi strategy and commitment. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Filip Miketa  (male), MA degree in Business Economics. As a chief Operating Officer (from the year 2001) he develops 
marketing and commercial activities in Mi-Plast and lately in Bio-mi. He is also involved in the company´s green business and 
products process implementation. Currently he is a project manager and researcher in 10 H2020, FP7, LIFE EU projects and 
several Esif funds projects. As a Head of R&D he is active member of different expert bodies in Croatia (expert group for H2020 
SC2, H2020 SC5, S3 clever specialisation) but also at European level (Bio-based Industry Consortium).   
 
Alan Drljacic (male): Chemical engineer with 30 years of experience in refining, compounding and chemical industry. He has 
extensive experience in new products formulation and development. In Bio-mi he will be responsible for scale up of extrusion 
process.  
 
Ivona Miketa (female): Master of Arts degree in Economics. As a project manager and strategic manager, she participates in 
several H2020 and FP7 EU funded projects. At Bio-mi company she is also working on development of green products which 
have to be aligned with all three components: social, environmental and economic. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
Main products are packaging and semi packaging products i.e. films and trays for primary secondary and tertiary packaging 
(for food applications, shopping bags, garbage bags, transport films) as well as for agro -sector (films, big bags mulch films) 
and construction sector. Except manufacture of this products our main core activity is recycling of plastic waste and 
manufacture of some products which are 100% obtained from waste. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 67 of 105 
 
 
Participant no. 9 Name (short name)/ Country Emsur M acdonell, S.A (EMSUR)/ 
Spain (terminated because of the 
partial takeover) 
Description of the legal entity  
Emsur is the division of the Lantero  Group dedicated to the manufacture of flexible packaging 
solutions primarily designed for the food sector, with both rotogravure and flexographic printing. Our 
printing technologies include both QR and Ink-jet printing.  
Emsur’s activities began in 1990 a t the Coexpan plant in Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, with the 
production of flexible sheet plastic containers for packaging food products. 5 years later Emsur opened its first production plant 
in Madrid, which started an expansion process that took the company to an international level, with its current 8 plants located 
in Spain, Poland, Mexico, Argentina, France and the USA, as well as our 7 sales offices. 
Main tasks 
Emsur will contribute to defining the packaging specifications in WP1. They will support in the development of the barrier 
and repellence coatings for films & trays in WP3, especially performing initial thermoformability tests. Emsur will also 
contribute to exploitation and dissemination activities (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Emsur is among the European leaders in segment of flexible packaging  film, has a range of production plants with extensive 
technologies and has already been involved in innovative projects for developing improved packaging materials. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Mrs. Angels Castaño  (female), R&D Global Flexible Project Ma nager EMSUR. Chemistry degree. Expert in design and 
manufacturing flexible film. More than 8 years dealing with customers, innovation projects within the food packaging industrial 
sector. 
Mr. Pascal Reina (male), R&D Global Director EMSUR, COEXPAN. Chemistry Degree. Product Development & Innovation 
leader with more than 21 years experienced in rigid and flexible packaging for the Food industry. Hugh Experience in processes 
of extrusion & coextrusion (barrier) of basewebs for thermoforming applications. 
1. H2020 BBI Effective -Advanced Eco -designed Fibres and Films for large consumer products from biobased 
polyamides and polyesters in a circular Economy perspective 
Other relevant participation through BioMi’s founder MiPlast: 
2. H2020 BBI HYPERBIOCOAT - High performance biomass extracted functional hybrid polymer coatings for food, 
cosmetic and medical device packaging BBI-2015 2019 NA 
3. H2020 CIRC-PACK- towards circular economy in the plastic packaging value chain 
4. H2020 BBI REFUCOAT- High barrier monolayer packaging solutions 
5. H2020 BBI PULPACKTION - Cellulose-based packaging solutions for the specific demands of the food and electronic 
packaging industries 
6. FP7 KBBE BIO -QED - Large scale demonstration for the bio -based bulk chemicals BDO and IA aiming at cost 
reduction and improved sustainability 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Bio-Mi has free access to Mi-Plast facilities, including owns 4 blown extrusion plants and 1 cast extrusion line. Also, at disposal 
is other peripheral equipment and equipment for obtaining of final packaging and semi packaging solutions with printing units 
and recycling plants for regeneration and recycling of waste plastics.  Except mentioned, Bio-mi purchased (via ESIF) several 
new extrusion lines with different purposes where except transformation of plastics and recycling of plastics Bio -mi will be 
ready to create new plastics from bio-sources. 
  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 68 of 105 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
Relevant food packaging formats below (especially lids for trays): 
 
EMSUR also has a range of technical packaging for pharma, chemicals, and cosmetic sectors  (they are UBESOL’s supplier 
for wet wipes packaging): 
 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
• HSL PVC free for dairy products (own recipe) 
• Development of a OPS printed sheet for dairy cup which avoid the need of a banderole, sleeve or even the label. 
• Emseal 25: new dairy packaging 
• Printed film sheet for Dairy packaging  
• Biodegradable barrier coating 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
- One blown extrusion 3 layers line to develop flexible PE-based films. 
- Rotogravure printing machine to apply the coatings (also possibility of flexo application) 
- Blown extrusion line 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 69 of 105 
- Rotogravure printing line 
- Oxtran and Permatran from MOCON to measure the permeability 
- IR Spectrum 
- DSC equipment 
- Dynamometer and COF equipment to control and measure the performance of the material.  
-             New machine Nordmeccanica Labo Combi 400 pilot coating and lamination line 
 
Participant no. 10 Name (short name)/ Country Cristóbal Meseguer S.A. (CMSA)/ Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
CMSA, located in Murcia, was founded in 1987. Its main activity consisted of 
the manufacturing of plastic nets for packaging of agricultural products, but also 
packaging based on paper and plastic film.  
Thanks to a continuous search to find packaging solu tions for our customers, 
CMSA is able to develop and patent new bags and packaging systems which put the packaging of fresh products on a level 
with more industrial production systems. All this without losing the soft treatment of the product and gaining speed. 
We now offer a wider range of products and solutions for packaging, ranging from cheaper products to Premium products. 
Considering the background of 4 years of collaboration, Cristóbal Meseguer S.A. and Mundipack S.L. were merged in June 
2012. This action has improved and completed the product offering, thus becoming a very competitive, complete, innovative 
and modern company of the sector. 
Its products comply with the highest quality standards (currently they are ISO 9001: 2000 certified) and comply with the 
international Framework Regulation regarding food contact material. This translates into an offer of high quality products as  
well as a clear commitment to the environment. 
CMSA markets its products through its own sales network, in 20 countries o f several continents, mainly in Central European 
countries. 
Main tasks 
CMSA will contribute to defining the packaging specifications in WP1. They will participate mainly to the development of 
the net for packaging solutions in WP6, as well as to their validation in comparison with standard materials. They will 
also contribute to exploitation and dissemination activities (WP7) and WP4 (LCA). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
CMSA has a lot of experience in nets packaging development with different formats that can be adapted for a lot of food 
application, mainly in agriculture sector. They have the technical capacity to adapt their equipment for  each format, product 
and material, being the perfect partner for the use of a new material. 
Their experience in the previous project ECOBIONET give they the experience in the development of nets made from 
biodegradable materials. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Mr. Jose Mª Meseguer Huertas  (female). Business degree. CEO of CMSA during more than 20 years, supervising the 
tasks related with their innovation projects and the investment needed for their execution. Participation in European 
Project ECOBIONET 
Mr. Pedro Rodríguez Molina (male). Industrial engineering degree. Production manager in CMSA since 1996. Production 
experience during more than 20 years. Participation in European Project ECOBIONET 
Mrs Ana Guillén Sandoval (female). Biology science degree. Head of the quality area in CMSA. Experience in quality process 
during more than 25 years.  
Mrs Carmen Lorca Morales (female). Bussines management degree. Financial controller at CMSA. 
Mr. Adolfo Pérez Garnés (male). Machining technician. Industrial designer at CMSA. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
• Nets for different format of F&V packaging including some merging industrially compostable nets 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 70 of 105 
            
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
ECOBIONET. Industrial implementation of biodegradable and compostable packaging nets for agricultural and shellfish 
products (Eco-innovation programme) 
ACTIPACH. Development of soil biodegradables packaging with antifungal, antibacterial and anti -germinate properties for 
potatoes and onions packaging (National funding) 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Equipment for net production (extruders and specific dies and accessories) and packaging machines for the final 
bag manufacture. 
 
Participant 
no. 
11 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
SILON s. r. o. (SILON) / CZECH REPUBLIC 
Description of the legal entity  
SILON is a limited liability company that is based on the previous traditional chemical business 
in the Czech Republic. Originally SILON was a registered trade mark of a polyamide fibre 
produced in the plant since 1960’s. Further SILON started with fibre based on other polymers 
and finally added compound production. 
At present, Fibres Division of SILON produces solely PET fibre and majority of the raw 
material is recycled PET. The production is performed on two -step production lines or short -spun. Still the  company profits 
from the long-lasting tradition and know-how that is generated from strong technical cooperation with customers. 
Compounds division produces variety of modified polyolefin -based compounds using a reactive extrusion technology for 
multiple uses, among others raw material for construction purposes – water pipelines, automotive parts, food packaging. 
SILON is a world supplier of the key players in automotive, engineering, food industry and hygiene. 
Main Tasks 
SILON will mainly participate in WP4 by compounding recycled materials for textiles applications and in WP6 processing fibres 
and coated non-woven. They will provide technical and market knowledge on the current use of recycled packaging into textiles 
for a range of applications. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Core competence: Production of compounds and recycled polyester staple fibres. 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Automotive Interiors Expo Stuttgart 2018, 2019, 2020 
Techtextil Frankfurt am Main – Silon is a long-term exhibitor 
INDEX Geneva 2021 – SILON is a long-term exhibitor 
Networks: Edana 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Jana Kadlecová (female), Ing. Ph.D. Technical key account manager: Jana is responsible for new product development, 
validations and approval. She is a Ph.D. graduate of Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Transportation and 
former scientific worker at CTU i n Prague. She has 7 years of experience in processing various EU and national projects in 
interior design, vehicle safety and human -machine interaction. She will be the administrator and Team leader for SILON in 
SUPEFIOR. 
Ing. Adam Vojtovič (male): Adam is the customer support specialist at SILON. He is also doing in parallel his doctoral thesis 
at University in Pardubice – Faculty of Chemical Technology. His role in the project will be analyses using his chemical 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 71 of 105 
 
 
Participant no. 12 Name (short name)/ Country SIOEN Industries NV (SIOEN)/ Belgium 
Description of the legal entity  
SIOEN Industries NV is a diversified stock quoted group with an extensive portfolio 
of products and activities: spinning, weaving and coating, manufacturing of clothing, production of fine chemicals and 
processing of films and technical textiles. Horizontal and vertical integration, diversification and permanent growth have driven 
us since 1960. SIOEN Industries NV is: 
➢ World leader in coated technical textiles 
➢ Strong specialist in high end technical apparel (protective clothing) 
➢ Specialist in fine chemicals 
➢ Global player in the processing of technical textiles (confectioning) 
 
SIOEN Industries NV is a multinational with consumers, employees, business partners and shareholders on every continent. 
SIOEN has 3 divisions: Coating, Apparel and Chemicals. Every day, around the world, millions of people choose our products 
to protect themselves and their goods. Our mission “Protecting through innovation” is not a hollow slogan. By developing and 
producing innovative products that meet people’s and companies ’ everyday needs, we have become world market leader in 
coated textiles. Our films and technical textiles are used for truck side curtains, tilts and tarpaulins, pool covers, tents and 
textile architectures, silo’s, flexible containers (flexitanks), publicity banners, filters, geogrids, road and roofing reinforcement, 
background. 
Ing. Michal Čermák, Ph.D. (male) – has an exhaustive experience in cable insulation area, automotive application. Graduate 
from West Bohemian University in Pilsen, faculty of Electrical engineering, post-graduate studies graduate with several periods 
abroad. 
Ing. Klára Budilová (female): Klára has 8 years of experience in new product implementation and is responsible for product 
processability. Her role in the project will be technology adjustments and product processability. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Compounded materials via reactive extrusion. 
2. Use of fillers (glass, carbon and others). 
3. Crosslinking material. 
4. Fibres for Automotive: application of hollow fiber in acoustic insulation of a vehicle. 
5. Fibre Hygiene: continuous spinning of two different linear weights for direct carding. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  
• SILON performs mostly industrial development which is tailor-made regarding the need of its customer. Thus, the clients 
receive specific product made according to the desired application. 
• Recently, SILON has put together an R&D team (and has been hiring staff) to perform strate gic projects on longer term. 
As an example, Dr. Kadlecová was hired. She is an author/co -author of numerous publications related to automotive 
industry, covering from vehicle interior functions to human-machine interaction modelling as well as practical experience 
with FP6, FP7 and further European and national research projects as a co-solver or administrator. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
• Reactive extrusion lines with multiple possibilities 
• Film-producing pilot line 
• Flammability measurement 
• Chlorine resistance measurement 
• Short-spin (one-step) lines adjusted for processing of post-consumer bottles 
• Long-spin (two-step) lines, possibility to use end-reactor for liquid state polycondensation, adjusted for processing of post-
consumer bottles 
• Laboratory-scale carding and needle punch equipment, precise colour measurement 
• Laboratory for fibre testing 
• Laboratory for analytical chemistry 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 72 of 105 
mattress and pillow covers for hospitals, protective clothing (including gowns and drapes for the operation room), and many 
more. 
Main tasks 
The main role of SIOEN will be in WP6 whereby they will support pilot trials for multifilament yarn extrusion, as well as for the 
production of woven and nonwoven fabrics and preliminary coating trials of fabrics, and therefore also in WP3 which is focus 
on the coating development. They will also contribute to the definition of the specifications for the textiles applications in WP1 
and for the dissemination and exploitation planning in this sector in WP7. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
As a producer of technica l textile with a special focus on geo and agro -textile, SIOEN has the perfect technologies and 
understanding of the market for the project. Each year SIOEN converts appr. 16,000 tons of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 
pallets into technical, high tenacity , multifilament, low and normal shrinkage yarns in a range from 245 dTex to 6600 dTex 
with/without marine-finish, rubber adhesion activator, etc. On demand the yarns can be twisted. These yarns are applied in 
multiple woven and nonwoven applications such a s geotextiles and all kinds of coated textiles (i.e. tarpaulins) in which the 
fabrics act as the reinforcement material. Spinning, weaving and coating of technical textiles are SIOEN’s core competences. 
They already produce tea bags from PLA (see below) an d will consider the project as a platform to obtain a home 
compostable version thereof as well as to explore new bio-based textile application in reusable bags and food wraps. 
Polymers with improved biodegradation in mild conditions are also relevant for their activities in the agrotextile field. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Ir Bert Groenendaal  (male) obtained his PhD in polymer chemistry at the Eindhoven University of Technology 
(Netherlands). After a postdoctoral fellowship at the University of California at Berkeley he moved to industry (Bayer AG and  
Agfa-Gevaert NV, resp.). Since 2008 he is active at Sioen Industries NV as R&D project coordinator. Bert was coordinator of 
the FP7 project AT~SEA (2012-2015) and has been involved in multiple national and international R&D projects. Bert will be 
focussed on tangible results. 
Dr Joost Wille  (male) holds a PhD in Chemistry. After working for Philips and Siemens for several years he jo ined Sioen 
Industries in 1999 to head its R&D department. Joost has many years of experience in coated textiles and was involved in 
various national and international projects. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
▪ SIOEN is Europe’s largest producer of technical, high tenacity, multifilament, low and normal shrinkage yarns 
▪ In recent years SIOEN developed a novel teabag fabric based on PLA 
 
 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
SIOEN has been coordinator and partner within several EU projects (FP7), dealing with a wide range of topics (e.g. electronics 
integrated textiles (i -Tex), textile cultivation substrates (AT~SEA), novel shelter materials (SPEEDKITS), and recycling of 
coated textiles (EcoMeTex). One of these projects, ATSEA, was coordinated by SIOEN and resulted in the founding of the 
spin-off company ATSEA Technologies 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
SIOEN has all infrastructure for industrial scale spinning and weaving of technical yarns, as well as all analytical 
equipment to characterize such yarns. It currently produces 16,000 tons of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 
based technical, high tenacity, multifilament, low and normal shrinkage yarns. 
 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 73 of 105 
Participant no. 13 Name (short name)/ Country WEAREBIO OÜ (WEAREBIO) / Estonia 
Description of the legal entity  
WEAREBIO is a private company located in Tallinn, Estonia. Its current activity is developed in 
the food processing, distribution and retailing areas and thus is part of the extensive supply 
chain of organic farming. The wide range of products include all sorts of raw materials for food 
processing within the organic market but also already processed products such as snacks, 
ready-to-eat food, vegetable oils and others aimed to the final consumer. WEAREBIO follows 
the highest quality standards in the food industry and is currently subject to the EU regulations 
in regards organic production. Moreover, the company values are following the principles of 
sustainable and organic farming in which environmental protection, the use of sustainable and green solutions are key to 
maintain the consumers’ confidence. Through extensive links with food companies in EU, WEAREBIO has a strategic position 
in the Baltic and Scandinavian area that allows the synergy and development of commercial and marketing activities. Other 
activities done are market research, consultancy for EU companies in regards organic farming, production and processing. 
Main tasks 
Main role of WEAREBIO in the project will be supporting the packaging specification definition and validation in WP5 (trays)  
and 6 (nets), providing especially organic fruits and vegetables for the trials and coordinating the packaging validation tes ts 
with its 3rd party La Grana Ecologica SL. Moreover, they will provide wheat milling waste to be used in the processing of the  
biocomposites (WP2). WEAREBIO can provide a strategic view of the future commercialization of the packaging solutions, 
especially in the organic food segment, through market analysis and know-how transfer of the current food packaging solutions.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
WEAREBIO provides the consortium with a specific focus on the organic food sector which has specific expectations in terms 
of having access to sustainable packaging and limitations in terms of food additivation there requiring outmost performances. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Mr. SERGIO MENDOZA (male) is a graduated biochemist with 8 years of experience in the pharmaceutical industry and 7 
years in the organic food producing and processing industry. He is co -owner of the private Spanish Company La Grana 
Ecologica and owner of the Estonian Company WEAREBIO. Sergio has participated in 2 EU research projects for the 
development of sustainable food packaging solutions 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
Broad range of Organic food products packed in different formats. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
Through its 3rd party (La Grana, see section 4.2), from which they are a spin off, WEAREBIO was involved in: 
1. Leguval (FP7): Development of new protein films and coatings with improved barrier properties in packaging when applied 
as a layer on biodegradable plastic films while maintaining biodegradability of the final package. 
2. OLI-PHA- A novel and efficient method for the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate polymer-based packaging from olive oil 
waste water. (Grant Agreement no: 280604-2, Completed)* 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
WEAREBIO will manly provide market insight and packed products. 
See third party for the equipment that will be used in food storage tests 
 
 
Participant no. 14 Name (short name)/ Country Queserías Entrepinares S.A.U (ENTREPINARES) / Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
Queserías Entrepinares is the leading company, by sales volume, in the Spanish Cheese market, since 2012.  
The company was founded in 1984, with closed data on 2015:  
HUMAN CAPITAL: >600 employees; VOLUME (Kg): 44 million; SALES (€): 259 million. 
The company have got different plants manufacturing in Spain to produce different kind of cheeses:  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 74 of 105 
- Ripened Cheeses from different species of milk (cow, sheep, goat and mixed milks), with pasteurized or raw milk, and 
different ripening times (from young to old), including different healthy varieties as Light and low salt. It’s important to note 
that Entrepinares is the first Spanish company which produce Havarti Cheese.  
- Pasteurized white cream cheese (spreadable) in different varieties and flavors. 
- Processed cheese.  
Queserías Entrepinares has got a very high automatized plant for making different formats and packaging technologies to 
obtain the final products.  
The organization has chosen an integrated management system, an d certified in every part, which includes Quality 
Management (ISO 9001), Food Safety (IFS, BRC), Logistic Management (IFS -logistic), Environmental Management (ISO 
14001) and Occupational Health and Safety (OSHAS 18001). 
The company has got a R&D Department with technical specialists in each technology, working in different research lines as 
new product development and product/process improvement. 
Main tasks 
ENTREPINARES will contribute to the definition of the specification for the new eco-innovative packaging concepts to pack 
some of their cheeses as well as the validation trials to prove they fulfil their needs (WP1). They will provide food for the  lab 
scale evaluation of the different laminated and thermoformed packaging and do final validation trials of the selected option 
(WP5). They will contribute to define the applicability of the new packaging and will disseminate the results (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Participation is due to the need for verification that development packaging can be applied in dairy products (cheese) and the 
shelf-life of product thereof is guaranteed without suffering adverse changes. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
ANA ISABEL MORENO BLANCO (female). Technical Quality and R & D Specialist packaging and packaging processes. 
Technical Agricultural Engineering (specializing in Food and Agricultural Industries, with a publication: “Estudio Agronómico  
de Geria”, ISBN 11/2004/7318) and Science and Food Technology. Master in Food Safety and Biotechnology. Manager R&D 
(GESTIDI Program). 7 Years experience in food industry working as technical in wine industry, fish oils, dairy products, and 
during a year working as scientist in the project "Design of new functional foods with heart-healthy features" at the Faculty of 
Sciences (UBU). 5 years working in Queserías Entrepinares as Quality and R+D+I Technical, leading projects related to new 
materials and packaging solutions for different kind of cheeses. 
Dr. INÉS LÓPEZ LÓPEZ (female) PhD in Food Science and Technology, CSIC in Madrid by the Complutense Universi ty of 
Madrid, for the development of functional meat products with seaweeds in 2010. Master in Quality Management. 11 years of 
experience in Food Industry. During 6 years working as scientist in the development of functional meat products at ICTAN 
(CSIC), publishing 15 articles in SCI Journals, 2 articles in no SCI, 2 chapter of book, 1 patent and different communications 
in different National and International Congresses. Currently she is the R&D Manager of Queserías Entrepinares, working in 
the Company from 5 years coordinating the different projects of the company. 
OSCAR J. ESTEBAN CABORNERO (male). Degree in Biology, Master in Food Technologies and finishing PhD (2017) about 
Quality Management Models in Cheese Industry.  3 years in “Universidad Complutense de Madrid” as scientist and 18 years 
of experience in Food Industry as Quality and R&D (dairy, juice and beverages).  Publishing 2 articles and 5 congress 
communications. Quality and R&D Director in Queserías Entrepinares for 7 years.  
PABLO RIVERO IBÁÑEZ (male). Agronomist Engineer by the University of Valladolid (2012). 7 years of experience in Food 
Industries. 1 article in SCI Journal about the starch digestibility of high insoluble fiber content in breads. 2 years workin g in 
Entrepinares as R&D Techn ician, supporting all the controls and analyses (microbiological and physicochemical) of the 
products in all kind of Projects of the company, fixing the shelf-life. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
NA 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1.  New cheese products with healthy properties”, CDTI 2009-2011  
2. “Technological improvement in processed cheese” ADE  
3. “Sensor development for the on-line monitoring of coagulation milk process”, Línea S21. Cª Agricultura y ganadería-JCyL. 
2011-2013 
4. “Optimization of the process of swiss cheese maturing in bag” CDTI 2015-2016 
Also, the Company has got several internal and confidential projects related to the packaging materials and process. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Industrial packaging lines with different technologies to validate the materials: thermoformed, vacuum and flow pack. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 75 of 105 
Laboratories with different equipment to analyse the cheese parameters along the shelf life: composition, texture, color, 
microbiology and water activity. 
Trained sensory panel to evaluate the products. 
 
 
Participant no. 15 Name (short name)/ Country UBESOL S.L. (UBESOL)/ Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
Ubesol, company founded in 1980, is a company specialized in the care of family and home hygiene. Since 2001, 
we have been supplying Mercadona, under its Deliplus and Bosque Verde brand, with a wide variety of products, 
including: baby wipes, children's, cosmeti cs and body hygiene, mops, cloths, chamois, feather dusters, hair 
accessories, wipes clean home, work clothes... And always, following the philosophy of our client, offering the 
highest quality at the lowest possible price. We have two manufacturing centers located in the Valencian town of 
Atzeneta de Albaida with more than 30,900 m2 and a staff of about 300 people. Our products, with very different but 
consolidated positions, certify our experience in the satisfaction of the final customer, both for the quality of the product and for 
the emotional values that it communicates: feeling, practicality, safety ... Deliplus and Bosque Verde are brands that endorse 
us as experts in hygiene and as manufacturers of your maximum confidence. The company's company policy is based, mainly, 
on the following pillars: quality, good service, wide range of products and seriousness in our commitments. In addition, we are 
committed to continuous training, specialization and the culture of effort.  
In terms of corporate social responsibility , Ubesol has a firm commitment to society and the environment Everything we 
manufacture is safe for b oth the environment and health. We are specialists in durable products, easy to use and with safe 
products and cutting-edge technology. It is our intention to maintain the sustainable approach of the company, defending day 
by day ecological, social and economic values that meet the expectations of present and future generations. For this reason, 
from Ubesol we are committed to:  
• Ensure compliance with current regulations and legislation on environmental matters. 
• Reduce the environmental effects of stories such as emissions, discharges and waste.  
• Optimize the use of natural and energy resources.  
• Integrate environmental criteria in the development of new projects. Likewise, Ubesol, collaborates closely with various 
associations that develop solidarity action s or related to the conservation of heritage and other social and cultural 
issues. 
www.ubesol.es 
Main Tasks 
UBESOL will have a strong role in the validation of the packaging for personal care products (WP5) , their characterization to 
show if they meet the established parameters for such use and can be viable at an industrial level as most sustainable plastics 
in their products, reducing this way the environme ntal impact generated by the consumption of plastics.  They will provide 
specifications in WP1. While focusing on wet wipes in the project, they will also consider the applicability for other cosmet ics, 
personal and home care products they manufacture. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Ubesol coincides with this project due to the commitment it has with the environment as an entity and seeing the need to have 
some packaging for cosmetic products with quality / biodegradability.  
Additionally, we are a leading company in national market share of many of the products we manufacture  and we are very 
interested in being pioneers in any innovation of application to our company or products. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Sr. JOSE MANUEL VICENTE (male), Industrial Chemical Engineer by the P olytechnic University of Valencia , Master in 
environmental technology and textile technology and numerous formative courses in plastics (injection, extrusion, 
characterization, etc ...). Working in UBESOL as Coordinator at the Research & Development Department since 2005. He has 
more than 10 years of experience in the development of new products and raw materials applicable to our lines of work. 
Srta. ARANTXA MORENO (female), Industrial Design Engineer, Master in Textile engineering by the Polytechnic University of 
Valencia and courses specialized in plastic materials and laminate complexes. Working in Ubesol as an R&D technician since 
2016 involved in the development in the packaging of our products, especially in flexible material that allows to unite innovation 
and functionality in our lines of works.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 76 of 105 
 
 
 
Participant no. 16 Name (short name)/ Country Organic Waste Systems NV (OWS)  (terminated)/ 
Belgium 
Description of the legal entity  
Organic Waste Systems (OWS)  (terminated) is a stock company under Belgian law, 
constituted in 1988. The company is mainly active in following areas: the area of 
engineering, construction and operation of composting and biogasification plants, the area 
of biodegradation and composting laboratory testing, the area of waste management 
consulting services and environmental sustainability assessment. OWS(terminated) developed the anaerobic Dranco-process 
to treat several waste streams. In the last years OWS (terminated) also offers processes for energy  crops, namely Dranco-
Farm and BES reactor types. The OWS(terminated) laboratory is fully equipped to perform the necessary tests and analyses 
to simulate and manage a digestion process. Moreover, OWS (terminated) has a longstanding experience in the field of 
biodegradation and compostability testing. OWS(terminated) was very actively involved in the development of test procedures 
(and international standards) to evaluate the biodegradation of materials under different environments (compost, soil, 
anaerobic, water, marine). OWS(terminated) was, and still is, very actively involved in various standardisation committees and 
standardisation projects: ISO TC61/SC5/WG22 - Biodegradable Plastics (Off. Belgian delegate); CEN TC261/SC4/WG2: 
Packaging-Organic Recovery (Off. Belgian delegate); CEN TC249/WG9: Plastics – Degradability (Off. Belgian delegate); 
ASTM D 20.96 Degradable Plastics; E 47.06 Chemical Fate; D 10 Packaging; D 34 Waste Management. Furthermore, 
OWS(terminated) has experience in Life Cycle Assessment studies in previous and current EU-projects.  
Main tasks 
Within BIOnTOP OWS(terminated) will be responsible for biodegradation testing under industrial and home composting 
conditions and under anaerobic conditions (WP4). They will provide the data for  a biodegradation predictive model to be 
developed by IRIS. Moreover, OWS(terminated) will examine the suitability of the developed packaging for organic recycling 
by composting and anaerobic digestion . Also, toxic effects of degradation residuals will be evaluated. Furthermore, 
OWS(terminated) will perform life cycle assessment (LCA) and life cycle cost assessment (LCC) on the products developed 
in the project (WP4). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
OWS(terminated) is one of the world leaders on biodegradation and compostability testing of polymers, plastics, 
packaging…The lab results of OWS (terminated) in this field are accepted by the certification institutes worldwide ( Europe 
(TÜV AUSTRIA Belgium, DIN CERTCO), USA (BPI), Australia (ABA), Japan (JBPA)…).  The lab has more than 25 years of 
experience in biodegradation and more than 2500 samples were tested for more than 750 clients. OWS (terminated) has an 
experienced staff performing life cycle assessment with technical knowledge of production chains in the chemical, plastic, food 
and energy industry, in the transport sector and in the field of waste treatment. Life cycle assessment (LCA) studies are 
performed according to t he ISO 14040/44 guidelines and the International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) 
Handbook, assuring quality and consistency of life cycle data, methods and assessments. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
They produce wipes for a number of cosmetic and sanitary purposes for babies, adults, etc. Using packaging material from 
EMSUR/INNOTECH, those are sold in flow pack or individual sachets (some examples below). Currently, in the development 
of a new BIO line for wet wipes and cleaning textile products. 
 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  
1. First time H2020 applicant. 
2. Participated in national projects and internal R&D activities linked to the project. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Equipments and materials for the characterization of flexible plastic containers 
 
Equipment for mechanical, chemical and physical tests: Universal Testing Machine, Climatic Chambers, Optical Microscopy, 
Microbiology Laboratory, GC, … 
Pilot plant line for wipes converting tests and packaging forming. 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 77 of 105 
Mr. BRUNO DE WILDE (male), lab manager, Master in bioscience engineering with a specialization in environmental 
technology at the State University of Gent and started working in OWS (terminated) at 1989. He is the author or co -author of 
many scientific art icles on biodegradation and compostability. For many years he has been actively involved in several 
standardization committees such as ISO, CEN and DIN in the field of biodegradable and compostable materials. He is also a 
member of the Certification Committee Biodegradable Materials of DIN CERTCO (Germany). 
Mr. STEVEN VERSTICHEL (male), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a specialization in 
environmental technology at the State University of Gent. He is the author or co -author of several scientific articles on 
biodegradation and compostability. He started working at OWS (terminated) at 1999 and is head of BCE department. Within 
OWS(terminated) he is responsible for organisation of EU projects. 
Ms. NIKE MORTIER (female), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a specialization in 
environmental technology  at the State University of Gent. She started working in 2008 and is project manager for 
compostability and ecotoxicity testing and was and is res ponsible for EU-projects as FP7 KBBPS and FP7 OPEN -BIO. She 
was and is active in several standardisation committees on biodegradation. 
Mrs. LYNN SERBRUYNS (female) is Master of Science in Biology at the State University of Gent. She started working in 
2011 and is project manager for biodegradation testing within OWS(terminated). 
Mr. LASSE SIX (male) is Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a specialization in environmental technology at 
Ghent University. He is responsible for LCA studies and is involved in several EU-projects as FP7-SPLASH, FP7-CARODEL, 
H2020-NANO-CATHEDRAL… 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. De Wilde, B., Mortier, N., Verstichel, S., Briassoulis, D., Babou, M., Mistriotis, A. & Hiskakis, M. (2013). Report on 
current relevant biodegradation and ecotoxicity standards. 
(http://www.biobasedeconomy.eu/media/downloads/2013/01/130226%20KBBPPS%20Deliverable%206_1.pdf) 
2. Phuong T.V., Verstichel S., Cinelli P., Anguillesi I., Coltelli M. -B., Lazerri A. (2014). Cellulose Acetate Blends – Effect of 
Plasticizers on Properties and Biodegradability. Journal of renewable materials 02/2014; 2(1).  
3. Plackett D., Holm V., Johansen P., Ndoni S., Nielsen P., Sipilainen-Malm T., Södergård A. and Verstichel S. (2006). 
Characterization of L-polylactide and L-polylactide-polycaprolactone copolymer films for use in cheese packaging 
applications. Packaging Technology and Science 2006, 19, 1-24. 
4. Mortier N., Velghe F. and Verstichel S. (2016). Organic Recycling of Agricultural Waste Today: Composting and Anaerobic 
Digestion. Book Elsevier: Biotransformation of Agricultural Waste and By -Products. The Food, Feed, Fiber, Fuel (4F) 
Economy, Chapter 4, Pages 69-122. 
5. Six L., Velghe F. Verstichel S. and De Meester S. (2016).  Sustainability Considerations on the Valorization of Organic 
Waste. Book Elsevier: Biotransformation of Agricultural Waste and By -Products. The Food, Feed, Fiber, Fuel (4F) 
Economy, Chapter 11, Pages 287-305. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. FP7 FORBIOPLAST ‘Forest resource sustainability through biobased composite development’, tasks OWS(terminated): 
biodegradability and compostability (organic recycling) testing, z-LCA. 
2. FP7 OLI-PHA ‘A novel and efficient method for the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate polymer -based packaging from 
olive oil waste water’; tasks OWS(terminated): biodegradability and compostability (organic recycling) testing, ecotoxicity, 
LCA, anaerobic digestion of organic residuals of process. 
3. FP7 SYNPOL ‘Biopolymers from syngas fermentation’; tasks OWS (terminated): biodegradability and compostability 
(organic recycling) testing, ecotoxicity, LCA. 
4. FP7 BIOBOTTLE ‘Biodegradable solutions for packaging of li quid dairy products’; tasks OWS (terminated): 
biodegradability and compostability testing (organic recycling), ecotoxicity, LCA. 
5. FP7 OPEN -BIO ‘Opening bio -based markets via standards, labelling and procurement’; task OWS (terminated): 
biodegradability in all  kind of environments with specific attention to marine conditions, organic recycling (composting, 
anaerobic digestion), ecotoxicity. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Incubation rooms for composting vessels and reactors. Incubation at different temperatures possible. 
Growth chamber for plant growth tests, acclimated room for animal ecotoxicity tests (e.g. earthworms, daphnia, algae). 
Analytical equipment for compost analyses (drying oven, muffle furnace, titrators, pH-meters, centrifuge, manual and automatic 
sieves, gas chromatographs, spectrophotometer, AAS, flow injection analyzer, grinding equipment, TOC…). 
Equipment for biodegradation tests in all kind of environments: compost, anaerobic, soil, water, marine… 
Sima pro software and database Eco-indicator 99 for LCA. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 78 of 105 
 
 
 
Participant no. 17 Name (short name) / Country ROMEI srl (ROMEI)/ ITALY 
Description of the legal entity  
Romei company is specialized in post -industrial plastic scraps 
recycling. The company was established in 1983 upon the unique 
initiative of Renzo Romei who managed to foreseen the possibility to 
develop a new business in the plastic recycling that, at that time, was an unexplored market.  
With over 30 year experience, ROMEI built a deep and efficient know -how of the plastic recycling processes: the company 
collects scraps and by -products from the plastic industry and trans form them in raw materials (flakes and granules). It can 
efficiently supply many markets from the goods manufacturing sector to the packaging industry. The investments on quality 
standards allows us to offer recycled products with similar characteristics as virgin products but with a lower price and the minimal 
carbon footprint.  
Thanks to an ongoing financial and technological growth the company is now operating on three warehouses. The company 
property consists of a total area of 32.000 sqm (12.500 covered area) equipped of the best technologies to successfully complete 
the recycling process of most common polymers and all form of plastic scraps: grinders, shearing machineries, vibro -screens, 
metal detectors, plastic presses, mixing silos, choppers, extruders for pellets and quality test laboratory.  
The company is owned by Marco, Enrico and Daria Romei who have the full management over marketing, administration and 
production process. 
ROMEI company strongly believes that the post -industrial scraps recycling represents a great contribution to the reduction of 
lost wastes and an important promotion for reusable resources.  
Main tasks 
In WP1, ROMEI will provide insights in the current EoL situation of plastic packaging especially in terms of recyclability. T he 
main role of ROMEI is the validation of a customized recycling process for the innovative materials from the project includin g 
bioplastics, multilayer films with bio-based barrier coating in WP4 working with INSTM in terms of suitable process for the coating 
removal. They will use classic recycling technologies with the possible implementation of new devices  in correlation of fed and 
recovered materials and the monitoring of the plant parameters  They will also collaborate with IRIS in terms of applicabil ity of 
the sorting of the new materials. Applicative testing about the recovered materials will be also performed in the ROMEI quali ty 
control internal laboratory. SRM materials will be provided as needed to WP5-6. Moreover, ROMEI will provide inputs for LCA in 
WP4. Finally, ROMEI will contribute to the exploitation planning and dissemination especially in terms of reaching policy makers 
who could improve the legislative framework in terms of recycling in EU (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the proposal 
Romei has been developing an over 30 year experience in the plastic recycling processes. ROMEI is mainly specialized in 
PET recycling coming from the food packaging industry. The food packaging products, seeking better performances, are 
subjected to continuous developments. This constant packaging development requires a great effort by the recycling 
companies to reprocess always more complex scraps. ROMEI company is well trained to react to complexity and is able to find 
new applications for these materials. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
MARCO ROMEI (male), R&D manager, Graduated in electronic engineering at University of Florence. In Romei since 2002.  
ENRICO ROMEI (male), Production manager, in Romei since 1987. 
GIANLUCA FASANO (male), R&D Coordinator, in Romei since 2013. Graduated in Chemistry with specialization in plastic polymers.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. ROMEI’s main products are PET compounds for injection moulding and extrusion applications coming from food packaging 
recycled materials. 
2. PET/PE and PET/EVOH/PE recycling know-how. 
3. Wide experience and know how on recycling technology and application for industrial and post-consumer materials. 
4. Wide experience and know how on food packaging technology and products. 
5. A full equipped facility for production tests and analysis on a wide range of polymers. 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal 
1. RIGEPLAST project (Rigenerazione mediante processi sostenibili di plastomeri post -uso per applicazioni predeterminate 
con valore aggiunto), regional POR-CREO project, 2009-2011. 
2. SUPERTEX project (Sustainable Flame Retardant Technical Textile from Recycled Polyester), ECO/10/277225/SI2.596871 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 79 of 105 
under CIP ECOINNOVATION program, 2012-2014. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Logistic facilities for collecting and storage samples of raw materials and recycled polymers. 
Free space and offices to host the pilot recycling plant and use existing energy and water supply plants. 
• Two twin screw extruders for production tests on PLA coming from separation plant. 
• One single screw extruder for production tests on PE layer coming from separation plant 
• Various size reduction machines for test any kind of raw materials (shredders, choppers, mills etc.) 
• One single screw extruder and two injection moulding machines, lab scale, for three kind of specimen production. 
• One mill, lab scale, for sample flakes reduction. 
• Various mixing equipment, production scale, for samples homogenization. 
Full equipped laboratory for sample testing:  
• FT-IR spectrophotometer and DSC thermal analysis for polymers identification 
• Brabender “Aquatrack” for moisture content determination 
• Dynamometer for tensile test 
• Melt flow rate for polymer MFR measure 
• Analytical balance for polymer density measure. 
• Various ovens and a colorimeter 
 
 
 
Participant no. 18 Name (short name)/ Country IRIS Technology Solutions S.L. (IRIS) / Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
IRIS Technology solutions, SL., as part of IRIS technology group (http://www.iristechnologygroup.com/), is an 
advanced engineering company that was established in Barcelona in 2007 and specialises in the manufacture and 
integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the process 
industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and 
chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises propriet ary state-of-the-art IR analysers for at -line 
and in-line process monitoring.  
On the one hand our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics -in the fields of MEMs Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. We leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence 
and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support systems. In addition to photoni cs-
based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning 
industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an Innovation Unit 
for managing and executing the company’s innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint pr ivate projects with industry partners, 
our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and 
partners), and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 
60+ staff with a turnover of €  5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, 
optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-
ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of 
technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE  and 
SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that 
specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 80 of 105 
.  
Main tasks 
IRIS will have very strong roles in WP4, leading the development of suitable monitoring system(s) for the new biopolymers to 
allow automatic sorting so they can be handled according to their relevant end of life scenario but also novel predictive 
biodegradation models and derived app as an eco-design tool for the new materials and products taking into account their target 
end of life. In WP3, IRIS will collaborate with ASU on the background related to a whey protein coating they are part of the 
exploitation parties for. They will support process simulation and characterisation of the coated films as well as their comparison, 
among other via OTR tests, with prior (mainly non-bio-based) coated films. In WP7, they will also participate in the IPR, innovation 
and knowledge transfer and training activities , especially contributing to the graphic identity of the project. They will chair the 
executive board responsible for the strategic management of the project.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company strong expertise in data science, biopolymers, 
chemiometry, spectroscopy among many others. 
With its team and resources, including electronics engineers, mechatronics, mechanical, industrial design engineers, system 
engineering, application programming and web development etc. the group can carry out full system design and engineering, 
including electronic design (PCB) and assembly, firmware and software development, electrical harnesses and interconnections, 
mechanical design for enclosure and prototype integration, as well as installation, validation and industrialisation of proto types 
and equipment in food and pharma production plants. As such they have recently delivered advanced plastic sorting devices. In 
addition to this broad cross -disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of material scientists and physicists, 
among other, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT (female) Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite 
Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applie d Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Leader of the Eco -Materials business 
unit in IRIS since 2009. Coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio -based packaging materials development, 
process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experie nce: R&D in chemical industry especially related to reactive 
polymer formulations: i) Arkema (ex. Cray Valley, 2002, Spain) in the field of polyester powder coating; Wacker Chemie (2002 -
2005, Germany and France), Silicone division that funded her PhD thesis: development of nanocomposites based on an epoxy 
matrix and silica; iii) Ashland (2006 -2009, located sequentially in US, Spain and France) in the Composite Polymers division, 
focussing on bio-sourced resins, flame retardant resins, SMC resins, PU and epo xy structural adhesives. Led and participated 
in many R&D projects aimed at developing new formulations, understanding mechanisms and structure-properties relationships, 
developing new analytical methods and modelling (for improved quality management); as well as collaborations with academic 
labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Author of several papers in peer-reviewed and technical journals, and has 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 81 of 105 
presented her work in numerous international conferences.  
MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES  (male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His background 
comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, colorimetry, 
UV-VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has extensive practical experience 
in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as well as R&D methodology and management. His career has included 
positions as researcher applications engineer, design engineer, business developer and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in 
the FTIR spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the agro -food (wine) industry, whereby he developed two new 
measurement instruments for wine analysis.  His career as industrial physicist has been focused in applying his wide expertise 
to provide solutions for industrial problems.  Since 2011, he has been the Technical Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 
engineers and researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing novel high-end solutions for industry. Currently, he is 
the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS. 
Dr. LAURA RODRÍGUEZ TURIENZO  (female) B.S in Food Science & Technology (2008) Masters in Innovation in Safety & 
Food Technologies (2010), PhD in Biological Sciences (2011), all from University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain. She 
has participated in a number of R&D regionally and nationally funded projects aimed at developing and validating new bio-based 
active edible packaging, physico-chemical characterization of novel foods and valorisation of food industry wastes. She is author 
of several papers in peer-reviewed journals and has participated in different national and international conferences. 
Dr. MARIANO PERÁLVAREZ  (male) PhD in Physics from the University of Barcelona (2009). Currently Project Technical 
Responsible and Optical Engineer at IRIS, Mariano is specialised in the fields of LED technology, Lighting, Optoelectronics and 
Photonics. He has been responsible of Photometric, Photonics and Optoelectronics labs, focusing, among many other activities 
(Spectroscopy, Materials Science…), on the design (3D-CAD, ray-tracing and CFD), development, prototyping and performance 
assessment of luminaires and light-engines (photometric, thermal and electric), collaborating closely with manufacturers in the 
Lighting field. He also has a deep knowledge of Concentration Photovoltaics especially in terms of raytracing simulations of 
optical concentrators and indoor/outdoor tests of optoel ectronic performance. Mariano also participated in 18 R&D projects, 
funded through both public competitive calls (at National and EU level) and private institutions such as the Project LED4ART,  
devoted to the refurbishment of the Sistine Chapel Lighting system.  
Mr. DAVID MONTES MONTESERIN. (male) BSc in Mechanical Engineering (2011), Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC), 
Barcelona. Prior to joining the Production Processes group at IRIS as Mechanical Design Engineer, he gained wide experience 
in product design and development, including dosing sy stems for the chemical industry and both industrial and domestic 
appliances for the water treatment sector. He has also held positions as Engineering Team Manager, applying renewable 
energies to industrial -sized drinking water plants among other projects.  He is specialised in design for manufacturing and is 
proficient in SolidWorks, design software which has taught to several companies as a freelancer. 
Dr. IDOIA MARTÍ ALUJA  (female) is a Senior Scientist. She received her PhD in Chemistry at the Universita t Rovira i Virgili 
(Spain). Her thesis was focused on the establishment of novel analytical methods for the study of different processes by infrared 
spectroscopy and chemometrics techniques. After her thesis, she expanded her knowledge in spectroscopic techniques working 
as a Technician in the Spectroscopic and Kinetics Unit (SKU) at the Institut Català d'Investigació en Química (ICIQ, Spain). She 
was in charge of the  calibration and maintenance of the instruments of the unit (UV -Vis, NIR, FTIR, FT -Raman, C ircular 
Dichroism, Fluorescence spectra and polarimetry).  Moreover, she worked as a  PostDoct at the Institute of Photonic Sciences 
(ICFO, Spain), leading a project whose aim was to develop a new and novel infrared instrument based on a high power laser 
source with direct emission in the mid - to long-wave infrared for chemical microspectroscopy of biological samples. She was 
using chemometrics techniques to extract meaningful information from the recorded data. She also worked as Material Science 
Engineer at Zobele Spain, being in charge of the selection, testing and validation the most adequate raw materials, with particular 
focus on the interaction between chemical products (mainly perfumes, solvents and detergents) and materials.  
Dr. DAVID NETTLETON (male) Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph. D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat Politécnica de 
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 
U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience of applying 
data mining algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical techniques (including ANOVA, regression, 
principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and modeling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, 
customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has 
conducted research and lectured at two universi ties. He has published a diversity of articles in specialised data analysis 
journals/congresses and three books. He has participated in several competitive multi -partner research projects and has a 
European patent application for a graph matching algorithm . His IT Industrial experience includes project management, 
consultancy, programming and analysis, database development and business startups. He has developed software with a 
diversity of programming languages, (including Java, C++ and COBOL/CICS/DB2), database systems (such as Oracle, Ingres, 
MySQL) and data mining systems (IBM Intelligent Miner, Clementine, Weka). In IRIS he is currently involved in two major 
European projects (OpenMind and Sharebox), as a data mining specialist. The work in OpenMind involves modelling a complex 
industrial production process for producing high precision medical instruments. The work in Sharebox involves building a 
symbiosis system for industrial collaborations between companies for the recycling of waste products using ca se based 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 82 of 105 
reasoning and agent modelling. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Maxi-use of wastes from agro -food processing to obtain truly sustainable bioplastics, E. Bugnicourt, O. Mc Nerney, A. 
Lazzeri, Bioplastics magazine, Vol 6, 32-34, April 2011. 
2. E. Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe , M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Recent Prospects in the Inline Monitoring of 
Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings by Optical Technologies, Nanomaterials  2016, Review, 6(8), 150; 
doi:10.3390/nano6080150 
3. Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining biodegradability, 
Patrizia Cinelli, Markus Schmid, Elodie Bugnicourt, Jessica Wildner, Agostino Bazzichi, Irene Anuillesi, Andrea Lazzeri, 
Polymer Degradation and Stability. 07/2014; DOI: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.07.007 
4. Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): Review of synthesis, characteristi cs, processing and potential applications in packaging , 
Elodie Bugnicourt, Patrizia Cinelli, Vera Alvarez, Andrea Lazzeri, eXPRESS Polymer Letters 06/2014; 8(11):791-808 
5. Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and 
Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F.Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, London, UK, July 28-29, 2016 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. OLI-PHA- A novel and efficient method for the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate polymer-based packaging from olive oil 
waste water. (Grant Agreement no: 280604-2, Completed) 
2. LEGUVAL:  " Valorisation of legumes co -products and by -products for package, application and energy production from 
biomass ", Grant agreement no: 315241, FP7, R4SME, on-going) 
3. WHEYLAYER2- Barrier biopolymers for sustainable packaging. (Grant Agreement no: 315743 FP7, R4SME Completed) 
(and its predecessor WHEYLAYER - Whey protein -coated plastic fil ms to replace expensive polymers and increase 
recyclability (Grant agreement no.: 218340-2, Demonstration action Completed) 
4. PolyBioSkin, High performance functional bio-based polymers for skin-contact products in biomedical, cosmetic and 
sanitary industry – H2020 BBI GA 745839- 2017-2020 
5. AgriMax: Agri & food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks biorefinery processing technologies for 
new high added value applications (BBI GA 720720) 
IRIS coordinator in all except Wheylayer2 where they acted as technical manager 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and 
Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral 
imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial 
suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC -
milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others.   
IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by means 
of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“opticalware”). 
Food and w et chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipments, microspcope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers , water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic 
coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
 
 
Participant no. 19 Name (short name)/ Country Laboratori ARCHA Unipersonale s.r.l. (ARCHA) / ITALY 
Description of the legal entity  
Laboratori ARCHA s.r.l. (ARCHA) is an Italian SME that provides chemical & biological analytical, 
research and consultancy services to enterprises, in different industrial sectors such as food, waste 
management, paper, tannery, textiles, ICT, metallurgical, pharmaceutical and biomedical.  
ARCHA staff is composed by 35 employees (70% of them, degree holder), supported by consultants 
and contract researchers. ARCHA is organized in three main sectors: 
1. Technical sector, composed by Laboratory area performing chemical and biological analyses, Research area performing 
R&D&I activities, Consulting area  provides services related with regulatory compliance on the environment, H&S in 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 83 of 105 
workplaces, implementation of Quality, Environment and Safety systems, Start-up assistance area supports start-up of new 
companies and testing laboratories, following also their certification, Personnel qualification organizes qualification courses 
in project management, waste management, H&S aspects. 
2. ICT sector designs and develops software applications for process control, management and archiving of data concerning 
the environment and safety, the management of laboratories of analysis and service activities. 
3. Industrialization sector. ARCHA annually invests more than 5% of the volume of business for the develo pment of new 
products and technologies and know -how to industrialize for its business. The industrialization sector deals with the 
exploitation of project outcomes. Due to this activity, in the last years two NEWCO in partnership with other companies have 
been started (respectively TANNOW for the production of tannery chemicals derived from olive oil waste, TECHA for the 
production and commercialization of chemical products  for textile sector , and JONIX for the commercialization of 
equipment based on Non-Thermal Plasma technology for air and water treatment). 
In 2017 ARCHA has spun-off its training agency in the NEWCO ARCHADEMY, dealing with highly qualified personnel training 
related with regulatory compliance on the environment, H&S in workplaces, wa ste management, implementation of Quality, 
Environment and Safety systems. 
Main tasks 
In BIOnTOP, ARCHA in mainly involved in WP5 and WP6, respectively dedicated to the health & safety assessment of food 
packages and F&V nets, in WP 3 and  6 for technological validation of new surface -coated textiles in terms of water & oil 
repellency and stain resistance. ARCHA will also follow step-by-step the development of all the new solutions, by analyzing raw 
materials, products and by products, in order to assess their compliance in WP7 with REACH and CLP regulations.  In view of 
their product line in terms of textile treatment products, ARCHA could have a key role in the distribution of the new coatings. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
ARCHA is certified according to ISO 9001, ISO 14001, BS OHSAS 18001 and SA 8000 and provides servi ces related with 
regulatory compliance on the environment, H&S in workplaces, implementation of Quality, Environment and Safety systems. 
The Laboratory area perform chemical and biological analyses, most of them accredited according to UNI CEI EN ISO/IEC 
17025. Over the last 25 years the analytical units have specialized and gained a deep knowledge in assessing chemical and 
biological risk, as well as performing analysis on several materials (polymers, metals, concrete), waste, municipal & industr ial 
wastewater, emissions, soil and food, and in workplace environments. The analytical units are equipped to process over 6.000 
samples per year, as well as, with a mobile laboratory, which allows sampling and on-field analysis. 
The Research area is involved in sev eral research projects every years with private companies and research institution at 
National and International level, dealing with process and product development and optimisation. ARCHA is recognised as 
“highly qualified laboratory” by the Italian Minister of Research, participating to proje cts funded by Regional, National and EC 
Programs. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. MASSIMILIANO FRANCESCHI (male), Degree in Industrial Chemistry, Board Member, Head of Industrialization sector. In 
ARCHA since 2008, Dr. Franceschi has been following R&D&I activities and exploitation of outcomes. 
Dr. FRANCESCA GAMBINERI (female), Honor Degree in Industrial Chemistry, Board Member, Head of Research area. Since 
2000 Drs. Gambineri has been involved in definition and conduction of R&D project as researcher and technical manager. 
Drs. FRANCESCA BRACA (female), Degree in Chemistry, Senior Researcher. In ARCHA since 2001, Drs. Braca has been 
involved in conduction of R&D project in the field of waste and wastewater  analysis, management and recycling, industrial 
process optimization, H&S risk assessment, biodegradability and compostability analyses. 
Dr. YURI PELOSI (male), Degree in Industrial Chemistry,  Head of Analytical Chemistry Area. He has more than 15 years of  
experience in desk and instrumental chemical analyses, following method set-up, standardization and accreditation. 
Dr. AGOSTINO BAZZICHI (male), Degree in Biology, Specialist in Microbiology and Virology, his role in ARCHA is Head of 
Biological Department . He has more than 15 years of experience in Microbiological and Biological Analysis on Water, 
Wastewater, Food and Beverage, Pharmaceutical Products, Compost, Wastes, Working Environments, Biodegradability and 
Ecotoxicological Tests. 
Dr. VALERIA BEVILACQUA (female), Degree in Industrial Chemistry, Board Member, Head of Analytical and Consulting area, 
Health & Safety & Quality Manager. She has more than 15 year experience in consulting in environmental, health & safety 
assessments in workplaces. She is also the reference person for the ethical assessment. 
Dr. FABRIZIA TURCHI  (female), Degree in Industrial Chemistry, ARCHA vice -president, Board Member, Dissemination 
manager and Head of Start -up assistance area. Since 2000 Drs. Turchi has been following project proposal  preparations and 
follow-up, dealing mainly with consortium definition, business plans, market analyses, financial plans. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 84 of 105 
ARCHA has a state -of-the-art analytical laboratory, with modern and sophisticated equipment t o meet the more stringent 
analytical needs, whether chemical, biological or physical, on different matrices and scopes of application: environment, 
workplace hygiene, security, process optimization, product quality control, regulatory compliance, foods, ai r emissions, 
environmental impacts, noise, vibration, electromagnetism, support to applied research, wastewater, water for human 
consumption, refuse and waste, forensics, drugs and narcotics. The analytical units are equipped to process over 6.000 samples 
per year, as well as, with a mobile laboratory, which allows sampling and on-field analysis. 
The laboratory works in conformity with the UNI EN ISO 9001 and UNI CEI EN ISO / IEC 17025 regulation, while the Research 
sector is acknowledged by the Ministry of University and Research as being a "Highly Qualified Research Laboratory". 
Publications: 
1. “Innovative fully biodegradable mulching films & fruit protection bags – LIFE+ MULTIBIOSOL project”. Francesca Braca, 
Massimiliano Franceschi, Silvia Pierozzi, Antoni o Cecchi, Carolina Peñalva, Berta Gonzalvo, Pere Castell. Workshop on 
Italian-Nordic Polymer Future, Pisa (Italy), 14-15 September, 2017 
2. “Poly(lactic acid) plasticized with low -molecular-weight polyesters: structural, thermal and biodegradability features” . 
Francesca Cicogna, Serena Coiai, Cristina De Monte, Roberto Spiniello, Stefano Fiori, Massimiliano Franceschi, Francesca 
Braca, Patrizia Cinelli, Seyed Mohammad Kazem Fehri, Andrea Lazzeri, Werner Oberhauser, Elisa Passaglia. Polym. Int. 
(2017) - DOI 10.1002/pi.5356 
3. Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining biodegradability, 
Patrizia Cinelli, Markus Schmid, Elodie Bugnicourt, Jessica Wildner, Agostino Bazzichi, Irene An guillesi, Andrea Lazzeri, 
Polymer Degradation and Stability. 07/2014; DOI: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.07.007 
4. “LCA of innovative processes for the treatment and recovery of organic sludge and industrial wastewater” Presented during 
the conference: "Tools for assessing the sustainability of products / processes: Environmental and Social LCA, Life Cycle 
Costing, Environmental Footprint, Carbon and Water Footprint, E nergy, MFA", edited by: CTS Ecomondo, Italian LCA 
Network, ENEA, University of Bologna during Ecomondo (November 2014). 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. AgriMax: Agri & food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks biorefinery processing technologies for 
new high added value applications (BBI.VC3.D5-2015 GA 720719, in grant agreement preparation phase) 
2. HyperBioCoat: High performance biomass extracted functional hybrid polymer coatings for food, cosmetic and medical 
device packaging (BBI.VC1.R3-2015 GA 720736, in grant agreement preparation phase) 
3. OLIPHA - A novel and efficient method for the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate polymer-based packaging from olive oil 
waste water (FP7-NMP-2011-SMALL-5) 
4. DIBBIOPACK - Development of injection and blow extrusion molded  biodegradable and multifunctional packages by 
nanotechnology: improvement of structural and barrier properties, smart features and sustainability. (FP7 -NMP-2011-
LARGE-5) 
5. LIFE MULTIBIOSOL - Innovative fully biodegradable mulching films & fruit protection b ags for sustainable agricultural 
practices. LIFE14 ENV/ES/00048 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
ARCHA is located in Pisa (Italy) in a 1500 m2 building, which nearly 900 m2 are devoted to laboratories and process prototype 
testing. Relevant equipment is N° 1 Inductively Couple Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometer for metal determination, N° 1 Ion 
cromatograph for cation and anion determination, N° 2 Gas-chromatographs with Mass detector, N° 1 Gas-chromatograph with 
FID detector, N° 1 Gas -chromatograph with ECD detector, N° 1 Gas -chromatograph with TCD detector, N° 1 HPLC with UV -
DAD detector, N° 1 TOC analyser, N° 1 COD analyser, N° 1 FTIR spectrometer, N° 1 UV-VIS spectrometer, N° 6 OXITOP for 
BOD measurement, 1 Climatic chamber, 2 ovens, 1 muffle oven, 1 incubator, 1 microwave oven for sample mineralisation, 
Equipments for separation, extraction, purification, Static and dynamic respirometric test, Equipment for Biodegradability tests.  
The analytical units are equipped with a mobile laboratory, which allows sampling and on-field analysis. 
Regarding the certification of effective and efficient business management, the credentials that ARCHA offers their customers  
are those of the most important awards in the field of Quality, Environment and Safety. This is confirmed by the Certificate of 
Excellence, awarded to ARCHA by Certiquality in 2012 for achieving three certifications: ISO 9001, ISO 14001 and BS OHSAS 
18001, and attests ARCHA’s attention to customer satisfaction, environmental protection and health and safety in the workplace. 
Confirming ARCHA’s commitment to social aspects, ARCHA has also obtained the SA8000 certification, which ensures the 
company's ethical conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 85 of 105 
Participant no. 20 Name (short name)/ Country ENCO S.R.L. (ENCO) / Italy  
Description of the legal entity  
ENCO is an innovation and research-consulting firm based in Naples, active since 1987. 
Originally specialized in business consulting and industrial engineering, it has expanded 
its range of activities becoming an experienced advisor for both private busine ss and 
public authorities involved in territorial development and opened two new offices in Rio 
de Janeiro and Brussels. The company participates in national and international R&D&I projects as a facilitator for business,  
product, technology and process in novation in different industrial areas, including energy, environmental management, the 
agro-food sector and logistics. The company has a long track record participating in EU -funded projects as WP leader, task 
leaders and project coordinators. The company is specialized, inter alia, in two main fields:  
• Development of market analysis, business plan and exploitation plans: studies (elaborated at European and international 
scale) for innovative products, technical solutions and systems are focused on market trends, market profitability and 
distribution channels. ENCO conducts market surveys with potential customers, Desk analysis, SWOT analysis, identification 
of economic, legislative and behavioral barriers, customer segments analysis and competitor analysis, market feasibility 
studies and Risk analysis. Moreover, ENCO develops innovation and business strategies, quantitative assessment of pricing 
and cost-benefit analysis, identifying Capital and Operational Costs. 
• Communication and dissemination strategies: developing action plans for dissemination and  communication activities; 
identifying target stakeholders, tools and actions to be implemented; developing tailor made campaign to raise audience’s 
awareness on the project rationale, activities and results; identifying and selecting events, workshops and meetings; organizing 
information and dissemination events; producing publications, newsletters, brochures, leaflets, promotional and marketing 
materials; setting up and managing project websites, and participating in relevant events and exploiting institu tional 
communication channels; building a broader community around the project topics. 
Main tasks 
ENCO will lead WP7 Market strategy and Innovation Impacts, to support the full deployment of the project outputs and results. 
To achieve this, a set of acti vities has been planned in order to carry out BIOnTOP primary goals’ – the successful market 
uptake of bio -packaging with tailored b iodegradability and home-compostable solutions. ENCO will have a strong role in 
planning exploitation routes for the post -project phase. To properly achieve this and to guarantee a fair exploitation of all of 
the Key Exploitable Results, ENCO will manage the IPR and knowledge. An extensive professional communication campaign 
to reach key stakeholders in different sectors  will b e designed by ENCO and EUBP and implemented in a spirit of full 
cooperation by all the project partners. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
As an experienced business consulting company, ENCO has joined the BIOnTOP consortium to support to full deployment of 
the project output, by building a programme to take the results generated closer to the market. To achieve this, a set of  
innovation activities has been planned under WP7 in order to define appropriate actions for the creation of bioeconomy value 
chain strategy and sustain the take-up of novel bio-packaging solutions through the definition of business model options for 
early adopters. ENCO will design and execute a plan to establish collaboration with key stakeholders all along the value chain. 
ENCO itself has participated in a number of different EU-funded projects where it has assumed diverse responsibilities ranging 
from market research  and legislative framework analysis for the respective innovative technology, to dissemination and 
communication of project  outcomes, as well as project management and coordination of project activities. To ensure the 
broadening of the impacts of the project activities and results, ENCO will guide Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication 
activities as well as IP and knowledge management. Consequently, the decision to include ENCO in the BIOnTOP consortium 
has been informed by the firm ’s pertinent and  extensive experience in (1) providing business support with a focus on the 
European market, (2) designing and carrying  out exploitation and dissemination activities, (3) communicating the project to 
target audiences by selecting the most  appropriate method an d channel. As an internationally active consulting company, 
ENCO’s participation in the BIOnTOP consortium allows the company to extend its business network and once more prove its 
ability to support emerging technologies in the most critical steps of their development. With ENCO’s involvement in the project, 
the company expects to position itself on the international consulting and business development market. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Dr. Ing. MARCO DE LA FELD (male). Senior Project Manager, since 2008. He graduated in Mechanical Engineering in 2003 
and obtained a Research Doctorate in “Engineering of Materials and Production” in 2006. Mr. de le Feld is currently working 
as Project Coordinator of SMART GROUND (H2020-GA 641988), and the IP & Exploitation Manager of SaltGae (H2020-GA 
689785) and has successfully managed more than 8 European research projects including the FOODIE project (CIP-ICT-PSP 
GA 621074), ALGATEC II (FP7 -SME GA 315469) and OPTISOLV ( ETB-2012-26). He is very skilled in delivering business 
scenarios and plans for internationalization and fast replication of innovative products and services. In addition to his vas t 
experience as a project partner/manager and as a research advisor in numerous European projects, Mr. de la Feld has several 
experiences as EU Project trainer and has led several capacity building workshops. (in-house consultant) 
Ms. SIMONA MINCIONE (female). Junior Project Manager, since 2014. She holds a Master degree in International Relations 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 86 of 105 
and European Studies. She as excellent skills in the planning and execution of communication and dissemination (D&C) and 
exploitation activities, besides preparing deliverables and monitoring project’s baseline reports for some EU-funded project as 
Waste2Fuels (H2020-GA 654623), SaltGae (H2020- GA 689785), Smart Ground (H2020 -GA 641988), FOODIE (ICT -PSP-
GA 621074) . In particular, she is responsible for the development and implementation of  D&C action by: designing 
communication, dissemination and exploitation strategies, elaborating D&C materials; maintaining the project websites  and 
animating social network accounts. (employee) 
Mr. Ing. GIAMPIERO DE LA FELD  (male). Managing Director of ENCO since 1986, thanks to his more than 30 years of  
experience and his engineering background, Mr. de la Feld has been involved in his company’s projects and has managed  
and coordinated diverse national and international projects with  strong focus on their technical and financial aspects.  
Furthermore, Mr. de la Feld was president of Confindustria Campania in 2000/2002, which is a non-profit organization uniting 
different business associations from the Italian region of Campania and representing their interests, needs and demands vis-
à-vis political and administrative institutions, trade unions and other social forces. He has thus gained further insights into the 
European business world, its opportunities and difficulties, as well as experience with administrative and political institutions/ 
procedures involved in business development and innovation. Moreover, Mr. de la Feld has sound  experience in supporting 
start-ups in developing their business as well as planning all the actions to undertake to facilitate  market penetration of 
innovative systems, developed under EU-funded projects. (SME owner) 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. Rossetti, P., Dino, G. A., de la Feld, M., Pizza A., Coulon, F., Wagland, S., Gomes, D., and the SMART GROUND Team 
(2016). SMART GROUND Project: SMART data collection and integration platform to enhance availability and 
accessibility of data and information in the EU territory on SecoNDary Raw Materials, Geophysical Research Abstracts 
Vol. 18, EGU2016-5881-1, 2016 EGU General Assembly 2016 
2. Charvát, K., Kepka, M., de la Feld, M., Mincione, S., Šplícha,l M., Šrédl M. (2015) POMODORE – Smart Agri Food Project, 
ISAF 2015, 15 September 2015 
3. Papa, G., (2013). Wikipigs, cowshed 2.0 is coming. Naples is in the farm of the future. Il Denaro, 18 April 2013 
4. de la Feld, M. (2012). Real time monitoring of temperature in the agro -food logistic chain for energy savings and waste 
reduction (ENBED project). Presentation at CIBUS – Parma Exhibition Center, 9 May 
5. de la Feld, M., Lorenzo A., Pizza, A., (2014). ALGATEC II: ottimizzazione delle soluzioni di riciclaggio dell’acqua di 
lavaggio delle olive, Acta Italus Hortus, Bari 2014 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
1. SMART GROUND (H2020-WASTE-4C2014 GA no 641988), SMART data collection and integration platform to enhance 
availability and accessibility of data and information in the EU territory on SecoNDary Raw Materials, intends to foster 
resource recovery in landfills by improving both the availability and the accessibility of data and information on SRM in the 
EU and creating synergies among the different stakeholders involved in the SRM value chain. www.smart-ground.eu ENCO 
acts as Project Coordinator and leads the Innovation, Exploitation and Dissemination Management. 
2. WASTE2FUELS (H2020-LCE-11-2015 GA no 654623) aims at producing biobutanol as a sustainable alternative fuel 
contributing to decentralised energy production towards EU energy security. The project will enlarge the current biomass 
feedstock basis by the development of next generation biofuel technologies capable of converting unavoidable agro-food 
waste streams into high quality biobutanol. www.waste2fuels.eu  
ENCO develops the exploitation, value chain analysis and business plan strategies for the project. 
3. SALTAGE (H2020-WATER-1b-2015 GA no 689785) aims to implement and demonstrate at large scale the long -term 
technological and economic feasibility of an innovative, sustainable and efficient solution for the treatment of high salinity 
wastewater from the F&D industry.  Moreover, the project will also address cross -cutting barriers to innovation related to 
wastewater by developing a platform for the mobilization and networking of stakeholders from all the different sectors 
related to wastewater. 
ENCO guides Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication activities as well as Business planning under the WP related 
to “Measures to maximise SALTGAE impacts”. 
4. FOODIE – Farm Oriented Open Data In Europe ( CIP-ICT-PSP-2013-7 GA no 621074) aims at building an open and 
interoperable agricultural specialized platform hub on the cloud for the management of spatial and non-spatial data relevant 
for farming production. www.foodie-project.eu  
ENCO leads dissemination activities and is responsible for the preparation of a viable IPR plan allowing an effective and 
widespread exploitation of project results.  
5. ALGATEC II - Optimisation of the biotechnological recycling solution for olive washing water (FP7 -SME-2012-3 GA no 
315469) aims at providing an affordable technical solution for reducing the consumption of drinkable water in the olives 
washing process. www.algatec2.eu  
ENCO guided and developed business planning activities and market analyses. ENCO was also in charge of leading 
dissemination and knowledge transfer activities. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 87 of 105 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
As a leading business consultant with extensive experience in business planning and development, communication, 
dissemination and exploitation of the project results, ENCO possesses the suitable human resource and operational capacity 
for the tasks to be fulfilled within the project. 
 
Participant 
no. 
21 Name (short name)/ 
Country 
Movimento Consumatori (MC) / Italy 
Description of the legal entity  
 Movimento Consumatori (MC) is a national consumer association with over 
30 thousand members , including individuals and federated 
associations. For more than 30 years, thanks to the activity of hundreds of 
volunteers and enthusiasts, it works to implement consumer rights and to  
achieve equal rights of economic citizenship as enshrined in our 
Constitution. He is a member of the National Council of Consumers and Users (CNCU), established at the Ministry of Economic 
Development. Movimento Consumatori is an association of social promotion that fights, with a vision that extends not only to 
Italy, but also to Europe, for the rights to the protection of health and safety , the protection of economic interests, 
compensation the damage suffered by consumers and users, the right of those to be informed, represented and listened to 
with special advisory services to members, to offer them the best conditions of consumption, users, savings, environmental 
quality. 
It is committed, through information and training to the consumer, to achieving t he objectives of the UN 2030 Sustainability 
Agenda. 
Main Tasks 
Initial consumers perception insisghts  will be shared in WP1 to be considered in the product specifications. The main task 
within the WP7 will be to investigate the needs of consumers and inform them about the topics covered by the project. The 
association will carry out a research to investigate the knowledge and needs of consumers on the topics covered by the project: 
• Habits of consumption 
• Knowledge of the subject 
• Emerging needs 
• Tips 
A well-defined number of questions will be dedicated to investigating the awareness of one's own role as a consumer, a 
subject able to direct consumption choices through consumption. 
The questionnaire will be administered through the following channels: 
• branches of the association spread all over the national territory 
• website and social network 
• Newsletter 
• Magazine of the association (Consumers' Magazine) 
• local branches network associations with which Mc collaborates; 
• Partner associations of ECU, European Consumers Union, European consumer association. 
The results of the questionnaire (Research) will be discussed in three focus groups, to which associations, companies 
and institutions will take part. The contents will flow into the communication tools of the project. 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
MC, as an association of consumers with 30,000 members has the opportunity to investigate their needs and disseminate 
information through their own communication channels with experience on sustainability, safety and packaging information 
issues. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Alessandro Mostaccio (male) - General Secretary - Lawyer 
Engaged for years in Piemonte in associative development, mainly on issues of food safety and the environmental impact of 
consumption. It represents the association in many institutional bodies. 
Angela Carta (female)– Journalist - Expert in consumerist issues. He writes in magazines and websites. 
Immacolata Napoli (female)- External relations manager. For years he has worked with consumer associations with a 
specific focus on sustainability issues. Participates in numerous institutional work and research groups. 
Piero Pacchioli (male)- Administrative manager and president of association in Lombardy.  Lawyer, expert in consumer 
training activities. 
Marco Gagliardi (male)-  President of association in Piemonte.  Lawyer, expert in consumer training activities. 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 88 of 105 
 
Participant no. 22 Name (short name)/ Country Innotech Coexpan -Emsur, S.L.  
(INNOTECH)/ Spain 
Description of the legal entity  
 
  
Main tasks 
Innotech will support in the development of the barrier and repellence coatings for films & trays in WP3, especially performing 
initial thermoformability tests. Their main role will be focus ed on the development of flexible  and rigid packaging solutions 
(especially lids for multilayers and standard trays or for flow pack) in WP5, to be validated for food and personal care packaging 
in this WP too. Innotech will also contribute to exploitation and dissemination activities (WP7). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
Emsur and Coexpan (innotech associated companies) are among the European leaders in flexible and rigid packaging. They 
have a range of production plants with extensive technologies and ha ve already been involved in innovative projects for 
developing improved packaging materials.  Innotech is, in this context, the new entity that joins the innovations and 
developments for both divisions, offering a number of pilot lines, laboratory equipment and technical personnel. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
1. "Manifesto of the socially responsible consumer" - year 2017  
2. The third sector and the objectives of sustainable development - Report 2017 - Forum Third sector 
3. CONSUMERS 'MAGAZINE - Monthly magazine Registration of the Court of Rome n. 464 of 8 October 2007 
CONSUMER MOVEMENT Head – ASSOCIAZIONE. 
4. Consumers' News 
head of CONSUMER MOVEMENT 
Reg. Court of Milan n. 781 
of 10/31/1989 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project  
1. “Io Sono Originale”. Information campaign on counterfeiting issues throughout Italy, in collaboration with other consumer 
associations.  The project is financed by the Ministry of Economic Development. 
2. “We Like. Il Consumo che ci piace.”  An information campaign aimed at schools and citizens on the theme of sustainability 
and corporate social responsibility and consumption. The project is financed by the Ministry of Labor. 
3. “Glocal. Giovani in Azione <Glocale”.  A project aimed at young people through the organization of laboratories in the 
territories. Students will be provided with competences on the sustainable development of territories for the development 
of communication products or sustainable projects to be experimented with local networks: businesses, organizations and 
universities, identified by project promoters and partners. The project is financed by the Ministry of Labor. 
4. “ECU- European Consumers Union” ECU is a second-class consumer association, founded in 2009, whose main objective 
is to aggregate the national consumer organizations of the member countries (15), and not only, into a European 
association. It wants to be an instrument of European institutional representation for all registered associations. MC is 
member of ECU.  
5. “Sportello del consumatore”.  Telematic tool to dialogue with consumers who turn to the association both to resolve the 
controversies and to inform about new regulations and different consumption choices. 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
NA 
Innotech Coexpan-Emsur, S.L. is the R&D centre of the Lantero 
Group, and it is specifically dedicated to developing projects for 
Coexpan and Emsur.  
Innotech opened its facilities in the first half of 2019, having the opening ceremony the 2 nd of July of 
2019. It has been created as a differentiated legal entity, although the owners are Emsur and Coexpan 
at 50% each. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 89 of 105 
Mr. Oscar Valero (male), Laboratory Manager. Biologic Sciences. Expert in rigid packag ing, food and non-food, specially in 
thermoforming of rigid sheets. His background includes quality, customer validations, food safety accomplishment, among 
others 
Mr. Fernando Baeza  (male), Flexibles Expert. More th an 30 years of experience in Production and R&D in Emsur, great 
expertise in coating application, lamination and printing. 
Mr. Carlos Pedreño (male), Extrusion Expert. 20-year experience in extrusion and injection of plastics, great expertise in cast 
extrusion of PET, PS, PP for thermoforming applications 
Mr. Antonio Riaño (male), Innotech Manager. Chemical Engineer. Expert in blown and cast PE extrusion with more than 18 
years in Packaging Industry, high quality leadership skills. Experience dealing with strategic projects, key customers, 
implementation of new standards.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
These are some formats made by Coexpan (associated company): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Dairy Fruits and vegs Coffee & Tea Fresh Food Processed Food 
  
Formats made by Emsur (associated company): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Dairy Pouches Snacks Drinks Coffee Fresh Food H&PC 
 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
• HSL PVC free for dairy products (own recipe) 
• Development of a OPS printed sheet for dairy cup which avoid the need of a banderole, sleeve or even the label. 
• Emseal 25: new dairy packaging 
• Printed film sheet for Dairy packaging  
• Biodegradable barrier coating 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
- Dr. Collin cast extrusion line, up to 9 layers and 600 mm wide 
- Nordmeccanica Labo Combi 400 pilot coating and lamination line  
-             Elton thermoforming line, suitable for trays and lidding 
-             Rovema VFFS pouching line 
-             Oxtran and Permatran from MOCON to measure the permeability 
- IR Spectrum 
- DSC equipment 
- Dynamometer and COF equipment to control and measure the performance of the material.       
 
 
 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 90 of 105 
Participant no. 23 Name (short name)/ Country OWS RESEARCH FOUNDATION PS (OWS RF) / 
Belgium 
Description of the legal entity  
The object of OWS Research Foundation PS is to contribute to the scientifical know-how and optimization of technologies in 
the field of biogas, biodegradibility, compostability and ecotocity, alone or in cooperation with third parties, in Belgium or outside 
Belgium. OWS Research Foundation may therefore develop the following activities: 
- the development and execution of laboratory analyses and research, among others for the determination of the 
biological biodegradibility, compost quality, environmental sustainability, compostability, ecotoxicity and other 
environmental and biological aspects of products and packaging; 
- the delivery of recommendations, consultancy, laboratory analyses, feasibility studies, process monitorin g and 
engineering studies, among others in the field of municipal solid waste treatment and waste treatment, composting, 
aerobic and anaerobic fermentation, gas fermentation, fatty acids fermentation and other fermentation, biological 
degradability, renewable energy and the environment in general; 
- contribute to the development and optimization of special installations, more specifically systems and plants for 
the treatment of municipal solid waste, organic fractions of municipal solid waste or equivalent organic waste 
streams, energy crops or organic residues, systems and plants for the production of energy, compost, chemical 
and organic products, products for soil amelioration and substrates from agricultural crops, systems and plants 
that contribute to the remediation of the environment or the production of renewable energy, installations for the 
conversion of gases via fermentation to components with higher value; 
- contribute to the development and optimization of the collection, the transport, the storage, the treatment and the recycling 
of raw materials, semi-finished products, the treatment and recycling of raw materials, agricultural crops and residues and 
waste; 
- the delivery and maintenance of certificates related to compostability, biodegr adibility, environmental sustainability, 
recyclability, sustainability. 
- participation to international, national and local scientifical or commercial research, innovation and development projects. 
- the application for, receiving and utilization of international, national or local governmental or private subsidies, financing, 
loans, incentives or other economic benefits. 
Main tasks 
Within BIOnTOP OWS RF will be responsible  (from 15th June 2021) for biodegradation testing under industrial and home 
composting conditions and under anaerobic conditions (WP4). They will provide the data for a biodegradation predictive model 
to be developed by IRIS. Moreover, OWS RF will examine the suitability of the developed packaging for organic recycling by 
composting and anaerobic digestion. Also, toxic effects of degradation residuals will be evaluated. Furthermore, OWS RF will 
perform life cycle assessment (LCA) and life cycle cost assessment (LCC) on the products developed in the project (WP4). 
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project 
OWS PF was created with the expertise inherited from OWS (terminated), so OWS RF can be considered one of the world 
leaders on biodegradation and compostability testing of polymers, plastics, packaging…The lab results of OWS RF in this field 
are accepted by the certification institutes worldwide (Europe (TÜV AUSTRIA Belgium, DIN CERTCO), USA (BPI), Australia 
(ABA), Japan (JBPA)…). The lab has more than 25 years of experience in biodegradation and more than 2500 samples were 
tested for more than 750 clients. OWS RF has an experienced staff performing life cycle assessment with technical knowledge 
of production chains in the chemical, plastic, food and energy indust ry, in the transport sector and in the field of waste 
treatment. Life cycle assessment (LCA) studies are performed according to the ISO 14040/44 guidelines and the International 
Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook, assuring quality and consist ency of life cycle data, methods and 
assessments. 
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work 
Mr. STEVEN VERSTICHEL (Male), lab project manager, Master of Science in bioscience engineering with a specialization in 
environmental technology at the State University of Gent. He is the author or co -author of several scientific articles on 
biodegradation, compostability and anaerobic digestion. He is responsible for organization of EU projects within the company. 
He was active in projects as TRANSBIO, VOLATILE, AGRIMAX and FUNGUSCHAIN. 
Mr. BERNARD MOERMAN (male), Permanent Representative of Euander BV and Authorized Representative of OWS 
Research Foundation PS. He studied at the State University of Gent and New York University S chool of Law. He is legal 
advisor. 
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content 
Not applicable 
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this project 
Not applicable 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 91 of 105 
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
Not applicable 
 
4.2. Third parties139 involved in the project (including use of third party resources) 
 
Participant no. 1 – AIMPLAS - Asociacion de Investigacion de Materiales Plásticos y Conexas (AIMPLAS) / Spain 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not 
be sub-contracted) 
Y 
In WP2 there are considered 15.000 € as subcontracting, the reason of this amount is just to include the batch reaction in 
case the higher amounts of materials are requested to be obtained for the supply to WP4.  
In WP7 it will be subcontracted the project website including a public and a intranet section that will allow the partners the 
interexchange of project documents. The technological watch will be also included in order to keep the stakeholders that 
follow the project development updated about the latest news, patents, events, conferences and seminars organised linked 
to the packaging and biomaterials and biopolymers. The estimated amount is 8.000 € 
The total amount for AIMPLAS 23.000 € will ensure the accomplishment the best value for money principle and the no 
conflict of interest (in the agreement with Article 13 of the MGA) 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners140 (Article 14a of the 
General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Participant no. 2 - Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali (INSTM) / Italy 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not 
be sub-contracted) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General Model Grant Agreement) 
Y 
 The third party will be the University of Pisa, Department of Civil and Industrial 
Engineering located at Pisa (DICI -UNIPI). INSTM will be main partner as associated 
BBI member having a larger activity in the project for composites production on 
laboratory, and pilot scale, supporting industrial production, and for mechanical, and morphological characterization. The 
Department of Civil and Industrial Engineering is fully integrated in INSTM (which is a consortium of Universities) and has long 
lasting cooperation with INSTM in other research projects for chemical modification and characterization of materials and wish 
to benefit of DICI-UNIPI contribute to the project as third part.  
 
Profile of third party: 
The DICI-UNIPI unit of the University of Pisa is l ocated in Largo Lucio Lazzarino 1, in the centre of Pisa. The Industrial 
Chemistry and Materials science group, directly involved in PolyBioSkin) project activities, consists of about 30 researchers  
and 10 technicians. DICI was established in 2012, following a major reform of the Italian higher education system, as a merger 
of the former departments of Aerospace Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Industrial Chemistry and Materials Science, 
Mechanical, Nuclear and Production Engineering, and a part of the de partment of Civil Engineering. The institute research 
covers a wide variety of skills in Materials Science: characterization and development of materials, polymer processing, design 
 
139 A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collaboration not limited to the action. (see relevant articles Model Grant Agreement). 
140 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non -associated third country which is not eligible for fund ing under Article 10 of 
the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 92 of 105 
and modelling of mechanical properties. These research activities have a strong influence in areas of high social and economic 
impact, such as materials and environment, health, energy, industrial. The research activity is carried out in the DICI -UNIPI 
laboratories by employing advanced scientific instruments in collaboration wi th a variety of both national and international 
academic and private institutions.  
Main tasks attributed in the project  
DICI-UNIPI will cooperate with INSTM in most tasks of the proposal but in particular in WP3 and WP6, for processing on 
laboratory scale and characterization, in particular for Dynamic thermal analysis, mechanical testing, and morphology. DICI -
UNIPI will support also INSTM to correlate the performances and properties of the materials produced with their chemical 
nature. The detailed investigations of this correlation will give useful feedbacks to the set-up or revise the industrial processes. 
Personnel who will take part in the work: 
Prof. Patrizia Cinelli (female) PhD in Chemistry at Pisa University partly performed at the United States D epartment of 
Agriculture (USDA), Peoria, IL, USA. 20 years of experience in materials science, polymer processing and characterization, 
biodegradation and life cycle assessment. She is co-author of over 55 papers in peer-reviewed journal, 9 book chapters, and 
8 patents on innovative materials. She is associate professor of Pisa University for applied chemistry and Materials Technology 
at Master Degree student of Construction Engineering and Architecture at Pisa University, and master degree students if 
Materials and Nanotechnology. She has worked in over 15 EC project from FP5, FP6, FP7 and Horizon 2020, directly following 
writing, scientific activity, and reporting.  
Dr. Serena Danti (female), INSTM unit coordinator, is Assistant Professor in Materials Scie nce and Engineering at the 
University of Pisa. She had MD in Chemical Engineering and PhD in Health Technologies, being a scholar research associate 
at Dept. of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX. Her research topics are Biomaterials, Nanomateria ls and Tissue 
Engineering. She has 14 years of experience on scaffold fabrication and biological interactions with primary human cells in 
orthopaedics, otorhinolaryngology and oncology. She is an author of 40 papers in international peer reviewed journals, 9 book 
chapters and 3 patents. She is a Lecturer of Biomaterials, acted as a scientific coordinator of two researcher projects funde d 
by the Tuscany Region, is currently technical manager of POLYBIOSKIN (H2020 BBI project) and principal investigator of 
NANOSPARKS (MISTI seed funds) together with MIT, Cambridge, MA. She is also coordinator of AURICULAE, a project 
funded by the Stem Cells & Life Foundation, Padua, Italy. 
Prof. Maurizia Seggiani (female) was graduated cum laude in Chemical Engineering at Univ ersity of Pisa in 1993. She has 
been junior researcher at the ENEL (Italian National Electricity Company) (1995-1997). In 2000 completed her PhD in Chemical 
Engineering at the University of Pisa. She has been Assistant Professor (2001 -2014) and from 2014 A ssociate Professor of 
Industrial and Technological Chemistry at University of Pisa. Her current research activities are focused on waste management 
(treatment/recovery/valorization of industrial wastes), biomass gasification/pyrolysis, development of 
biodegradable/compostable composite materials and modelling/simulation of chemical processes. Many of these activities are 
conducted in collaboration with public and private research agencies. Her scientific activity is documented by over 70 papers  
in peer revi ewed international journals and 1 patent. She is professor of Synthesis of Chemical Processes and Chemical 
Industrial Instrumentation at Master Degree in Chemical Engineering, University of Pisa. She coordinated Regional projects 
on gasification of industrial wastes and is currently coordinating a Regional project on the development of green biodegradable 
composites based on PHA and natural fibres for marine applications.  
Dr. Francesca Signori (female), PhD in Biomaterials at Trento University (Italy) in 2003. As PhD student, she performed part 
of the research (2001 -2002) at the University of Twente, The Netherlands. In 2006 she received the European Biomaterials 
and Tissue Engineering Doctoral Award, by the European Society of Biomaterials. Her research to pics focus on polymer 
chemistry and physics, mainly on the synthesis, the engineering and the structure -properties relationship assessment of 
biodegradable polymeric materials for biomedical applications. Moreover, she got interested in the use of biodegradable 
thermoplastic materials in the field of nanotechnology and for industrial applications. She is also active in the preparation 
and investigation of biodegradable based polymer composites and blends. Her scientific activity is testified by co -
authorship of 35 papers in peer-reviewed international journals. 
Dr. Sara Filippi ( female), PhD in Chemical Science at University of Pisa, has 20 years of experience on polymer science: 
synthesis and characterization of LCP and energetic polymers, chemical modification of polymers, compatibilization of polymer 
blends, recycling of thermoplastic polymers, preparation and characterization of polyolefin organoclay nanocomposites, 
production and characterization of polymer modified asphalts with anti -ageing properties. She is co -author of more than 50 
publications and she supports the didactical activity of courses for Civil and Construction Engineering.  
 
Relevant publications:  
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 93 of 105 
1. F. Signori, M. -B. Coltelli, S. Bronco, Thermal degradation of poly (lactic acid)(PLA ) and poly (butylene adipate -co-
terephthalate)(PBAT) and their blends upon melt processing, Polymer Degradation and Stability 94 (2009) 74–82 
2. E. Quero, A. J Müller, F. Signori, M.‐B. Coltelli, S. Bronco, Isothermal Cold-Crystallization of PLA/PBAT Blends With and 
Without the Addition of Acetyl Tributyl Citrate, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 213, 36−48 (2012) 
3. M.‐B. Coltelli, I. Della Maggiore, M. Bertoldo, F. Signori, S. Bronco, Francesco Ciardelli, Poly (lactic acid) properties as a 
consequence of poly (butylene a dipate‐co‐terephthalate) blending and acetyl tributyl citrate plasticization, Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science, Vol. 110, 1250–1262 (2008) 
4. P. Cinelli, M. Schmid, E. Bugnicourt, J. Wildner, A. Bazzichi, I. Anguillesi, A. Lazzeri.  "Whey protein layer appl ied on 
biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining biodegradability", Polymer Degradation and 
Stability, 108, 151-157 (2014).  
5. F. Cicogna, S. Coiai, C. De Monte, R. Spiniello, S. Fiori, M. Franceschi, F. Braca, P Cinelli, S. Mohammad Kazem Fehri, 
A. Lazzeri, W. Oberhauser E. Passaglia, "PLA plasticized with low molecular weight polyesters: structural, thermal and 
biodegradability features" Poly. Int. 66, 761-769 (2017) DOI 10.1002/pi.5356. 
Relevant Patents: 
1. Andrea Lazzeri, Thanh Vu Phuong, Patrizia Cinelli, Copolymers based on reactive polyesters and plasticisers for the 
manufacture of transparent, biodegradable packaging film, WO 2013164743 A1 2.  
2. Maurizio Penco, Andrea Lazzeri, Thanh Vu Phuong, Patrizia  Cinelli, C opolymers based on polyester and aromatic 
polycarbonate, WO 2012025907 A1 
Relevant Projects: 
1. FP7 FORBIOPLAST ‘Forest resource sustainability through biobased composite development’, tasks OWS (terminated): 
biodegradability and compostability (organic recycling) testing, LCA 
2. WHEYLAYER (GA 218340) Whey protein-coated plastic films to replace expensive polymers and increase recyclability, 
completed 
3. WHEYLAYER2 (GA 315743) barrier biopolymers for sustainable packaging 
4. BIOBOARD (GA 315313) Development of sustainable protein-based paper and paperboard coating systems to increase 
the recyclability of food and beverage packaging materials 
5. EVOLUTION (GA 314744) The Electric Vehicle Revolution enabled by advanced materials highly hybridized into 
lightweight components for easy integration and dismantling providing a reduced life cycle cost logic 
Significant Infrastructure and Equipment (description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of 
technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work): 
• Minilab Haake mini extruder equipped with MiniLab Injection Moulding Press 
• AMUT flat die extrusion unit for producing films and sheets 
• Testing machine 40 MTS Criterion 
• Differential Scanning Calorimeter TA Q200  
• DMTA Gabo Eplexor® 100N 
• Microtome Leica Reichert Ultracut E 
• Scanning Electron Microscope, JEOL JSM-5600LV  
• Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope, FEI 
 
Budget:70,177€ allocated in WP2 
Partly in kind as for main party 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners141 (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
Participant no. 13 - WEAREBIO OÜ (WEAREBIO) / Estonia 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not 
be sub-contracted) 
Y 
 
141 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non -associated third country which is not eligible for funding under Article 10 of 
the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 94 of 105 
WEAREBIO will subcontract the task 5.4 validation of the trays with fresh products and task 6.4 net validation for fresh 
vegetables.  
The total amount for WEAREBIO 18.000 € will ensure the accomplishment the best value for money principle and the no 
conflict of interest (in agreement with Article 13 of the MGA) 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties N 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of 
the General Model Grant Agreement) 
N 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International Partners142 (Article 14a of 
the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
N 
 
 
 
 
5. Ethics Issues
5.1 Ethics 
During the preparation of this proposal, in keeping with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an Ethics Self-assessment 
was performed with the completion of the Ethical Issues Table, and this project does not involve Ethics issues exc ept with 
the handling of personal data during the survey activities that will be held to gain insight on consumers and stakeholders 
perspective in WP 8. We will make sure that we keep with H2020 guidelines in terms of recruitment, informed consent, data 
storage, protection and destruction procedures (no personal information will be collected during surveys, which will be 
anonymous, not involve minors nor any audio or video recording). 
Although the self -assessment identified no ethics issues arising from the actual workplan itself, it is worthy of comment the 
measures that we are taking during the project work plan to address and mitigate any concerns that could indeed appear in the  
future: 
• Regulatory and safety -related activities have been incorporated fr om the outset of the project with the intention of 
gathering data to fuel into a further safe and compliant development phase. In terms of product, safety aspects will deal 
with food safety regulations as most relevant to packaging but also with environmen tal toxicity to soil of biodegraded 
plastics. Furthermore, the use of a LCSA approach, which identifies environmental as well as health impacts, can help 
identify where the maximum impact could occur providing the opportunity for process or material modifi cations to 
minimise these impacts.  
• The appropriate health and safety procedures conforming to relevant local/national guidelines/legislation will be followed 
by staff involved in this project. In this sense, all partners follow recognised hygiene and safety rules, including chemical 
regulations such as REACH, which compliance will be studied in WP 4 where it applies (polymers are exempt from but 
will be duly followed when dealing with additives, monomers and oligomers). 
• Finally measures related to responsible research & innovation, spread as relevant along the work plan, are overseen in 
WP7. S-LCA will also be performed to encompass social & ethical aspects (like child work and gender equity) (WP4) 
and ethical concerns of consumers regarding our bio-sourced materials or their EoL will be analysed in task 7.2. 
All in all, the developed materials are in fact expected to be safer for both the consumer (increased shelf-life, use of safe natural 
materials) and environment (less land filling, less depletion of fossil resources and less long term pollution by plastics) and more 
sustainable than their standard (synthetic) counterparts or even than some of their bio -based relatives- many of which are food 
competing, the ethics of which are questionable - thereby responding to growing consumers desires to make more responsible 
choices. Furthermore, in terms of end of life, as seen, currently only 31% of the plastic packaging are currently recycled and a far 
too high proportion is landfilled (27% on average) which, in the end, leads to direct and indirect pollution for example when plastics 
are blown away from their place of disposal. So, having access to solutions with versatile and tailored EoL -being recycled and 
industrially/domestically composted or even suitable for anaerobic digestion (AD) as the most sustainable choice that 
we will promote while advocating for improved waste management of bioplastics that also generates increased value 
for our stakeholders - would represent significant socio -economic and environmental  progress. Responsible plastics 
consumption is urgently needed and can no longer be done at the expense of the environment: plastics not only need to meet 
the techno -economical requirements of the target application, they also need to ensure sufficient sus tainability criteria 
 
142 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non -associated third country which is not eligible for funding under Article 10 of 
the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 95 of 105 
especially at end of life. All in all, how ethical is it to continue jeopardising our future generation’s ability to access resources 
and to enjoy a clean environment?
5.2 Security 
In terms of security, project will involve NO: 
• Activities or results raising security issues 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results  
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 96 of 105 
6. Annex: letters of support from advisory board members 
 
Our consortium has collected letter of intent from different pre -selected advisory board members. Those cover the supply and 
value chain and will have different roles such as:  
• Supply of samples of materials (biomonomers: REVERDIA, NL)  
• Support in the dissemination of the project results among relevant clusters and if needed mobilisation of 
stakeholders to get further insights along the work plan: PACKAGING CLUSTER, (Spain) Textile ETP (EU), 
FLANDERSFOOD (Belgium, BIC member), ISWA (Industrial solid waste association, Global) 
• Evaluation of the potential of the new materials for new applications: Roll&Eat / Marca diferencia s.l. (textile food 
wrap, Spain), FERRER: (packaging for pharma products, Spain), BIOTREM (tableware, Poland), Ginegar Plastics 
products (mulching films, Israel) 
• Evaluation of the retailers needs and further insights on consumers buying patterns: Colruyt Group (reference food 
retailer in Belgium with focus on sustainability, interest in using bio-based packaging for its division ‘fresh meat’).  
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 97 of 105 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 98 of 105 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 99 of 105 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 100 of 105 
 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 101 of 105 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 102 of 105 
 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 103 of 105 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 104 of 105 
 
  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 105 of 105