1.2 Relation to the BBI-JU Annual Work Plan 
The BIOnTOP proposal, addressing the topic BBI.2018. SO3.R10 - Develop 
bio-based packaging products that are biodegradable/ compostable 
and/or recyclable , will contribute significantly to the KPIs se t out in the 
Strategic Innovation and Research Agenda (SIRA)5 and is fully aligned with the 
BBI roadmap as will be further discussed in section 2. Our overriding goal aligns 
with its 4 strategic orientations (SO) (fig. 2): SO1) we will use biomass derived  
feedstocks (significantly >85%, although minor non bio-based compounds, e.g. 
processing aids or catalysts, may be used if no alternative exists); favouring 
local resources of second or third generation wherever possible, e.g. waste from 
agro-industrial value chains: plasticizers, malic acid as well as lactic acid from 
fruit processing, FA from oil by -products, and wheat fillers as milling residue; 
SO2) the core of our activities will deal with the eco-design of packaging based 
on novel copolymers and compounds from selected bio-based building blocks; 
SO3) we will tackle the requirements of several mass products together worth 
192 bn €/year for which the materials will be validated (SO4) awareness raising 
campaigns will allow us to meet the needs of our EU end user industries as well 
as the consumers’ demand for greener products. Besides creating socio -
 
5 Strategic Innovation and Research Agenda (SIRA) BIO-BASED INDUSTRIES for Development & Growth in Europe – May 2017  
Fig. 2: The 4 SO in the BBI SIRA 2017 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 8 of 105 
 
economic value, the project will also help the EU in implementing better waste management strategies as well as reducing the 
major societal challenge reflected in the European Plastics strategy . Further extending the impact of the BBI -JU, we also have 
beneficiaries from countries where no BBI participant in awarded funded projects are based like Czech Republic, as well as for 
personal care & pharma packaging which are, to our knowledge, not yet covered in the running projects. We further cover cross 
cutting advanced materials and processing  KETs. The  detailed relation of the proposal to the specific challenge and scope 
addressed by the topic are outlined in table 1 below:  
Table 1: How BIOnTOP relates to the scope and challenges of the BBI 2018.SO3.R10 topic  
Topic text  How BIOnTOP addresses these challenges/scope 
To make the packaging 
EoL significantly more 
sustainable. 
Design new processing 
systems for functional 
bio-based packaging 
products that are 
reusable, recyclable, 
and/or compostable and 
biodegradable in various 
environments to reduce 
their overall 
environmental footprint., 
as an alternative to the 
current identified 
benchmark products.  
The packaging formats that we focus on are generally both neither renewably sourced, nor recyclable at EoL 
independently of being based on monomaterials (light packaging) or multimaterials (multilayer or coated products). As 
seen, even biodegradable polymers have weaknesses in terms of use (properties) or even EoL (limited 
biodegradability in mild conditions or at high thickness). Innovations in the area of bio -based packaging give unique 
opportunities to make their production and use more circular. As will be tested in WP4, our new bio-packaging will be 
eco-designed to be compatible with the most suitable end of life options on a case to case basis according to 
best practice studies from ISWA (member of our AB) on a general and regi onal basis . Applying Circular 
Economy (CE) principle, reusable packaging (bags & wraps) will be delivered to maintain the resources in use at their 
outmost initial value for longer. For single use materials and at the end of the multiple use packaging where applicable, 
final material recycling will be considered. Since the upstream sorting of EoL waste is not always optimal, we will check 
that each material can be properly identified as a pre -requisite to be handled in the right waste management stream 
and, if applicable, recycled into new materials for packaging or textile applications (we can note that there are 
increasing efforts for recycling PLA as already done by ROMEI). For applications contaminated with organic 
substances after use, different compost ing routes will be available. Our solutions will be suitable for industrial 
composting even at high thickness where this EoL option is available, for home composting and for AD. Soil and 
marine biodegradability will also be tested. Where applicable, eco-toxicity tests will be performed on the developed 
materials along with the biodegradation trials. 
The eco-design of our new materials  will be further enabled by the novel biodegradation predictive models  
developed in WP4. All these materials and processes al ong the product life cycle will allow meeting society’s and 
users’ demands to improve the EoL options to avoid landfilling and support manufacturers , who are responsible for 
the suitability of the materials they commercialise, to enforce relevant waste legislations. 
Incrementing our circularity, we will use biomass by-products as raw materials fibres from wheat bran, monomers such 
as lactic and malic acids from fruit waste, coatings from cheese by -products and nano -scale surface modifications 
from ubiquitous fatty acids from plant oils (most sustainable will be selected). Although outside of our scope that is 
rather on later packaging conversion, research into biorefining additional building blocks such as LA from second (non 
edible) and third generation  (waste) feedstock at suitable purity is currently pursued intensely . As soon as on the 
market, those could be substituted by the relevant monomers to further increase BIOnTOP sustainability. 
In case of multilayer materials, we will either resort to removable coatings (whey protein +FA grafting), so separated 
monomaterial can be obtained in the pre-washing step of the recycling process, or to coated textiles using similar 
polymeric matrix as the textile it is applied on.  
In case of multi-layer 
products, consider the 
feasibility of producing 
multi-layer/single-
polymer solutions, 
provided they meet all 
required functionalities 
and outperform state-of-
the-art alternatives for 
sustainability. 
Other innovations in 
functionality and 
production are assets. 
In terms of multifunctionality brought by our coatings, we will bring innovations in terms of providing packaging films 
and textiles with: i) easy emptying behaviour (relevant to  minimise residual product at EoL of e.g. cosmetic sachets), 
ii) non-stick properties (relevant to improve consumer experience e.g. for cheese release lids, iii) waterproof properties 
(e.g. for carrier/ shopping bags). Furthermore, our protein barrier coatings also ensure UV barrier while keeping coated 
film transparency, again a preferable feature vs. e.g. non-transparent metallised barrier. Finally, alginates will be used 
as aroma barrier for tea bags providing an added asset vs. fossil counterparts or emerging PLA solutions.  
Further maximising resource efficiency (optimising properties and use of materials by barrier layers that can reduce 
packaging thickness), t he materials to be delivered will have a number of unique selling points vs. conventional 
counterparts: i) close to 100% bio -sourced, ii) superior food preservation in case of barrier packaging , iii) 
meeting converters’ needs in terms of processability  (standard converting techniques used also for novel 
materials) and iv) EoL options adjustable to the respective applications. Other properties like mechanical, thermal 
resistance, optical and barrier properties, etc., will be tuned to match the requirements o f each of the selected 
applications employing or combining several approaches, e.g. modular copolymers structure, fillers, REX, etc. (see 
section 1.4). Benchmarking will be done vs. currently broadly used fossil and emerging bioplastic solutions along with 
the validation of the new materials for each application and economic as well as environmental sustainability studies 
of both delivered products and processes to demonstrate such comparison on a cradle to cradle basis.  
Address the production 
process, including the 
necessary 
improvements to coating 
and chemical FA 
grafting steps to obtain 
the target end-products 
and their specifications.  
TRL3 to 5.  
We will develop different approaches for obtaining biopolymer-based packaging for multiple food and persona l 
care products as well as multisector bags (secondary packaging) through innovative processes . We will also 
evaluate the theoretical applicability of our materials to other applications (further textiles products, pharma packaging, 
among others). Therefore, we will initially select different monomers, fillers and additives that will be compounded with 
PLA, as available bio-based polymer, but also with new BIOnTOP copolymers. We will upscale the coating process 
for both plastic films and textiles. This encompasses new coatings processes based on whey protein and their further 
top coating using fully bio-based fatty acid anhydrides nanolayer. If needed, in specific packaging formats, lamination 
will be performed but it is not expected to be modified while using our new materials. 
The start, progress and end TRL of each technical component is justified in table 3. In each WP, from the bioplastics 
& coatings development in WP2-3, to the production and characterisation of the derived bio-based packaging for each 
target application (WP5-6), we will work subsequently at lab and pilot scale obtaining significant amounts of material 
for an industrially relevant further characterisation and validation of the demonstrators. Different techno -economical 
aspects of sc alability will be considered in WP5 -6 to give recommendations for successful transfer and sustainable 
production scale up, so the results TRL is further matured to reach the market.  
Actively industry The whole circular bio-based value chain  is covered by BIOnTOP partners. All WPs involve industrial partners in 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 9 of 105 
 
participation to 
demonstrate integration 
potential for the 
developed concepts into 
current industrial 
landscapes or existing 
plants towards quicker 
deployment and scaled 
up to apply industrial-
wide. 
the supply of the raw materials as well as in the upscaling and testing of the new packaging materials  based 
on the initial industrial requirements defined in WP1. The consortium has a strong industry component including the 
participation of 9 SMEs, 6 Large enterprises and many more associated via membership in the participating industry 
association. It is noteworthy that 4 partners are associated and 2 full BIC members and therefore committed to making 
the BBI roadmap successful. In terms of end users , the food & personal care  sector are covered by 3 industrial 
partners. This dense ecosystem will allow researchers and early adopters alike to cooperate, understand the specific 
market demands, and set the basis for the long -term success of the new value chain s. They will also drive the 
knowledge transfer across all involved sectors and the upscaling of the results obtained by the RTDs with a view to 
the smooth post-project replication. 
Demonstrate the 
benefits versus the 
state-of-the-art and 
existing technologies. 
This could be done by 
providing evidence of 
new processing 
solutions and new 
products obtained. 
Involve consumer 
organisations, together 
with recyclers and 
composting plant 
representatives. 
 
The validation of the demonstrators obtained for each sector (nets, trays, flowpacks/sachets, bags of different types…) 
will be performed in WP5 and 6. This activity will encompass the testing of the processability of the new compounds 
and coatings by the converters and testing by final users according to their established quality control approaches but 
also the comparison of the BIOnTOP solutions with existing counterparts on the market . Any additional 
standards that the new products need to comply with will be considered (e.g. the packaging will be tested by migration 
to establish food contact  safety in WP5 -6). A list of selected substances and food contact approval number in 
compliance with existing legislation for use in food contact materials is given in section 2.1. We are confident that our 
developments can convert into a sustainable supply of usable material with functionalities that outperform existing 
biopolymers and fossil-materials but employing processes compatible with the existing packaging lines .  
Our consortium, optimally constituted as a preliminary seed for the future value chain,  involves a number of partners 
that are linked to end of life management: OWS (terminated)/OWS RF (composting & biogas plant design), SILON 
(reprocessing packaging into textile), ROMEI (material recycling) and BIO -MI (production of materials and final 
products and recycling). Furthermore, we mobilise a consumer organisation (MC) who will support understand driving 
factors in consumer acceptance in our requirements in WP1 and in their final perception in WP7.  
Assess the 
environmental impacts 
of the developed 
processes or products 
using LCA 
methodologies based on 
available standards, 
certification, accepted 
and validated 
approaches (section 
2.2.5 BBI JU AWP 
2018). 
Allow for pre- and co-
normative research 
necessary for 
developing the needed 
product quality 
standards. 
Any potential hazards 
associated with the 
developed processes 
and products should be 
analysed to ensure that 
the products comply 
fully with 
REACH legislation and 
other toxicity, safety 
requirements and any 
relevant EU legislation. 
In WP4, a thorough LCA will be performed resulting in an identification of the hot spots and recommendations for the 
selection of products and processes in the project to improve sustainability of the products and EoL options.  
In terms of pre-normative analysis, we will contribute to the discussion on emerging standards for biodegradation 
in specific environments that are still under construction as a harmonized EU framework (e.g. home compostability 
and AD) and, to that end, provide a number of biodegradation test results, especially in mild conditions and anaerobic 
conditions whereby reliable systematic studies lack (see section 1.4). This task will be embedded in our comprehensive 
set of activities focused on standardisation and certification , adherence to and co mpliance with agreed standards 
and best practices is essential for the market introduction of new materials and products. Therefore, the relevant and 
applicable standardisation and certification landscape for BIOnTOP will be thoroughly assessed covering: i) applicable 
standards for biodegradation such as EN 13432 (industrial composting of packaging), or NF T 51 -800 (home 
compostable plastics ); ii) applicable standards for determining bio -based content (e.g. EN 16640, EN 16785) and 
relevant certification sc hemes; iii) current developments, e.g. in the CEN working groups CEN/TC 411 (Bio -based 
products) and CEN/TC 249 (Plastics); iv) relevant sustainability certification schemes, e.g. for sustainable sourcing of 
bio-based materials. The lack of standards regar ding biodegradable plastics/products in AD systems will also be 
tackled since it is also a valuable organic recycling procedure (to some extent even more than recognized industrial 
composting as also biogas is produced. We will identify areas in which BIOnTOP can contribute to the improvement 
and development of standards. In order to bring any relevant findings of the BIOnTOP action to bear on the field of 
standardisation and certification, the consortium will engage in an in-depth exchange with the relevant standardisation 
bodies, in which EUBP and ISWA (AB) are involved, and with the most important independent certifiers in the field of 
bioplastics, namely TÜV AUSTRIA Belgium and DIN CERTCO, who are also EUBP members.  
In terms of policy and regulation, the  current political and policy framework for bio -based and biodegradable plastics 
will be surveyed, detailing any beneficial and detrimental legislation and initiatives, and the key actors on the EU level, 
and in some exemplary Member States that exhibit either very progressive or very inhibitive legislation for bioplastics, 
as well as depending on their waste management land scape. In order to positively influence the political framework 
for BIOnTOP exploitation, specific fact-based, scientifically backed information will be used in policy recommendations 
in WP7, for example in the areas of waste management and increased resource efficiency, to help utilise the potential 
of bioplastics in implementing circular bioeconomy principles. BIOnTOP will reach out to  EU decision -makers to 
disseminate this information and thus contribute to progressive policy initiatives supporting the bio -based economy.  
In terms of safety, our safe by design packaging will consider food contact legislation from the project outset and  we 
will also perform migration tests on the primary as well as secondary materials from the project. Furthermore, a task 
in WP7 will be dedicated to the analysis of REACH compliance of our innovation.  
Include an economic 
viability performance 
check (value chain and 
market analysis) of the 
developed products and 
processes, analysis of 
social impacts. Social 
science as cross cutting 
priority 
The proposal focuses on improved copolymers derived from PLA that is the most affordable biodegradable 
biopolymer nowadays available at industrial scale with a high maturity. It is therefore suited for mass short-term use 
applications where EoL has a major socioeconomic impact. To further improve its cost competitiveness, it will be 
blended with low cost waste biomass derived additives like plasticizers and organic fillers. Likewise, the very thin 
(nano-scale) fatty acid (FA) grafted layers are very material efficient and therefore cost effective. Our target for the 
new packaging is to be cost competitive ( iso-cost vs. PLA or 40% maximum increase vs. fossil -based benchmarks, 
see estimates table 5). An LCC will be performed in WP4 and economic aspects will be included in the business plan 
in WP7 together with a value chain analysis. Social aspects will be covered both in the consumer perspective study in 
WP7 and by the s-LCA in WP4.  
In keeping with the expected scope of proposal under BBI 2018.SO3.R10 topic,  the BIOnTOP proposal has a budget of ca. 
€5.5 million and an EC contribution of ca. €4.2 million, therefore being within the range guided by the call text (including 31% in 
kind contributions by partners as described in section 2). The project will generate excellent value for money for the bio -based 
industries value chains while delivering a number of bio-based solutions as well as new applications valorising agro-food wastes.  
 
 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 10 of 105