1.4 Ambition  
Advance beyond the state-of-the-art and the extent to which the proposed work is ambitious 
The use of bio -based materials is a very interesting way to decrease the environmental impact of end users and packaging 
industries. However improvements in the functionality and properties of bio-based materials are required to fill performance and 
price gap with fossil mater ials that generally hampers their replacement. In this sense, BIOnTOP project has the ambition to 
develop novel packaging products in different formats (trays, films, flowpacks and textiles) using new copolymers based 
on PLA and other bio -based diacids as well as innovative barrier coatings  that will lead to significant knowledge 
advancements of the state-of-the-art in packaging materials with tailored end-of-life phase as follows: 
State of the art in the field of home and industrially compostability and degradation under anaerobic conditions 
Industrial compostability was the first process of organic recycling for which a test strategy including specific requirement s was 
developed. This resulted in the harmonized EU standard EN 13432 Requirements for packaging recoverable through composting 
and biodegradation - Test scheme and evaluation criteria for the final acceptance of packaging (2000) according to which a broad 
range of products are certified. However, during home composting, the high temperatures (> 50 °C) required by some polymers 
such as PLA for starting the degradation and obtained during industrial composting processes, are mostly not reached. At lower 
temperatures, degradation rate is reduced or even limited. Furthermore, in order to be home compost able, a material must 
demonstrate sufficient biodegradation and disintegration at ambient temperature. This principle was first applied by the OK 
compost HOME Conformity Mark of certification institute TÜV AUSTRIA Belgium. Currently, also the German Certification Institute 
has developed a logo: DIN -Geprüft Home Compostable. On a European level, no standard has been established yet for home 
compostable products, but recently home composting has become an important factor in France, with the ban of convention al 
lightweight plastic shopping bags, the encouragement of bioplastics compostable at domestic level and the introduction of a 
French national standard on home compostable materials NF T 51 -800 Plastics – Specifications for plastic suitable for home 
composting (2015). Moreover, several European companies, such as BASF, BIOTEC, LIMAGRAIN, NOVAMONT, FUTAMURA, 
etc. have developed polymer resins that are home compostable, but they have limited thermomechanical behaviour and 
processability. Most of these product s are starch, polyhydroxy butyrate (PHB) or polyhydroxy succinate (PBS) based, although 
the Ecovio compounds of BASF contain PLA (in low amount when meeting home compostability requirements - rest being non-
bio-based PBAT). On the market, there is still a l ack of products meeting the needs of the packaging applications (in terms of 
price, controlled biodegradability and product properties). Moreover, it should be noted that at present, PLA can be in the material 
formula (although it is not degrading at ambient temperature), as the current test requires that 90% absolute or relative to cellulose 
biodegradation is reached. However, in line with the International and American specifications for industrial compostable products 
and DIN-Geprüft Industrial Compostable label, in which it is requested that organic components between 1% and 10% must be 
tested separately, it is likely that the European standard in discussion follows a similar approach. In that case, materials including 
 
8 Londa Schiebinger (2008). Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 14 of 105 
 
even minor PLA amounts and currentl y claiming home compostability would fail. In this case, the use of BIOnTOP copolymers 
would become mandatory.   
Besides, it is well known that compostability rate is thickness dependent. While it may be possible to compost a specific bioplastic 
sample used in packaging film, a consumer product such as thick injected cosmetic jar, made from this bioplastic may not compost 
at a rate sufficient to meet the compostability standard, simply because it is too thick. This is true even for starch derived or PLA 
based materials at high thickness used for rigid food packaging (trays). For example, PLA for industrial composting conditions is 
certified up to 2000 µm thicknes s (Total-Corbion), but polybutylene succinate (PBS) up to 68 µm (Xinjian Blue Ridge Tunhe 
Polyester Co., LTD; China) and polybutylene adipate terephthalate (PBAT) up to 120 µm (BASF, Germany)[9.  
As biodegradation is also determined by the characteristics of the environment (temperature, moisture content, pH, oxygen 
presence, microbial population…), specific test procedures were developed to determine biodegradation of plast ics under 
anaerobic conditions (ISO 15985). However, although AD in biogasification plants is considered in the EU Waste Directive as a 
valuable treatment method for organic recycling, there is currently no standard existing that defines the specific requirements on 
biodegradation, disintegration and effect on the digestate that should be fulfilled (similar to EN 13432 for industrial composting). 
AD has so far only been poorly investigated as an EoL option for bioplastics and packaging. Still, it is an inte resting technology 
due to additional biogas formation, suitable for electricity or heat production. In fact, the bioplastics can have a positive effect on 
biogas production due to their high C/N ratio. The results of this project will help to understand th e behaviour of plastics and 
packaging in these anaerobic systems and can be a basis for development of such a standard.   
Beyond the state of the art, BIOnTOP will combine several technologies discussed below to reach modular EoL that are currently 
not achievable with the available materials under control waste management scenario, while still ensuring the material meets the 
properties required for packaging productions. BIOnTOP will improve the biodegradation of PLA based blends and copolymers 
in home composting conditions, allowing to apply a higher PLA content and more cost-effective products. Moreover, the behaviour 
of PLA products in AD systems will be evaluated opening new EoL options, in both cases contributing with tests results towards 
new harmonised standards. 
State of the art in the field of PLA, lactide (LD) and lactic acid (LA) based copolymers  
Among the biodegradable polymers, polylactic acid (PLA)-based polymers are one of the 
most extensively studied biomass -derived synthetic polymers, used for a wide range of 
applications covering disposable household items, food packaging, agricultural films, drug 
delivery systems, and implantable biomedical devices. However, some PLA properties are 
still insufficient for their breakthrough in more potential applications, mainly due to its lack of toughness and impact resistance.10 
Generally commercial grade of PLA are co-polymers of L-LA and D-LA or the corresponding lactide (LD) forms.11. The ratio of L 
to D enantiomers is known to affect th e properties of PLA. Thus, the content of D-LA affects the glass transition of PLA, which 
decreases progressively, as well as the melting temperature and the crystallization rate, which decrease with the increase in the 
D units content. In general, in industrial packaging applications, the use of PLA with a content of D units of a 2–6 wt. % randomly 
distributed is very common as then, the crystallization of PLA is low, favouring the production of amorphous transparent films (in 
contrast to textiles needing high crystallinity). The crystallinity of PLA interferes with controlled degradation and is an obstacle to 
the application of PLA as a biodegradable plastic. Therefore, research aims to equip PLA-based polymers with controllable 
biodegradation profiles , tailored mechanical properties, reactivity for chemical modification, and other functionalities while 
keeping the favourable characteristics of PLA. In that sense, a promising approach is the introduction of hydrophilic 
(reactive) segments, other bio-based monomers and/or branched structures into PLA. Currently, the lack of consistency 
in biodegradability studies, with varying conditions and protocols being applied to different systems, makes it very hard and 
controversial to compare the biodegradability of plastics and in particular of PLA and derived materials developed in 
the academic literature.12  
Biodegradation of PLA 
As seen previously, the biodegradation of plastics is a complex process involving multiple steps and pathways and is highly 
dependent on the conditions. The initial degradation step for PLA is to be broken down into monomers or low molecular weight 
oligomers, where the ester bonds are cleaved hydrolytically to facilitate uptake into microorganisms.13 PLA becomes water soluble 
when the molecular weight (Mn) is below 20,000 g/mol. 14 The initial degradation into smaller fragments is a rate limiting step in 
biodegradation processes.15 After uptake into the microorganisms, subsequent metabolic activity breaks the polymers down into 
metabolic end products such as carbon dioxide and water, while a portion of the carbon is converted into biomass.16 Composting 
of PLA proceeds efficiently under adequate conditions due to the combined effects of hydrolysis and microbial activity. 17 
 
9 http://www.okcompost.be/data/pdf-document/okc-mate.pdfdincertco.tuv.com/search/categories?category_id=442&locale=en 
10 Mehta, et al..,Synthesis of poly (lactic acid): a review. J. Macromol. Sci. Polym. Rev., 2005; 45(4): 325–349 (2005) 
11 http://www.natureworksllc.com/What-is-Ingeo/Where-Ingeo-Comes-From 
12 Garrison et al.. Review Bio-Based Polymers with Potential for Biodegradability. Polymers 2016, 8, 262; doi:10.3390/polym8070262 
13 Stlouk et al. Kinetics and mechanism of the biodegradation of PLA/clay nanocomposites during thermophilic phase of composting process. Waste Manag. 2015, 42. 
14 Gorrasi et al., Effect of PLA grades and morphologies on hydrolytic degradation at composting temperature: Assessment of structural modification and kinetic parameters. 
Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2013, 98, 1006–1014 
15 Husárová, et al. Identification of important abiotic & biotic factors in the biodegradation of PLA. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2014, 71, 155–162 
16 Mueller, R.J. Biological degradation of synthetic polyesters-Enzymes as potential catalysts for polyester recycling. Process. Biochem. 2006, 41, 2124–8. 
17 Ghorpade, et al., Laboratory composting of extruded poly(lactic acid) sheets. Bioresour. Technol. 2001, 76, 57–61. 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 15 of 105 
 
Furthermore, elevated temperatures encountered during composting accelerate the hydrolysis process of PLA, especially when 
temperatures exceed 50ºC. 18 Extracellular enzymes released by specific microorganisms can cause cleavage of PLA chains, 
which may contribute to the deg radation process. However, some studies have shown that extracellular enzymes do not 
significantly accelerate depolymerization. The reaction mechanism for the hydrolysis of polyesters is a bimolecular nucleophi lic 
substitution reaction (SN2), which may be catalysed with either acids or bases. 19 Furthermore, the reaction rates for hydrolytic 
degradation are dependent on a number of factors: temperature, size and shape of sample, molecular weight (Mw), crystallinity, 
and relative humidity. Moreover, polymers that crosslink during irradiation tend to show reduced biodegradation because the 
higher Mw decreases the ability for uptake by microorganisms.20  
PLA synthesis 
The synthesis routines of PLA can be divided into polycondensation reaction from LA and ring op ening polymerization (ROP) 
from LD via a coordination-insertion mechanism.21,22 
-Direct polycondensation (DP): DP of LA is usually performed in bulk by distillation of condensation water with or without a 
catalyst, while vacuum and temperature are progressively increased. A polymer of low Mw and uncontrolled stereoregularity is 
sometimes obtained being the main disadvantage of DP and restricts its use. The polymer thus possesses inferior mechanical 
properties. So, this method is normally employed only to obtain polymers of low Mw (e.g. prepolymers for WP2 or coatings).  
-Ring-Opening Polymerization (ROP) : While DP of LA is cheaper, ROP of LD is the method used commercially. Many 
researchers have studied this ROP and some patents 23  have been filed (mostly already expired patents not focusing on 
copolymers as in the present project), however a huge research is still needed. As an example, NatureWorks LLC has developed 
a solvent-free, low-cost continuous process for the production of PLA from com-derived dextrose. The resulting PLA (Ingeo™) is 
the first synthetic polymer to be produced from annually renewable resources. The ROP of LD can be initiated by metal complexes, 
organic compounds or enzymes to yield high Mw PLA in excellent conversion and purity. The benefits of ROP in conjunction with 
a "living" method have enabled the controlled synthesis of block, graft, and star polymers. It is very important to control the 
stereochemistry of PLA because it plays a very important role in PLAs’ physico -chemical, mechanical properties and 
biodegradability. 
-Reactive Extrusion (REX): REX has emerged as a powerful tool with potential to replace chemical batch reactor in some cases. 
REX, performed in a well-designed twin-screw co-rotating extruder, is an attractive route for bioplastic processing in order to carry 
out polymerization. The obvious advantages of an extrusion polymeriz ation are that it is a solvent free melt and a low-cost 
continuous process, starting from monomers or prepolymers and resulting in polymers, while controlling the chemistry  
throughout the process. In this regard, REX processing of PLA -based materials has b een investigated mainly at small scale in 
order to modify their properties. REX can therefore enhance the commercial viability and cost-competitiveness of these materials 
as already found for biodegradable polymers like PLA 24. 
Beyond state-of-the-art copolymerization routes of diacids with lactic acid/lactide, throughout the BIOnTOP project we will 
develop two cost effective environmentally friendly approaches (direct polycondensation and REX synthesis; this latter is currently 
not well established in the Industry due to insufficient knowledge of its advantages) that will supply tailored EoL such as 
biodegradability in home composting conditions and increase the sustainability of the bio-based polymer synthesis process. 
Chemical Structure Influence on Biodegradation 
Several studies in the literature suggest relationships between the chemical structure of substrates and their degradation ra tes. 
Likewise, the polymers exhibiting the lowest mechanical properties are also generally the ones with the highest degradation rates 
and it is also why commercially available solutions for home compostable shopping bags or so are not suitable for higher 
demanding applications as tackled in the project. High biodegradability rates depend  primarily on (1) the presence of terminal 
hydroxyl or acyl functional groups to allow for metabolic processes and (2) lower molecular weights. Such findings25,26,27  suggest 
that in many cases biodegradability may be directed by physico -chemical phenomena , such as the mobility of substrate, 
availability, mixing, mechanical properties impacting breaking down of the macrostructure, and/or hydrophilicity of chemical 
species. Bio-based or bio -renewable monomers can lead to materials that may not necessarily be  fully or significantly 
biodegradable and the biodegradability of a large number of novel bio-based systems has not been investigated yet. Changes in 
the functional groups of bio-based monomers, crosslink density and co-polymerization with non-biodegradable comonomers can 
lead to materials that exhibit various degrees of biodegradability, with varying environmental impact.  
 
18 Tokiwa, Y.; Jarerat, A. Biodegradation of poly(L-lactide). Biotechnol. Lett. 2004, 26, 771–777. 
19 Lyu, S.P.; et al.. Kinetics and time-temperature equivalence of polymer degradation. Biomacromolecules 2007, 8, 2301–10. 
20 Kijchavengkul, Assessment of aliphatic–aromatic copolyester biodegradable mulch films. Part II Laboratory simulated conditions. Chemosphere 2008, 71, 1607-16 
21 Garlotta, D. A.,literature review of poly (lactic acid).J. Polym. Environ., 2001; 9(2): 63-84. 
22 Li, B et al.,Synthesis of poly(lactic acid-b-p-dioxanone) block copolymers from ring opening polymerization of p-dioxanone by poly(L-lactic acid) macroinitiators. Polym. Bull., 
2008; 61(2): 139-146. 
23 a) Grubber P. R., Paul St., Hall E. S., et a1. U. S. Pat. 5,142,023 (1992).); b) Enomoto K., Ajioka M., Yamaguchi A U. S. Pat. 5,310,865 (1994); c) Maeda H., Shimizu K., 
Miyakawa Y., et al. U. S. Pat. 5,866,677 (1999). 
24 Processing, Characterization and Physical Properties of PLA Chapter 4 2014 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/9781782624806-00099 
25 Lu  et al. Isomer-specific biodegradation of nonylphenol in an activated sludge bioreactor andstructure-biodegradability relationship. Water Res. 2015, 68 
26 Genovese. New eco-friendly random copolyesters based on poly(propylene cyclohexanedicarboxylate): Structure-properties relationships. Express Polym. Lett. 2015, 9, 972 
27 Beran, E.; Hull, S.; Steininger, M. The relationship between the chemical structure of poly(alkylene glycol)s and their aerobic biodegradability in an aqueous environment. J. 
Polym. Environ. 2013, 21, 172–180 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 16 of 105 
 
PLA Copolymers 
The introduction of different monomers (dicarboxylic acids: DA) in the PLA chain reduces PLA crystallization and the resulting 
copolymers will display enhanced biodegradability. Furthermore, this modification allows obtaining different lengths and Mw 
distributions providing a good approach to tune the biodegradation of the final compounds. While the presence of a methylene 
in position alpha to the carboxylic acid of LA hinders its biodegradation, the selection of polymers without this steric hindrance will 
favour their biodegradability because the access of the microorganism to the carbonyl group is easier. The choice of ini tiator 
system, co-initiator as chain control agent, catalyst concentration, monomer -to-initiator ratio and polymerization temperature & 
time, significantly affects the polymer properties, such as the Mw, degree of crystallinity, and residual monomer content, which in 
turn affect the physico-mechanical properties and processing temperature range of the polylactide and its copolymers as well as 
their biodegradation behaviour.28 
The US Department of Energy identified 12 strategic building block chemicals that can be produced from carbohydrates or sugars 
via biological or chemical conversions from biomass. 29 Most of them are bifunctional dicarboxylic acids among which BIOnTOP 
considered itaconic acid, adipic acid, tartaric acid, malic acid, succinic acid, glycolic acid and aspartic acid as potential candidates 
that can be copolymerized with LA to obtain biodegradable copolymers in suitable conditions. All of them, except glycolic aci d, 
are bio-produced at low cost. Taking into account their price, bio -based availability in Europe, chemical structure, bibliographic 
references and patents to prepare copolymers with LA or lactide and their biodegradability, malic and succinic acid have been  
selected to be copolymerized with lactic acid in WP2. 
Malic acid (MA): Companies such as Novozymes and Myriant have developed proprietary technologies based 
on aforementioned fermentation process. Currently, 80% of global malic acid is produced synthetically and 
the remaining is produced by renewable sources among othe r from fruit waste , as done by OENO 
(collaborator of INSTM who will act as supplier for WP2 ). Commercialization of bio -based malic acid at competitive pricing as 
compared to its synthetic counterpart is expected to create immense opportunities to be used as platform chemical in the future. 
The estimated bio-based MA price is at around 2400€/tonne.30 At the market price of 1.9€/kg, MA production from soy molasses 
via PMA fermentation offers an economically competitive process. MA is used to produce bio -based polyesters which find 
application in pharmaceuticals used to treat cancer cells. It has been demonstrated that poly(malic acid -co-L-lactide) acts as a 
superb degradation accelerator for PLA in physiological conditions due to the superiority of poly(malic acid) vs. PLA to 
biodegrade.31 Their findings also proved the usefulness to tune the degradation rate. 
Succinic acid (SA): Nowadays, the bulk of SA is produced at a rate of 25,000 tons per year from maleic 
anhydride obtained by oxidation of the C4 fractio n (n -butane or butadiene) of crude oil. However, the 
biotechnological production of SA by fermentation of carbohydrates has attracted recent attention.32 At larger 
scale (typically 50 kTonnes), and due to lower costs of raw materials, bio-SA has the potential to be cheaper than its fossil-derived 
product and is expected to open up new markets and applications. Reverdia and Myriant’s production cost for bio-SA is estimated 
to be lower than 1,040€/MT 33 whereas market prices for petroleum -derived SA are reported between $6,000 and $9,000/MT 34. 
Building on such advantage, the most conservative market studies estimates 250 ktonnes of bio -based SA will be produced by 
2020 with high opportunities for growth in EU. Some of the major companies dominating this market are Reverdia (AB), BioAmber 
and Succinity. As an example of copolymerization synthesis, LA, ethylene glycol and SA were copolymerised with different 
monomer feed ratios by direct polycondensation. 35 The lack of methyl groups in the succinic molecule should  favour the 
biodegradation and the biodegradation of its derivatives such as poly(butylene succinate) (PBS) are well demonstrated.36 In fact, 
PBS is home compostable according to Vinçotte certificate. For that reason, it is an interesting blend partner for  PLA. However, 
most PBS on the market is not yet bio-based and its market is less established than that of PLA.37 Possibility of terpolymers with 
adipic acid are interesting solutions to be addressed too.38 
Beyond state-of-the-art copolymerization strategies, throughout the BIOnTOP project, novel tailor made copolymers of malic 
and succinic acids with lactic acid/lactide will be developed through different synthetic routines. Moreover, copolymers with  
different ratios MA or SA/LA, molecular weights, lengths of each segment and crystallinity will be designed which will allow 
breakthrough in their biodegradation behaviour in mild conditions, e.g. for home composting. In addition, the comparison of the 
degradability behaviour of different bio-based systems in a consistent manner will allow a systematic understanding of the effect 
 
28 Duda, S. et al, “Polymerizations of ε-caprolactone and L,L-dilactide initiated with stannous octoate and stannous butoxide—a comparison,” Macromolecular Symposia, vol. 
153, no. 1, pp. 41–53, 2000. D. W. Grijpma et al., “Polymerization temperature effects on the properties of l-lactide and ε-caprolactone copolymers,” Polymer Bulletin, vol. 25, 
no. 3, pp. 335–341, 1991 
29 Werpy T, Petersen G (2004) Top value added chemicals from biomass, vol 1. U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge 
30 https://greenchemicalsblog.com/2012/09/05/novozymes-expands-bio-based-activities/ 
31 Poly(malic acid-co-L-lactide) as a superb degradation accelerator for Poly(L-lactic acid) at physiological conditions. DOI: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2016.10.016 
32 www.dsm.com/en_US/downloads/media/12e_09_dsm_and_roquette_commercialize_bio_based_succinic_acid.pdf, www.bio-amber.com/press_releases.php 
33Paradigms in Green Chemistry and Technology, Angelo Albini,Stefano Protti, Springer 
34 The National Non-Food Crops Centre 2013 
35 Biodegradation behaviour of poly(lactic acid) and (lactic acid-ethyleneglycol-malonic or succinic acid) copolymers under controlled composting conditions in a laboratory test 
system, Oana Cadar et al. Polymer Degradation and Stability 97 (2012) 354e357 
36 Polymer, Vol. 50, 5, 23, 2009, 1178-1186, A novel biodegradable multiblock poly(ester urethane) containing poly(l-lactic acid) and poly(butylene succinate) blocks;  
Biotechnol. J. 2010, 5, 1149–1163; G.-Q. Chen (ed.), Plastics from Bacteria: Natural Functions and Applications, Microbiology Monographs, Vol. 14 
37 http://www.okcompost.be/data/pdf-document/okh-mate.pdf 
38 X. Zheng, B. Wu , L. Wu, J. Hu, Z. Bu, B. -G. Li; “Poly(l -lactic acid)-block-poly(butylene succinate-co-butylene adipate) Multiblock Copolymers: From Synthesis to Thermo -
Mechanical Properties”, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53 (9), pp 3550–3558, DOI: 10.1021/ie403623f 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 17 of 105 
 
of the structure of the end of life behaviour that is currently lacking in the literature and a contribution to biodegradation standards.  
Use of biomass derivatives and blends for tailoring of biopolymers biodegradability in composting environments 
As seen, polymer biodegradability is connected with polymer crystallinity, crosslinking and molecular weight. In addition, the 
selection of proper additives, in particular plasticizers and fillers can significantly speed up the biodegradation of polymer based 
materials39. Plasticizers lower the glass transition temperature of polymers and promote the rubber state that is easier to 
biodegrade, as experienced by INSTM and OWS (terminated) on cellulose di-acetate blends plasticized with triacetin40, a GRAS 
compound according to FDA. In PLA -based blends41 the selection of proper plasticizer type and amount allows promoting the 
biodegradability. In or der to avoid migration of excessive plasticizers with consequent changes in mechanical properties with 
ageing and possible contamination in case of packed items, the use of reactive plasticizers and their reaction with the polymeric 
matrix, possibly in the extrusion step, is an interesting approach. As such, REX will be also used in the preparation of blen ds 
besides the copolymerisation step. It has been proven by INSTM for the production of PLA based transparent films with epoxy 
functionalised plasticizers42, recently updated by INSTM with bio -based and for food contact approved epoxydised agro -based 
derivates plasticizers. In BIOnTOP, INSTM plans to use mainly bio -based plasticizers such as acet yl tributyl citrate and 
functionalised (epoxy, maleic) oligomers of LA as well as epoxy derived natural oils such as soybean oil derivates. INSTM has  
also already experienced positively the use of LA oligomers as plasticizers in PLA achieving valuable mechanical properties and 
compostability. The effect of nucleating agents such as PDLA 43, talc, calcium carbonate or even montmorillonites 44,45,46, etc. will 
be also studied in order to modulate the biodegradation properties, which are connected with the distr ibution of the PLA 
amorphous and different crystalline phases. Such inorganic fillers in small amounts also improve processing avoiding sticking on 
the mould or of blow moulded films. 
Likewise, biocomposites using natural fibres or fillers (NF) have been r esearched intensively over the last years yielding to new 
applications due to their processing advantages, biodegradability, low cost, low relative density, high specific strength and  
renewable nature. Several examples of biodegradable composites are reported in literature using different types of matrixes, e.g. 
starch based blends and PLA, and natural reinforcements such as fillers from pine, cellulose, potato pulp, rice husk 47. NF 
considerably reduces the price of the final material since generally natural fillers are cheaper than bio-based polymeric matrices 
such as PLA. Moreover, if proper compatibility is achieved, fillers can strengthen the material and increase the Young’s modulus, 
or impact resistance. Besides, composites can promote biodegradability, as the presence of fillers increase the polymer surface 
available for microbial attack especially when the fillers are based on easily degradable natural components48, such as cellulose 
or by-products with high content in hemicellulose. The swelling and degradation of the fillers highly promote the disintegration of 
composite materia l49. The amount of fillers loaded in a composite is limited by weak adhesion at the fibre -polymeric matrix 
interphase, poor mechanical properties and difficulties in processing 50. Therefore, the use of compatibilizers such as maleic or 
itaconic anhydride may allow to obtain a higher load of fillers in PLA polymeric matrix. As well as fillers pre-treatment, the amount 
and properties of the coupling agent are also crucial for the properties of the composites51.  
In terms of alternative routes, while the polymer blending wit h home compostable polymers like PCL or PBS is limited by low 
properties/high costs thereof, and, as discussed earlier, the presence of even low amount of PLA can prevent meeting related 
standards, there is also a significant amount of academic literature regarding the use of enzymes mixed in different polymers 
showing variable results depending on the matrix. The BIOCLEAN project52 among other studies 53 concluded that none of the 
tested enzymes showed degradation capability toward tested conventional polymers. In the case of PLA, Carbios, a French 
company, has developed a pilot technology for embedding an enzyme in plastic at the time of production. 54 In contrast, to avoid 
issue with the further thermal sensitivity of the enzyme that may lead to a loss of enzyme activity and therefore a slower 
biodegradation, BIOnTOP will prefer additivation and copolymerisation routes to tune the polymer behaviour.  
In BIOnTOP, an accurate study of polymer crystallinity will be performed as function of additives and fillers content and processing 
 
39 A.Corti, et al.; “Biodegradation of Poly(vinyl alcohol) in Soil Environment: Influence of Natural Organic Fillers and Structural Parameters”, Macromol.Chem.Phys. 2002, 203, 
1526-1531; E. Chiellini et al. “Environmentally Degradable Bio-based Polymeric Blends & Composites”Macromolecular Bioscience, 2004, 4, 218-231. 
40 V.T. Phuong, et al.. “Cellulose Acetate Blends – Effect of Plasticizers on Properties and Biodegradability”, Journal of Renewable Materials, 2014, 2 (1), 35-41, ISSN 2164-
6371, 2164-6325. 
41 E. Bugnicourt, P. Cinelli, A. Lazzeri, V. Alvarez; Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): Review of synthesis, characteristics, processing and potential applications in 
packaging,Express Polymer Letters, 2014, 8(11), 791-808. 
42 A. Lazzeri, T.V. Phuong, P. Cinelli PCT/IB2013/053302 (WO 2013164743 A1), “Copolymers based on reactive polyesters and plasticisers for the manufacture of 
transparent, biodegradable packaging film”  
43 L. Aliotta et al., European Polymer Journal 2017, (Effect of nucleating agents on crystallinity phases, and properties of Poly (lactic acid) (PLA) 
44 Ray et al.., 2003. New polylactide-layered silicate nanocomposites. 2. Concurrent improvements of material properties, biodegradability and melt rheology. Polymer 44, 857–
866. Stloukal et al. Kinetics and mechanism of the biodegradation of PLA/clay nanocomposites during thermophilic phase of composting process Waste Mngt 42 (2015) 31–40 
45 Castiello et al., Comparative study about preparation of poly(lactide)/Organophilic montmorillonites nanocomposites through melt blending or ring opening polymerization 
methods, J Appl Polym Sci, 2012 
46 Scatto et al., Plasticized and nanofilled poly(lactic acid)‐based cast films: Effect of plasticizer and organoclay on processability and final properties, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013 
47 Mohanty A.K. et. al. Compos. Interf., 8 (2001) 313.; W. Surata, I G.A. Kade Suriadi, K. Arnis, “Mechanical Properties of Rice Husks Fiber ReinforcedPolyester Composites” 
International Journal of Materials, Mechanics and Manufacturing, Vol. 2, No. 2, May 2014 
48 M Seggiani et al.. “Development of Fibres-Reinforced Biodegradable Composites” Chemical Engineering Transaction, 2015, 43, 1813-1815. 
49 GUIDANCE DOCUMENT INDUSTRIAL COMPOSTABILITY CLAIMS CHECKLIST, JUNE 2016, The Plastics Industry Trade Association (SPI) Bioplastics Division. PLA and 
PHA Biodegradation in the Marine Environment, California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery March 5, 2012 
50 E.Chiellini, et. al. Biomacromolecules, 2001, 2, 806-811; E. Chiellini et. al., Macromolecular Bioscience, 2004, 4, 218-231. 
51 M Seggiani et. al., Chemical Engineering Transaction, 2015, 43, 1813-1815 
52 New Biotechnological approaches for biodegrading and promoting the environmental biotransformation of synthetic polymeric materials 
53 http://www.ows.be/lab-consulting-services/publications/  
54 https://carbios.fr/ 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 18 of 105 
 
conditions55 to address the connection between polymers morphology, mechanical properties and biodegradability. The formula 
patented42 by INSTM of flexible films based on PLA and reactive plasticizer targeting the production of films for shopping bags 
will be optimized by REX between PLA (or the new copolymers thereof) and food contact, biodegradable, bio-based plasticizers 
such as FA based derivatives and modified oligomers of LA or adipic acid, and acetyl tributyl citrate. To tune 
crystallinity, a proper selection of nucleating and strengthening agents, or low molecular weight oligomers of 
LA, will be made. For selected packaging formats such as trays , food contact approved natural cellulose 
based fillers such as wheat milling by -products will be used to tune disintegration and lower material cost. 
Furthermore, the NF/matrix  interface will be improved with wax coating and coupling agents such maleic 
anhydride. The combination of NF, copolymers and suitable additives will be optimized to achieve our 
biodegradability targets. 
State of the art and progresses in the field of net packaging for fresh produce (F&V) 
Nets are a widely used packaging format for fruits and vegetables. ECOBIONET project faced up the EoL treatment of plastic 
nets if mixed with the household waste. The management of this waste causes problems to household 
waste treatment due to their low apparent density and high strength (i.e. material is difficult to be cut 
and the nets may get entangled  and collapse treatment machines). The main objective of the project 
was to industrialize the process and technologies related to the fabrication of different types of 
biodegradable compostable nets, obtained by extrusion melt spinning process (one-step process), 
for agriculture and shellfish packaging products. ECOBIONET goal was to manufacture completely 
biodegradable and compostable packaging nets while being both cost -competitive and technically comparable to current 
polyolefin-based nets. For this, a new biodegradable compound was obtained, derived from the synergic combination of different 
immiscible biodegradable polyester materials (including an important percentage of PLA) with plasticizers and compatibilizers . 
However, ECOBIONET nets are only completely biodegradable in the conditions of a composting plant56.  
Building on the knowledge regarding the production of industrially compostable PLA -based nets developed by AIMPLAS and 
CMSA in ECOBIONET project, BIOnTOP will develop suitable formulation for home composting which is an asset due to 
difficulties in collecting such light packaging, but also for countries with limited composting plants as well as for domesti c 
valorisation as a fair share of F&V are spoiled in pack.  
State of the art and progresses in the field of biopolymers and PLA for textile fibres and filaments.  
The use of biopolymers in textile applications is nowadays only via extrusion and is estimated at 100 kTon per year57, which has 
the potential to increase strongly in the coming years if broader applicability and better price with adapted polymer formula tions 
are achieved. Mostly used (partially) bio -based polymers are often “drop -in” variants of the oil -based counterparts such as bio -
PE, bio-PET, bio-PTT, etc. Current bio-based and biodegradable textiles consist mainly of PLA 58. TPS (thermoplastic starch) is 
rarely used since its mechanical properties are insufficient for most textile applications. Other (partially) bio -based materials are 
in research for textile applications as well (e.g. PHA, PBS, PEF and bio -PA). PLA is currently and will be in the near future the 
only bio-based and biodegradable polymer resulting in high-quality products which is also available in sufficient amounts 
and at acceptable price . However , although the feedstock is bio -based, for fully environmentally sustainable solutions, 
improvements are still required for EoL not to be limited to high temperature and humidity composting conditions. As other 
bottlenecks, PLA is more expensive than fossil-based textiles, PLA processibility is more sensitive (mainly due to hydrolysis) and 
a better understanding and control of the biodegradation potential are needed.  
PLA fibres have a number of characteristics that are similar to many other thermoplastic fibres, such as controlled crimp, smooth 
surface and low moisture regain. The physical properties and structure have been studied by several researchers59, and suitability 
as textile fibre is already acknowledged. Its mechanical properties are considered to be broadly similar to those of conventional 
PET60 and, probably due to their lower melting and softening temperatures, comparisons to polypropylene are also appropriated61. 
PLA filaments are available on an international market, but volumes are still limited. Examples of their producers include Monotex62 
(Biolene - PLA monofilament), Teijn Fibers63 (Biofront - scPLA), Polisilk64 (Polisilk HT PLA), Diolen65 (Swicofil HT PLA). Also, PLA 
based textiles for clothing application are being developed66.  
PLA-based textiles are commercially available: some examples are groundcovers for weed control, textiles for crop protection, 
 
55 Fehri MK et al. “Composition dependence of the synergistic effect of nucleating agent and plasticizer in poly(lactic acid): A Mixture Design study”  eXPREss Polymer Letter 
2016; 10(4): 274-288; M.L. Di Lorenzo et al. ,Effect of thermal history on the evolution of crystal and amorphous fraction of poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate] upon storage at ambient 
temperature, Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2013, 117(40) 12303-12311, M.C. Righetti et al..The role of the crystallization temperature on the nanophase structure evolution 
of poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate],  
56 http://www.ows.be/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/LAYMAN_ecobionet-report_vfinal.pdf  
57 http://www.european-bioplastics.org/market/applications-sectors/ 
58 L. Ruys,  Raf Van Olmen - New developments in agrotextiles based on the results of the FP7 project: “BIOAGROTEX” – Unitex, nr 5, p 4-7, 2012. 
59 Drumright, R.E., Gruber, P.R. and Henton, D.E., Advanced Materials, 2000, 12 (23), 1841 
60 Lunt, J. and Bone, J., AATCC Rev., 2001, 1 (9), 20 
61 Palade, L.I., Lehermeier, H.J. and Dorgan, J.R., Macromolecules, 2001, 34 (5), 1384 
62 http://monotex.ro/bio.php 
63 https://www.teijnfiber.com/english/products/specifics/biofront.html 
64 http://www.polisilk.com/ 
65 http://www.swicofil.com/diolen.html 
66 H2020 project ‘Fibfab -Industrialization Of Biobased Textile Fabrics For Clothing Applications’ , see fibfab-project.eu  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 19 of 105 
 
etc. PLA-based materials are also gaining interest in textile domains like apparel and interior textiles where biodegradability is not 
such an issue as recycling is a more valuable EoL solution. Often these products are mainly to demonstrate the feasibility of a 
sustainable/bio-based product and they have so far no or only a very limited market share.  
An example of a more successful introduction of a PLA bio -based textile is being realized by our project partner SIOEN who 
applies a woven fabric from very fine PLA monofilaments (30dtex) in teabags. The main PLA disadvantage for this application 
is however the lack of home compostability needed due to disposal with content and difficult collection.  
PLA coatings for textiles.  Coatings are used on textile s for a number of aesthetic and functional purposes and are generally 
based on non bio -based materials such as PU and PA. There are multiple applications in which PLA coatings could substitute 
existing coatings. Indeed, PLA has  an excellent UV -stability and decent flame retardance (FR) properties which makes it 
applicable for interior and exterior applications for a broad range of items. So, there are several initiatives to develop PLA coatings 
for textiles, but so far, no suited PLA coating formulations are commercially available. One of the main reasons why PLA coatings 
have not yet reached the market is their brittleness. This is due to the high molecular weight of commercial PLA (ca 100.000 
g/mol) vs. what is needed (ca 10.00 0 g/mol) for coatings. As a result, the coatings need the addition of plasticizers as can for 
example be seen on fig 3. from partner CTB. Therefore, like for compounding, developers of PLA coatings need to look into most 
suited environmentally friendly (preferably bio -based) 
molecules available to plasticize PLA. Plasticizers are not 
always compatible with PLA and issues with migration of 
the plasticizer arise. This causes not only increased 
brittleness over time but also an unpleasant feeling of the 
coating. Migration of the plasticizer can be limited using 
highly compatible molecules and/or grafting them on PLA.  
Beyond the state of the art, the development of new tailored copolymers and blends with controlled biodegradability f rom the 
BIOnTOP project will be applied to extrude PLA filaments that will be further processed into woven fabrics. As applications, we 
want to develop the first fully home compostable woven teabag as BIOnTOP new formulations have the potential to enhance 
the biodegradability in mild conditions. We will also look into developing a PLA coating or alternative FA grafting strategie s 
(discussed below) for PLA fabric to be used in a reusable food wrap that at the end of its life is recyclable or compostable. Those 
will impart durable hydrophobicity enabling industry to replace fluorocarbons which are now currently used in hydrophobic 
coatings but are toxic, persistent and bioaccumulative. In addition, the secondary use of the recycled PLA materials will be 
shown by processing the recycled PLA material into nonwovens, that will be functionalised by our waterproofing coatings 
and used in a demonstrator carrier bag.  
State of the art and progresses in the field of bio-based oxygen and aroma barrier coatings and films 
Protection against oxygen is a key factor for sensitive/fresh food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical products to achieve a suffici ent 
shelf life. Otherwise colour or taste deviation, oxidation of grease, formation of micro -organisms or degrading nutrients will take 
place. To achieve low oxygen permeability co -extruded or laminated multilayer plastic films are widely used in the packaging 
industry whereby mineral oil derived EVOH, or PVDC, are the mostly used oxygen barrier materials. However, theses polyme rs 
are neither biodegradable nor bio -based. Therefore, research into sustainable packaging materials that barrier maintains the 
performance has been recently intensified. In recent European67,68 projects with participation of INSTM and IRIS, oxygen barrier 
coatings based on whey protein have been developed. Whey continues to be a widely available and underutilized (only 40% 
is valorised and a much lower amount would in fact allow substituting all EVOH for packaging worldwide) by-product 
from cheese making containing around 13% protein in dry matter. The whey protein-based coatings are formulated using Whey 
Protein Isolate (WPI) as well as bio-based plasticizers and/or reactive additives such as urea to enhance thermoformability. The 
whey formulation is subsequently coated on a plastic substrate and dried. In this process step the protein is denatured in order to 
form a crosslinked network. This patented step is necessary to achieve an oxygen permeability as low as 1.5 cm 3/(m2*d*bar) 
(Q100). Finally, the coated film is laminated into the final structure and eventually additional conversion processes such as 
thermoforming, sealing etc. can be carried out to obtain the packaging items. Application of both standard and thermoformable  
whey coating formulations have been proven in pilot scale in roll -to-roll lacquering and lamination lines. Resulting films were 
reported to have excellent mechanical as well as gas and UV barrier properties, beyond most existing biopolymers (fig. 3). Whey 
coatings are thus capable of replacing synthetic oxygen -barrier layers such as EVOH in multilayer packaging. Furthermore, the 
whey coating is both bio-based and biodegradable. On PLA, based on preliminary tests, barrier improvement factors (BIF) 6 were 
obtained (although further ones planed here are needed to reach the full potential of the whey coating on this substrate as its 
intrinsic barrier calculated on PET should have led to a 60 fold improvement vs. PLA). The use of such nitrogen rich material s 
 
67 Wheylayer (Grant Agreement FP7- 218340-2) and Wheylayer 2 (Grant Agreement: FP7- 315743) 
68 ThermoWhey (EraNet-ManuNet 02PN2020) 
 
Fig. 3: Plasticized (left) vs. unplasticized  PLA coating on woven textile 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 20 of 105 
 
protein coatings on biodegradable based films will not compromise 
biodegradability but in fact even accelerate it69. Thus, whey protein-
coating, which are in market introduction phase, represents a new 
application for an agro-food industry by-product while safeguarding 
the performance and enabling the recyclability of multilayer films 
which are generally landfilled. Additionally, the whey protein-based 
coatings used in multilayer laminates fulfil the requirements of 
European Commission Regulation (EU) No 10/2011.  
In addition, bio -based coatings can be used as aroma barrier. 
Alginate is widely used in various industries such as food, beverage, 
textile, printing and pharmaceutical as thickening agent, stabilizer, 
emulsifier, chelating agent, encapsulation, swelling, suspending 
agent or used to for m gel, film and membrane . Sodium alginate is 
the most common salt of alginate . It is commercially available and 
can be applied as coating to serve as aroma and oxygen barrier for 
products with low relative humidity70. 
State of the art on nanoscale surface modification by chemical grafting for improved hydrophobicity and to optimize 
barrier properties 
As seen, films which are based on protein isolates have excellent oxygen barrier properties due to their polar nature and 
crosslinked polymer network71, however, the water vapour barrier needs to be improved in order to make this novel b io-based 
coating suitable for many applications  sensitive as well to humidity uptake or loss ( e.g. dry pharma or food products, or wet 
products such as wet wipes). To overcome these drawbacks, polar substrates are generally combined with hydrophobic layers, 
such as polyethylene layers, via wet lamination (with adhesives), extrusion lamination (without  adhesives), wet and extrusion 
coating. In the “wet” processes, water borne options are favoured for environmental reasons. Such solutions and dispersions of 
waxes, starches or poly(vinyl alcohol)  are available. Additionally, physical (vacuum deposition) and chemical vapor deposition 
(plasma coating) are possible on a planarization coating. It can consist in bio-ORMOCER, an organic-inorganic hybrid polymer 
which is only partially coming from renewable resources and not providing any intrinsic barrier without inorganic coatings . 
However, the inorganic coatings can be scratch sensitive so protected by another top coat.  
An innovative approach will improve also the water vapour barrier properties of bio-based films and coatings by green chemical 
grafting with FA from renewable resources (using palmitoyl chloride as benchmark and the fully bio based fatty acid anhydrides) 
to monomolecular graft a hydrophobic layer on the protein films72,73. The modified protein films are expected to provide significantly 
improved barrier properties towards water vapour (unpublished first results showed that water vapour BIF of 6 have been reached 
on protein based cast film s without process and material optimization). The chemical grafting will be applied on protein based 
films and coatings by the so -called transfer method which was developed for the surface grafting of PVOH -based films74. The 
main attractions of this solven t free grafting process are its low cost, its use of existing industrial bio-based reagents and its 
potential to be applied on a printing machine at high speed and high efficiency. It is also a clean chemistry process that does not 
give rise to by-products or to polluting effluents. In addition, the FA green grafting is expected to provide easy emptying properties 
due to significantly reduced surface energy of the grafted surfaces. These rebalance properties are comparable to emerging non 
bio-based market available solutions such as LIQUIGLIDE™ developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology or Toyal 
Lotus® developed by Toyo Aluminium K.K. or AsahiGuard E-Series developed AGC Chemicals.  
Beyond the current state of the art, BIOnTOP will develop the no vel combination of the polar whey protein -based oxygen 
barrier with a non-polar bio-based FA water vapour barrier coating to offer a barrier both against humidity and oxygen. 
It is expected that grafting process optimization on tailored protein film can lead to similar BIF values as already achieved  on 
PVOH-films (approx. BIF 20). In addition, this will provide easy emptying functionality and easy product (e.g. packed cheese) 
release functions which are beyond the current state of the art as non -migrating alternative to existing solutions. The developed 
formulations and processing parameters will be upscaled to obtain  flexible and thermoformable laminates tailored to the target 
applications. Furthermore, the project will consider alginate coatings and FA -grafting as a novel route for functionalising textiles 
respectively for aroma barrier in tea bags and for waterproofing reusable food wraps and bags. 
State of the art in the field of packaging recycling 
Plastic packaging sorting 
The sorting of polymers is of vital importance since even very low amounts of cross contamination can ruin the entire batch.  
Material recycling from mixed waste plastics is challenging and based on sophisticated process chains combining different sorting 
 
69 P.Cinelli, M. Schmid, E. Bugnicourt, J. Wildner, A. Bazzichi, I.Anguillesi, A. Lazzeri; “Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier 
properties while maintaining biodegradability” Polymer Degradation and Stability, 2014, 108, 151-157,  
70 Jost et al  (2014). "Influence of plasticiser on the barrier, mechanical and grease resistance properties of alginate cast films." Carbohydrate Polymers 110: 309-319. 
71 schmid et al. Properties of Whey-Protein-Coated Films and Laminates as Novel Recyclable Food Packaging Materials with Excellent Barrier Properties. Int Journ Polymer Sc 
72 SAMAIN, D. 2002. Method for treating a solid material to make it hydrophobic, material obtained and uses. Google Patents. 
73 BERLIOZ, S. 2007. Etude de l'estérification de la cellulose par une synthèse sans solvant. Application aux matériaux nanocomposites. Université Joseph-Fourier-Grenoble I. 
74 SCHMID et al. 2012a. Fundamental investigations regarding barrier properties of grafted PVOH layers. International Journal of Polymer Science, 2012. 
Fig. 4: Barrier properties of whey -based coating vs. 
other plastics commonly used in food packaging 
industry (normalized to 100 μm) 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 21 of 105 
 
steps like screening, wind sifting, NIR sorting, electro-magnetic removal of different metals and others. Equipment to automatically 
sort plastics are already widely commercially available (e.g. via spectroscopic identification systems, including near-infrared, X-
ray, colour, or laser, and combinations thereof ), but currently many recyclers still sort plastics by hand. Such an approach is 
unreliable, expensive and not suitable for all transparent packaging.  
Nevertheless, all the used identification techniques require a pre -calibration which has to be developed for innovative materials 
as BIOnTOP, for which the right identification approach has to be proposed both to allow its subsequent recycling but also allow 
industry acceptance for new biopolymers  in the main stream of currently recycled materials . According to a study from 
Natureworks contradicting the initial reluctance from PET recycling facilities, PLA c annot be considered a threat for the current 
recycling plants as it is easily automatically sorted out from other polymers included PET based on conclusions from Titech (>97% 
NIR accuracy, consistent with sorting efficiencies for other materials) but also Unisensor (laser efficiency on flakes>96-99%) and 
MSS which confirmed PLA unique polymeric NIR “signature” to identify it from PET, PE, and other plastics. Furthermore, a study 
from Tomra sorting solution conclude that automatic sorting of PHB, Starch, TPS, etc. or blends is also possible by NIR75.  
In the case of multilayer, although plastic/plastic composite films are predominately incinerated, they sometimes end up in material 
flows of different target fractions e.g. in case there is no automated sorting or if the outer layer of a composite is thick enough to 
let the sorting systems identify the outer layer only. If the density of the composite material is similar to the density of the target 
fraction, further floatation system often in place at recyclers will not work either. As such, efforts are n eeded to improve the 
available systems for the case of multilayer recycling. That will be made more easily when using our new bio -based barrier 
coatings, which have very specific spectroscopic signatures vs. other plastics. Indeed, in the previous Wheylaye r project, the 
capacity to detect the protein presence by IR -TF (fig. 7)76 was shown. The FA layer is so thin that it will not need identification 
even when applied on flexible (e.g. 20 microns) films. IRIS has experience in developing tailored fast online VIS/NIR spectroscopic 
tools for plastic processing monitoring to lead to identify precisely their 
composition and traces of unwanted substances 77,78. In case of multilayers, 
results from IRIS show the capacity using HSI to distinguish colored from natural 
HDPE and from LDPE from multilayer films including PE among its layers using 
chemometrics analysis selecting different principal components (fig. 6). 
 
Recycling of the monomaterials of interest 
Whereas 57% of the petrochemical based PET going  to bottles or containers are recycled in to bottles or textiles mainly , and 
polyolefins as well as mixed plastics can also be commonly found in recycled grades for downgraded applications at lower cost  
than the virgin grades they compete with, when it comes to more speciality materials used in packaging (or even less for textiles), 
there is generally no current industrial solution. Currently some companies dedicated to recycling of plastic materials, as ROMEI 
in Italy, collect and commercialize post -industrial thermoforming scraps coming from packaging companies after the necessary 
operations of grinding and eventually compounding. Such SRM were also considered in previous works for applications in the 
automotive field in the EVOLUTION project 79. The use of recovered PLA in biodegradable blends or composites for durable 
applications thanks to reactive processing techniques is broadly considered. 
The recycling of monomaterial PLA via grinding of sheets and trays, washing of the scraps, drying and the processing in extrusion 
machine to obtain pellets was also studied in PLA4FOOD and BIO4MAP projects 80. The mechanical and rheological results 
revealed that flowability of the melt and mechanical properties of the materials produced are maintained during several processing 
cycles and this assures the possibility to use recycled PLA in blend with virgin PLA without loss of material characteristics. In fact, 
our SME partner ROMEI already performs such activity industrially, collecting PLA scraps from thermoforming comp anies and 
reprocesses them to technical sheets. Due to its low depolymerization temperature and possible presence of impurity, as an 
alternative to mechanical recycling, PLA is a good candidate for an environmentally sound chemical recycling as it can be readily 
hydrolysed with water to form LA, which is then purified and polymerised to remake prime polymer81.  
 
75 http://www.plasticseurope.org/documents/document/20120821135405-new_trends_within_polymer_sorting_to_tackle_for_tomra_sorting_solutions.pdf 
76 "Processing and Validation of Whey -Protein-Coated Films and Laminates at Semi -Industrial Scale as Novel Recyclable Food Packaging Materials with Excellent Barrier 
Properties"; E. Bugnicourt et al.; Advances in Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 2013, Article ID 496207, 10 pages, 2013. 
77 OPTIJECT project (Grant Agreement no. 262623), www.optiject.eu 
78 B2B contracts for the detection of good batches of recyclates as well as for HSI-based monitoring solution for plastic identification in recycling line 
79 Phuong, VT et al, Compatibilization and property enhancement of poly(lactic acid)/polycarbonate blends through triacetin-mediated interchange reactions in the melt, Polymer 
55 (2014) 4498e4513 
80 Signori, F, Coltelli, MB,  et al., Thermal degradation of poly(lactic acid) (PLA) and poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT) and their blends upon melt processing, 
Polymer Degradation and Stability, 94, 1, 2009, 74-82 
81 Natural fibers, biopolymers, and biocomposites, Taylor & Francis 2005, Chapter 16, Polylactic Acid Technology, David E. Henton, Patrick Gruber, Jim Lunt, and Jed Randall 
Fig 7: FT-IR spectra of PET, whey coating 
and coated PET after 2 h washing  
Fig 6: Example of chemometrics analysis on NIR HSI results on waste plastics  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 22 of 105 
 
Note that modification strategies such as the FA grafting (the thickness of a C16 FA grafted layer is approx. 2,5nm which would 
be less than 0.005% (v/v)  vs. a 50 µm multilayer film) or whey protein coating when applied on rigi d packaging, could still be 
behave as monomaterials. They are for example excluded by “ Der Grüne Punkt – Duales System Deutschland GmbH (DSD) ” 
which is nowadays the leading provider of take-back systems that considers packaging as monomaterials when other materials 
are used in content below 5% (w/w). Indeed , such “traces” can be removed in the cleaning stages during reprocessing and do 
not normally harm the property of the SRM.  
Multilayer packaging recycling 
PET/PE bilayer, widely used for packing fresh foo ds could only be recycled by grinding and extrusion. As PET and PE are 
immiscible, their compatibility must be improved in order to employ them in high -value applications. This is possible by using 
proper compatibilizers82,83,84 but the resulting cost is not industrially viable although some example of PET/PE recycling in highly 
performant technical textile applications was achieved in previous works85 thanks to the application of proper REX techniques86,87. 
Furthermore, it was observed that the degradation of the adhesive between the two layers, often consisting in poly(ethylene-co-
vinyl acetate) (EVA), can result in yellowing of PET/PE blend granules 88, thus discouraging applications where a light colour is 
required. Another example is multilayer packaging containing polyolefins and a coextruded barrier layer of EVOH that cannot be 
separated and is incompatible with PE and PP89 during recycling. While flexible films cannot be recycled at all, only final recycled 
products with low mechanical properties can be obtained  from such rigid multilayer packages (low EVOH ratio). All in all , for 
multilayer packaging composites, especially flexible ones, there is no high-quality recycling established currently in Europe, and 
most material is used for energy recovery only, which is achieved by incineration plants with an average efficiency of 35%, or 
landfilled depending on the country, which in both cases is counteracting current efforts towards the CE90. 
In contrast to described direct reprocessing, there are several other approaches to achieve recycling of multilayer films. On e of 
them is the solvent based CreaSolv® technology91. Specific solvents dissolve one polymer type out of the composite. A multi -
step procedure separates other components of the multilayer and recovers the polymer in high purity by removal and recirculation 
of the solvent. Such approach is still in its industrial implementation phase. Another approach addresses the removal/dissolution 
of the adhesive layers of multilayer packaging. This results in separation of the components of a multilayered polymer composite 
but requires a subse quent separation of the segregated films by density, NIR or electrostatic. The technology is provided in 
technical scale by the German company Saperatec GmbH 92 and uses a micro emulsion to separate composite films. However, 
the application of this concept is not yet universal, as many different adhesives are used in the multilayer market. Likewise, the 
use of removable barrier layers in multilayer structures is an emerging approach to significantly contribute to increasing 
the recycling potential for this post-consumer waste (fig. 8)93.This has already been extensively proven at TRL 4 for the whey 
protein coating, whereby the washing stage of the recycling process needs to be tuned to allow the hydrolysis of the whey coating 
using enzymes or a temperature of  30-40ºC depending on the needed process speed. This recycling approach for multilayer 
materials is specific to our bio-based barrier coatings but requires very little changes and investment in the recycling lines which 
can use their own sorting capabiliti es (when existing, 
they will only need to be tuned with the right 
chemometrics package to detect the new materials), 
shredders, washing baths, and optionally a density 
separation unit (e.g. in case of multimaterial structures 
used with the whey coating suc h as PET/barrier/PE)  
before each material can be reprocessed independently 
in usual compounding steps. In fact, in recent years 
other companies have been attempting to use this 
capacity to remove PVOH to claim recyclability 94. 
Nevertheless, PVOH is not bio -based so it doesn’t 
compete directly with our project but the acceptance of 
such new recycling approach by the recyclers could in 
fact be synergistic with our proposed process. 
 
82 Coltelli, M.B.; della Maggiore, I.; Savi, S.; Aglietto, M.; Ciardelli, F. Modified styrene-butadiene-styrene block copolymer as compatibiliser precursor in 
polyethylene/poly(ethylene terephthalate) blends. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2005, 90, 211–223 
83 Aglietto et al. Postconsumer polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/polyolefin blends through reactive processing. J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manag. 2004, 6, 13–19 
84 Yousfi, M.; Soulestin, J.; Vergnes, B.; Lacrampe, M.F.; Krawczak, P. Morphology and Mechanical Properties of PET/PE Blends Compatibilized by Nanoclays: Effect of 
Thermal Stability of Nanofiller Organic Modifier. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2013, 128, 2766–2778 
85 De Schrijver et al., Supertex-sustainable technical textile from recycled polyester, Chemical Fibers International, 1/2014, 44-46 
86 Raffa, P., Coltelli, MB,  et al., Chain extension and branching of poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) with di- and multifunctional epoxy or isocyanate additives: An 
experimental and modelling study, Reactive & Functional Polymers 72 (2012) 50–60 
87 Raffa P., Coltelli MB, et al., Expanding the Application Field of Post-Consumer Poly(ethylene terephthalate) Through Structural Modification by Reactive Blending, J. Appl. 
Polym. Sci. 2014, 131, 40881. 
88 Bartoli et al. Conversion of post-industrial PET-PE scraps into compatibilized plastic blends for new applications. AIP Conf. Proc. 2012, 1459, 160 
89 Wang, Q.; Qi, R.; Shen, Y.; Liu, Q.; Zhou, C. Effect of high-density polyethylene-g-maleic anhydride on the morphology and properties of (high-density 
polyethylene)/(ethylene–vinyl alcohol) copolymer alloys. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2007, 106, 3220–3226 
90 BUND Wege zu einer nachhaltigen Abfallwirtschaft; 2010. 
91 Mäurer, A. et al. (2004): Good as new. Recycling plastics from WEEE and packaging wastes. Waste management world Vol 4, May/June, pp. 33-43.  
92 9.AG, S. http://www.saperatec.de/technology/#technologie_top (accessed 19.07.2018). 
93 P Cinelli et al., Recyclability of PET/WPI/PE Multilayer Films by Removal of Whey Protein Isolate-Based Coatings with Enzymatic Detergents, Materials 9(6):473, June 2016 
94 http://www.g-polymer.com/eng/gasubariasei/ 
Fig. 8: Illustration of the enzymatic removal that allows layers 
combined with whey coating in multilayer packaging to be recyclable 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 23 of 105 
 
Furthermore, when applying the whey coating on bioplastic substrates (based on  either cellophane or PLA), fully compostable 
solutions with improved barrier properties were obtained 95. As such our multilayer structures containing a whey protein -based 
intermediate layer will benefit from improved both improved material recyclability w hen combined with standard substrates and 
organic recyclability when combined with biodegradable substrates.  
Coated textile recycling 
Many textile materials are treated with a coating or finishing for improving material functionality. These coated textiles currently 
cannot be recycled because the coating layer is difficult to impossible to separate from the textile substrate material, es pecially 
as the coating layer is typically cured and therefore not reprocessable. Some possible routes are mentioned in literature such as 
coatings that debond upon a trigger96 or previously mentioned Creasolv® chemical recycling based on selective extraction. These 
solutions are however complex, require specific sorting and handling and are thus currently not yet economically feasible. A mono-
material solution (textile and coating from same polymer class) could therefore be a valuable alternative.   
BIOnTOP will demonstrate the capacity for recycling all materials under study where such EoL is relevant . To tackle the 
different challenges related with sorting of new materials , we will optimize the hardware , combining several spectroscopic 
technologies (possibly NIR and visible HSI), software thanks to advanced chemometrics analysis and possibly data fusion. The 
reprocessing of BIOnTOP monomaterials (or those with a very thin FA grafting) will be optimised. In addition, the use of a new 
PLA based coating on top of a PLA textile will allow the recycling of the coating textile material as a whole, without the need of a 
preceding separating step. Where needed for multilayer packaging, the removal of the whey protein coating will be adjusted to  
BIOnTOP substrates and overall recycling process upscaled in a pilot scale at ROMEI.  
State of the art in the biodegradation modelling 
As previously seen, polymer biodegradation is a poorly controlled and understood mechanism  influenced by the crystallinity, 
crosslinking, molecular weight, additives, but also by the environment (moisture, temperature, pH, microbial activity…). Whil e 
different models, such as BIOWIN, BESS, METABOL, etc. exist for the prediction of the biodegrada tion of organic compounds 
(chemicals), no model is available for the prediction of the biodegradation of polymers.  
Due to the underlying complexity and number of influencing variables, it seems unrealistic to envisage a mechanistic model that 
would properly describe the actual behaviour of new bioplastic item in real life conditions. In contrast, data driven approaches can 
cope with such challenges. Data representing biodegradation profiles both in industrial and home composting conditions can be 
modelled by benchmarking different machine learning algorithms which use a fitness function as objective output to optimize the 
biodegradation curve, accounting for the effects of the known parameters influenc ing the disintegration and biodegradation. 
Therefore, at least two fitness functions can be considered: the first in terms of decomposition time and % decomposition achieved 
(absolute and/or relative to cellulose); and the second in terms of the time to reach a target decomposition, which is one of  the 
final quality criteria of the applicable standards. Similar metrics can also be devised for the disintegration process. Two initial  
definitions of fitness functions for biodegradation are as follows: 
𝐹𝑖𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠1 = ((1 −
𝑇𝑝
𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) ×  𝛼) + ((
𝑃𝑝
𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥) ×  𝛽 )   (1)                   -                   
Fitness2 = 1 −
𝑇𝑜
𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 , 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑃𝑜 = 0.90                     (2) 
where 𝑇𝑝 is the time to reach the plateau, 𝑇𝑜 is the time to reach 
90% bio -degradation (set standard requirement),  𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the 
maximum time of the standard test , 𝑃𝑝 is the percentage 
biodegradation when reaches plateau, 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the maximum 
percentage of biodegradation achievable by any method, and 𝛼, 𝛽 
are two user defined weights. In Fig. 9, two example characteristic 
bio-degradation curves are shown with their corresponding values 
for 𝑇𝑝, 𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑃𝑝, 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑃𝑜 (where relevant). The number 
of experiments can be reduced by, for example, employing appropriate statistical techniques such as the Cholesky 
decomposition97, to generate simulated data to cover a wider distribution range for key variables. Also, a “calib ration” approach 
can be considered, using a Monte Carlo98 method to generate candidate inputs (the parameter settings, e.g. composition) which 
give the result which is closest to the desired output (i.e., the optimum values for biodegradation in given condition). Data modelling 
algorithms will be used such as SVR (Support Vector Regression)  and RI (Rule Induction): the SVR is a black -box technique 
adequate for numerical data, whereas RI generates a model as explicative rules which can also be used for data interpretation. 
"Deterministic" controllable test parameters and properties (crystallinity, crosslinking...) and the less controllable enviro nment 
characteristics (exact compost composition in organic recycling or moisture, temperature, microbial activity in home composter) 
can be differentiated. The latter may be considered as having a "stochastic" aspect (that is, some random/chance element which 
cannot be defined in predefined rules). This supports the use of machine learning algorithms which can cope with a certain amount 
 
95 Patrizia Cinelli, Markus Schmid, Elodie Bugnicourt, Jessica Wildner, Agostino Bazzichi, Irene Anuillesi, Andrea Lazzeri, Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable 
packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining biodegradability, Polymer Degradation and Stability. 07/2014 
96 Patents EP2519596 (B1), EP2519565 (A1), EP2265681 (A2), EP1814935 (B1), EP1611217 (B1), WO2013/189956A1 
97 Press et al. Cholesky Decomposition: The Art of Scientific Computing, 2nd ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, pp. 89-91, 1992. 
98 N. Metropolis et al., Equation of State Calculations by Fast Computing Machines, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 21, Vol. 6, pp. 1087-1092 
Fig. 9: Example of bio-degradation Fitness curves  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 24 of 105 
 
of noise and stochastic behaviour. A CBR (Case Based Reasoning) approach can also be adopted in which successful 
configurations (i.e. environmental parameters and compositions) are stored in a historical database. CBR has been successfully 
used for relevant bio-industrial applications such as fermentation.99. 
Beyond the state of the art lacking any model for polymer biodegradation, based on the results of the biodegradation testing 
performed in different conditions along the formulation development during the first BIOnTOP project midterm, data driven 
modelling that will account for parameters of composition, process, environmental  use, thickness, etc. will be 
performed. Machine learning algorithms, able to process complex datasets combining deterministic and stochastic behaviours, 
will be used to model both biodegradation and disintegration. The resulting predictive models will be a support tool to eco-design 
packaging that biodegrade according to the target EoL and standard (thickness, composition, etc.). They could also be relevan t 
for the waste management plants to predict if compostability will be met for given packaging streams  using the data from the 
previously discussed composition monitoring system used for sorting. 
Innovation potential  
While bioplastics100 currently only represent about 1% of the about 300 million tonnes of plastic produced annually, experts predict 
a fourfold increase in production capacity within the next years 101. According to EUBP data, in 2016 the split between bio -
based/non-biodegradable and biodegradable (both bio-based, such as PLA, or fossil-based, such as PBAT) was 76.8% vs. 23.2% 
respectively with a predicted decline for the latter category.  The EU currently has a very low presence in the overall bioplastics 
manufacturing industry and most of expected novel production sites will be established outside Europe as well. It is anticipated 
that the current European share (15%) in production capacity will decrease 101. Nevertheless, countries like Germany and Italy 
have a very good position in the smaller segment of bio -based biodegradable packaging. It is therefore very important to equip 
Europe with differentiating bioplastic innovations and validate in sectors of high relevance in the EU economy. 
Bio-based packaging 
Europe is one of the largest consumers of plastics in the world and around 40% of the material processed is used in packaging102. 
The food packaging industry is showing an increased interest in the development of new bio-based materials to ensure 
that the food contained is safe and healthy and have an optimal conservation. Big brand owners have introduced bioplastic 
packaging, including Danone (Actimel, Activia, Volvic), Coca-Cola (PlantBottle), PepsiCo, Heinz, Tetra Pak and L’Occitane. But 
currently there is no market available cost-effective home compostable polymer with high bio-content that also complies with the 
requirements of sensitive products packaging. In 2014, 67.5% of produced biopolymers were used for packaging. The majority of 
the current bioplastic -packaging (86% according to EUBP data) consist s of bio-based but non -biodegradable plastics such as 
bio-based PE and bio-based PET. However, there are undoubtedly applications where this feature is desirable (e.g. when food 
leftovers or material structure make material recycling non -feasible, or when collection is not properly handled). In terms of 
biodegradable plastic packaging, food packaging controlled more than 70% of the global market which is growing at over 18% 
CAGR globally from 2013 to 2019 to reach a value of $8,415.20 million103.  
Mono and multilayer Films and trays. The market driver for growth are new packaging material developments with improved 
properties, greater availability and lower price, increasing awareness of environmental issues, and the adoption of new regulatory 
requirements. While being biodegradable, i n keeping with the waste management hierarchy, our solutions would still allow 
material recycling in the cases where such end of life option would be preferable. Using barrier materials, BIOnTOP also supports 
one of the general trends in packaging which is the decrease of packaging weight  (thickness) to reduce the environmental 
impact due to resources efficiency and energy savings in transport. How this trend acts against easy material handling during  
recycling and further justifies the need for organic rec ycling as preferred EoL. Furthermore, such higher barrier packaging 
solutions can extend food shelf-life and maintain the initial food nutritional for longer, serving consumer interest in healthy food. 
This is especially relevant for the target group of or ganic food producers (such as WEAREBIO) who are very limited in terms of 
use of conservatives therefore request selected bio-sourced packaging, consistent with their products, to be ensure even better 
food conservation without requiring additives.  
While the 2010 annual EU consumption was 10 billion pieces of multiuse bags, in the recent years, the case of shopping bags 
has widely evolved with the banning of single use fossil based non -biodegradable options in most EU countries. Complying 
94/62/EC Directive on packaging and packaging waste and its amendment 720/2015, our innovative materials will tackle both the 
needs for bags used as recyclable secondary packaging used in multiple sectors, where thicker films, made out of SRM, will be 
blown extruded but also thinner films made of virgin BIOnTOP compounds compatible with primary F&V packaging. Indeed, the 
challenge of ultralightweight bags used to pack F&V still remains and it is estimated that over 10% actually leaks in the 
environment at EoL due to difficul ties in their collection justifying the need for local home composting where possible (current 
materials meeting such target have too high cost or poor properties). 
Textile primary and secondary packaging. A number of textiles are used in the packaging sector, such as nets, sachets, pads, 
etc. Mainly due to consumers’ preferences in terms of convenience, as opposed to tea in bulk, individual serve tea  bag is the 
 
99 Montague, G., Martin, E., O'Malley, C. (2008) Forecasting for fermentation operational decision making, Biotechnol Prog. 2008 Sep-Oct;24(5):1033-41 
100  including polymers that are bio-based, biodegradable or both, Entwicklung des Verpackungsverbrauchs nach Branchen. Gesellschaft für Verpackungsmarktforschung, 
2010, Mainz, 3rd Edition. 
101 Bioplastics- Facts and Figures, European Bioplastics, 2015, Berlin 
102 Plastics- The Facts 2015, PlasticsEurope, 2015, Brussels Belgium 
103 “Biodegradable Packaging Market by Packaging Type, Applications, and Geography– Global Trends & Forecast to 2019, RnRMarketResearch.com  
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 25 of 105 
 
leading format in the EU hot tea market. Tea bags were traditionally made of cellulosic non wovens with PE bags as secondary 
packaging. Nevertheless, improved materials based e.g. on PET are also used in new formats like pyramids. These pyramid bags 
are still limited in absolute numbers, e.g. €13million in Germany compared to standard bags (>€550million) 104. However, whereas 
the revenue from standard bags is decreasing, the pyramid tea bag revenue increased by more than 20% from 2015 to 2016. 
Project partner SIOEN already supplies woven tea (pyramid) bags from PET and is also offering a biobased alternative from PLA. 
However, as already mentioned,  that one is  not yet home compostable . To drive the application of (the slightly more 
expensive) PLA tea bags, biodegradation is key . Further, following the trend for minimizing packaging , by our home 
compostable tea bags we will remove the need for secondary packaging, that way creating a unique truly sustainable solution.  
Another driver for packaging innovation is the need for more reusable options. BIOnTOP will 
contribute to this via a textile based reusable food wrap  (application relevant to AB member 
RollEat, see figure on the right) which are emerging solutions consumers can tap upon as primary 
carrier for dry food. The global market for food wrap films was valued at US$ 10,038.6 million 
in 2017105. The increased demand for on-the-go food across the globe is the key driver for the global 
food wrap films market. The market is forecast to expand at a CAGR of 2.1% during the forecast 
period, 2018-2026. Currently, market is dominated by aluminium and plastic wraps, together >80% of market. But, the market is 
under pressure because of environmental concerns associated with the harmful effects of conventional plastic materials 
which are not biodegradable. Moreover, the main materials used nowadays pose potential health threats105: (i) the toxic effect 
associated with plasticizers in PVC  based food wrap fil ms is hazardous for an individual; (ii) LDPE based food wrap films 
may contain harmful chemicals such as diethylhexyl adipate (DEHA); (iii) the direct contact of food with aluminium-based 
food wrap films might cause dementia and other adverse effects on the consumer health.  
Furthermore, BIONTOP will also evaluate the use of SRM from our primary packaging applications into reusable carrier bags 
among other textiles use. Indeed, food contact is limited by the regulatory framework when working with recycled materials 
hindering similar applications as for prime material.  
Besides assisting Europe in the transition towards a green economy in economically extremely important sectors in EU like food 
and personal care packaging, our innovative new materials will also be enablers for innovation in other sectors such as packaging 
for other goods which leftover at end of life prevent efficient recycling, o ther agricultural devices, disposable biomedical , non-
packaging textiles and sanitary applications among others.  
Overall benchmarking and IP position 
While PLA is currently the most affordable bio -based and biodegradable polymer, the key BIOnTOP innovation potential arises 
from improving PLA (or its monomers/prepolymers derived copolymers) formulations to match modular controlled 
biodegradability requirements under mild conditions as well as from the combination with novel coatings (PLA, whey 
and FA-based). At the same time, price level reduction can be aimed at, by the introduction of low-cost & low density NF vs. 
PLA while comonomers are iso cost vs. LA. This can help to bridge the current gap for further uptake in the considered packaging 
market where the economic aspects are extremely important. Likewise, the EoL issue (further discussed in section 2) is of extreme 
significance due to the volume gener ate by those single use items. In addition to be almost solely based on renewable  
resources (>85% based on renewable resources, partly produced from by-product biomass), the waste management scenarios 
of our new materials will also be improved, contributing from both ends to a future EU circular bioeconomy. In addition, this will 
on the long -term lead to a significantly reduced landfill (from currently not recyclable packaging) or incineration and 
environmental burden from plastic derived products (reduced carbon footprint and environment pollution by microplastics). 
Table 5 shows how we expect  BIOnTOP results to comply with the industry & consumer needs comparing expected cost 
and performance vs. fossil-based non-biodegradable benchmarks (set at 100% for normalisation when no absolute value is 
available) and emerging bio-based/biodegradable counterparts based on set project KPIs from section 1.1. 
Table 5: Benchmarking of our planned innovations vs. other commercial solutions  
Demo 
materials 
Compared 
properties 
Standard (fossil) solution Emerging bioplastic solution BIOnTOP solution 
Monolayer 
tray &          
films          
(F&V) 
Bio-content 0% (e.g. PP tray and PE lid) Close to 100% (PLA) Close to 100% 
EoL Limited recycling for rigid ones, 
landfilling when polluted 
Industrial composting Domestic and industrial composting, 
recycling for trays 
Approx. price /pack 100% 200% 140% 
Nets (F&V) Bio-content 0% (e.g. PE) Close to 100% (PLA solution 
developed at TRL6 in EcoBioNet) 
Close to 100% 
Tensile properties Resistance:19 MPa 
Elongation: 680 % with standard 
material (PE) 
Resistance:20 MPa; Elongation: 400 
% with materials developed in 
ECOBIONET  
100% /Maintaining the mechanical properties   
EoL Landfilling Industrial composting Domestic and industrial composting 
Approx. price /pack 100% 200% 130%102 
Multilayer tray 
& film (dairy, 
personal care)  
Bio-content 0% (e.g. EVOH based multilayer 
structures) 
 
Non available yet >95% 
 
104 https://www.mordorintelligence.com:81/images_db/RD_Images/Germany%20Tea%20Revenue%20By%20Packaging%20Type.png  
105 https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/food-wrap-film-market.html  

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 26 of 105 
 
Food protection 100% - >100% (as UV -barrier is included in the 
protein coating) 
EoL Incineration or landfilling - Domestic and industrial composting, 
recycling for trays 
Approx. price /pack 100% - 100% (as very material efficient water vapour 
barrier due to the nano-scale grafting). 
Textiles tea 
bags  
Bio-content 0% (e.g. PET, PP) Close to 100% (PLA) Close to 100% 
Performance Perfect by melt spinning  Limitations due to sensitivity to 
humidity and limited mechanical 
performance - Loss of odours and 
flavours during shelf life 
Improved processability with new raw 
materials, preservation of flavours and 
odours thanks to water soluble coating.  
EoL Landfilling/ when polluted difficult to 
collect 
Limited industrial composting due to 
contamination, no home composting 
Domestic and industrial composting 
Approx. price /pack 100% 200% 90 – 120 % 
Reusable 
textile food 
wrap 
  
Bio-content 0% (e.g . recycled PET  with EVA 
lining).  
Close to 100% (cotton based) 100% (PLA based with bio-based coating) 
Processabilty Good Good, but cotton production has big 
environmental impact 
Good thanks to the use of optimised PLA 
compounds and bio-based coatings 
EoL Incineration or landfilling Compostable  Home compostable 
Approx. price /pack 100% 150% 120% 
Secondary 
packaging 
(textile bags) 
 
 
 
Bio-content 0% (e.g. PE, PP) Close to 100% (cotton based) 100% (PLA based with PLA coating) 
Processabilty Perfect (e.g. by staple fibre 
spinning & nonwoven production) 
Good, but cotton production has big 
environmental impact 
Good thanks to the use of optimised PLA 
compounds and bio-based coatings. 
EoL Incineration or landfilling Compostable Material & organic recycling 
Approx. price /pack 100% 150% 150% 
 
 
Secondary 
packaging 
(extruded 
blown bags) 
Bio-content 0%- PE 0% (but from r-PE) 100% 
Mechanical 
properties 
Tensile strength >25Mpa 
Elongation per break >400% 
Youngs modulus >350MPa 
Energy per break >4000KJ/m2 
50-80% vs. virgin Same as SRM from PE 
EoL Landfilling, mechanical recycling 
(only for thick films e.g. 50 microns) 
Landfilling, mechanical recycling 
(only for thick films e.g. 50 microns) 
Composting, mechanical recycling (only for 
thick films e.g. 50 microns) 
Approx. price /pack 2€/kg 1,75€/kg- partially recycled content 2,80€/kg- partial recycled content 
 
To maximise our innovation’s commercial potential, beyond the definition of the new value chains and outreach activities, a 
comprehensive series of measures including consumer perception, standardisation and regulatory aspects, as well as business 
planning and knowledge /IPR management will be undertaken. The knowledge and IPs generated by the project will be exploited 
by partner companies, in order to improve their competitiveness, differentiating their products in the market, thereby tapping into 
increasing market and consumer demand for environmentally friendly packaging and textiles with high performance compared to 
traditional petroleum-derived counterparts and improved EoL options. The expected derived growth potential in terms of jobs and 
revenues are discussed in section 2 along the supply and value chain. 
Freedom to operate was already given a major insight as it is vital for the commercial exploitation of the results, and a pat ent 
search has been performed around each of the technologies on which our target materials are based by the respective technology 
holders and experts (further reflected in the state of the art). The prior art is rich for all target applications in the project, and while 
certain areas are covered by patents which will be taken into account in the project development and the consortium holds several 
of the required patents that will be used as a basis for the planned advances in the project (see background table 13 in sect ion 
2), there is space for further innovating beyond the state of the art. Whenever possible, the project will consider not only developing 
confidential know -how but also results that could be protected by patents after deepening the IP search made in proposal 
preparation and ascertaining the business opportunity following a methodology further explained in WP7 and sect ion 2. In 
particular, we expect to derive IP from the specific compositions that meet our EoL target (which will act as enabler for all derived 
products) and to copyright the biodegradation models (although the patentability of the derived eco -design tool will also be 
considered). In terms of relevant patents in our main innovation areas, we have reflected some in the following table, which 
differences with BIOnTOP are also highlighted (when relevant they will be further monitored along our technology watch activities 
to see the evolution of their approval and enforcement status): 
Table 6: Results of the patent search focused on the main innovation area of the novel IP considered to be generated in BIOnTOP 
Patent (reference, title, status) Relevance to BIOnTOP Conclusion in terms of impact on the project 
US 611033A, PCT/IE1997000031 
Acidic polylactic polymers, 
withdrawn in EU 
Biodegradable polyesters from lactic acid and other 
hydroxyacids or acids 
Although this patent is withdrawn and therefore does not affect our 
freedom to operate (FTO), we will consider different diacids when 
possible to maximise our copolymer novelty and combine it with 
other approaches not contemplated in this patent  
KR20040063236A, Process for 
producing biodegradable 
polylactic acid by direct bulk 
polycondensation, published 
Process for producing a high Mws PLA, excellent in 
biodegradability, tensile property, by bulk-
polycondensation of an organic divalent carboxylic 
acid selected from a SA, an adipic acid, or a mixture 
thereof, and a diol. 
Different comonomers will be applied but in the case of SA our 
FTO is not affected because this patent is only filled in Korea. 
BIOnTOP’s novelty will be ensured also by synthesis strategies 
(REX)  
CN102786672B, Preparation 
method of polylactic acid 
segmented copolymer, published, 
only filled in China 
SA and butanediol react to obtain poly(butylene 
succinate) in a molten condition; and poly(butylene 
succinate) and lactide react to obtain the PLA 
segmented copolymer.   
BIOnTOP will apply direct polycondensation and reactive extrusion 
(REX) approaches 
JPH0753685A, Polylactic acid Biodegradable copolymer of lactic acid, dicarboxylic This patent does not affect our FTO, nor our novelty because a 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 27 of 105 
 
copolymer, published, not 
renewed  
acid (succinic acid), glycol (ethylene glycol) and/or 
alpha-oxyacid and/or a cyclic lactone 
different copolymerization approach is applied involving other 
comonomers (an additional alpha-oxyacid and/or a cyclic lactone), 
catalysts and conditions to obtain a low melting copolymer. 
US6342268B1, Method for 
treating a solid material to make it 
hydrophobic, material obtained 
and uses 
A solid material is treated, the chemical structure of 
which defines reactive protogenic hydrophillic 
functions accessible to gases, applying a gas stream 
onto a microdispersion of at least 1 grafting reagent. 
BIOnTOP will partially use the described process which was filled 
in 1997. Thus, the term of the patent expired already and therefore 
will not affect our FTO.  
JPH10101911, Emulsification-
evaporation technique for PLA 
coating; only granted in Japan  
This patent (among other related but none leading to 
commercial products) describes a possible method 
for coating PLA. 
BIONTOP will develop both improved PLA copolymers and 
formulations with plasticizers allowing the application of a PLA 
coating on top of a PLA textile but use a totally different technology. 
 
2. Impact