2.2 M € - - 
In short , the foundation for achieving the expected impact of the project has been laid: an innovative research agenda, a 
resourceful action plan for the contextualisation and exploitation of the expected results, and an excellent conglomerate of actors 
in the consortium who are in pursuit of a shared common goal.
2.2 Measures to maximise impacts 
Our vision is to lead the transition towards a sustainable post-petroleum society in the plastic sector while decoupling economic 
growth from resource depletion and environmental impact by serving industry with the provision of cost-effective high 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 38 of 105 
 
performance sustainable multifunctional bioplastic packaging solutions with tailored materials and organic recyclability and 
biogas potential at EoL. In order to assist Europe in the transition towards a bio -economy new sustainable cross-sectorial value 
chains will be established providing competitive bio-based alternatives in lightweight packaging, such as nets and trays and textile 
applications. In line with a number of EU and national regulations the use of non-biodegradable shopping bags and lightweight 
multipurpose bags as well as those banning potentially polluting single use items, e.g. disposable tableware (e.g. in France), but 
also other enforcement measures for the broader EU SET plan 137, combined increasing incentives for significant bio -sourcing 
(e.g. in Germany), there is a clear need for new materials with high bio -based content and for meeting the demand for plastics 
with innovative EoL options. In order to realise this vision, post-project exploitation pathways have been carefully planned already 
during BIOnTOP proposal preparation. We have devised our initial strategy for the dissemination and the exploitation of the 
project results, with a view to increasing the projects’ innovation & business outcome as well as social & environmental impacts. 
Outline of the dissemination plan 
The dissemination plan for BIOnTOP comprises a set of actions to spread the non-confidential results generated during the 
project to ensure that as many relevant audiences as possible have access to them . The aim underpinning the dissemination 
strategy is to h eighten awareness about the tangible and intangible outputs of BIOnTOP, to contribute to knowledge building 
and advancement of innovation in Europe as well as to avoid duplication of research work. In order to safeguard the commercial 
opportunity, the dissemination activities will be subject to a confidentiality policy. By default, and building on the consortium 
experience in collaborative projects, any result of the project is to be treated as confidential and can be disseminated only  after 
agreement of the project partners following the relevant clauses of the consortium agreement (signed during the grant agreement 
preparation phase in keeping with initial agreements on ownership reflected herein and respecting the general terms of the grant 
agreement). This approach allows us to retain complete control and make sure that no “exploitable” information is disclosed before 
being protected. The protection of the IPR is of invaluable importance for the participating partners. Therefore, the non-confidential 
results and information on the project to be publicly disseminated will be carefully ident ified. The RTD participants in the 
consortium will publish results in peer -reviewed open access journals, which, will be an indicator of overall project success (in 
terms of progress vs. the scientific state of the art) and an important element of dissemin ation towards industry, standardisation 
bodies, and policy makers. The industrial partners and market actors will focus on showcasing and disseminating results at 
conferences and trade fairs and through other industrial channels such as technical/sectorial  magazines, industry network 
meetings, and the like (to demonstrate the industrial novelty and commercial potential of our project outcomes).  
The IPR Manager (Dr. Marco de la Feld from ENCO) will work closely with the project innovators to manage the iden tification of 
non-confidential disclosable information that can be published/disseminated. He will lead the project partners in strategically 
planning and effectively implementing the dissemination during a dedicated task in the Work Plan, Task 7.5 Exploit ation and 
Dissemination Planning. All the measures (outlined in table 10) will be tailored taking into account the project needs, the target 
groups’ background and the expertise of the project partners. Our project dissemination activities will intersect d issemination 
strategies of the BBI-JU, via full members BioMi and PLANET (in process) and associated BIC members AIMPLAS, INSTM, CTB 
and EUBP, as well as other EU PPP as SPIRE through IRIS and ENCO, which will contribute to the distribution of project outputs 
across the relevant European and international communities and amplify the project dissemination effort. All the disseminatio n 
activities will be developed with an eye towards the exploitation of the project results by other parties, in order to lay do wn the 
basis for subsequent innovation actions as well as other private initiatives which can accelerate the route towards the take-up of 
new technologies within the bio-based plastic sector, also beyond the BIOnTOP selected applications.  
Beyond above discussed use of traditional dissemination channels (presentations & posters at conferences, publications, industry 
magazines, newsletters and on -line platforms), we will also tap into more  vanguard channels, such as social media platforms 
(ResearchGate, Academia.edu, SlideShare, Twitter, YouTube, Vision2020  open innovation platform ), etc. Also, the project 
website will serve as a lasting virtual hub for disseminating downloadable public deliverables and outputs of BIOnTOP, as it will 
house also the ‘BIOnTOP Green Channel’ for open access to the peer-reviewed publications of the project. 
In particular, the network of EUBP across the European bioplastics value chain should be highly instrument al in identifying and 
approaching prospective business partners and potential licensees. With around 70  member companies from across the 
bioplastics value chain that are active in the European market, EUBP works closely together with all major stakeholders  in this 
industry. The association also has access to several unparalleled channels of communication within the bioplastics industry, 
ranging from the largest European bioplastics conference, to the bioplastics -focussed newsletter with the widest circulati on, to 
one of the most widely -followed (4000+ followers) Twitter accounts focussing on bioplastics topics. To amplify our impacts, we 
also capitalise on ISWA’s (in our AB) communication channels to reach the waste management sector.  
Table 10: Outline of the BIOnTOP Dissemination Plan 
Target Audience Tools & Channels How contributing in achieving Impacts 
Consumers, Farmers, Retailers, 
General Public 
Project Leaflet, Video Clips, Website, Blogs and Magazines 
e.g. Food Production Daily, Bio-Based World News, 
PlastEurope, Farmers Weekly, ESOF (EuroScience Open 
Forum) 
Market pull. Public acceptance of the proposed 
innovative bio-based plastic applications that impact 
daily life stimulating the feeling they are getting value 
for money from public funded research. 
 
137 http://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/technology-and-innovation/strategic-energy-technology-plan 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 39 of 105 
 
Monomers producers, Copolymers 
producers, Compounders, Agro 
feedstock suppliers  
Trade fairs/exhibitions: EFIB, Compounding World Expo 
Open Access Journals (OAJ): Polymers 
Widespread of the use of the project innovation. 
Multiply success of the project by inspiring new 
initiatives based on the project results. 
Packaging converters 
Textiles producers  
Food processors  
Organic Food producers 
Cosmetics & personal care companies 
Other packaging users 
Trade exhibitions and conferences: Interpack (GE). 
International Conference and Exhibition on Food 
Processing & Technology (UK); Alimentaria (ES); 
Cosmetics Business (DE), Anuga FoodTec&Anuga (DE); 
Bioplastics Business Breakfast (GE), ICTF: Annual 
International Conference on Textiles and Fashion; Aachen-
Dresden International Textile Conference; European 
Textile Platform conference, Textile ETP, Dornbirn 
Conference, Techtextil  
Magazines: Fibers and Filamant, Plastics News Europe  
Project’s training events. 
Foster new supply chains and new cross-sectorial value 
chains (which will be reinforced by the presence of our 
expert Association EUBP) 
Raise awareness about BIOnTOP materials and 
suitable end of life options tailored on a vase by case 
basis.  
Multi-actor approach to support the transition towards a 
post-petroleum economy 
Industry Multipliers- Sectorial 
Associations (PlasticsEurope, CEFIC, 
Plastics Europe, PAFA - Packing and 
Film Association, Copa Cocega, 
European Crop Protection Association, 
European Association of Agricultural 
Economists) and other associations. 
Conferences, seminars and workshops (participation in 
organising, scientific committees, with poster, papers, 
presentations, or chairing): Annual World Food and 
Innovation Forum; Bio -based World, Biopolpack, Biopol, 
Sustainable Bioplastics, Bioplastics, Biorefining, Bio -based 
Materials, etc. 
Features in Newsletters and e-bulletins (plastics today, 
food production daily, plastic news, agronotizie, 
CosmeticsMag, etc.) 
Dissemination of new knowledge and technologies for 
transitioning to a bio-based economy. 
Communication to retailers and consumers about the 
bio-based materials used in BIOnTOP. 
Increase target industry sustainability for consumer and 
environmental protection. 
Building new value chains and cross sectorial 
interconnections among clusters. 
Standardisation bodies (CEN, ISO, DIN 
CERTCO, AfOR, COBRO, Vinçotte), 
and policy stakeholders, national food 
safety authorities, EFSA, EC, Expert 
Group for Bio-based Products 
(E02886), National governmental 
bodies, FAO, EUROPEN, INCPEN. 
Policy dialogue: joining roundtables fostering multilevel 
and horizontal discussion on BIOnTOP results.  
Collaboration with public administration will drive better 
informed decision-making processes across Europe also 
with a view in improving waste management legislation and 
standards. 
To increase the influence of the project and its results in 
policymaking towards the creation of a positive 
framework for the take up of BIOnTOP (and in general 
bio-based plastics with tailored EoL).  
Public/Private waste management, 
Recyclers (industrial organic and 
mechanical recycling) 
Conferences: ISWA World Congress, Waste 
Management, Ecomondo, Waste & Recycle Conference, 
Plastics Recycling Conference 
OAJ Articles:  Waste Management & Research (ISWA-run 
Academic Journal) 
Magazines: Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine) 
To support the transition towards a post-petroleum 
economy improving circularity 
Market & public organisation push 
Research and academic stakeholders Magazines: Pack World, Bio-based News, Plastics films, 
plasticseurope.it plasticsnewseurope.com, Bioplastics 
Magazine, Sustainable Plastics, Labiotech. Plasticeurope, 
Plastiker, Bio-based World News, Farmers Journal (IE) 
OA Journal Articles, Advances in Materials Science and 
Engineering  
Specific events as Open day at Universities, Researchers' 
Nights, Knowledge Open Festivals. Project training events. 
Effective knowledge sharing among the research and 
scientific communities in order to accelerate the 
paradigm shift from oil-based towards bioeconomy.  
Early stage researchers 
Attract more young people to scientific and research 
careers, enriching their curricula with knowledge from 
the project. Early stage researchers inspired by the 
results, will be motivated to remain in EU- research and 
possibly work in areas that are beneficial for society, 
BBI, sustainability and innovation. 
Other H2020 BBI projects and 
international/ national projects 
REFUCOAT, SuperBIO, Open-Bio, BioSTEP, InnoNet, 
BIOCOMPLACK, CommeBeBiz, AGRIMAX, PolyBioSkin, 
Hyperbiocoat, MultiCycle  
Cooperation, knowledge interchange and reuse 
between previous and future projects. 
Initial Exploitation and Business Plans for BIOnTOP Key Exploitable Results (KERs) 
The BIOnTOP consortium mobilises the necessary partners not only for the pilot scale production of novel bio-packaging based 
on bio-coatings and copolymers with multiple tailored EoL (WP2-3) but also to validate the new bioplastics applications (WP5-6) 
including environmental and economic sustainability, testing and modelling biodegradation in specific conditions (WP4), a set of 
activities which are all highly relevant for future market exploitation (WP7). 
A market -oriented approach will drive BIOnTOP R&D activities with Task 1.3 capitalising on the participating lightweight 
packaging, such as trays and nets as well as textiles, end users’ and the AB members’ expertise, and Task 7.4 ensuring that 
sufficient knowledge is collated to steer the research towards delivering a consumer-oriented solution with good market potential. 
Our intention is to realize all exploitation pathways for the results:  
a) Commercial exploitation: a key exploitation route will be the industrial use of the project knowledge for the creation of new 
innovative bio-based and biodegradable packaging materials, within and beyond the validated applications, new 
processes and advisory services to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts.  
b) Education and training:  the use of the new knowledge generated for upskilling and for enriching curricula in European 
education will have a high impact for raising the European knowledge base to prepare lightweight textiles and films-based 
packaging, and end user industry sectors for the transition to the bio-based economy; 3 training events will be organised. 
c) Further research: planning future spin-off research and development projects especially in areas that will contribute to the 
transferability of the project results to new applications;  
d) Contribution to standards: while making available new bio-based materials with innovative EoL options, the project results 
could on the long term contribute towards new regulations in the field of disposable plastic waste favouring the choice  of 
materials that are home compostable, wherever a better option like industrial composting or material recycling is not available 
or viable due to food scraps e.g. from F&V and tea. 
 
Detailed business plans will be developed in Subtask 7.5 Business and exploitation planning , and annexed to the Plan for the 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 40 of 105 
 
Exploitation and Dissemination of results ( PEDR), in order to provide the details on how the project’s results will be used in 
commercial exploitation activities, for training purposes, further research as well as standardisation activities.  Further measures 
will be planned in the framework of this task to increase the likelihood of continuity of the established ecosystem and value chains, 
as well as market uptake of BIOnTOP KERs for European industrial sustainability, competitiveness, growth, and jobs. During the 
proposal stage, each partner has communicated clear exploitation expectations (Table 11), as well as expected growth derived 
from the project in line with the share of the respective previously discussed overall growth of the sector he represents and that 
he could tap into. This will be planned in greater detail during WP7 to maximize the innovation impact but while growin g large 
companies by few percent has already a significant impact, it can be a game changer for very small companies like the young 
start ups PLANET, BioMi or WEAREBIO. 
Table 11: Summary of exploitation intentions of the BIOnTOP partners and expected growth year 7 post project (% vs. current) 
no Short Name Intention for use of project results 
Turnover 
increase 
New 
Jobs  
1 AIMPLAS Further developments to design and produce at lab/pilot plant scale of specific copolymers with tailor made 
properties using a broad range of different bio-based monomers. Possible patents on these formulations will be 
developed for food packaging and personal care products among others. Use of the knowledge generated in 
further projects related to development of full biodegradable plastic packages for a wide range of food and non-
food products. Further knowledge about the most suitable copolymers formulations with tailored EoLs will be 
applied to future projects as well as their behavior once recycled for different applications with demanding 
requirements. 
NA, non profit 
2 INSTM Further knowledge in processing of bio-based polymers and co-polymers for packaging and personal care 
applications used in services and projects. Possible patent (to license) on formulation for production of PLA based 
materials based on PLA and bio-based reactive plasticizers, or additives to promote biodegradability. 
NA, non profit 
3 CTB Offering consultancy, pilot facilities and testing services in the domain of biopolymers for textile applications. 
Extending future portfolio in research and development projects for biopolymers in textile applications. 
NA, non profit 
4 ASU Further knowledge in FA grafting of proteins for packaging applications used in services and projects. Possible 
patent licensing on grafted protein materials. 
NA, non profit 
5 EUBP Promoting the increasing use of innovative bio-based and biodegradable materials and supporting research into 
the further development of bioplastics with the goal of creating performance-improved & more sustainable 
applications. 
NA, non profit 
6 TOTAL-
CORBION 
sales of LD and PLA prepolymers for REX, of copolymers by batch process, as well as of PLA for the coatings. 
Grown presence in EU. 
Not possible to 
estimate 
7 PLANET Industrial production and commercialization of masterbatch based on BIOnTOP formulations. 50% 3 
8 BIO-MI Industrial production of materials, films and final packaging applications. 15% 5 
9 EMSUR Commercialisation of home compostable trays and lids with differential end of life trough associated companies. 2% 15 
10 CMSA Commercialisation of home compostable nets with differential end of life. 10% 5 
11 SILON Extending market of bio-based compounds (possibly from SRM) and staple fibres with tuned biodegradability. 3% 2 
12 SIOEN Extending market of bio-based textile with tuned biodegradable products. 10% 15 
13 WEAREBIO Commercialisation of F&V packed in sustainable materials. Extension to further organic food products. 15% 2 
14 ENTREPI. Commercialisation of cheese packed in sustainable materials. Possible future supply of whey for barrier coatings. 3% 2 
15 UBESOL Commercialisation of personal care products packed in sustainable materials. Extension to cosmetic products. 4% 1 
16 
 
23 
OWS 
(terminated) 
OWS RF 
Position as a leader in environmental assessment services for bioplastic sectors, especially through proposed 
improved test standards. 
5% 7 
17 ROMEI Commercialisation of BIOnTOP SRM and BIOnTOP based compounds. 10% 3 
18 IRIS Further development (customization service) of the biodegradation predictive models and licensing of the derived 
app. Commercialisation of full monitoring systems or the specific chemiometrics package to be installed in 
existing recycling plant to enable the sorting of the new bioplastic. Use of the knowledge generated in further 
projects related with bioplastics. 
10% 3 
19 ARCHA Exploitation of new coatings as water repellent finishing agent for clothing textiles. Strengthen its position as 
analytical and consulting service provider across EU. 5% 3 
20 ENCO Use of the knowledge in bio-based plastics market in further related projects and in consultancy services. 10% 1 
21 MC Serve the interest of consumers for better products NA, non profit 
22 INNOTECH Commercialisation of home compostable trays and lids with differential end of life trough associated companies. 2% 15 
 
The following table gives a summary description of a selection of the expected BIOnTOP KERs: 
Table 12: BIOnTOP Key Exploitable Results (Knowledge, products or technologies) 
WP KER Owner Envisaged IPR Tool Type of exploitation Target end-users Timetable 
2 
Copolymers 
synthesis route 
AIMPLAS Patents Licensing to REVERDIA 
and others 
Polymer 
producers 
2/3 years from the end of the 
project 
Compounds 
formulations 
INSTM Patent or trade secret Licensing to PLANET Polymer 
converters 
Directly post project for PLA 
blends and 3 years for copolymers 
3 
FA grafting ASU Patent or trade secret Licensing to ARCHA to 
supply INNOTECH 
associated companies 
Polymer 
converters 
Directly post project for in terms of 
licensing, 2-3 years for upscaling 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 41 of 105 
 
Process to allow FA 
combination with 
whey coating  
ASU, IRIS Whey coating processing 
patented, so protection 
already granted, but 
patenting combination is 
considered  
Licensing to INNOTECH 
associated companies 
Polymer 
converters 
Directly post project for in terms of 
licensing, 2-3 years for upscaling 
Fibres coating CTB, ASU Patent or trade secret Licensing to ARCHA, 
SILON and SIOEN 
Textiles 
converters 
Directly post project for in terms of 
licensing, 2-3 years for upscaling 
4 
Predictive models 
and derived app for 
biodegradation 
kinetics of BIOnTOP 
IRIS Confidential algorithms that 
will be used in software 
development secured by 
code 
Licensing Polymer 
producers and 
converters as well 
as waste sorters 
2/3 years post project for 
integration of the predictive model 
in a software product 
Biodegradation 
testing and LCA 
OWS(termina
ted)/OWS RF 
NA, specific standard test Services Polymer 
producers and 
converters 
Directly post project 
Monitoring system for 
BIOnTOP materials 
IRIS Confidential know-how for 
hardware calibration + 
design, software secured by 
a code 
Sales of turn key 
solutions 
Recyclers 5 years after the project when EoL 
BIOnTOP amounts are sufficient 
to recycle 
5 
Coated laminates INNOTECH 
Confidential know-how Sales of products - 
associated companies 
Packaging 
converter and 
food packers 
Approx. 4 years post project 
Secondary packaging BioMi Confidential know-how Sales of products Packaging and 
converting sector 
1-3 years post project 
Films & trays 
packaging 
INNOTECH Confidential know-how Sales of products - 
associated companies 
Food & personal 
care products 
packers 
Approx. 4 years post project 
6 
Processability of 
novel biopolymer 
formulations into 
textiles 
CTB Confidential know-how on 
processing parameters/ 
properties relationship 
Consultancy Textile producers Services and support offered after 
project finalisation 
Process to obtain 
nets  CMSA 
Confidential know-how Sales of products Food packers Approx. 4 years post project 
Specific 
biodegradable 
formulations for 
textiles 
Sioen Confidential know-how / 
Patents for specific end 
products 
Own production / 
licensing 
Packaging end-
users of specific 
textiles (food, 
retail) 
Product development within 1 to 3 
year timeframe. 
A Business Model Canvas has been prepared for the BIOnTOP materials, featuring core KERs along the value chain (Fig. 16). 
Similar tools will be completed for each KER in WP7. This will be instrumental to develop and pivot the related business models 
during the project. The final business plans (D7.5) will provide the details on how the project’s results will be used in commercial 
exploitation activities, for training purposes, for further research activities as well as for standardisation activities. It will also specify 
in detail for each result both joint and individual exploitation strategies in terms of technology roadmaps, finance require ments, 
commercial opportunities and related business roadmap, taking into account IPR. 
Fig. 16: Business model canvas to be applied to each KER in WP7 
Fig 17 represents the expected full scale coordinated deployment of the different semi -finished materials and finished products 
along the supply and value chain to reach our target markets within 3 to 5 years post-project, as well as the adoption to new 
applications in the year after that. In terms of the measures that will be in place in order to effectively plan for the exploitation 
Key Partners  Key Activities                                   Value Proposition     Customer Relationships        Customer Segments 
• Bio-based 
monomers 
producers  
• Biopolymers 
producers (esp. 
PLA) 
• Wheat, citric and 
wax converters (for 
by products) 
• Packaging 
convertors 
• Waste 
management 
bodies 
(composters and 
recyclers) 
• Distributors  
• Licensees 
• Application consulting 
• Integration assessment/know how 
transfer 
• Manufacturing of the different products 
along the value chain 
• Sales and distribution 
Formulating novel coatings as 
well as PLA copolymers and 
compounds, Biontop will deliver 
recyclable-by-design cost 
competitive packaging solutions 
that can be mechanically 
recycled or industrially/ 
domestically composted or even 
suitable for AD. Each solution will 
have a tailored EoL and 
performance validated for trays , 
films, nets and textiles packaging 
for different products . We  also 
provide eco-design 
biodegradation predictive models, 
the know how needed for 
converting, using and recycling 
them.  
• Samples based trials for client 
engagement 
• Free initial application assessment 
for client capture 
• Direct marketing and sales of the 
different products by the different 
partners 
• Plastic Converters 
(packaging, textiles as 
early adopters of SRM; 
in a second phase, 
agricultural, tableware 
but also medical and 
sanitary sectors)  
• Packaging end users, 
especially for food in the 
organic sector, but also 
cosmetics and 
pharmaceutical sector 
• Consumers of packed 
products. 
Key Resources                     Promotion Channels             
• Financial capacity to cover fixed costs 
until breakeven (possible further public 
funding, private investments to be 
studied in WP7) 
• Technical &Sales force human capital 
• Operational managing structure for 
business development 
• Production infrastructures among 
partners 
• Specialised tradeshows 
• Specialised events 
• Professional press 
• DEM (Direct Email Marketing) 
• SEM (Search Engine Marketing) 
• Lobbying on influencers 
• Direct targeting to current costumers 
and new prospects  
• Cost Structure                                                                    Revenue Streams                                                                                                                   
• Cost of raw material + production of the different final products 
• Sales structure costs (technical assessment) 
• Human capital costs 
• Sales of PLA copolymers and compounds, novel coatings, packaging solutions (trays, pouches, nets and 
textiles) 
• Sales of services/equipments to support Biontop implementation including the monitoring systems for the 
EoL for the new materials and biodegration modelling derived services 
• Royalties on licensing 
 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 42 of 105 
 
of the results of the project, the robust industry involvement in the consortium (SMEs and Large companies will unique market 
expertise in bi oplastics & packaging ), backed by strong knowledge management, knowledge transfer and market exploitation 
plans, and their key role in the project activities will boost an industry-driven approach to the project respecting market, consumer 
and regulatory r equirements. This will ensure that BIOnTOP is successful in transitioning knowledge towards the market 
overcoming potential barriers that may hinder the swift uptake of the results of BIOnTOP research in the post-project phase.  
Effective knowledge transfer , under Subtask 
7.5.4., from technical partners to SMEs 
(internally),), third-party enterprises and  end-
users (externally) will also be fundamental for 
paving the way towards commercializati on, 
guaranteeing that sufficient knowledge and 
competencies to exploit results are acquired. To 
this end, the involvement of RTDs of 
international renown in the fields of plastic 
formulations (INSTM), plastic processing & 
synthesis (AIMPLAS), packaging technologies 
(ASU), PLA compounding and textile extrusion 
& processing (CTB), and who have a track 
record in working closely with and in 
transferring research results to industry, as well 
as providing training and educational 
programmes, is a valuable asset, which will 
ensure that we bridge the innovation gap that 
frequently prevents industry adopti on of R&D 
outputs. In particular, AIMPLAS performs very 
frequent broad scope trainings for its over 600 
associated companies in the plastic sector. The 
non-industrial partners will exploit the results of BIOnTOP to enhance their educational offer with the novel concepts and system 
design principles that will be identified and developed during the project. Some of the topics tackled in the project shall become 
part of Master degree courses, as well as research topics for Master & PhD theses, offering students a taste of research problems 
that have practical impact and interest, and the opportunity to perform research in a high quality international environment.  The 
inclusion of ENCO with extensive experience in translating R&D output into actual commercialisation and market penetration, is 
another important added value for the consortium and will contribute to ensuring the post-project stage. Importantly, as opposed 
to greenwashing claims sometimes found for materials having minor bio-based content or low overall sustainability, we will work 
towards very high bio -based content of our formulations (close to 100%) and we will follow a cautious and transparent 
communication policy both in terms of sourcing and EoL, backed up by consequential LCA results, which will contribute to raising 
industry confidence delivering a positive breakthrough in the context of environmental-friendly food packaging, as well as 
carrier bags. 
Sound management of the knowledge generated during the project, active planning in relation to post -project exploitation 
activities, further research work for escalating along the TRLs, as well as scouting for possible viable financing routes to 
commercialisation that will allow us to quickly scale up, bridge the innovation gap, navigate the ‘valley of death’, and swiftly 
overcome the critical stage between pre-competitive results and the market according to previously outlined market deployment 
timeline (fig 17).  
 
Fig. 17: Market deployment plan of main final BIOnTOP KERs   

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 43 of 105 
 
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project Although the exploitation 
interests will be favoured by default,  BIOnTOP will participate in the Pilot Open Access Research Data scheme for a selected 
amount of research data generated by the project. A data management plan (DMP) has been included among WP8’s deliverables. 
Non-confidential results will be widely disseminated in open access media  and repository (after anonymising critical information 
e.g. on composition). All publications and selected results will be considered for this so as to provide the scientific community with 
a better understanding of e.g. the influence of the structure of the copolymers on biodegradation after an agree d embargo time 
allowing excluding the commercially sensitive details in case of selected successful formulations. All publicly available dat a will 
be protected by copyright statements. 
Strategy for knowledge management and protection 
The Knowledge Manageme nt Strategy (Fig. 1 8) which will be followed 
throughout the duration of  BIOnTOP is heavily interconnected with the 
exploitation and dissemination activities to pave the way for post -project 
exploitation. An integrated approach will be followed for the iden tification, 
capture, retrieval, distribution, sharing, use and reuse of BIOnTOP 
information and knowledge assets. This will be essential to drive the value 
and benefits of these information and knowledge assets and contribute to 
maximising the innovation impact of the action. Knowledge management 
sessions will take place regularly during the project meetings. These sessions 
will be chaired by the Project Coordinator (Dr. Belen Monje, AIMPLAS) and 
the IPR Manager (Dr. Marco de la Feld, ENCO), attended by all project 
beneficiaries, and will facilitate the disclosure of the IP and the novelty of the 
project results. The aim of these sessions is to review: i) expected results per 
WP, ii) evaluation of the IP (technology watch/prior art review), iii) evaluation 
of protection options (IPR tools evaluation) , iv) third party components 
included in the project activities including tools and datasets, v) confidentiality 
of project results , vi) expected publications per partner  and vii) exploitation 
intentions per partner. 
Background IPR and access rights 
Background, that is, information and knowledge (including inventions, databases, etc.) held by the partners prior to their accession 
to the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are needed for carrying out the project or for u sing 
results held by the consortium, or indeed by third parties, is defined in the proposal preparation phase (pre -Grant Agreement). 
The current status of the background being brought to the project by the consortium is listed in Table 13. Access to Background 
necessary for the implementation of  the project will be granted royalty free and background needed to use the results of the 
project will be provided either royalty free or under fair and reasonable conditions. 
Table 13: Background per partner 
No    Name  Background 
1 AIMPLAS 
Know-how in copolymerisation and reactive extrusion synthesis of biopolymers. Know-how in biopolymers for food packaging applications. 
Know-how in extrusion and thermoforming processes. Know-how in recycling technologies. Several patents in the field of bio-based and 
biodegradable polymer like EP 2784114 A1, ES 2364831 B1. 
2 INSTM 
Know-how on biodegradable polyester based materials extrusion. Knowledge on polyester recycling through reactive extrusion methods. 
Patent related to Copolymers based on reactive polyesters and plasticisers for the manufacture of transparent, biodegradable packaging 
film, WO 2013164743 A1. Patent related to blends of polyesters and aromatic polycarbonate, WO2012025907A1. Patent on toughened 
post-consumer condensation polymers (including PET and PET/PE from multilayers based formulations), Italian patent, P12011A000090. 
3 CTB Know-how in formulation (including functionalisation) and processing of biopolymers for textile, composite and packaging applications. 
4 ASU Know-how in formulation (including functionalisation) and processing of biopolymers for flexible packaging applications. 
5 EUBP 
Leading bio-based and biodegradable plastics industry association in EU with extensive insights into the global biopolymer and bioplastics 
market; decade-long experience with communication on and dissemination of information relating to these materials. 
6 
TOTAL -
Corbion 
Knowledge in bio-based biodegradable plastics as well as monomers, converting processes, application, end of life, markets 
7 PLANET Knowledge on compounding and REX. Licence of IMSTM’s patents WO 2013164743 A1. WO2012025907A1. P12011A000090 
8 BIO-MI Know-how in flexible packaging production. 
9 EMSUR Know-how in flexible and rigid packaging for a broad range of applications. 
10 CMSA Know-how in the field of nets for a broad range of applications. 
11 SILON Know-how on compounding and staple fibre extrusion of recycled PET and PLA. 
12 SIOEN Know-how on textile converting including PLA. 
13 WEAREBIO Knowledge in food sector specialised in organic food and use of eco-friendly packaging for bulk and retail uses. 
14 ENTREPI. knowhow on dairy food production and packaging requirements. 
15 UBESOL knowhow on personal & home care and cosmetics products production and their packaging requirements. 
16 
 
23 
OWS 
(terminated) 
OWS RF 
Knowledge about analysis of (organic) recyclability, evaluation of compostability (e.g. industrial composting: the complete EN 13432 testing 
program; home composting NF T 51-800), biodegradation and disintegration under anaerobic conditions and Life Cycle Assessment. 
17 ROMEI knowhow on packaging recycling including PLA. 
18 IRIS 
Know-how in monitoring systems especially including NIR, HIS -Knowledge on data mining for predictive modeling and bioplastics. License 
of the Wheylayer patent “Whey coated films” PCT / IB 2011 / 05327 and the Wheylayer trademark. 
19 ARCHA Expertise as analytical and consulting service provider related with regulatory compliance on the environmental aspects, H&S on products 
Fig. 18: Knowledge Management Strategy 
 
                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 44 of 105 
 
and in workplaces, implementation of Quality, Environment and Safety systems. 
20 ENCO Knowledge in communication, business & market analysis. Knowledge in innovation, exploitation and IPR management. 
21 MC knowhow on consumer perception studies, and communication towards them. 
22 INNOTECH Know-how in flexible and rigid packaging for a broad range of applications. 
Results definition, protection, ownership and access rights  
Selected results from the project were previously listed in Table 12 along with the expected scenarios of results ownership. This 
table will apply for all project results, and it will be periodically revised and updated during the project in line with dev elopments. 
The project results will be continually assessed in terms of nov elty, patentability and protection through Task 7.4, as part of an 
effective knowledge management strategy. The choice of the most suitable form of IP protection, as well as the duration and 
geographical coverage depends on the results at stake, but also the business plans for their exploitation and legitimate interests 
of consortium partners. By default, results will be owned by the partner generating them. To avoid doubt or confusion over 
ownership, a protocol of procedures will be defined, which will be followed by each partner to clearly show the development of 
the generation of knowledge or results. In case a result is jointly generated (i.e. where the separate parts of some result a re 
attributed to different participants), it will be jointly owned. Consequently, Joint Ownership Agreements will regulate the allocation 
and the terms of exercising this joint ownership(s). However, an overriding principle will be that the participating industry partners 
are always provided with the access that they need to the results to exploit them in keeping with the needs and strategy of their 
business. As such, access rights to results for implementing the project will be granted on a royalty -free basis and in case of 
access rights for use purposes will be granted eithe r royalty-free, or on fair and reasonable conditions (these conditions will be 
established in Exploitation Agreements that will be negotiated between the requester and granter of the access rights). A fir st 
draft of the Exploitation Agreement will be available by M12 and will be continually revised and edited throughout the project, and 
a final version will be signed by all partners at M48 (annexed to D7.6). 
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications 
BIOnTOP partners will provide peers and end -users with free of 
charge online access to the project peer-reviewed scientific research 
articles. Partners can follow two routes towards open access: (1) by 
self-archiving their journal articles in an open access repository, also 
known as 'green' open access, or (2) by publishing in an open access 
journal, known as 'gold' open access. Whereas fees to cover 
publishing in gold open access journals have been budgeted, 
BIOnTOP will privilege green open access, whereby the partners will 
publish in peer-reviewed scientific publications and then self-archive 
a version in repositories (using only those indexed in specialised 
search engines like Scopus). The project website will 
complementarily house the ‘ BIOnTOP Green Channel’ for open 
access to the peer-reviewed publications of the project. In relation to 
expected publications from the project, these include but are not 
limited to: results from food bio-packaging and textile value chain 
analyses; results from demonstration of recyclability, 
biodegradability and home compostability of BIOnTOP compounds; 
LCA; novel results and applications of PLA and copolymer blends.  
Communication activities   
Communication activities are of the outmost importance for 
effectively promoting our action and outputs towards the 
stakeholders that we want to reach to fully exploit this BBI action. To 
successfully connect and cooperate with,  and acquire positive 
support from relevant stakeholders and the public at large, a 
strategic plan will be implemented in Task 7.5.5, on top of the preliminary outline presented in Fig. 18. The overall communication 
campaign, which covers the whole project duration, will be led by the Innovation, Communication & Dissemination Manager entity 
EUBP, which holds an established extensive network and communication capacity to ensure that benefits and impacts of the 
project are genuinely conveyed to key stakeholders and the general public  (in particular through MC). Our aim is to i) generate 
understanding of what BIOnTOP seeks to achieve, ii) stimulate interest and support, and iii) motivate the collaboration o f actors 
along the value chain as well as of the general public in order to boost the transition to the bio -based economy in EU.  The 
BIOnTOP communication campaign leverages one -way, bilateral, and multilateral strategic channels.Following a preliminary 
stakeholder analysis (which will be developed in Task 7.3), the target audiences of BIOnTOP  communication activities comprise 
monomers & biopolymer suppliers, agro -food processors, plastic packaging manufacturers and converters, personal care and 
food manuf acturing industry and retailers, other packaging end users, consumers & consumer organizations, agricultural 
associations, public authorities, standardisation & safety agencies/organisations, scientific communities, and recycling & industrial 
composting companies. Particular efforts will be made to engage with and raise awareness of the general public. It is important 
to address consumers’ concerns by informing the public about our strong dependence on fossil-based conventional plastics 
 
Fig. 19: BIONTOP Communication Toolbox 

                                                                          Part B                                                                            
 
Page 45 of 105 
 
to which renewably sourced, bio-based, high-performance, and cost competitive bioplastics can be the more sustainable 
alternative. The awareness raising actions carried out will aim to generate acceptance and open the path to building trust towards 
innovative biopackaging solutions, through optimal communication and transparency using appropriate language  enabling EU 
consumers to make informed purchasing and consumption decisions . A set of key messages will be developed specifically to 
popularise complex subjects and to bring the issue closer to people’s lives by making it more understandable. The campaign will 
be rolled out through various channels and tools (figured in Fig. 19), with the following approach: 1. ‘Push’ communication (graphic 
identity, newsletters, press releases, promotional materials, gadgets, etc.) and 2. ‘Pull’ communication and interaction (website, 
social media, liaison with other initiatives and projects, joint communication, etc). The fact that our demonstrators are bro adly 
focused on consumers applications like packaging (which in turn was a prominent reason for their selection) will allow maximising 
the awareness of the impact of the bioeconomy, and indeed BBI programmes, on their everyday life. 
 
3.  Implementation