1.2 Methodology 1.2.1 Overall methodology, including key concepts, models, assumptions and potential challenges In order to build the BIORADAR BTI environment, an ambitious coordination and support programme will be rolled out, with the aim of demonstrating and validating BIORADAR in three industrial environments. The programme will be flanked by a number of exercises aimed at understanding and monitoring the non-technical aspects crucial for the development and deployment of the BIORADAR BTI. Fig. 4. presents the BIORADAR methodology at a glance. It consists of four main phases of technical development (Identify and Evaluate, Model and Develop, Integrate & Validate, Upscaling and Replication). At the same time the technical work will be accompanied, the framework conditions is set for a successful development and deployment of the BIORADAR BTI, including (i) Environmental aspects, (ii) Economic aspects and pathways towards commercialisation, (iii) Societal aspects, (iv) Circularity aspects and (v) standardisation.  What follows is a detailed description of the research methods to be deployed in order to reach each phase of the proposed methodology, including key concepts, models, assumptions and potential challenges. An in-depth analysis of the methodological approach has led to the conclusion that the BIORADAR methodology does apply to the “do no significant harm” principle of the so-called EU Taxonomy Regulation. 1. Identify and Evaluate Concept: The project will be initiated by investigating existing industrial bio-based systems within the EU and connected countries and drafting a specification of BIORADAR based on the three bio-based industrial use cases (in bio-based textile, bio-fertiliser, and bio-packaging) and re-confirming the KPIs pre-defined at proposal writing stage.  Methodology: BIORADAR will review the state-of-the-art research and ongoing R&I projects on the sustainability and circularity of industrial bio-based systems and their products. This step includes identifying and classifying the range of operating industrial bio-based systems in the EU, investigating EU trade agreements with other countries/regions, and gathering technical and environmental specifications of specified systems. Existing KPIs and metrics to assess the sustainability and circularity of such systems will be investigated, and environmental and social impact will be assessed through Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and Social LCA (S-LCA). This methodological step would include: ● Evaluating transportation carbon emission in industrial bio-based systems. ● Exploring the potential of renewable energy use in industrial bio-based systems. ● Determining energy use, CO2 emission, and land use indicators for bio-based systems. ● Exploring existing methods/metrics to evaluate iLUC risk of bio-based systems. ● Exploring end-of-life problems of the bio-based products in the scope of CBE JU. Finally, opportunities for climate change mitigation and closing the loops within the supply chain of industrial bio-based systems will be explored, and their economic feasibility will be assessed. 2. Model and Develop  Concept: The idea is to ensure that the needs/requirements of stakeholders to use the monitoring system of the BIORADAR (BTI environment) are taken into account early in the project. The key stakeholders will be involved in early steps. A proprietary bio-based ecosystem analysis (from identify & evaluate step) will be used to ensure the creation of a viable ecosystem covering the multiple dimensions of BIORADAR’s socio-technical system (see Fig. 3). Work conducted at this stage will also inform later work on potential commercialisation pathways, including decisions to sell the BIORADAR digital tools as products or rather as part of a servitisation business model for bio-based systems (Circularity as a Service, CaaS). Methodology: In the “Model and Develop” step, new criteria, metrics, and assessment methods are designed and developed. The Develop phase consists of but is not limited to the below activities: ● Developing criteria and metrics to assess the carbon removal potential of bio-based solutions. 
Figure 4 Overall methodology of BIORADAR 
BIORADAR    7 
● Develop methods to evaluate iLUC risks of bio-based systems.  ● Developing indicators that assess how well a bio-based system performs in the context of a circular economy. ● Implementing a life cycle approach to increase material efficiency of bio-based systems through durability, reuse, repair, remanufacturing, and recycling patterns. Then the digital tools underpinning BIORADAR BTI will be developed in parallel and tested individually in use-cases. What follows are descriptions of methodologies to develop each digital tool. a) Self-assessment The idea behind the development of BIORADAR BTI will be to produce a user-friendly service which can allow the interested stakeholders to assess and analyse the considered metrics by themselves in a secure and autonomous environment, only dependent on the data entered for the key studied parameters. To this end, a well-structured back-end front-end digital platform (self-assessment tool) will be developed and adequate to the singularities of the targeted bio-based ecosystems and stakeholders. Previous requirements from users will be gathered and evaluated in order to guarantee and optimal use.  b) AI-driven (data-driven) benchmarking The developed tool will include different modular and micro-modular architectures prepared to embed Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based algorithms, which will allow a more trustable and experience-based approach for the assessment of the production, consumption and impact of the targeted bio-based materials. To this aim, AI-base models will be designed and generated based on the previously gathered industrial specifications as well as in based in the selected KPI for each bio-based environment. All participant stakeholders will be required to contribute. c) Global bio-based systems regulatory tracker tool  In response to the current momentum in bio-based industry policy-making and unprecedented demand for more quality corporate disclosures on external risks, the project will also perform institutional analysis to investigate rules and regulations in selected exporting countries and assess current policies' social and legal feasibility toward circular bio-based industries. The Tracker combines collection of hard laws and soft norms in the field.  3. Integrate, validate, and benchmark  BIORADAR tools integrated and validated on the three industrial use cases, collecting and analysing the best available systems using real industrial data, and re-confirming the KPIs pre-defined at proposal writing stage. Table 3 presents an overview of the three use cases at the project partners Bio-based textiles, packaging, and fertilizer.  Concept: Integration in the desired bio-based industrial environments will be one of the final goals of the development.  This validation will provide certainty that the digital tool and the AI-based models will act aligned and in consequence of the previously selected specifications and KPI. Moreover, it will serve as an initial trial for bug fixing and connectivity optimization.  Table 3. Details on the BIORADAR use-cases.  USE-CASE 1 Bio-based Textile industry USE-CASE 2 Bio-fertiliser (bio-chemical)  USE-CASE 2 Bio-packaging Current state of play for environmental and social impacts, and circularity indicators in selected bio-based industries 
The chemical industry has recently introduced bio-based synthetic fibers, such as bio-nylon, bio-polyester, etc. replacing fossil materials with vegetable oils, starches, and sugars from biomass. These new fibers contribute to the "decarbonization" of textile production to reduce the use of fossil raw materials. Biobased synthetic fibers are already available on the market. The fibers can be 100% bio-based, i.e., entirely produced from biomass, or only partially bio-based, i.e., in a composition of around 50% with fossil materials. Bio-based fibers account for a small share of the market, but the volumes are growing fast. The European Bioplastics Association and the Nova Institute, the leading European research center in the sector, calculate that bio-based chemical fibers production is today close to 300 thousand tons. 
Bio-fertiliser industry is experiencing new changes since  16th July 2022, the New Fertilising Product Regulation (FPR) entered into force, with the aim to reduce synthetic product usage and provide more restrictive CE Marking requirements, opening the single market for bio-based fertilisers. In addition, and from the environmental point of view, the new regulation introduces new limit values for contaminants in fertilizers and promotes the increasing use of recycled materials for producing fertilisers, while reducing dependence on imported nutrients and help to develop the circular economy. At social level, most of farmers are not aware of the new policy content, and the legislation will increase the consumer’s confidence by guaranteeing the safety of the products. 
The global dependency of fossil-derived plastics is very well known; in facts, statistics reveal that only in Europe more than 50 million tonnes are consumed yearly and a ca. 32% of the resulting waste is recycled (1); and in the specific case of packaging, more than a ca. 30% leaks to the environment creating a long-term damage (2). Considering that more than 40% of plastics are produced for the packaging industry, to endure and optimise its recyclability and circularity are crucial. In that sense, bio-plastics have been put into focus as a possible replacement of fossil-based plastics. However, despite their continuously growing (3) and their capabilities to switch production towards renewable feedstocks (5), bio-plastics still do not represent a big share of consumed and produced plastics (ca.1-2% approx.). 
BIORADAR    8 
Envisaged BIORADAR use-case expected improvement of parameters 
BIORADAR, NTT as the lead, will perform the assessment of a textile product’ environmental sustainability and circularity by combining traditional concepts of a circular economy with the novel understanding of a circular economy by going beyond waste treatment and enhanced recyclability to include the repurposing and holistic redesign of products. 
BIORADAR, CETENMA as the lead, will map the bio-fertilizer value chain considering current legislation and results from other funded projects (i.e. FERPLAY) in order to get real metrics on environmental, social and costs impacts. These metrics will be validated with stakeholders from industries and will easy them to transform their production lines to sustainable ones. 
BIORADAR, IRIS as the lead, will map & assess the specific KPI and most reliable evaluation factors in bio-packaging. The task will be carried out considering current European Policies as well as in collaboration with current and past projects (i.e. PRESERVE) and public outputs successfully contributing to bio-plastics upcycling, recyclability and end of life (EoL).   Methodology: Firstly, the resulting digital tool will be validated at the laboratory scale in order to guarantee a consistent communication and intra-modular connectivity. Once it has been validated, it will be then deployed under industrial condition (end users) for further optimization, adequate and validation of the selected KPI. On this aim, all interested stakeholders will participate and continuous assessment will be performed. Also, a continuous and periodic revision of the modulus will be performed at the operational level,as well as adequation of the platform requirements to possible new upcoming specifications. 4. Upscale and replicate  Concept: Pave the way for post-project commercial uptake by monitoring and influencing framework conditions (e.g. standards), understanding the best business model and commercialization strategy for the future product, and prove that all BIORADAR digital tools can be upscaled and demonstrated in real industrial bio-based environment.  Methodology: A set of procedures to upscale, replicate, and exploit the results from the BIORADAR project, so that they are widely spread in the participant countries and beyond. Including, but not limited to: Set up of the “BIORADAR Replication Facility”, Elaboration of the BIORADAR implementation scorecard, Exploitation and Business Plan (EBP) for replication and upscaling, Investigate novel business models, Improving professional skills and expertise via MOOC for bio-based transition (see WP4).  Further, BIORADAR partners have sketched out a high-level business case (see 2.2.2), and commercial details in regard to the actual business model (e.g. CaaS servitisation) will be developed in the project to upscale and deploy the results of the project. 5. Framework conditions Concept. Activities as part of the “framework conditions” exercises will run in parallel to many technical developments described above. The ambition is to ensure that the technological outputs of the project have been vetted against any potentially negative environmental, societal or economic implications that may prevent a successful uptake of BIORADAR post-project.  Methodology. The environmental aspects of BIORADAR developments will be monitored by conducting a lifecycle assessment (LCA) of the bio-based systems, according to the standard EN ISO 14040:2006 Environmental management - Life cycle assessment. In order to evaluate the environmental assessment of the bio-based systems, firstly an inventory to collect the required data will be elaborated. Primary data coming from partners will be the first option. These data will be validated following its quality. In case that specific data are missing, data will be sourced from peer-reviewed publications and databases (e.g ecoinvent). In addition, data will be gathered from previous projects where partners are participating. Using the inventory, the potential environmental impacts will be evaluated from the selected systems, defining previously the functional units and ecological boundaries for streams.  In regard to the societal aspects, the partners will identify hotspot about socio-economic and social aspects. Assessments will be performed for example following UNEP-SETAC guidelines and including stakeholder categories (e.g consumers, local community) and subcategories. ISO 14075 standard will be considered. The social impact data will be gathered from different sources, literature and databases (e.g PSILCA) and surveys.  In regard to the ethical aspects, the project partners will constantly monitor the technological developments to mitigate emerging ethical issues. At the same time the partners will closely monitor the emerging legal regulations, such as the EU’s proposed regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence from April 2021, to ensure the developments proposed in the project do not go against any regulations soon to emerge in the EU market. In regard to the standardisation aspects, the project partner UNI (Italian Standardisation body) responsible for standardisation activities will connect the project to relevant technical bodies, in order to foster the transfer of project results to the standardisation world, while keeping the partners updated about new relevant standardisation activities. For example, novel developments that may fall into emerging standards are presented to the appropriate bodies (such as CEN TC 411). UNI will also promote a liaison agreement between the consortium and a relevant possibly European technical body. The presence of UNI in the consortium will ensure the relevance and alignment of project standardisation activities with international bodies (CEN and ISO). Finally, the partners will establish a working group looking specifically into commercialization pathways of the BIORADAR monitoring systems. Besides traditional B2B models, the group will focus in particular on novel business models focused on servitisation (Circularity as a Service, CaaS). The idea behind CaaS is to offer the entire BIORADAR value proposition as one service package targeted at the bio-based industry. The idea is to conceptualise service packages including the set-up, ramp-up and performance monitoring of bio-based industrial system, followed by global bio-based system regulatory tracker tool.   
BIORADAR    9 
1.2.2 Interdisciplinary approach, including involvement of social sciences The classical engineering and software development approaches (idea, concept, design, tests, validation, development, demonstration) will be complemented in the project by approaches deployed in business research and social sciences. The partner YAG brings to the project the unique expertise on networked ecosystem analysis, identifying relevant indicators with the triple bottom line business concept in order to identify all relevant stakeholders (and their needs and values), model and analyse the future BIORADAR monitoring business environment. The idea is to start this exercise already at project beginning in order to feed the learnings into the technical specification of the software tools to be developed, but also better understand which business models (including those focused on servitisation) could be developed for BIORADAR (see Fig 5). In addition, the partner UNI brings to the project the unique perspective on the process to go towards the development of standardisation documents. 1.2.3 Links to national/international research and innovation activities BIORADAR will build upon a number of ongoing projects. Links to the projects will be established primarily by exploiting solely owned proprietary IP generated in those projects by the BIORADAR partners, who are part of these projects. Whenever this will not be possible (either because of not being part of a project, not owing relevant IP or because of IP being co-owned with additional parties) the partners will seek to establish relevant links by accessing openly available research outputs from those projects (e.g. datasets, publications). BioMonitor (“Monitoring the Bioeconomy”) Horizon 2020, 2018-2022: the project establishes a sustainable data and modelling framework for the bioeconomy. The biomonitor framework aim to enable quantification of the bioeconomy and its economic, environmental and social impacts. No BIORADAR partner is involved in the project, but alignment will be sought via dedicated dissemination activities. Bioplastics Europe (“Sustainable Solutions for Bio-based Plastics on Land and Sea”) Horizon 2020, 2019-2023: investigates sustainable strategies and solutions for bio-based products to support the EU Plastics Strategy and a Circular Economy. Partner HAW is the project coordinator.  FER-PLAY (“Multi-assessment of alternative fertilisers for promoting local sustainable value chains and clean ecosystems”) Horizon Europe, 2022-2025: gather, harmonise, select and complement the knowledge on alternative fertiliser value chains to promote the wide-scale production and application of alternative fertilisers with best environmental, social and economic performance as well as technical and regulatory viability. Partner CETENMA is the project coordinator.  BIO4SELF Horizon 2020, 2016-2019: BIO4SELF aims at fully biobased self-reinforced polymer composites. Partner NTT is involved and performs LCA, SLCA and LCC evaluation of the value chain.  ALICIA (smart digital tools for the sustainable, circular, human-centric and resilient use of production resources) Horizon Europe, 2022-2026: The aim of ALICIA is to create and demonstrate a Circular Manufacturing Ecosystem (CME) for production resources, such as robotic arms or conveyor belts. Partner YAG is involved.  Biorecer ("Biological Resources Certifications Schemes") Horizon Europe, 2022-2025: aims to ensure the environmental performance and traceability of the biological feedstock used by the bio-based industries, deploying guidelines to strengthen the current certification schemes. Partner UNI is involved. STAR4BBS ("Sustainability Transition Assessment Rules for Bio-Based Systems") Horizon Europe, 2022-2025: is a three-year multidisciplinary and multi-actor collaborative project, involving seven partners, three associated partners and one linked third party. The overall aim of STAR4BBS is to maximize the potential of Sustainability Certification Schemes. Partner UNI is involved. PRESERVE (“High performance sustainable bio-based packaging with tailored end of life and upcycled secondary use”), Horizon Europe, 2021-2024: will boost the circular use of bio-based packaging. Specifically, it will work to enhance the performance of primary food packaging. Partner IRIS is the project coordinator. Partners NTT and KNEIA are involved. 1.2.4 Gender dimension The gender dimension will be integrated into the project by mapping the requirements of male and female in bioeconomy, bio-based industrial systems. BIORADAR addresses gender analysis as both an essential policy element of its response to the challenge of this call, and as a key substantive dimension for the research and development to be conducted in the project. Gender is taken into account in three main ways in: 1. All of the planned impact and communication, dissemination, and exploitation activities (WP 4,5) will strive for gender balance and will be inclusive of stakeholders who can represent gender equality issues and the interests of female citizens.  2. The BIORADAR will, in all design and implementation steps and subsequent analyses, be sensitive to gender equality. This involves maintaining, throughout the project, sensitivity to the ways in which a culture of sustainability paradigm is implemented and impacts the elimination of gender bias in R&I, development and growth in bio-based industry.  
Figure 5 The layer concept for new business model development 
BIORADAR    10 
3. The monitoring system is being designed with gender equality element as a key substantive development and growth area in. These include indicators for horizontal and vertical participation of women in development and growth, and for organisational measures for promoting and institutionalising gender equality, and for gender content in research. The proposed gender equality related indicators will be critically assessed (WP 3) and options explored for its improvement or upscaling (WP 4). It will be important to liaise with the European Commission regarding new indicators for the next edition of SHE Figures4, with a view to ensuring BIORADAR efforts are complementary with such efforts and do not duplicate or overlap work already underway. In summary, BIORADAR will be focusing considerable substantive work on the gender equality throughout the entire life of the project.  1.2.5 Open science The open science strategy of BIORADAR will be guided by the principle of making research results available free of charge as soon as possible in the process unless it goes against the commercial interests of the partners and would hinder the exploitation post project. In support of this objective, the following practices will be integrated within the delivery of the proposed research programme. Firstly, BIORADAR will facilitate open access to all scientific publications released by partners which draw on project research results via an open research repository Zenedo and via the Open Research Europe platform.5 To ensure ‘early and open sharing,’ the BIORADAR plan relating to the use of AI-driven benchmarking and selected data sets, will be published in several public repositories, including OSF and As Predicted. Research articles in BIORADAR will be published in two stages, i.e., pre-research, and post-research, and subject to peer-review. Similarly, all academic partners will be encouraged to release preprint of their scientific manuscripts. Secondly, BIORADAR will ensure the responsible management of research data in line with FAIR principles. A detailed description of the research data management plan is provided in the following section. Thirdly, BIORADAR will ensure the reproducibility by providing external stakeholders with access to all information and research outputs, tools, and instruments to validate the conclusions of scientific publications or to validate/re-use research data. This objective will be achieved by releasing a detailed methodology document describing the implementation of the approach and provisioning open access via OSF and Zenedo platforms. Finally, BIORADAR will facilitate the active participation of bio-based industrial end-users, throughout the monitoring system processes. Besides technical stakeholders, open science efforts (as captured by the Communication Plan) will also aim at addressing citizen science, i.e. bring some of the technical topics behind BIORADAR closer to non-expert audiences in Europe. 1.2.6 Data management and management of other research outputs All data gathered in the project will be managed according to Open Research Europe’s Guidelines for Handling Research Data6. Firstly, a Data Management Officer will be nominated by YAG at project start. This person will be responsible for elaborating a bespoke Data Management Plan for BIORADAR. The plan will follow YAG’s internal research data handling guidelines, Research Code of Conduct and the Open Access Policy.  The plan will include detailed roadmaps on the planning, collection, pro-cessing, and publication of research data. The main types of data currently envisaged to be collected in the project include: (1) Specifications of the use-cases by use case partners (including potentially sensitive commercial information); (2) Meeting, workshop and event summaries; (3) Data on AI-driven benchmarking; (4) Reports (All deliverables); (5) Scientific publications; (6) Qualitative and quantitative data generated in the self-assessment tool; (7) Data generated in the global bio-based systems regulatory tracker tool  A well-established infrastructure for data management is in place at BIORADAR and will be used to support all BIORADAR partners in managing non-commercially sensitive data. It consists of three main building blocks: the BIORADAR Research Service Center, the repository mediaBIORADAR and the software YAG Workbench. The BIORADAR Research Service Center will be supporting BIORADAR partners (and YAG as the coordinator) on aspects related to the infrastructure for data management, individual data management questions and publication. The mediaBIORADAR repository will be used to publish the respective data according to the FAIR principles (see below). This includes research papers as well as open datasets. Finally, the YAG Workbench software will be used for a truly open science approach, i.e., making data not only available for project partners, but enabling proactive collaboration with stakeholders outside of the consortium to exploit the project results. The Workbench allows for easy data sharing according to acknowledged standards and enables collaborative activities (e.g., peer review, creation of digital lab journals). The web-based platform offers numerous functions for creating electronic lab books and data management plans, but also for managing appointments, resources, contacts, and tasks. Research data can be uploaded, structured, shared & provided with metadata. The tool itself is based on open-source software eWorkbench (available via GitHub) and is free of charge.  The largest amount of data generated in the project can be expected in the area of process data. The YAG workbench is therefore linked to a long-term storage the DSS (Data Science Storage) building block, which will be available for BIORADAR. Furthermore, the YAG Workbench allows the link of metadata to primary data.  Metadata can, for example, be the indicators for environmental and social sustainability and circularity. All data will be handled according to the FAIR principles that are described in the table below.    4 European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, She figures 2021 : gender in research and innovation : statistics and indicators, Publications Office, 2021, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/06090 5 https://open-research-europe.ec.europa.eu/  6 https://open-research-europe.ec.europa.eu/for-authors/data-guidelines  
BIORADAR    11 
Table 4. FAIR principles compliance. Findable Accessible.  Ensured by: (1.1) Issuing and supporting globally unique persistent identifiers; (1.2) Applying widely-use discovery metadata schema in human and machine-readable formats, including Dublin Core, DDI, DataCite and Schema.org; and (1.3) Ensuring data and outputs are registered or indexed in a searchable resource, e.g., DataCite, Schema.org, B2FIND, and VLO. This will be supported by the mediaBIORADAR platform, i.e., a dedicated tool for publishing and managing research data open source,   
Ensured by: (2.1) Ensuring items are retrievable by their identifier using a standardised communications protocol, e.g., Hypertext  Transfer  Protocol,  Rsync  over  Secure  Shell,  Representational   State   Transfer, etc.; (2.2) Supporting both session and API key-base authentication and authorisation protocols; and (2.3) Facilitating appropriately robust deaccession procedures should changes need to be made to the items, or if items need to be removed completely.   Interoperable Reusable  Ensured by: (3.1) Using formal accessible, shared and broadly applicable language for knowledge representation via a Linked Data approach supported with JSOB-LD for Schema.org; (3.2) Ensuring the use of FAIR controlled vocabularies and data models; and (3.3) Ensuring qualified references to other relevant data or research outputs via the DDI schema. 
Ensured by: (4.1) Releasing items with a clear and accessible usage license, i.e., published under the default license CC0; (4.2) Ensuring items are associated with detailed provenance, including information about authors, providers, distributors, and other related data, and supported by W3C PROV; and (4.3) Ensuring items meet domain-relevant community standards  2. Impact 2.1 Project pathways towards impact The way BIORADAR contributes to the outcomes mentioned in the call topic has been discussed below.  a) BTI framework to enhance circular bio-based systems (with long-term techno-economic assessment) Need: The engagement of cross-value chain partners are necessary, since collaboration is key for the circular bio-based transition. No company can drive the circular transition on its own. Novel approaches to facilitate such cross-value chain collaboration between stakeholders and connecting them are needed not only to reduce the environmental footprint of fossil-based products (by transitioning to bio-based products), but also supporting more circular bio-based systems. Expected Results: BIORADAR will deliver two tangible results to address this need: (i) A system of metrics that can guide decision making of industrial bio-based systems’ stakeholders when adopting circularity in their entity/corporate strategy. BIORADAR thus provides metrics for every step of monitoring bio-based systems (see Fig. 3); (ii) Global bio-based systems regulatory tracker tool: a unique, one-source reference for the latest policy developments tied to environmental impacts, iLUC risks, carbon removal potential and circularity of bio-based systems.  These results are expected to contribute to the following outcome mentioned in the call topic: Outcome  Businesses can use the BTI framework (incl. metrics and regulatory tracker tool) to show the opportunities the circular bio-based systems offers shareholders, customers, suppliers and employees. Metrics aid the search for and identification of circular bio-based solutions most suited to individual businesses—they can assess the potential of the solutions and build business cases to ensure implementation at scale.  Metrics will also measure and report upon a business’s progress in becoming more circular. BIORADAR provides different metrics for every step of the innovation process to point in the direction of new or improved products that are beneficial from an economic, social & environmental viewpoint. Scale and significance # At least 70% of CBE JU projects to be reached out for BTI framework # Contact to all bio-based and fossil-based industry association over BTI framework and metrics # Collection of regulations from 50+ countries around the world Potential barriers and mitigation strategies Strong lobby by non-EU fossil-based industry for preventing transitioning to bio-based products (Mitigation strategy: dissemination activities pointing to the potentially detrimental effects on the EU’s economy in case of continuing with fossil-based products, with BTI framework being a solution) The target groups to benefit from the results are: ▪ Scientific community (innovators, researchers, environmental research groups) ▪ Policy makers at EU and national levels ▪ Cities and governments ▪ Bio-based producers and providers incl. SMEs and start-ups ▪ Bio-based industry associations The above-mentioned outcome is expected to directly contribute to the following impacts from the call destination: Wider Impacts  Environmental, Societal and Economic: Contribute to a lower consumption of natural and fossil resources and materials, fewer environmental effects (e.g. water and land use, greenhouse gas emissions) and an increase in socio-economic development and growth in the circular economy and employment levels. Scale and significance # Presuming 50% of companies exploring the environmental impacts (or economic aspects) of their products, the BTI framework would help individual companies or organisations on their transition towards a circular bio-based systems Potential barriers and mitigation strategies 
Low interest by governments and companies to apply BTI framework and have a true transition towards bio-based systems (Mitigation strategy: additional incentives for companies/governments may be provided at national and EU levels, such as showing how their transition towards bio-based systems/products could bring some financial gains for companies and at national/EU levels) 
BIORADAR    12 
b) Novel digital tools for monitoring systems for industrial bio-based systems, focused on assessment of the environmental impacts, circularity, and social impatcs  Need: The innovation towards circular bio-based systems will require different measurements and metrics than the ones developed to monitor and innovate in the linear business models. Companies, policy makers and investors currently lack the tools for understanding the environmental and social impacts, iLUC risks, carbon removal potential and circularity of bio-based systems. This is even more true for combinations of these aspects, leading to the conclusion that it is still less risky to use linear fossil-based system than circular bio-based one. The perception of companies purely from an economic perspective additionally amplifies the challenge, leading to many still fossil-based material use being.     Expected Results: BIORADAR will deliver two tangible results to address this challenge: (i) a unique set of novel digital tools for offering a one-stop-tool for the monitoring bio-based products, access to collection of best practices and benchmarks indicators, access to regulations and access to extensive instruction and interpretation on the bioeconomy across all indicators and process steps; (ii) Demonstrations of these tools in three industrial environments. The key focus of the BIORADAR BTI is to provide insights needed to steer towards a more circular bio-based systems. That is why the BTI process does not stop after calculating the performance. BTI process continuous improvement model encourages interpretation and contextualisation of the results in order to assess circular, environmental, and social opportunities and linear risks, and formulate an action plan and clear targets. The unique feature of tracing the lifetime of bio-based systems coupled with an AI-driven benchmarking and data analysis tool additionally allows for identifying new indicators. Finally, bio-based systems regulatory tracker tool provides corporate and entities executives with unique, data-driven insights to help them proactively address bio-based regulatory risks and opportunities in the risk management and due diligence processes. These results are expected to contribute to the following outcome mentioned in the call topic: Outcome  Provide a range of support solutions and innovative digital tools for bio-based companies, in order to enhance circular bio-based systems, with specific focus on areas such as carbon removal potential of bio-based solutions; iLUC risks of bio-based systems; and the resources efficiency, including energy, and effectiveness on a life-cycle perspective (i.e., durability, reuse, repair, remanufacturing and recycling patterns of bio-based products), other circular aspects. Scale and significance # Use by more than 1,000 businesses and Generate reports and inform stakeholders effortlessly, to be expected to have a customer based of 4,000 enterprises 5 years after market entry # Apply by 50 projects within the European Bioeconomy Network # Monitoring & stocktaking on the status of industrial bio-based system value chain, enabling up to 100% production resource recirculation (either by reuse, remanufacturing or recycling) once receiving a maximum verified score of self-assessment   # Take up of novel servitisation business model for bio-based systems (Circularity as a Service, CaaS) by at least 6 bio-based company  Potential barriers and mitigation strategies Acceptance issues by industrial bio-based systems stakeholders, e.g. caused by distrust for data-driven solutions (Mitigation: contribution to standardisation activities, trainings via BTI lab capacity building) Interoperability issues with other existing tools (Mitigation: open reference BTI framework approach) The target groups to benefit from the results are: ▪ Scientific community (innovators, researchers, environmental research groups) ▪ Bio-based companies and their team (engineers, technicians, R&D, procurement dept.) 
▪ Investors ▪ Policy makers at EU and national levels ▪ Civil society organisations The above-mentioned outcomes are in turn expected to directly contribute to the following impacts from the call destination (in italics) and additional impacts not mentioned in the Work Programme (regular font): Wider Impacts  Environmental: Create a new green, flexible and digital way to derive the environmental impacts throughout the life cycle of a bio-based product across different use-cases (by LCA) and concentrates on the flow of materials throughout the use of a product (by material circularity indicators).  Societal: Improved transition capacity through BIORADAR digital tools towards social indicators. Categories such as health and safety; jobs creation; working conditions; well-being etc. will be addressed. Economic: Encouraging the flow of bio-based production will also increase the access SMEs have to tools such as BIORADAR BTI, hereby strengthening their competitiveness and significantly reducing Europe’s reliance on third-country tool imports. Scale and significance # Quantify and improve the impact of bio-based products through comprehensive data-driven, eco-impact circularity analysis with recirculation potential (up to 100%) # 20% increase in citation index of scientific authors involved in the project within 3 years Potential barriers and mitigation strategies Little interest among policymakers/public (Mitigation: strong dissemination and communication activities pointing to the challenges and its potentially negative impacts on the EU and its societies if they keep using linear fossil-based systems) c) Specifications/standards on sustainability and circularity for biobased products and systems Need: The use of bio-based resources is growing. This has triggered innovative technologies and use of new bio-based materials and products. Companies, governments and consumers are confronted with numerous uncertainties. These may limit new products and technologies from growing into full scale commercial applications. The market needs to consolidate the 
BIORADAR    13 
state of the art, to enable commercialisation of new technologies, products and further research, development and innovation. Lacking international standards on the industrial bio-based systems, interoperability challenges (vendor lock-in) and technical challenges related to understanding an bio-based product’s remaining lifetime prevent fossil-based producers and providers from transitioning to circular bio-based systems. As a consequence, fossil-based stakeholders are incentivised to purchase the more costly and less environmentally friendly materials rather than bio-based products. Expected Results: BIORADAR will generate five results to address the above-mentioned need: (i) Bio-based transition indicator (BTI) framework (aligned with the CEN/TC 411 standards); (ii) Position paper on the interoperability of sharing data from BIORADAR BTI data-driven benchmarking and analytics platform; (iii) Datasets on self-assessment tool from the three industrial use-cases; (iv) Novel “servitisation” business model centred around “Circularity as a Service” (CaaS) for bio-bases systems; (v) Initiation of standardisation activities for circular biobased products/systems (i.e. it will be promoted the development of a pre-standardization document,  a CEN Workshop Agreement and/or the possible contribution to the eventual on-going and future standardisation activities) from the results of the project.  These results are expected to contribute to the following outcome mentioned in the call topic: Outcome  Define specifications and standardised solutions for bio-based data, products, and/or business and management processes, that can be agreed and commonly used by many biobased industrial actors; and facilitate industry agreements on circularity and sustainability through increased data exchange among value chain actors and enable the development of new types of businesses; Scale and significance UNI will promote the participation of #BIORADAR partners in meetings ofa national/European technical bodies to showcase the projects’ results/activities related to circular biobased systems. Depending on the outcome, further activities for the development of a pre-standard, a CEN Workshop Agreement (CWA), will be initiated. Potential barriers and mitigation strategies Slow process for establishing new standards, which may prevent post-project market entry of BIORADAR tools (Mitigation strategy: involvement of a standardisation partner, UNI, in the consortium to pave the way for future standardisation documents  (e.g. CWA) already during project running time) The target groups to benefit from the results are: ▪ Bio-based businesses (i.e. producers and providers) ▪ Policymakers (EU Parliament) ▪ National standardisation bodies ▪ Standardisation bodies (CEN/CENELEC, ETSI, ISO) 
▪ CBE JU committee and DG environment ▪ Circular economy action working group at EU Green Deal programme) ▪ General public The above-mentioned outcomes are in turn expected to directly contribute to the following impacts from the call destination (in italics) and additional impacts not mentioned in the Work Programme (regular font): Wider Impacts   Environmental: Set out a credible pathway to contributing to climate neutral, circular and digitised bio-based industry Economic: New European standards for circular bio-based products and systems in place  Scale and significance # BIORADAR standardisation activities can provide the basis for new standards on circularity of bio-based products and systems Potential barriers and mitigation strategies Industry stakeholders may not embrace the project solutions and eventually highlight criticalities in the emerging standardisation document (Mitigation strategy: dissemination strategy targeting investors and end-users of bio-based businesses (incl. producers and providers), also fostering their contribution to the eventual CWA) 2.2 Measures to maximise impact – Dissemination, exploitation and communication 2.2.1 Draft plan for dissemination, exploitation and communication (DEC) PDEC (Plan for the dissemination, exploitation, and communication activities): The PDEC will be delivered by M6, and will provide a formal planning document for using, communicating, and disseminating knowledge throughout the project and ensure that as many stakeholders as possible have access to these results. This includes the potential end-users and relevant industrial sectors, financial and market actors, environmental consultancies, policymakers, the scientific community, mass media, and multipliers for addressing the public, such as consumer associations, as well as other targeted stakeholders (EC and national R&D initiatives). The most appropriate communication and dissemination tools and channels will be selected for each target audience identified. The plan will ensure the dissemination does not interfere with the IPR management but serve it. To protect the exploitation potential, a confidentiality policy will underpin our dissemination activities: all information is treated as confidential unless otherwise agreed. The PDEC will be developed under the supervision of the DEC Manager (KNEIA) to ensure high visibility of the funded actions and to contribute to the expected outcomes and impacts as described in 2.1, allowing also future exploitation of BIORADAR results. The PDEC will define the purpose of the dissemination and communication actions; the message; the type of audience, the communication methods, and the timing of the project execution. Performance indicators will be established as part of the plan, such as the number of citations, number of hits on the web, number of downloads, number of industry consultations (from tradeshows/exhibitions), number of policy-maker engagements, etc. Table 5 summarizes the main PDEC elements. 
BIORADAR    14 
Table 5: Summary of DEC activities and measures to maximize its impact Activities D & E & C Measures Publication of research results Open access publications in specialized journals and Open Research Europe (≥7 papers published in Q1 journals or conferences/magazines) Presentation at conferences, events, and trade shows • Conferences, trade fairs, and events attended ( ≥20 events by the end of the project) • Horizon Impact Award (≥ one application) • Conference publication (≥ 1 paper accepted per year (3 total)) Dedicated dissemination events • 2 Intermediate Workshops (≥40 participants in both)  • M36 Final Conference ( ≥60 participants) Online dissemination & communication: • Corporate identity: logo and templates, used in all deliverables/materials • Newsletters (≥ 200 subscribers by the end of the project) • Project website ( ≥8000 visits by the project end) • Project Videos (≥ 2 videos) • Press Releases (Engagements with five journalists/influencers) • Twitter (≥ 400 followers) • Linkedin (≥ 200 followers by the project end)  Off-line dissemination & communication • Infographics & factsheets ( ≥ 200 views by the end of the project) • Leaflets (≥1000 leaflets distributed/organizations reached) • Project Roll up (≥5 events where the roll-up is displayed) • Posters (≥ 2 posters) Specific communication activities • MOOC for bio-based transition ( Active and accessed by ≥ 5000 participants) • Identify and list all possible stakeholders • Development of the BIORADAR brand • Design and implementation of effective communication campaigns Clustering and Networking activities • Joint Dissemination Webinars (≥ 2 joint webinars) • Involvement in network/clusters (project entrance in at least 1 cluster be evaluated) • Inclusion in EU dissemination resources such as the EU Horizon Magazine Whilst designing the draft DEC, the partners have departed from a stakeholder mapping exercise in order to identify and prioritise the various stakeholder groups. Fig. 6. presents the results of the stakeholder mapping exercise, divided into four main priority groups (i) “Prioritise for engagement” (highest priority); (ii) “Empower to advocate” and “Meet needs/address concerns” (both second highest priority) and (iii) “Engage indirectly” (lowest priority). In the next step, the partners have developed bespoke and proportional dissemination, exploitation and communication measures addressing each of the four identified stakeholder groups. These have been presented in Table 6 below. 
 Figure 6 BIORADAR stakeholder mapping exercise results

  
BIORADAR          15 
Table. 6. BIORADAR draft DEC Plan TARGET GROUP DEC MEASURES RATIONALE/JUSTIFICATION PRIORITISE FOR ENGAGEMENT ● Research Community (Bio-based industry researcher experts, data scientists, circular economy experts) ● National and EU standardisation bodies (CEN, CENELEC)  
DISSEMINATION: ● Concept of the integrated digital tools behind BIORADAR BTI presented at 2 scientific conferences focused on industrial bio-based systems ● Presentation of BTI framework and self-assessment method in 2 journal publications ● BIORADAR network analysis and sustainability measurement methodology presented at 2 circular economy conferences (e.g. Circular Economy Stakeholder Conference, Circular Materials Conference) EXPLOITATION: ● Anonymised LCA datasets from the three use-cases and demos of the tool made available for further research via an open access platform (e.g. OpenAIRE, Zenodo) ● Initiation of standardisation activities (i.e. the development of new pre-standardization document,a CEN Workshop Agreement, and/or the possible contribution to the eventual on-going and future standardisation activities) from the results of the project ● Registration of BIORADAR digital tool patents at WIPO7 COMMUNICATION: Amplifying the research result presentations via tailored LinkedIn posts and uploading articles on ResearchGate/the BIORADAR website 
DISSEMINATION: Share the scientific insights with the wider community, distinguishing between different research subgroups.       EXPLOITATION: Make selected project data available for further research according to the open science principles. Protect research results to ensure post-project commercialisation. Pave the way for future (management) standards on industrial bio-based systems.    COMMUNICATION: Tailor communication towards various research subgroups.  ● Bio-based feedstock producers and providers ● Bio-based Industries Consortium (BIC) ● European Bioeconomy Network projects  
DISSEMINATION: ● Presentation of the BTI framework incl. metrics, Self-Assessment tool, and Global bio-based systems regulatory tracker tool to 70-100 bio-based producers, providers, industries consortium amd EU bioeconom network projects/members EXPLOITATION:  ● Demonstration results (included KPIs) presented to bio-based companies at 3 bioeconomy & circularity exhibition (e.g. Global Bioeconomy summit, European Circular Economy Stakeholder Platform, United Nations Bioeconomy conference). ● Workshop with 5-8 bio-based producers and providers on challenges/opportunities related to circular bio-based systems and novel servitisation business models (CaaS) COMMUNICATION: ● Communication material (e.g. insights) from data-driven benchmarking for bio-based companies. 
DISSEMINATION: ● Share the insights with the wider community of practitioners ● BTI framework Metrics widely published and easily accessible across variety of stakeholders and practitioners.  EXPLOITATION: ● Presentation of advantages of using BIORADAR digital tools for bio-based and fossil-based industry as future end-users to pave the way for post-project commercialisation. ● Addressing bio-based producers and providers as stakeholders, whose current business models may be endangered by BIORADAR, with the idea of pointing those stakeholders to possible advantages of acting as first-movers, coupled with high potential of lucrative business models associated with circularity servitisation (CaaS). COMMUNICATION: Strengthening the message about advantages for bio-based systems stakeholders beyond the group of bio-based producers and providers invited to the workshops.  7 https://www.wipo.int/portal/en/index.html  
 
BIORADAR    16 
Policymakers (CBE JU committee, DG environment, Circular economy action working group at EU Green Deal programme)  
EXPLOITATION: Sharing of a Position Paper summarising the legal/policy obstacles behind the establishment of BTI in the EU with the CBE JU committee and circular economy action plan working group at EU Green Deal. COMMUNICATION: ● Publication of the Position Paper on the BIORADAR website Presentation of the project results during the EU Circular Week and EU Green Week: Bio-based industries and the green recovery 
EXPLOITATION: Contribution towards establishing future EU legislation on circularity of bio-based  systems.  COMMUNICATION: Amplifying the messages sent out to policymakers via website and social media.  EMPOWER TO ADVOCATE & MEET NEEDS/ADDRESS CONCERNS (two yellow boxes in graphic above) ● SMEs in the bio-based systems value chain ● Innovators/start-ups in the bio-based industry ● Investors interested in the commercialisation of BIORADAR post-EU project ● Fossil-based materials producers and providers 
DISSEMINATION: Webinar on the opportunities provided by the BIORADAR BTI digital tool, framework and BTI lab to SMEs and start-ups active across industrial bio-based systems value chain EXPLOITATION: Creating the Task Force on Bio-based-Related Indicators, together with investors as an investor-led coalition that bridges the gap between the businesses and investor communities  COMMUNICATION: Dedicated LinkedIn posts and press releases to be published via Bioplastics Europe, Preserve, HOOP and other bio-based EU projects website promoting the webinar and the call for proposals. 
DISSEMINATION: Raise awareness of SMEs/start-ups on the possibilities to act as service providers in the BIORADAR BTI EXPLOITATION: Directly address Investors, SMEs, start-ups as important stakeholders to play a role in the BIORADAR BTI whilst promoting the BIORADAR BTI framework. COMMUNICATION: Promote the project among start-ups and SMEs and fossil material producers and providers. Attract the attention of investors for post-EU project activities. ● Running Horizon Europe projects addressing circular economy/sustainability topics ● Bio-based industry associations 
DISSEMINATION:  Two workshops with bio-based industry association and selected EU project partners to present the project results (by mid- and end of project) and pave the way for further collaborations COMMUNICATION: Presentation of selected project results (e.g. demo of BTI digital tool) on the BIORADAR website 
DISSEMINATION: The idea is to exchange with industry peers on the BIORADAR digital tools and results and define touch points for further monitoring collaborations post-project (publicly or B2B funded). COMMUNICATION:  Providing users with a hands-on experience to upscale the BIORADAR BTI digital tools.  ● General public ● Journalists ● Environmental NGOs COMMUNICATION: ● Insights and analysed data from the self-assessment and data-driven benchmarking tool and news story presented on the BIORADAR website and in social media ● Project results are presented as a poster as part of EU Green Week and via website 
COMMUNICATION Target journalists to further amplify the project messages and reach the general public. Point to the environmental and circularity advantages of the BIORADAR BTI to address environmental NGOs Target citizens to enable citizen science activities. ENGAGE INDIRECTLY ● Adjacent industries and their associations (e.g. processing industries) ● Students ● Horizon 2020/Horizon Europe projects looking at circularity and decarbonizing other industries 
COMMUNICATION: ● Presentation of results at EU Infodays and cross-industry conferences ● Presentation of project via website and social media  
COMMUNICATION: Inspiring cross-fertilisation and take up of selected BIORADAR elements in other industries/EU projects.  
 
BIORADAR   17 
2.2.2 Business case and exploitation strategy Business case. Target market. The target market for BIORADAR are primarily bio-based industrial stakeholders incl. SMEs and start-ups. Besides those, BIORADAR will also open up the value chain towards other stakeholders, investors and policymakers in bio-based market.,The BIORADAR online BTI digital tools will make this possible.  An assessment done by the European Commission has indicated that bio-based products and biofuels represent approximately €57 billion in annual revenue and involve 300 000 jobs. According to forecasts, the bio-based share of all chemical sales will rise to 12.3% by 2015 and to 22% by 2020, with a compounded annual growth rate of close to 20%.8 A successful deployment of BIORADAR BTI is expected to tap into market segments by (i) showing and clarity on bio-based businesses current circular performance, as well as track their progress (ii) Quantify the impact of circular strategies on the the environmental impacts, iLUC risks, carbon removal potential and circularity of bio-based systems. This information can be used to better understand carbon footprint benefits, evaluate trade-offs and help prioritise circular improvements. BTI regulatory tracker tool also helps to this. User and customer needs. Table 7 presents the needs of the main BIORADAR users (i.e. stakeholders potentially willing to be commercially involved in the BIORADAR BTI). For each stakeholder, the BIORADAR unique selling points (USPs) have been identified. Table 7. Customer and User needs    NEEDS BIORADAR USPs USERS & CUSTOMER 
Bio-based businesses (incl. producers and providers) 
● Mitigation of the he environmental negative risks, iLUC risks, carbon removal potential  ● Increased circularity of systems ● Improved social impacts  
● Self-assessment tool will support users in their day-to-day practice, directly influence the embedding environmental, social, and economic aspects, as well as more circular bio-based system ● Data-driven benchmarking and data analytics tool ● Generate quarterly monitoring updates showcasing how the risk landscape evolves, how your peers and others address emerging risks and track related policy developments worldwide Policy makers and industry associations  ● Reflection of policy maker decision and regulation by faster and more flexible design into assessment and monitoring practices  ● Increased awareness for Standardisation, Scenario analysis, and Benchmarking 
● Global bio-based system regulatory tracker tool consists of both Short-term regulatory risks (mandatory regulations) and Longer-term regulatory risks (soft norms) ● Combination of digital tools enabling policymakers coupled with novel servitisation business models (CaaS) to dynamically adjust the list of indicators and associated standards.  Investors ● Long-term techno-economic assessment against potential investees  Ensure consistency and completeness of bio-based systems indicators with data-backed insights into 200+ external risk factors, including ESG and sustainability, and geopolitical issues. That helps investors to ensure about their investment. Expected market position and competitive advantage. The partners aim at positioning themselves in the market to measure, improve and report on circular performance of (industrial) bio-based systems through smart data-gathering and analysis. The deployment of BIODARAD tools in the bio-based market is expected to generate competitive benefits in regard to helping businesses improve their impact on resource depletion, climate change and waste creation, as well as improving their environmental and social impacts, iLUC risks, carbon removal potential and circularity of bio-based systems. In regard to the alpha customers, the partners envisage an uptake of the BIORADAR solution mainly by SMEs in the first phases after commercial launch. The main reason being that SMEs – differently to large players – do not have the engineering nor financial resources to purchase expensive consultancy services, but at the same time have a high interest in improving their sustainability (incl. environmental, social, and economic) and (material) circularity impacts. The BIORADAR partners are convinced that the situation for fossil-based players will be changing as the bio-based products market are booming in the near future and as a result a critical mass of alpha customers will be joining the BIORADAR BTI. If we presume that 5% of all fossil-based producers, switching to bio-based products, within the EU would take-up BIORADAR 5 years after market entry (i.e. around 2030), this would equal to a customer based of 4.000 enterprises. Presuming these customers would be willing to pay on average EUR 1.000 for the licensing of BIORADAR CaaS, that would equal a turnover of EUR 48 Million annually, meaning a return on investment of 16:1 for every Euro on taxpayer’s money invested in the BIORADAR EU project.     Exploitation Strategy. The presence of industrial partners such as YAG, IRIS (acting as technology co-developers) in the consortium and industrial use-cases (within IRIS, NTT, CETENMA) ensures commercial uptake capabilities are present. Actions required post-EU project will have to focus on further integrating the BIORADAR tools into a robust product and gaining additional alpha customer acceptance by further fine-tuning, upscaling and replication of the BTI tools and CaaS servitisation. One of the key challenges to be addressed will be the attraction of a critical mass of BIORADAR BTI  8 https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/sectors/biotechnology/bio-based-products_en  
 
BIORADAR    18 
stakeholders (both, bio-based businesses, but also policymakers and investors) to let BIORADAR fully unfold its potential. Achieving such a critical mass will be targeted already by the project’s dissemination and communication activities, and will continue post-project by dedicated information campaigns. Financing post EU-project. These activities are expected to be financed via a B2B effort, with the possibility to co-finance selected elements of BIORADAR via national funding. Funding for these activities will be sought either from the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+) or from the business actors involved.     2.2.3 Strategy for intellectual property (IP) management A patent search conducted during the state-of-the-art mapping using the Espacenet tool has confirmed that freedom to operate exists for the technologies being proposed.9 Table 8 summarises the types of background IP brought to the project by the partners and the expected foreground IP to be generated. Table 8. BIORADAR background and foreground IP  ITEM OWNER PROTECTION MEASURE BACKGROUND IP ESG risks monitoring tool (to improve risk management, annual reporting, and board oversight on ESG risks) YAG Trade secret FOREGROUND IP Self-assessment tool IRIS/YAG Copyright / Patent (if possible) Social LCA assessment  NTT/CETENMA Copyright / Patent (if possible) Data-driven benchmarking and BIORADAR analytics platform  YAG/NTT Copyright / Patent (if possible) Global bio-based systems regulatory tracker tool YAG Copyright  Detailed provisions related to the IP ownership and management will be defined in the Consortium Agreement. The strategy for managing the project IP envisages to consider IP during the entire lifecycle of the project and conduct regular check-ins in terms of where the technology development is heading and what does that mean for IP and exploitation strategies. These activities will be closely interlinked with innovation management activities in the project, i.e. comprehensive perspective on the project outputs not limited to business values.