3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole The BIORADAR consortium brings together 7 partners from 4 countries. Within the consortium, partners blend scientific excellence in monitoring system engineering, LCA research, circular economy research, bio-based industry, and standardisation expertise. The right balance between research and industrial partners ensures scientifically ambitious work is undertaken, with a clear post-project exploitation pathway in mind, covering the entire value chain (Fig. 8). What follows is a brief description of each of the partners and their complementary roles in BIORADAR. YAGHMA B.V. (YAG) is a small enterprise that specializes monitoring socio-technical aspects of new technologies, as well as have expertise in AI Impact Assessment and in responsible research and innovation (RRI). In addition to leading the project as coordinator, YAG will be involved on co-developing some of the BIORADAR digital tools, as well as will be responsible for executing CaaS servitisation business model. YAG will also lead the data collection and handling activities as part of WP6, ensuring research data and results are managed in accordance with FAIR principles and Open Science practices.  Hamburg University of Applied Sciences (HAW) HAW is represented in BIORADAR by the Research and Transfer Centre Sustainability and Climate Change Management. HAW will be responsible in the project for upscaling, replicating, benchmarking and policy recommendations in WP4. Further, HAW as the coordinator of BIO PLASTICS EUROPE is responsible for testing and validating the BTI digital tools on Bio-Packaging and Plastics sector.  IRIS Technology (IRIS) IRIS Technology Group is an advanced engineering group specialised in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology-based real-time quality monitoring solutions for the bioeconomy industry. In BIORADAR, IRIS will be mainly responsible for the co-development of the Self-Assessment tool and AI-driven benchmark analytics platform in WP3. In addition, IRIS act as a use-case partner via PRESERVE project for Bio-Packaging.   Next Technology Tecnotessile (NTT) is a private non-profit research company. NTT represents a reference point for research and technological innovation in the Textile sector. NTT thus will act as a use-case partner for Bio-Textile. In addition, assessment of environmental footprint of bio-based industry by means of LCA, LCC, S-LCA is one of NTT’ expertise. In BIORADAR, NTT will lead WP1, assessing sustainability aspects of industrial bio-based systems, as well as perform economic analysis of circularity aspects in WP2.  KNEIA is an SME works with public companies, research institutes, government agencies, and investors to provide assessment services on dissemination, communication, and exploitation strategies, knowledge transfer, and implementation of scientific technological structure worldwide. KNEIA is leading WP5 on DEC strategies and act as IPR and exploitation manager.  Ente Italiano Di Normazione (UNI) is the Italian standardisation institute, developing and publishing technical standards. In BIORADAR, UNI will be responsible for giving an overview of the standardisation landscape in bio-based sector and investigating whether selected project results and learning can feed into standardisation activities and are either already ongoing, or by starting new standardisation initiatives. UNI will mainly play a role in WP4 and WP5, which deals with standardisation.  CETENMA is a non-profit association. The company set up to support companies with technological research, development and innovation in areas to energy and environment. CETENMA is represented in the project by its Bioeconomy and Bioenergy unit. While, CETENMA will act as a use-case partner for Bio-Fertiliser via FER-PLAY project, they also lead WP2 on assessing circularity aspects of industrial bio-based systems.  
Figure 8: Complimentary roles of BIORADAR partners 
This proposal version was submitted by Emad Yaghmaei on 22/09/2022 15:00:18 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)