2.3 Summary Key elements of the project’s impact pathway and the measures to maximize its impact are summarized in Table 9 on the next page.  3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation 3.1 Work plan and resources 
 Figure 7 PERT chart of the BIORADAR project   9 https://worldwide.espacenet.com/  

 
BIORADAR         19 
Table 9: Section summary Specific Needs Expected Results (Outputs) D & E & C Measures Target Groups Outcomes (Outcomes from call text in italics) Impacts  (Destination impacts in italics) A number of bioeconomy frameworks already exist, while have rarely analyzed the sustainability and circularity of industrial bio-based systems at the process, performance, and strategy levels. 
BTI framework to enhance circular bio-based systems (with the long-term techno-economic assessment) 
• 4 open access Publications  • 1 Presentation at conferences • Off-line dissemination & communication • Project website • Press releases 
The scientific community, Policy makers at the EU and national levels, Cities and governments, Bio-based producers and providers, Bio-based industry associations 
Different metrics for every step of the innovation process point toward new or improved products & services that are beneficial from an economic, social, and environmental viewpoint; Report upon a business's progress in becoming more circular 
• Contribute to lower consumption of natural and fossil resources and materials, fewer environmental effects  (e.g., water and land use, greenhouse gas emissions),  • an increase in socio-economic development and growth in the circular economy and employment A number of online digital tools already exist. However, a comprehensive online dashboard usable for self-assessment, Data-driven benchmarking, and regulatory tracking is missing 
Novel digital tools for monitoring systems for industrial bio-based systems focused on the assessment of the environmental impacts, circularity, and social impacts 
• 3 open access Publications • 1 conference presentation  • Intermediate workshop • Online dissemination & communication • Development of BIORADAR brand • 2 webinars 
The scientific community, Bio-based companies, Investors, Policymakers at the EU and national levels, Civil society organizations 
Support solutions and innovative digital tools to enhance circular bio-based systems, with a specific focus on carbon removal potential, iLUC risks, resources efficiency, and circularity, including energy and effectiveness from a life-cycle perspective 
• Create a new green, flexible, and digital way to derive the environmental impacts throughout the life cycle of bio-based products  • Improve transition capacity through BIORADAR digital tools towards social indicators. • Encourage the flow of bio-based production will strengthen their competitiveness and significantly reduce Europe’s reliance on third-country tool imports Uncertainties may limit new products and technologies from growing into full-scale commercial applications. Lacking international standards prevent fossil-based producers and providers from transitioning to circular bio-based systems. 
Specifications/ standards on sustainability and circularity for bio-based products and systems 
• Three open access publications (incl. CWA pre-standard) • 2 launching workshop and webinar for CWA • Final conference • Inclusion in EU dissemination resources e.g. EU Horizon Magazine  
Bio-based businesses, Policymakers (EU Parliament), Standardisation bodies, CBE JU committee and DG environment, Circular economy action working group at EU Green Deal program, General public 
New European standards and Specifications for bio-based data, products, and business and management processes 
• facilitate industry agreements on circularity and sustainability through increased data exchange among value chain actors  • enable the development of new types of businesses • Set out a credible pathway to contributing to climate neutral, circular, and digitized bio-based industry 
 
BIORADAR  20  
BIORADAR GANTT Figure 3.1b BIORADAR GANTT chart 
 Table 3.1a list of Work Packages.  WP No Work Package Title Lead Partner PMs Start Month End month 1. Assessing sustainability aspects of industrial bio-based systems NTT 55 1 24 2. Assessing circularity aspects of industrial bio-based systems CETENMA 64 1 24 3. Developing and Validating digital monitoring tools IRIS 95 1 36 4. Benchmarking, Upscaling and Replicating the results HAW 62 1 36 5. Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation activities KNEIA 58 1 36 6. Project Coordination and Consortium Management YAG 21 1 36   Total person- months 356   Table 3.1b Description of Work Packages (according to WP template from January 2022).10 Work package number  WP1 Lead beneficiary NTT Work package title Identifying and Assessing Sustainability aspects (Environmental, Economic, Social) of Industrial Bio-based Systems and embedding them into BTI Framework Objectives ● Prepare preliminary inventory of bio-based systems ● Assessing the environmental impact and carbon emission of industrial bio-based systems Description of Work Description of work: T1.1: Identify industrial bio-based value systems and their products to be analysed in this project (M1-6) [Lead: CETENMA; Participants: YAG, HAW, IRIS, NTT] BIORADAR objectives will apply to 3 large sectors: Packaging, Textile and Fertiliser. Within these sectors, BIORADAR will collect data regarding their bio-based value systems and products. To do that, the following activities will be carry out:  10 https://tinyurl.com/wyzemm5b 

 
BIORADAR   21 
● Reviewing of the state-of-the-art of other research and ongoing projects. ● Reviewing guides and reports from public and private institutions on bio-based products and value chains ● Identifying and classifying the range of bio-products. ● Characterisation of bio-products (e.g TRL, bio-based carbon content, chemical classification, etc). ● Defining the boundaries of the supply chains in EU, associated countries and across borders.  T1.2 Evaluate existing methods/metrics to assess environmental impacts of the selected industrial bio-based systems and their products. (M1-24) [Lead: CETENMA; Participants: YAG, HAW, IRIS, NTT, UNI]  Subtask 1.2.1. Identification of environmental assessment tools/methods/metrics ● Review of environmental assessment methods e.g. Product Environmental Footprint used ● Review of existing environmental impact assessments (EIA) (incl. review past and ongoing R&I projects)  ● Access to UNI documents (standardisation) + mapping of existing environmental impact indicators (standards) in particular of industrial bio-based systems ● Gather eventual gaps for industrial bio-based system application Subtask 1.2.2. Evaluation of selected bio-products using existing methods (from review) for EIA calculations.  The EIAs will include at least climate change, biodiversity, land use and water resources use as priorities, but also air, water and soil quality categories. The impact on climate will be evaluated based on both greenhouse gas emissions and the carbon removal potential of bio-based systems to extract relevant indicators for BTI digital tools. CETENMA will carry out the evaluation on the biofertilizers sector, NTT on the textile sector & IRIS on the bio-packaging.  Subtask 1.2.3. Critical assessment of the existing environmental impact indicators of industrial bio-based systems Existing environmental impact indicators applied to industrial bio-based systems, for example, those indicators from LCA impact methodologies areas will be analysed: climate change, eutrophication of water bodies, use of fossil, mineral and metal resources, human health, ecosystems health and natural resources. In addition, energy use, CO2 emission and land use indicators will be identified. The critical assessment of these indicators will consider several questions: are they appropriated to the objectives of this project? Are they clear and understandable to stakeholders?, Can they measure the information needed reasonably?,etc.These indicators will feed WP3 & a workshop is organised end of T1.2 to sum-up the gaps identified.  Task 1.3 Life Cycle Cost and cost-feasibility (M2-22) [Lead: NTT; Participants: YAG, UNI, CETENMA] This assessment will measure and analyse the capital, operational costs and cost variations resulting from applying the proposed technologies for each of the stages in the materials life cycle and bio-based product’s supply chain. This analysis will be done by performing a Life Cycle Cost analysis (LCC). The consortium has an access to UNI (standardisation partner) documents about LCC, in addition we gather inputs about existing gaps in terms of standardisation of LCC methods applied to bio-based products. The LCC will present a similar structure and will be conducted in parallel to the LCA (in terms of functional unit and approach). The analysis will be developed in two basic steps: cost identification and a cost benefits analysis. Therefore, as soon as the process chain for the manufacturing of the new materials is established, cost models can be set up to estimate the product costs as a function of various parameters including volume of the batches, processes used, type of materials, supplies and other inputs etc. This model will also guide the process optimization e.g. by identifying possible bottlenecks in the process chain. A workshop is organised end of this task to sum-up the gaps identified.  Task 1.4 Social LCA assessments (M2-24) [Lead: NTT; Participants: YAG, CETENMA] The social and socio-economic benefits of implementing the proposed bio-based packaging, textile, and fertiliser products will be addressed. The Social LCA (S-LCA) methodology will be applied. The S-LCA is an innovative methodology that integrates traditional LCA methodological steps while having social impacts as focus, namely: (1) defining goal and scope of the assessment; (2) inventory of the drivers which may lead to an impact; a life cycle inventory is elaborated for indicators (e.g. number of jobs created) linked to impact categories (e.g. local employment) which are related to five main stakeholder groups (e.g., [i] worker, [ii] consumer, [iii] local community, [iv] society and [v] value chain actors); (3) impact assessment based in the selection and calculation of proper indicators of impacts; and (4) interpretation of the results. The S-LCA methodology proposed embeds a detailed inventory method tailored on real data, collected directly from the field of application thanks to customised surveys that allow modelling the life cycle of the proposed technologies. S-LCA makes use of generic and site-specific data, can be quantitative, semi-quantitative or qualitative, and complements the environmental LCA and LCC. Categories such as health and safety; jobs creation; working conditions; well-being among others will be addressed. The envisaged positive results will constitute valuable inputs to stimulate preferences for these new materials and technologies and will also be used as part of the baseline information aimed to design an adequate strategy to increase job opportunities, stakeholders and consumer’s acceptance.  T1.5. Evaluate metrics to assess the carbon removal potential and iLUC risk of bio-based solutions. (M1-18) [Lead: NTT; Participants: YAG, HAW, IRIS, CETENMA] As it may happen in rural ecosystems, industrial companies, especially bio-based, could have great opportunities to be rewarded for carbon removals of high quality and environmental integrity. However, it is known that the major barriers to the upscaling of carbon removals is the lack of a common EU standards for the transparent identification of activities that remove carbon from atmosphere in a sustainable way. In fact, Industrial carbon removals are rarely addressed. Different methodologies and standards may need to be revised for industrial carbon removals due to their different nature. The European Commission is working in a certification framework. Following the upcoming European certification framework, this task will identify and evaluate existing metrics to assess the carbon removal potential of bio-based products: ● Exploring opportunities for carbon removal and iLUC risk within the bio-based systems: Selected bio-based systems will be analysed in terms of carbon removal. Developing criteria and metrics to assess the iLUC risk and carbon removal potential of bio-based solutions.  
 
BIORADAR   22 
Work package number  WP2 Lead beneficiary CETENMA Work package title Identifying and Assessing Circularity aspects of Industrial Bio-based Systems and embedding them into BTI Framework Objectives ● Identify circularity opportunities (closing and optimising the loops) in industrial bio-based systems ● Identify existing indicators and developing new ones on circularity for industrial bio-based systems ● Taking into account environmental sustainability when applying circularity metrics ● Exploring end-of-life problems of the bio-based products in the scope of CBE JU Description of Work  T2.1. Identification of circularity indicators methodologies for industrial bio-based systems (M1-9) [Lead: CETENMA; Participants: YAG, HAW, IRIS, NTT] Most suitable metrics for circular economy are not totally reached consensus. There are available several indicators measuring circular economy strategies referring to governments (macro), industrial symbiosis (meso), companies (micro) and products (nano). BIORADAR objectives will apply to 3 large sectors: Packaging, Textile and Fertiliser. A review of the state-of-the-art research and ongoing R&I projects on the circularity of the industrial bio-based systems and their products will be carried out, together with the study of several existing methodologies (e.g BS (British Standard) 8001:2017, Material Circularity Indicators (MCI) by Ellen MacArthur Foundation, Material Efficiency Metric, Circularity Potential Indicator and Circular Economy Indicator Prototype).  T2.2: Evaluation of existing metrics on circularity for industrial bio-based systems and use-cases and proposition of new indicators (M3-18) [Lead: CETENMA; Participants: YAG, HAW, IRIS, NTT] Subtask 2.2.1. Evaluation of existing metrics. Based on the application of the cascading approach of biomass use, the resources efficiency, including energy, and effectiveness and a life-cycle perspective (i.e. durability, reuse, repair, remanufacturing and recycling pattern of bio-based products), selected existing metrics found in T2.1 will be evaluated on the proposed bio-based systems. Subtask 2.2.2. New metrics proposition. During this task and after analysing and evaluating existing metrics, the consortium will propose new indicators of circularity for industrial bio-based systems.  T2.3. Coupling of indicators among methodologies (M12-24) [Lead: CETENMA; Participants: YAG, HAW, IRIS, NTT] In order to reach complementary aspects such as material circularity (e.g. from MCI) and environmental sustainability (e.g from LCA), a mix of indicators from different methodologies will be provided. The idea is to merge material-based circularity metrics with strategies that foster environmental sustainability which could be applied to industrial approaches, that is, with different categories of Life Cycle Assessment.  It is known that very few companies count with tailor-made key performance indicators (KPI) to measure their CE approach. Therefore, a dedicated set of KPI will be selected for each proposed bio-based system with the objective of feeding the digital tools of WP3.  T2.4. Study of end-of-life issues of the selected bio-based products (M12-24) [Lead: CETENMA; Participants: YAG, HAW, NTT] The Environment Impact Assessments from WP1 will be complemented with an end-of-life study where issues of the bio-based products will be exposed. These barriers regarding end-of-life stage shall be included in any CE metrics since they should tackle energy recovery processes, secondary materials (i.e the quality of the recycled material), virgin material, proportions of recycled or reused, etc.    T2.5. Economic aspects of circularity (M12-24) [Lead: NTT; Participants: YAG, CETENMA] With the aim of exploring opportunities to promote circularity of industrial bio-based systems this task will analyse the market of non-bio-based products in the 3 selected sectors to detect activities that favours circularity and preserve their value for energy, employment and materials. The idea is to detect industries and their products coming neither from renewable sources nor secondary raw materials that could be moved from linear to circular economy models and highlight the economic aspects that may help them to achieve their transformation. To do that, a series of surveys will be prepared to send to these detected industries, together with the development of an analysis of their situation, taken data from bibliography, other projects, LCA databases, etc.  
Work package number  WP3 Lead beneficiary IRIS Work package title Developing and Validating Digital Monitoring Dashboard/Tools: Self-Assessment, AI-driven Analytics Platform and Regulatory Tracker Tool Objectives ● Prepare synthetic datasets to train the AI benchmark platform ● Identify and analyse patterns of benefits and impact of circular bio-based industry transition frameworks (BTI framework) by self-assessment tool quantitatively through selected use-cases.  ● Policy recommendations and building a preliminary set of benchmarks or references for best-performing industrial bio-based systems Description of Work  T3.1: Preparing synthetic datasets from WP1 and WP2 to train the AI-driven benchmarking and analytics platform (M1-18) [Lead: IRIS; Participants: YAG, HAW, NTT, CETENMA]  ● Generate synthetic but realistic data set based on discussion with the use cases and indicators received from WP1 and WP2. ● Building a framework to evaluate the performance of the AI-driven benchmarking analytics platform. ● Define the model to generate future (uncertain) benchmarking requirement. 
 
BIORADAR   23 
T3.2: Building AI-benchmarking and analytics platform and training the platform based on synthetic datasets and data from use-cases (M6-33) [Lead: IRIS; Participants: YAG, HAW, NTT, CETENMA] ● Design and develop a deterministic model to reconfigure the bio-based product. ● Develop a multi-stage program that extend the deterministic model to account for the life cycle of the bio-based product. This extension must account for various scenarios representing possible changes in the production requirement. ● Improve the scalability of the solution approach. Investigate methodological improvement such as approximate dynamic programming to approximate the future costs.  The following features will be developed in the platform: ● Easy Data Collection: When organisations answer questions in the Self-Assessment, our team can see it in data-driven Benchmark Analytics. Strict privacy measures will be followed. ● Data Visualization: We will use powerful the Tableau-based dashboard and charting engine (by for instance the Tableau Software) to produce compelling visuals on organisations circular bio-based systems/products. ● Benchmarking: AI-driven Benchmark Analytics has data set of bio-based project sustainability and circularity data. We will develop benchmarking filters in the platform, by which bio-based projects can benchmark their bio-based products/systems against other bio-based projects. bio-based projects can also track performance over time, check their positive and negative impacts, and track aggregate performance against disclosures and impact areas. ● Improve: BIORADAR will set quantitative and qualitative targets in the platform for the start, and encourage organisations to set their own while using the platform. The platform will also provide a library of resources on improvement and best practice guides to help organisations increase their positive impact & mitigate negative ones. ● Streamlined Reporting: we will develop the AI-driven Benchmark Analytics platform in a way that allows organisations to fulfil their sustainability (environmental, economic, and social) and circularity data reporting needs in one place and can share information with stakeholders easily. ● Aggregated Performance: We will design a feature in the platform, through which organisations can see how their portfolio performs collectively on principles, disclosures and business actions within a certain sustainability and circularity area that matter to them. ● Confidential: organisation data in AI-driven Benchmark Analytics platform is secure and shared only in aggregate and de-identified for benchmarking purposes. T3.3 Building Self-Assessment tool (M3-28) [Lead: IRIS; Participants: YAG] In this task, a dedicated common self-assessment tool will be developed by IRIS. The tool will be composed of several layers, i.e. a data acquisition layer, a data treatment including Artificial intelligence (AI)-based models developed and provided by YAGHMA in T3.3, a storage layer and a friendly User Interface (back-end, front-end) adapted to the consortium needs. In order to ensure possibly wide flexibility and adaptiveness to specific parameters and/or further models integration, continuous improvements and optimisation of the system will be carried out. The self-assessment tool will be developed considering high security standards while maintaining suitability and integrity of the output data for process optimization and control. End users will be required to actively participate in this subtask, in order to guarantee optimal system communications and adaptability.  T3.4 Testing, evaluation and validation of the self-assessment tool under industrial conditions (M12-36) [Lead: IRIS; Participants: YAG] Use-case testing will be performed to validate the process monitoring systems (self-assessment) under controlled conditions, before full deployment. The self-assessment will be tested in order to provide a clear and valid reading to the user, as well as to ensure that the AI-based models provide the right and accurate response for every use case. For this reason, during the entire validation and installation processes, the interaction with the end-users will be essential to ensure successful and realistic testing prior to real environment deployment. After the installations, continuous optimization will be performed as well as support will be provided by IRIS and YAGHMA to the end users in relation to the monitoring system functionality and the digital platform performance.  T3.5 Building Regulatory Tracker tool to present the most important policy-related issues worldwide (M10-30) [Lead: YAG; Participants: All partners] This Policy Brief provides essential insights for businesses looking to be compliant and stay one step ahead. It features expert commentary from DLA Piper, a Datamaran partner and global law firm.  Users of BTI framework and BTI self-assessment and benchmark analytics platform (bio-based industry, traders, investors, research institutes, certificates, and policy-makers) may need to prepare for some disclosure requirements. BIORADAR is making the latest version of its user-exclusive, quarterly Policy Brief accessible to the wider public. These policy developments are tied to environmental impacts, iLUC risks, carbon removal potential and circularity of bio-based systems. Key features include: ● Provide the latest regulatory insights in bio-based theme ● Collection of hard laws and soft norms ● Provides corporate and entities executives with unique, data-driven insights to help them proactively address bio-based regulatory risks and opportunities in the risk management and due diligence processes.    
Work package number  WP4 Lead beneficiary HAW Work package title Upscaling and Replicating the project results Objectives ● A set of procedures to upscale and exploit the results from the BIORADAR project, including the replication, so that they are widely spread in the participant countries and beyond. ● Having an upscaling component and provisions for the commercialization of the results, so that the approaches used, and results obtained may be used in other regions in Europe.  
 
BIORADAR   24 
● Upscaling and exploring the best available industrial bio-based systems in the scope of CBE JU within the EU in terms of environmental and circular performances  ● Pave the way for post-project commercial uptake by monitoring and influencing framework conditions (e.g. standards) and understanding the best business model and commercialisation strategy for the future product Description of Work  T4.1. Set up of the “BIORADAR Replication Facility” (M1-10) [Lead: HAW; Participants: All partners]   The “BIORADAR Replication Facility” will be set up to harmonise and exploit the project's outcomes as well as transfer information and services with government agencies, cities, industry, professionals and the general public, aiming to create a long-lasting thematic knowledge and cooperating platform on industrial bio-based systems. The “BIORADAR Replication Facility” is aimed at developing further cooperation initiatives, scaling up the best practices from the use-cases, and enabling the knowledge to be used in new innovation pathways. This unique infra-structure, with a well-structured governance system, will support the knowledge transfer from research to the public organisations, the general public, professionals and industry. All the partners will be part of the “BIORADAR Replication Facility” and will provide knowledge for upscaling and replication of its results. Its goal is also to optimise communication between the various stakeholders within the project, with external ones. Scientific results will be presented in an easy-to-understand way, to bridge the gap between academic and economic language and consider the various mindsets. It contains two subtasks:  a) a first co-creation workshop to gather inputs from various stakeholders and b) a review workshop will follow to share and exchange with stakeholders on the final version of the “BIORADAR Replication Facility”. Last, a launching webinar will be held and shared via social media to share information on how the functioning of the “BIORADAR Replication Facility” may support the work undertaken by partners from across Europe. It will be up-kept for at least 5 years after project completion. T4.2. Elaboration of the BIORADAR  implementation scorecard (M1-18) [Lead: HAW; Participants: All partners]   This task will develop an innovative multidimensional performance measurement tool (the BIORADAR implementation scorecard) that balances the economic, environmental, social, and circularity key performance indicators of the use-cases. The results will be used in sharing information with government agencies, cities, research organisations, NGOs, companies and other stakeholders, which will be involved in verifying the sustainability of the processes that favour CBE in Europe.  T4.3. Investigate novel business models (e.g. servitisation-based Circularity-as-a-Service(CaaS)) and commercialisation strategies (M12-36) [Lead: YAG; Participants: All partners]   ● Analyse variety of business models and best-practices in existing application domain across bio-based systems ● Development of sustainable business model concepts for BIORADAR based on sustainable business innovation frameworks e.g. value mapping tool, triple layered business model canvas ● Conduct value dynamics analysis based on the ecosystem analysis conducted by KNEIA in WP5 (T5.3). T4.4. Exploitation and Business Plan (EBP) for replication and upscaling (M12-36) [Lead: HAW; Participants: All partners] This task will demonstrate the cost-benefits of the adoption of new processes within industrial bio-based systems. It will build on the the BIORADAR implementation scorecard (T4.2) and servitisation-based Circularity-as-a-Service(CaaS) (T4.3) and will propose an EBP that will contain an integrated framework based on economic (expected quality, marketing support services, expected levels of investments, financial structures, as well as environmental and social indicators including market-driven solutions to overcome current barriers and to replicate, upscale and make the transition towards industrial bio-based systems through biological and technical loops. T4.5. Improving professional skills and expertise (M12-30) [Lead: HAW; Participants: All partners]  This task pursues the objective of improving professional skills and expertise of those working and being trained to work in bio-based industry by means of the execution of a set of training activities. A Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) based on bio-based transition framework, its methodologies and metrics, will be formed with the aims to enhance professional profiles that drive the governance and management of the organisations that will deal with CBE. UNI (standardisation partner) will also include some training components to the MOOC (standardization world + planning of a training with a focus on standardization and bio-based products, to be replicated also in the after life of the project). This MOOC will be available free of charge to companies, government agencies, research organisations, NGOs, and other stakeholders involved in material circularity and the environmental and social impacts of industrial bio-based systems. It is expected that 5.000 people from across Europe will access the course, hence concretely contributing to capacity-building in this key area. It will be upkept for at least 5 years after project completion.  
Work package number  WP5 Lead beneficiary KNEIA Work package title Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation activities Objectives ● Enable potential future exploitation of the project results by disseminating them to the relevant stakeholders. ● Ensure project’s findings are widely communicated to the scientific community and the general public. ● Document undertaken and proposed dissemination and communication activities. ● Ensure the project results reach the relevant stakeholders who will use and implement them. ● Guarantee IPR management according to the Guidelines of the EC within the Consortium Agreement. ● Ensure clustering and coordination with other related EU/National projects and initiatives. ● Attract business partners and potential stakeholders and to create market demand. Description of Work  The WP5 workplan is encased in a robust project dissemination, exploitation and communication plan (PDEC) that involves all relevant stakeholders and the scientific community through workshops and promotional material. 
 
BIORADAR   25 
T5.1 Communication Activities (M1-36) [Lead: KNEIA; Participants: All partners]   ● Communication Plan and reporting on communication: KNEIA will draw up a Communication Plan, as part of the PDEC (D5.3), to mobilise stakeholders’ interests and secure their support to the project. This plan will be closely linked with the dissemination activities, and it will follow the steps described in section 2.2. ● Project website: The website (D5.1) will serve as a powerful communication tool to all target audiences. The website will enable to disseminate non-confidential results (public reports, deliverables, publications as part of our green open access, etc.). It will also house on-line training tools and educational materials. At the end of the project, the relevant public information and results will be kept as the central virtual hub for post-project activities. ● Communication and promotional materials: Project leaflets, posters, project video (D5.2), newsletters and promotional materials (gadgets for tradeshows, etc.) will be designed to support project communication and branding efforts. At least 2 dissemination videos – an introductory video on month 6 for the general public and a divulgative report video at the end of the project describing the final results- will be developed and published on YouTube, the project website, and social media, to raise awareness and engage stakeholders with project use-cases and to promote uptake after the end of the project. These materials will be reported and Annexed to the Communication Plan as part of the PDEC (D5.3). ● Social/digital media channels: This subtask will exploit the potential of reaching to the targeted audiences through social media channels (Twitter, LinkedIn and YouTube): a social media grid will be drawn up; it will plot the most appropriate social media channel for targeting specific audiences. Visual media, videos, animations, icons and info-graphic imagery, and importantly, mobile enabled content and richer content experiences will be developed. T5.2: BIORADAR Dissemination Plan (M1-36) [Lead: KNEIA; Participants: All partners] A dissemination plan will be developed within PDEC, in alignment with the principles of Open Science. The following activities will be executed: ● Publishing at least 7/10 scientific articles in journals and conferences (after preliminary IP protection check) (2 journal publications for BTI framework, one position paper, 2 scientific conference papers, 2 papers in EU events e.g. EU Green week); ● Organising special sessions and scientific workshops as part of large conferences with high impact; ● Using the project and its results in teaching, in course materials and as a subject for theses in universities (e.g. MOOC in T4.5 and UNI training session for standardisation in T5.5); ● Targeted placement of articles and features in relevant trade and industry focused publications; ● Organisation of the “BIORADAR Agenda” of events that will be planned for the 36-month project duration: trade fairs, exhibitions, workshops, seminars, conferences, round tables, etc., that the consortium is already planning to attend or organising as part of ongoing activities. The target is 20 existing events as well as the organisation of dedicated project workshops: at least 2 intermediate workshops with sister projects and a Final conference (M36) that will be organised in the Netherlands (by YAGHMA+KNEIA) to showcase results and impacts. T5.3. Ecosystem and Stakeholder analysis and stakeholder engagement (M1-36) [Lead: KNEIA; Participants: All partners]  The stakeholder analysis (stakeholder mapping) will identify the most important stakeholders and end-users of the BIORADAR technologies and assess their position towards the project’s results in order to set up engagement strategies. In addition, the partners will jointly work to identify and engage and connect further stakeholders and end-users for BIORADAR technologies throughout the duration of the project, which enhances the BTI capacity building. All stakeholders identified in the initial stakeholder analysis will be invited to participate in an online survey designed to measure stakeholder characteristics, such as their interest, attitude, influence, knowledge and expectations relevant for the project. Based on the outcome of the survey, more targeted dissemination and exploitation actions will be implemented and relationships built with key stakeholders to the project. Relevant feedback about stakeholders’ expectations will be constantly provided to the project technological developers to be taken into account in the technology definition and upgrade. Survey results will inform the annual revision of the PDEC (D5.3). Further, Collaborating with other relevant projects and initiatives is performed to enhance synergies between EU projects and government and non-government agencies T5.4. BIORADAR Clustering (M1-36) [Lead: KNEIA; Participants: All partners] This task will ensure that BIORADAR is networked with relevant national and international projects, initiatives and networks. Multidisciplinary networking with other projects will ensure knowledge interchange and reuse between previous and future projects. A close interaction with other proposals selected for funding under the same or closer topics will be ensured. The networking plan will take into account relevant projects within international stakeholders and other EU/national projects (some of them identified in Section 1.2). Most of the project partners are coordinators of EU projects (e.g. PRESERVE, HOOP, BIOPlastic Europe, etc.) or/and members of relevant networks, groups and associations. These memberships will be instrumental to promote cooperation and integration with BIORADAR. Members of consortia of the networked projects will be invited to the 2 intermediate workshops (Task 5.2) and exchange of (non-sensitive) information will be implemented (e.g., by exploiting the newsletter or through dedicated meetings). At least 2 dissemination events in cooperation with other related projects will be organised and included in the BIORADAR Agenda. One section of the Newsletter (Task 5.1) will be dedicated to the information on other ongoing projects and exchange of newsletters from the other connected projects will be pursued. The progress of this task will be reported in the PDEC (D5.3). T5.5 Pre-standardization activities (M13-36) [Lead: UNI; Participants: All partners] UNI will identify the most relevant technical bodies which may be interested in the project activities and results and will promote a link with the consortium (eventually, a formal liaison agreement). This will be translated also in wrapping up with technical experts to get feedbacks about the possible standardisation scenarios, given the main project findings. The main goal of this task is exploring which results may be transformed into a pre-standardization document (CEN workshop Agreement – CWA). A CWA is a pre-standardization document published by CEN suitable for research and innovation projects since it is compatible with the 
 
BIORADAR   26 
project timeframe (it may be developed in 10-12 months). May the CEN approve the CWA project plan, a workshop will be initiated and all the partners with the relevant expertise (given the topic of the CWA) will participate to the development of the document, while UNI will manage the process and ensure the compliance with the CEN procedures and rules. All partners should foresee 1PM for the realisation of the project plan of the CWA and the participation to meetings and a training held by UNI + 2 PM for the development of the CWA.  
Work package number  WP6 Lead beneficiary YAG Work package title Project Coordination and Consortium Management Objectives ● To ensure an effective and accountable coordination of the project’s activities, including the operational management, project reporting, financial administration.  ● To ensure continuous communication and information exchange between the partners, and between the coordinator and the EC project officer.  ● To actively communicate and liaise with relevant communities such as other EU projects.  ● To establish and implement sound measures and procedures for quality control and risk management Description of Work  T6.1. Project co-ordination (M1-36) [Lead: YAG; Participants: All partners] The project co-ordination is performed by the project co-ordinator YAG. Its main tasks include:  ● Monitoring and supervision of the work progress, and maintaining the project implementation plan, ● Submitting all deliverables and project reports and submitting them to the Commission in due time and high quality, ● Regular communication with the partners and in particular the WP leaders both bilaterally and through multilateral teleconferences in order to monitor the progress of the work and to address potential problems early on and resolve eventual conflicts, ● Organisation of the project meetings and meetings of the Project Management Committee (PMC) according to the foreseen schedule, circulate agendas and minutes in due time, ● Communication and regular information exchange with the EC’s project officer, e.g. in case of any adaptation of the work programme, ● Acting as main contact partner for communication and liaison with relevant stakeholders and representatives of other EC-funded projects relevant to BIORADAR, ● Communication with the Advisory Board; organisation of the Advisory Board meetings, ● Oversee all administrative procedures.  T6.2. Project operational support (M1-36) [Lead: YAG; Participants: All partners] The project operational administration is responsible for: ● Ensuring an effective communication and flow of information between the partners. ● Preparation (identification of important issues, agendas, logistics, preparation of slides for top-level issues, etc.), execution (moderation and top-level presentations) and post-processing (action lists, minutes, follow-up of action items) for Project Management Committee (PMC) meetings. ● Management and maintenance of appropriate communication infrastructures (email, remote conferencing services) and document and data repositories, including Data Management Plan.  ● Providing the project reporting and enabling the PMC to perform the steering of the project. It consolidates partner information on scientific progress and use of resources and compares the projected progress according to the work plan. The tasks are:  ● Design of project specific templates for reporting, ● Acquisition of work package and partner data, ● Periodic management reports.  T6.3. Financial administration (M1-36) [Lead: YAG; Participants: All partners] ● Monitoring resource use of all partners, provision of the financial reporting ● Informing the consortium about the current financial situation of the project.  T6.4. Data management plan, risk management, quality control and ethical considerations (M1-36) [Lead: YAG; Participants: All partners] A data management plan (D6.1) will be drafted within the first four months of the project, and revised during the project after the main data collection and at the end of the project. An up-to-date DMP will be available to all consortium members at all times. When the exploitation plan is being developed, agreements and regulations of the DMP will be taken into account. If necessary, the DMP will be revised so that future efforts with BIORADAR remain compliant with EU regulations. Further activities in this task are: ● Subjecting all deliverables to a strict quality control by means of a systematic internal review process of all scientific deliverables prior to submission. The Quality Assurance Plan will be created at the start of the project and distributed to all members of the consortium. It will detail the measures to enhance and maintain high quality work that adheres to the European Commission’s criteria, one of which is the deliverable review process, ● Taking over the risk management according to the measures explained in Table 3.1e. As part of the plan, critical risks and mitigation strategies are defined. ● Managing the resolution of any conflicts between partners in the unlikely instance they should arise.  ● As part of this task, an ethical impact assessment is conducted. The report that flows from this review presents the ethical problems that may arise during the lifetime of the BIORADAR project and how these issues are to be mitigated by the consortium. This report will be linked with the DMP (D6.1). 
 
BIORADAR   27 
Role of the partners  ● As the project coordinator, YAG will be responsible for this WP. As close interaction within the consortium will also be necessary on the level of project management, coordination and quality control, a minor share of the WP resources will be dedicated to the other partners in the consortium. All partners will provide their financial information to the coordinator for the periodic reports.  
Table 3.1c. BIORADAR deliverables. No. Name WP Lead Partner Type Dissem. Level Delivery Date D1.1 Report on identification of bio industrial bio-based value systems for project analysis WP1 CETENMA Report (R) PUBLIC (PU) M6 D1.2 Evaluation of EIA on selected bio-based systems WP1 CETENMA R PU M24 D1.3 Report on Life Cycle Cost for the selected bio-based systems WP1 NTT R PU M22 D1.4 Report on Social LCA assessments WP1 NTT R PU M24 D1.5 Report on assessing carbon removal potential and iLUC risks of bio-based solutions WP1 NTT R PU M18 D2.1 Report on identification of circularity indicators methodologies for industrial bio-based systems WP2 CETENMA R PU M9 D2.2 Report on evaluation of existing/new metrics on circularity for industrial bio-based systems and proposition of new indicators WP2 CETENMA R PU M18 
D2.3 Study of end-of-life issues of the selected bio-based products WP2 CETENMA R PU M24 D2.4 Economics aspects of circularity  WP2 NTT R PU M24 D3.1 BIORADAR AI-driven benchmark and analytics platform WP3 IRIS OTHER SENSITIVE (SEN) M33 D3.2 BIORADAR self-assessment tool WP3 IRIS OTHER SEN M28 D3.3 Testing, validating, and training of the self-assessment tool WP3 IRIS R PU M36 D3.4 BIORADAR regulatory tracker tool WP3 YAG OTHER SEN M30 D4.1 BIORADAR replication facility WP4 HAW R PU M10 D4.2 BIORADAR  implementation scorecard WP4 HAW DEM PU M18 D4.3 Novel business model report and CaaS servitisation WP4 YAG R SEN M36 D4.4 Business models set up for replication and upscaling WP4 HAW DEM PU M36 D4.5 MOOC Active and accessed by 5.000 participants WP4 HAW DEC PU M30 D5.1 Project Website WP5 KNEIA DEC PU M6 D5.2 Project Videos WP5 KNEIA DEC PU M6, M36 D5.3 PDEC - Plan for the dissemination, exploitation and communication activities WP5 KNEIA R CO M6, M36, + reporting period D5.4 Towards a new standard: CWA project plan  WP5 UNI R PU M30 D6.1 Data Management Plan WP6 YAG DMP PU M4 D6.2 Risk management and quality assurance plan and Ethical impact assessment WP6 YAG R PU M6 D6.3 Periodic report WP6 YAG R PU M18 D6.4 Periodic report – Final report WP6 YAG R PU M36 Table 3.1d. BIORADAR milestones. No. Milestone name WPs Due  Means of verification M1 List of existing sustainability indicators (environmental, economic, social) for industrial bio-based systems 1 M6 D1.1 Report on identification of bio industrial bio-based value systems for project analysis 
 
BIORADAR   28 
M2 List of new sustainability indicators (environmental, economic, social) for industrial bio-based systems 1 M24 D1.2 EIA indicators on bio-based systems D1.3 Economic indicators from Life Cycle Cost (LCC) D1.4 Social LCA indicators D1.5Carbon removal potential & iLUC risks indicators M3 List of existing sustainability indicators for industrial bio-based systems 2 M9 D2.1 Report on Circularity indicators  T2.2.1 Report on existing circularity metrics M4 List of new circularity indicators for industrial bio-based systems 2 M24 D2.2, T2.2.2 Report on new circularity metrics  D2.3 Bio-based products’ end-of-life indicators D2.4 Economic indicators of circularity M5 BIORADAR self-assessment and analytics benchmark platform developed 3 M33 D3.1 AI-driven benchmark and analytics platform developed D3.2 BIORADAR self-assessment tool developed M6 BIORADAR Replication Facility set-up 4 M10 D4.1 Replication facility report  M7 BIORADAR implementation scorecard completed 4 M18 D4.2 Demonstration of multidimensional performance measurement tool (scorecard)  M8 Circularity-as-a-Service (CaaS) set-up 4 M36 D4.3 CaaS servitisation report M9 Project website 5 M6 D5.1 M10 Final event - diss. and realisation of BTI framework indicators 5, 6 M36 D5.3 PDEC report D6.4 Final report Table 3.1e. Critical risks for implementation  Description of risk Likeli-hood Severity WPs involved Proposed risk-mitigation measures Lack of primary data to carry out LCA Medium High WP1 Constant communication with end users will be carried out. In addition, supported and trustful databases have been identified to complete LCA assessment with secondary data (e.g ecoinvent, environmental footprint). Delay in the development of LCA Medium High WP1 Partners involved will start to recover information from the beginning of the project.  Difficulty to find tailor-made indicators Low Medium WP1 Continues communication with the data providers in order to ensure timing and data quality.  Lack of primary data to carry out LCC Medium High WP1 Constant communication with end users will be carried out. In addition, literature review will be used to do the calculations.  Lack of primary data to carry out S-LCA Medium High WP1 Constant communication with end users will be carried out. In addition, supported and trustful databases have been identified to complete S-LCA assessment with secondary data (e.g. PSILCA) Results from sustainability assessment are not according to literature Low Medium WP1 Several methodologies will be used and compared to determine the environmental impacts of bio-based products. Assumptions (limits) of the systems are not according to reality Low Medium WP1 The consortium counts with experts in the development of sustainability assessment, with experience working with the 3 selected sectors.  Lack of primary data for iLUC risks and carbon removal potential Medium High WP1 Constant communication with end users will be carried out. In addition, supported and trustful databases have been identified to complete data.  Difficulty to evaluate circularity with existing metrics Low Medium WP2 An initial analysis of current metrics on circularity will be done to adjust and tailor-made the circularity indicators to each sector/system. Difficulty to find useful LCA indicators for circularity metrics Low Medium WP2 The consortium counts with experts in LCA who analyse LCA indicators and their suitability for circularity metrics Delay in definition of parameters and/or requirements Low Medium WP3 Constant communication with end users and support from literature review. Continuous risk management Software incompatibilities with hosts of the digital platform Low Medium WP3 Continuous communication with the hosts and request their support and cooperation. Continuous risk analysis and requirements stablished in the early stage of the project 
 
BIORADAR   29 
Delay in the development of the AI-based models Medium Medium WP3 Continuous communication with the data providers in order to ensure timing and data quality. Continues data collection from the industrial use-cases Low Low WP3 Continuous communication with industrial hosts and provide them with a well and strict stablished calendar for collecting data and suppling it to the data consumer partners, Low data quality from use-cases Low Low WP3 Continuous communication with industrial hosts and provide them with a well and strict stablished calendar for collecting data and suppling it to the data consumer partners, Lack of primary data on soft and hard law and policies for regulatory tracker tool Medium High WP3 Constant communication with CBE JU and policy makers will be carried out. Indicators defined in WP1 and WP2 are too ambitious and thus cannot be achieved within the current project scope. 
Low High All Robust methodology aimed at re-confirming the KPIs by literature review and aided by self-assessment and benchmark analytics platform. Reluctance among key stakeholder to interact with BIORADAR in the fear of cannibalising their current business model 
Medium Medium WP4, WP5 The PDEC Plan will include tailored messages addressed at these groups, pointing to the opportunities related to new business (i.e. servitisation), but also benefits from acting as first-mover. No standardisation activities identified/low support among stakeholder to set-up new standards Low Medium WP5 Involvement of all project partners in Task 5.5 and continuous discussion and exchange with all project partners and the relevant standardisation committees about the progress of the standardisation activities. An internal partner dispute prevents project plan progressing in accordance with time plan, risking delay to expected deliverables. 
Low Medium All Robust project governance structure approved by all partners provides dispute resolution mechanism. Table 3.1f. Summary of staff effort  WP1 WP 2 WP 3 WP 4 WP 5 WP 6 Total Person- Months per Participant 1. YAG 5 5 17 5 3 15 50 2. HAW 5 8 4 23 3 1 44 3. IRIS 4 4 48 5 4 1 66 4. NTT 20 19 8 8 5 1 61 5. KNEIA 2 2 2 3 30 1 40 6. UNI 2 0 3 8 8 1 22 7. CETENMA 17 27 13 10 5 1 73 Total Person Months 55 64 95 62 58 21 356  Table 3.1h. ‘Purchase costs’ items -The following partners’ purchase costs exceed 15% of personnel costs & thus justified below. 3/ IRIS  Cost (€) Justification Travel  10.800 (€) 7 management meetings (1.200 € each), 2 dissemination trips (1.200 € each)                                                     Equipment, Other goods, works and services 
38.665 (€) Servers and cloud hosting fees (3.000 €), Database and interface management, licensing and security, adaptability and connectivity related costs (17.365 €), Communication materials and training (5.600 €), Specific content analysis and marketability of product related costs (3.700 €), Audit and regulations related costs (9.000 €)    Total 49.465 (€)   5/ KNEIA  Cost (€) Justification Travel  10.800 (€) 7 management meetings (1.200 € each), 2 dissemination trips (1.200 € each)                                                     Equipment, Other goods, works and services 
36.000 (€) Project website (stock images, domain, other developmen costs) (3.000 €), Dissemination materials (poster +leaflets+ pen drives) (2.500 €), Videos (production expenditures) (15.000 €), Conference organization  (Presential and Hybrid conferences) (14.500 €), Conference attendance fees (1.000 €)         Total 46.800 (€)  
 
BIORADAR   30 
 6/ UNI  Cost (€) Justification Travel and subsistence  15.000 (€) 7 project meetings (2 attendees each) (1.000 € each), 1 international dissemination event (2 attendees) + 2 national dissemination event [average cost 1000 € per travel] Other goods, works and services 13.000 (€) CWA fee + trade fair organization (stand) + dissemination material 
Total 28.000 (€)