2.2 Measures to maximise impacts  
Our vision is to lead the transition towards a sustainable post-petroleum society in the plastic sector while decoupling 
economic growth from resource depletion and environmental impact by serving industry with the provision of cost-
effective high performa nce sustainable multifunctional bioplastic packaging solutions with tailored materials and 
mechanical/enzymatic recyclability at EoL. In order to assist EU in the transition towards a bio -economy new 
sustainable cross -sectorial value chains will be establi shed providing competitive bio -based alternatives in rigid 
packaging, such as food & beverage trays, cups, bowls, bottles; cosmetic & homecare packaging applications. In line 
with a number of EU and national regulations, there is a clear need for new mater ials with high bio -based content 
and for meeting the demand for plastics with innovative EoL options. In order to realise this vision, post -project 
exploitation pathways have been carefully planned already during BioSupPack proposal preparation. We have 
devised our DRAFT detailed strategy for the dissemination and the exploitation of the project results  (see 
Annex, section 4-5), vital for the successful exploitation of the project with a view to increasing business outcomes 
as well as social & environmental impacts. 
The combined resources of industry and SMEs, academia and RTOs groups are complementary, and the multi -
sectoral nature of the dissemination partners will ensure widespread dissemination among the rigid primary & 
secondary plastic packaging, packa ging waste to secondary raw material production in several sectors and among 
wider industry stakeholders. BioSupPack Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation actions will: 
• Focus on building a stakeholder community that can be sustained and increased during and after the project’s 
lifetime. These actions will build a sustainable user community that will adopt and exploit the BioSupPack products 
and information. The BioSupPack stakeholders (see Annex 4-5): (1) will be engaged during the project; (2) wi ll 
likely benefit from the innovations in the BioSupPack developments (new PHA -based materials & products, new 
logistic & management system; new integrated technologies and EoL); and (3) will be the starting point for 
assessing the potential industrial business implementation of BioSupPack, through consortium agreements/licences. 
The outcomes of BioSupPack, as well as other information about the project and its products, will be tailored for 
external dissemination to the wider community. 
• The consortium will develop various activities and channels for communication to increase the visibility of the 
project and its outputs. Activities and their impacts will be continuously monitored during the project and these will 
be reported in all contractual progress reports. Dissemination activities to optimise communication of the value and 
impact of BioSupPack results will be undertaken by all partners with significant exploitation supports provided by 
WP8 ( future needed certification, IPR, management, market penetrat ion, business plan and commercialization 
strategy). Actions and their impacts will be continuously monitored during the project and the resulting actions will 
be reported in all contractual reports in months 12, 30 and 42. This is further supported by the overseeing role of 
the AB. This body will be directly informed of the project’s main achievements and will contribute, as an external 
advisory and quality assurance body, to keep the project aligned with the BBI on bioplastics needs, requi rements 
and specifications, as well as to maximise the exploitation and impact of the results.  
2.2.1. Dissemination plan 
BioSupPack will implement a Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of the Project´s Results (PEDR). It 
comprises a set of actions to spr ead the non -confidential results generated during the project to ensure that as 
many relevant specialist audiences as possible have access to them. The aim underpinning the dissemination strategy 
is to heighten awareness about the tangible and intangible o utputs of BioSupPack, to contribute to knowledge 
building and advancement of innovation in EU and as well as to avoid duplication of research and demonstration 
work. To safeguard the commercial opportunity, the dissemination activities will be subject to a  confidentiality 
policy. By default, and building on the consortium experience in collaborative projects, any result of the project is to 
be treated as confidential and can be disseminated only after agreement of the project partners following the relevant 
clauses of the consortium agreement ( updated and signed during the grant agreement preparation phase in keeping 
with initial agreements on ownership reflected herein and respecting the general terms of the grant agreement). This 
approach allows us to retain complete control and make sure that no “exploitable” information is disclosed before 
being protected. The protection of the IPR is of invaluable importance for the participating partners. Therefore, the 
non-confidential results and information on the project to be publicly disseminated will be carefully identified and 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 40 of 112 
specialized high-impact technical peer-reviewed journals will be chosen . The RTD participants in the consortium 
will publish results in peer-reviewed open access journals, which, will be an indicator of overall project success (in 
terms of progress vs. the scientific SoA) and an important element of dissemination towards industry, standardisation 
bodies, and policy makers. The industrial  partners and market actors  will focus on showcasing and disseminating 
results at conferences and trade fairs and other industrial channels such as technical/se ctorial magazines, industry 
network meetings, and the like (to demonstrate industrial novelty and commercial outcomes potential).  
The Exploitaiton & IPR Manager (Dr. Marco de la Feld from ENCO) will work closely with the project innovators 
to manage the i dentification of non -confidential disclosable information that can be published/disseminated. Our 
project dissemination activities will intersect dissemination strategies of the BBI -JU, via associated BIC members 
AIMPLAS, CTB and EUBP, as well as other EU PPP as SPIRE through IRIS and ENCO, which will contribute to 
the distribution of project outputs across the relevant EU and international communities and amplify the project 
dissemination effort. All the dissemination activities will be developed respecting the short-medium term exploitation 
of the project results by other parties as a result of the project´s innovation actions as well as other private initiatives 
which can accelerate the route towards the take -up of new technologies within the bio -based plastic sector, also 
beyond the BioSupPack selected applications.  
Beyond use of traditional dissemination channels (presentations & posters at conferences, publications, industry 
magazines, newsletters and on-line platforms), we will also tap into more vanguard channels, such as social media 
platforms (ResearchGate, Academia.edu, SlideShare, Twitter, YouTube, Vision2020 open innovation platform), etc. 
Also, the project website will serve as a lasting virtual hub for disseminating downloadable public deliverables and 
outputs of BioSupPack, as it will house also open access publications to the peer-reviewed documents of the project. 
In particular, the network of EUBP across the EU bioplastics value chain should be highly instrumental in identifying 
and approaching prospective business partners and potential licensees. With a round 70 member companies from 
across the bioplastics value chain that are active in the European market, EUBP works closely together with all major 
stakeholders in this industry. The association also has access to several unparalleled channels of communic ation 
within the bioplastics industry, ranging from the largest European bioplastics conference, to the bioplastics-focussed 
newsletter with the widest circulation, to one of the most widely -followed (4000+ followers) Twitter accounts 
focussing on bioplastics topics. To amplify our impacts, we also capitalise on our AB communication channels to 
reach the companies & citizens all over the cycle value chain (from material production to packaging end-users). As 
shown in Table 13, the project will disseminate the results through the participation in international conferences, 
project presentations and publications in journals/technical magazines. The ultimate goal is to demonstrate the added 
value and the innovation of BioSupPack technologies/materials. All partners in technical WPs are responsible for 
both academic and industrial publications.  
Table 13: BioSupPack Dissemination Plan 
Target Audience Tools & Channels How contributing in achieving Impacts 
Consumers, Retailers, Gene ral 
Public 
Project Leaflet, Video Clips, Website, Blogs and Magazines e.g. 
Food Production Daily, Bio -Based World News, PlastEurope, 
ESOF (EuroScience Open Forum) 
Market pull. Public acceptance of the 
proposed innovative bio -based plastic 
applications that impact daily life stimulating 
the feeling they are getting value for money 
from public funded research. 
Monomers producers, 
Copolymers producers, 
Coating manufacturers, 
Compounders, Agro feedstock 
suppliers  
Trade fairs/exhibitions: EFIB, Compounding World Expo, 2nd 
PHA Platform World Congress, K Trade Fair. 
Open Access Journals (OAJ): Polymers, Unitex journal, 
Bioplastics newsletter and magazine, Journal of coatings 
technology and research, Surface and Coatings Technology, 
European Coatings Journal, Journal of Polymers and the 
Environment., Biomacromolecules, Frontiers in Materials, 
Journal of Renewable  Materials, Coatings, Progress in Organic 
Coatings, Packaging Technology and Science, Packaging 
Europe, Packaging Journal, Green Chemistry, Chem Sus Chem.  
Plastics & Recycling Technology, Advances in Materials Science 
and Engineering, Polymers, Polymer Deg radation and Stability, 
Journal of Applied Polymer Science, Polymer Testing, Materials, 
Packaging Technology and Science, Food Packaging and Shelf 
Life, International Journal of Polymer Science. 
Widespread of the use of the project 
innovation. 
Multiply success of the project by inspiring 
new initiatives based on the project results. 
Packaging converters (plastics, 
polymers and coatings). 
Plasma technology, Biotech-
nology industry, Cosmetics & 
personal care, home care 
companies, other packaging 
users, other potential users 
(pharma or health food 
Trade exhibitions and conferences: Interpack (GE). International 
Conference and Exhibition on Food Processing & Technology 
(UK); Alimentaria (ES); Cosmetics Business (DE), Anuga 
FoodTec&Anuga (DE); Bioplastics Business Breakfast (GE), 
Fakuma International trade fair for plastics processing; European 
coatings show; FACHPACK (Nürnberg); Interpack (Düsseldorf) 
Anuga FoodTec (Köln); BiPoCo (Hungary); Innovations in Food 
Packaging, Shelf Life & Food Safety Conference; Pollination 
Foster new supply chains and new cross -
sectorial value chains (which will be 
reinforced by the presence of our expert 
Association EUBP) 
Raise awareness about BioSupPack materials 
and suitable end of life options tailored on a 
vase by case basis.  
Multi-actor approach to support the transition 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 41 of 112 
sectors). Day. 
Magazines: Plastics News Europe, Nature Sustainability, 
Bioresource Technology, Green Chemistry, Plasma Processes 
and Polymers, Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology. 
Project’s training events. 
towards a post-petroleum economy 
Industry Multipliers- Sectorial 
Associations (Plastics Europe, 
CEFIC, Plastics Europe, 
PAFA - Packing and Film 
Association, and other 
associations. Citizens & 
Education fields 
Conferences, seminars and workshops (participation in 
organising, scientific committees, with poster, papers, 
presentations, or chairing): Annual World Food an d Innovation 
Forum; Bio -based World, Biopolpack, Biopol, Sustainable 
Bioplastics, Bioplastics, Biorefining, Bio-based Materials, etc. 
Features in Newsletters and e -bulletins (plastics today, food 
production daily, plastic news, agronotizie, CosmeticsMag, 
Social responsibility and quality for sustainability, World 
Usability Day, etc.) 
Dissemination of new knowledge and 
technologies for transitioning to a bio -based 
economy. 
Communication to retailers and consumers 
about the bio-based materials used in 
BioSupPack 
Increase target industry sustainability for 
consumer and environmental protection. 
Building new value chains and cross sectorial 
interconnections among clusters. 
Standardisation bodies (CEN, 
ISO, DIN CERTCO, 
Vinçotte), and policy 
stakeholders, national food 
safety authorities, EFSA, EC, 
Expert Group for Bio-based 
Products (E02886), National 
governmental bodies 
Policy dialogue: joining roundtables fostering multilevel and 
horizontal discussion on BioSupPack results.  
Collaboration w ith public administration will drive better 
informed decision-making processes across Europe also with a 
view in improving waste management legislation and standards. 
To increase the influence of the project and 
its results in policymaking towards the 
creation of a positive framework for the take 
up of BioSupPack (and in general bio -based 
plastics with tailored EoL).  
Public/Private waste 
management & logistics, 
Recyclers (enzymatic and 
mechanical recycling) 
Conferences: ISWA World Congress, Waste Management, 
Ecomondo, Waste & Recycle Conference, Plastics Recycling 
Conference; International Conference on Sustainable Solid 
Waste Management. 
OAJ Articles:  Waste Management & Research, Waste 
Management World 
Magazines: Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine) 
To support the transition towards a post -
petroleum economy improving circularity 
Market & public organisation push 
Research and academic 
stakeholders 
Magazines: Pack World, Bio -based News, Plastics films, 
plasticseurope.it plasticsnewseurope.com, Bioplastics Magazine, 
Sustainable Plastics, Labiotech. Plasticeurope, Plastiker, Bio -
based World News, Farmers Journal (IE) 
OA Journal Articles, Advances in Materials Science and 
Engineering; International Polymer Science & Technology, Food 
packaging and shelf life (Elsevier); Packaging technology and 
science (Wiley); Polymers (MDPI); Kunststoffe international; 
Lebensmitteltechnik; Plastverarbeiter.  
Specific events as Open day at Universities, Researchers' Nights, 
Knowledge Open Festivals. Project training events. 
Effective knowledge sharing among the 
research and scientific communities in order 
to accelerate the paradigm shift from oil -
based towards bioeconomy.  
Early stage researchers, e.g. on 
LCA.  
Attract more young people to scientific and 
research careers, enriching their curricula 
with knowledge from the project. Early stage 
researchers inspired by the results, will be 
motivated to remain in EU - research and 
possibly work in areas that are benefi cial for 
society, BBI, sustainability and innovation. 
Other H2020 BBI projects and 
international/ national projects 
BIOnTOP, REFUCOAT, SuperBIO, Open -Bio, BioSTEP, 
InnoNet, BIOCOMPLACK, CommeBeBiz, AGRIMAX, 
PolyBioSkin, Hyperbiocoat, MultiCycle  
Cooperation, knowledge interchange and 
reuse between previous and future projects. 
**Partners will attend to a minimum of 15 conferences/trade shows as speaker or poster in EU & international level & will engage to launch a 
minimum of 30 publications in high impact journals. 
2.2.2.Business, Innovation & Commercialization Potential Plan 
• Exploitation and Business Plans for BioSupPack Key Exploitable Results (KERs) 
A market-oriented approach will drive BioSupPack innovation activities capitalising on the participating rigid PHAs 
packaging end users’ and the AB members’ expertise, and Task s 3.4/ 6.3; ensuring that sufficient know ledge is 
collated to steer the innovation towards delivering  consumer-oriented solutions  with good market potential. 
BioSupPack integrates all exploitation pathways for the results:  
Commercial exploitation: a key exploitation route is the industrial use of the project knowledge for the creation of 
new innovative bio-based and biodegradable packaging materials, within and beyond the validated applications, new 
processes and advisory services to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts.  
Education and training : the use of the new knowledge generated for upskilling and for enriching curric ula in E U 
education will have a high impact for raising the E U knowledge base to prepare rigid biopackaging, and end user 
industry sectors for the transition to the bio-based economy; several training events & workshops will be organised. 
Further research: planning future spin-off research and development projects especially in areas that will contribute 
to the transferability of the project results to new applications.  
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 42 of 112 
Contribution to standards: while making available new bio-based materials with innovative EoL, the project results 
can on the medium- term contribute towards new regulations in the field of disposable plastic waste. 
Detailed exploitation & business plans will be developed in Task 8.1 & 8.2., generating a Business and exploitation 
planning, and a Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of results (PEDR), in order to provide the details on 
how the project’s results will be used in commercial exploitation activities, for training purposes, further research as 
well as standardisation activiti es. Further measures will be planned in the framework of this task to increase the 
continuity of the established ecosystem and value chains, as well as market uptake of BioSupPack KERs for EU 
industrial sustainability, competitiveness, growth, and jobs.  
The exploitation routes and corresponding business models will be investigated in WP8. The route for future 
commercialization of the results can be logically identified from the BioSupPack WP structure and work plan, from 
the logical flow of the project activities and their clear role. 
As previously mentioned, ENCO will act as coordinator of the IPR & Exploitation, Business issues (as Exploitation 
& IPR manager) to ensure that all IP -owning partners as well as potential and confirmed exploitation partners wi ll 
work towards a successful technology and knowledge transfer to ensure efficient market uptake. The role of the 
Commercial & Exploitation manager will be to assess the commercial potential of the results and liaise with industrial 
companies to maximize their commercial use. ENCO will follow the progress made in BioSupPack and will develop 
full exploitation plans as the unique values of the project results are confirmed. Dr. Marco de la Feld from ENCO, 
helped with the chairing by EUBP (WP7 leader), and wit h the contribution of all the other partners, will constitute 
the Innovation Committee (IC) members. IC will work to establish targeted exploitation and dissemination strategies, 
ensuring that they are fully aligned, when the project outcomes reach enough maturity. The entire project Consortium 
will discuss this strategy and the corresponding document will be delivered for the mid-term assessment. An updated 
and more detailed exploitation plan will be submitted thereafter (Final PEDR -Exploitation Plan & Communication 
& Dissemination Plans, by combining inputs from WP7 & WP8). 
Furthermore, a successful maximisation of the project impact will contribute, in the mid -term, as an outcome from 
the project, to speed up the exploitation, in the different European ar eas. In a second stage globally including, for 
instances, North America, Japan and South East Asia. 
All technologies, materials and procedures developed by the partners will be considered for exploitation. A summary 
of anticipated Key exploitable results (KER) is reported in table 14. Exploitation issues will be brought to the 
attention of all partners at an early stage in the project ensuring that issues regarding market and commercialization, 
identified during exploitation analysis, can be fed into the demonstration actions of the project. Additional KERs are 
expected to be generated under the project development: 
Table 14: BioSupPack Key Exploitable Results (Knowledge, products or technologies) *Years after project end  
*Please note that the Timetable after the end of the project, will take into account th e gap between the demo sites development and the needed 
optimization of the installations and equipment adaptations, as well as the suitability and availability of feedstock; having  as a contingency plan 
the option to use mixtures with commercial PHAs & BSG source, until the full industrial process is ready. 
WP KER Owner Envisaged IPR Tool Type of exploitation Target end-users Timetable after  the 
end of the project * 
1 
PHB Bio -based 
formulated materials & its 
production process 
SABIO Confidential know -
how 
Own production Polymer converter First year of the 
project 
Material scale up 
production SABIO Patent  Licensing platform Other compounders 1or 2 years  
Recycling Process SABIO Confidential know-
how Sales of products Recyclers Direct post-project 
Production of biobased 
material PHB 
NFG Confidential know-
how 
Own production Nafigate Cosmetics  From the second year 
of the project and 
post the project 
Production of biobased 
material PHB 
NFG Patent or trade 
secret 
Own production, sales 
of products  
Medical industry 5 years  
Production of biobased 
material PHB 
NFG Confidential know-
how 
Own production, sales 
of products 
Nafigate Cosmetics 
and other cosmetics 
packaging producers  
2-3 years  
2  
PHA coated/ grafted fibre 
based packaging  GPI Patent if possible or 
trade secret. Direct sales Food and service food 
sector 
2 or 3 years or when 
PHA is commercially 
available  
Packaging development 
and production process ILAB Confidential know-
how Services Brand-owners Direct post-project 
Nano-scale grafted fiber-
based packaging  
ASU Confidential know-
how 
Consulting of 
packaging manufacture 
Producer fiber-based 
packaging materials 
Second Year of the 
Project 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 43 of 112 
• Plan for Exploitation & Dissemination of the Results (PEDR). 
A detailed business plan will be developed within WP8 and integrate into the Plan for Exploitation & 
Dissemination of the Results (PEDR). The exploitation of project results addresses a chain of value ranging from 
technological innovations (upstream) for the benefit of several technology -based user segments, to innovations on 
products and services (downstream) that foster the biopackaging business sustainability throug h better risk 
management, decision -making and overall business assessment. The Business Plan section will explain the 
commercialisation of different technological solutions resulting from the project and other exploitation measures. 
BioSupPack workshops in  the framework of relevant EU scientific and business conference should facilitate new 
research/services/business opportunities based on BioSupPack demonstration data and products for commercial 
applications. Actions organized under “community development”, “capacity building” and “clustering” are expected 
to have a positive impact on this. 
Besides cost-efficiency indicators, Key Performance Indicators (KPI) will be used in the innovation process moving 
towards higher TRL level that supports fast and easy uptake of the BioSupPack technologies and their penetration in 
relevant markets. The structure of the project Work packages has been designed to facilitate this process, including: 
(1) Refinement of the requirements and final applications to ensure the plan ned development is fit -for-
purpose. KPI: Positive feedback (satisfaction level) from the relevant user groups on the fit -to-purpose of the 
proposed BioSupPack materials and solutions for new packaging in food&beverage sectors, cosmetic & homecare.  
(2) Production and Demonstration of the new packaging materials and products with the BioSupPack 
technologies. KPI: Positive feedback (satisfaction level) from the relevant user groups on the capability of the novel 
developments to replace existing, more unsustainable technologies (market replication) 
(3) Uptake of BioSupPack new management system by the Industry, including the project relevant partners. The 
detailed assessment of BioSupPack overall solution in a specific demos site will be relevance. The feedback  of 
industrial end-users (public and private biotechnology & biobased companies), public authorities and other sectors 
(such as waste managers, plasma & enzymatic technologies, pharma, healthy food, etc.) will be critical. KPI: Number 
of positive feedback (satisfaction level) from targeted industrial and societal players (including project partners). 
Business plans will be developed to support the commercialization of each KER and partner. The Business Model 
and Plan developed in WP8 will integrate IPR, innovation protection, commercialization and exploitation strategies, 
and the accompanying techno-economic analysis, safety, regulatory and LCA studies developed in WP6. This will 
3 
Support PHA enzymatic 
recycling PLT Patents Sales of equipment Polymer producers 2/3 years  
BSG pretreatment PLT Confidential know-
how Sales of equipment Plasma biomass 
treatment 1-3 years post project 
Monitoring prototype for 
sorting application IRIS Patent/trade secret Sales of equipment Waste managers 1year post-project 
Modelling and data 
analysis IRIS Confidential know-
how 
Consulting service, 
commercialization 
Waste managers, 
quality control 
Directly after the 
project 
Validation of packaging 
prototypes 
NFG Confidential know-
how 
Own usage and 
consultancy 
NFGC and other 
cosmetics producers  
Directly post the 
project 
Study of consumer 
perception and acceptance 
NFG Confidential know-
how 
Own usage Nafigate Cosmetics Directly post the 
project 
4 Logistic model SAV Confidential know-
how License in platform BSG producers and 
feedstock end-users. 
1or 2 years. Tailor 
made design. 
5 
PHB-depolymerizing 
enzymes 
ASA  Confidential know -
how  
Production ans sales of 
enzymes 
Recycler Directly after the 
project 
PHB from 3HA after 
enzymatic hydrolysis 
NFG Confidential know -
how 
Own production The same as from 
PHB in WP1 
Directly post the 
project 
PHB-degrading 
Microorganisms 
AIMPLAS Confidential know -
how 
Sales of products Recyclers From the end of the 
project 
Improved PHB -degrading 
enzymes 
AIMPLAS Confidential know -
how 
Sales of products Recyclers 1-3years post-project 
6 
Knowledge of the LCA 
and LCC  
ASU Confidential know -
how 
Consulting on 
sustainability, LCA and 
LCC of PHA packaging  
Producer of food and 
packaging materials 
After the project end 
Use of PHB -based 
packages in food (ketchup, 
mustard) and homecare 
(wash liquid) end-products 
UNILEVER Confidential know -
how 
Sales of products Food & personal care 
products to EU28 
consumers 
Approx. 2/3 years 
(PHB-based packages 
are commercially 
available) 
7 Optimized water -based 
PHA coating formulation  
CTB Patent Licensing to formulator 
or GPI 
Formulators, paper 
coating companies 
1-2 years  
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 44 of 112 
pave the way for the successful exploitation of the project results. The expected impact based on a conservative 
scenario with the capacity to sell 5-10 Million bottles/year in the period 2025 -2029 is described in qualitative and 
quantitative terms in table 15- below. 
Table 15: BioSupPack Estimated economic impact & business model proposed by industrial partners per year after 2024 
Industrial 
Partner 
Product, application or 
system to be exploit 
Expected 
Turnover 
(M€/y) 
Direct 
Employ-
ment139 
Required investment Business model 
6.PLT-a Plasma bubble biomass 
reactors 2 3 
< 250K€ in new sales of 
plasma technology for 
biomass processing 
Selling scaled plasma bubble 
reactor technology 
6.PLT-b Plasma packaging 
surface modification 1.5 2 
< 100K€ in new sales of 
plasma technology for 
polymer processing 
Selling scaled plasma surface 
modification technology 
8.SABIO New grades of bio-based 
sustainable materials 0.3-0.5 4 ± 0.1 M€  Producing and selling new more 
sustainable materials. 
13.GPI PHA coated trays, bowls 
or cups 6 15 
0.5M€ to move forward from 
TRL7 to TRL9 and minor fine 
tuning of reallocated existing 
manufacturing facilities of 
PE-coated packaging  
Selling new more sustainable 
packaging 
14.IRIS 
Hyperspectral imaging 
solution for sorting 
1-1.5 M 5 
< 150K€ Personnel costs for 
optimization & adaptation of 
the chemometrics models, 
sales force engagement, minor 
adaptation to TRL 9 
Direct commercialization to 
users or OEMs 
16.ASA PHB-depolymerizing 
enzymes 0,5 – 1,0 2 No investment necessary.  Production and sales of enzymes 
17.SAV 
IoT logistic platform for 
the mobilization of waste 
to bioprocesses. 
0.2-0.35 2 <€0.2M Revenues from the IoT logistic 
platform  
10.ULK 
Introduce PHB -based 
packages in food 
(ketchup, mustard) and 
homecare (wash liquid) 
end-products  
0.7 
consideri
ng only 
the plant 
in Greece 
1-2 
Qualified staff to integrate the 
use of PHB -based packages 
and validate consumer 
perception and acceptance of 
the new packages (<€0.5M) 
Commercialize the PHB -based 
packages for sauces and wash 
liquids using BIOSUPPACK 
innovations developed to end 
users via exploitation of 
consumer perception evaluation 
study.  
9.NGF 
Several equipment 
adapted to obtain the 
new PHB (such as 
centrifuge, fermenters, 
etc.) 
1 2 
>180K€ for the new tool that 
enables to increase the 
current production capacities, 
>135K€ into the extension of 
current production lines. 
Commercializing new 
feedstock, Licensing production 
to potential partners for large 
production volumes. 
For the sake of clarity, a Business Model Canvas has been prepared for the BioSupPack materials, featuring core 
KERs along the value chain (Business plan annex). Similar tools will be completed for each KER in WP8. This will 
be instrumental to develop and pivot the related business models during the project. The final business plans will 
provide the details on how the project’s results will be  used in commercial exploitation activities, for training 
purposes, for further research activities as well as for standardisation activities. It will also specify in detail for each 
result both joint and individual exploitation strategies in terms of tech nology roadmaps, finance requirements, 
commercial opportunities and related business roadmap, taking into account IPR. 
Figure 13 represents the expected full scale coordinated deployment of the different materials and finished products 
along the supply and value chain to reach our target markets within 3 to 5 years post -project (in different stages, 
being launched the first packaging around 20226-2027), as well as the adoption to new applications. In terms of the 
measures that will be in place in order to effectively plan for the exploitation of the project results, the robust industry 
involvement in the consortium backed by strong k nowledge management, knowledge transfer and market 
exploitation plans, and their key role in the project activities will boost an industry -driven approach to the project 
respecting market, consumer and regulatory requirements.  This will ensure that BioSupP ack is successful in 
transitioning knowledge towards the market overcoming potential barriers that may hinder the swift uptake of the 
 
139 Job calculation between 250-450 k€ turnover/job. Average turnover increase in the chemical/engineering industry to create a new employee. 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 45 of 112 
results of BioSupPack innovations in the post -project phase. Effective knowledge transfer, under Task 7.3., from 
technical partners to SMEs (internally), third -party enterprises and end-users (externally) will also be fundamental 
for paving the way towards commercialization, guaranteeing that sufficient knowledge and competencies to exploit 
results are acquired.  
To this end, the involvement of RTDs of international renown in the fields of biomass fermentation processes, 
biopolymers production, polymer formulations, plastic processing & synthesis, coating technologies and interaction 
with the food and packaging; an d who have a track record in 
working closely with and in transferring research results to 
industry, as well as providing training and educational 
programmes, is a valuable asset, which will ensure that we 
bridge the innovation gap that frequently prevents industry 
adoption of R&D outputs. In particular, AIMPLAS performs 
very frequent broad scope trainings for its over 650 associated 
companies in the plastic sector. The non -industrial partners 
will exploit the results of BioSupPack to enhance their 
educational offer with the novel concepts and system design 
principles that will be identified and developed during the 
project. Some of the topics tackled in the project shall become 
part of Master degree courses, as well as research topics for 
Master & PhD theses , offering students a taste of research 
problems that have practical impact and interest, and the opportunity to perform research in a high -quality 
international environment. 
The inclusion of ENCO with extensive experience in translating R&D output into ac tual commercialisation and 
market penetration, is another important added value for the consortium and will contribute to ensuring the post -
project stage. Importantly, we will work towards very high bio -based content of our formulations (close to 100% 
including different bioplastics and board fractions) and we will follow a cautious and transparent communication 
policy both in terms of sourcing and EoL, backed up by consequential LCA results, which will contribute to raising 
industry confidence delivering a positive breakthrough in the context of environmental-friendly food packaging, as 
well as single use service packaging. 
Sound management of the knowledge generated during the project, active planning in relation to post -project 
exploitation activities, further research work for escalating along the TRLs, as well as scouting for possible viable 
financing routes to commercialisation that will allow us to quickly scale up, bridge the innovation gap, and rapidly 
overcome the critical stage between pre-competitive results and the market according to market deployment timeline. 
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project . 
Although the exploitation interests will be favoured by default, BioSupPack will participate in the Pilot Open Access 
Research Data scheme for a selected amount of research data generated by the project. A data management plan 
(DMP) has been included in WP9. Non-confidential results will be widely disseminated in open access media and 
repository (after anonymising critical information e.g. on composition). All publications and selected results will be 
considered for this so as to provide the scientific commu nity with a better understanding of e.g. the capability of 
PHAs in rigid packaging and their improved properties, thanks to novel technologies applied; allowing excluding the 
commercially sensitive details in case of selected successful formulations. All p ublicly available data will be 
protected by copyright statements.  
The Knowledge Management Strategy  (Figure 14) which will be followed 
throughout the duration of BioSupPack is heavily interconnected with the 
exploitation and dissemination activities to pave the way for post -project 
exploitation. An integrated approach will be followed for the identification, 
capture, retrieval, distribution, sharing, use and reuse of BioSupPack 
information and knowledge assets. It will be essential to drive the value and 
benefits of these information and knowledge assets and contribute to 
maximising the innovation impact of the act ion. Knowledge management 
sessions will take place regularly during the project meetings. These sessions 
will be chaired by the Project Coordinator (Ms. Rosa González, AIMPLAS) 
and the IPR Manager (Dr. Marco de la Feld, ENCO), attended by all project 
beneficiaries, and will facilitate the disclosure of the IP and the novelty of the 
project results. The aim is to review: i) expected results per WP, ii) evaluation 
of IP (technology watch/prior art review), iii) evaluation of protection options 
(IPR tools eval uation), iv) third party components included in the project 
activities including tools and datasets, v) confidentiality of project results, vi) 
Figure 1 3: Market deployment plan of main project 
KERs 
Figure 14: Knowledge Management 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 46 of 112 
expected publications per partner and vii) exploitation intentions per partner. 
The Partners have signed a Consortium Agreement (CA) prior to the signature of the Grant Agreement with the EC 
in which all the rules for ensuring confidentiality (procedure for granting publication of the results), ownership regime 
and IPR issues (background included and excluded, owner ship, licensing terms, etc) are detailed. Some previous 
knowledge and background are detailed in Annex-Business Plan. The CA is based on the DESCA model. The CA 
includes the initial KERs of the partners and patent interest list, which is the starting point for IPR protection and 
Exploitation Plans. 
The following three areas of activity have been identified to ensure proper IP management and maximize the impact 
and market relevance of the knowledge generated in the project: Proper assessment of the pre-existing knowledge of 
the various project partners, their potential contribution to the project results IP, and potential overlap of IP. The 
document will be upgraded during the project to include new results unforeseen at the beginning and included as an 
integral part of the final PEDR. 
The overall IPR strategy focuses on the knowledge generated by the project, the IP rights, the patentability and 
optimal IPR protection options. Any disputes over IPRs should be settled according to the CA. Legal requirements 
for commercialization will also be explored, in particular through “freedom to operate” analysis  as well as 
individual patent filing strategies and drafting of patent applications for the most promising project results. 
Background and Foreground: IPR and access rights, Results definition, protection and ownership. 
Each partner in the consortium has made a significant effort in order to define as detailed as possible their exploitation 
interests and possibilities (preliminary KER -Table 14). For the results obtained, ownership, protection and use will 
be considered in detail following the recommendations detailed in EU IPR helpdesk document140 (July 2018). So, the 
basic IPR framework agreed by the partners considers:  
Background: Background, that is, information and knowledge (including inventions, databases, etc.) held by the 
partners prior to their accession to the EC grant agreement, as well as any intellectual property rights which are 
needed for carrying out the project or for using results held by the consortium, or indeed by third parties, is defined 
in the proposal preparation phase (pre-Grant Agreement). Access rights necessary for the preparation of the proposal 
and the execution of the BioSupPack project will be gra nted on a royalty free basis. Most of the partners in the 
consortium will contribute to the project with their respective pre -existing know-how. At this stage no positive or 
negative list regarding the background access has been developed, and no partner h as explicitly required it. 
Background needed to use the results of the project will be provided either royalty free or under fair and reasonable 
conditions. The need of such lists has been again considered when preparing the Consortium Agreement. 
Foreground: Selected results from KER s, along with the expected scenarios of results ownership. This table will 
apply for all project results, and it will be periodically revised and updated during the project in line with 
developments. The project results will be continually assessed in terms of novelty, patentability and protection 
through WP8 tasks, as part of an effective knowledge management strategy. The choice of the most suitable form of 
IP protection, as well as the duration and geographical coverage depends on the results at stake, but also the business 
plans for their exploitation and legitimate interests of consortium partners. For the future exploitation of the results 
generated in this project, an agreement among the partners will be reached to transfer the ownership and grant 
licenses, based on the assessment provided by the Innovation Committee.  
The protection of every specific development will in any case be previously evaluated against the interest of the 
whole consortium, to assure other results exploitation will not be impaired due to a lack of foresight. For each result 
an evaluation will be made of whether the results may be licensed or shared with third parties, with the objective of 
giving all partners the widest possible autonomy after the project without compromising the others.  
A first draft of the Exploitation Plan will be available by M12 and will be continually revised and edited throughout 
the project, and a final version will be signed by all partners at M36 (annexed to D8.6.). 
Open access to peer-reviewed scientific publications 
BioSupPack partners will provide peers and end-users with free of charge online access to the project peer-reviewed 
scientific research articles. Partners can follow two routes towards open access: (1) by self -archiving their journal 
articles in an open access repository, also known as 'green' open access, or (2) by publishing in an open access journal, 
known as 'gold' open access. Whereas fees to cover publishing in gold open access journals have been budgeted, 
BioSupPack will privilege gree n open access, whereby the partners will publish in peer -reviewed scientific 
publications and then self-archive a version in repositories (using only those indexed in specialised search engines 
like Scopus). The project website will complementarily house the ‘BioSupPack Green Channel’ for open access to 
the peer-reviewed publications of the project. In relation to expected publications from the project, these include but 
are not limited to: results from food bio -packaging; demonstration of recyclability, bi odegradability, LCA; novel 
 
140 www.iprhelpdesk.eu/sites/default/files/newsdocuments/Fact-Sheet-Background-in-H2020.pdf 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 47 of 112 
results and applications of PHAs and copolymer blends, as well as the novel technologies integrated.  
• Communication activities   
Communication activities are of the outmost importance for 
effectively promoting our action and outputs towards the 
stakeholders that we want to reach to fully exploit this BBI action. 
To successfully connect and cooperate and acquire positive support 
from relevant stakeholders and the public at large, a strategic plan 
will be implemented in Task 7.1., on top of the preliminary outline 
presented in Fig ure 15. The overall communication campaign, 
which covers the whole project duration, will be led by the 
Innovation, Communication & Dissemination Manager, Mr.  
Christian Schulz  (EUBP), who holds an established extensive 
network and communication capacity to ensure that benefits and 
impacts of the project are genuinely conveyed to key stakeholders 
and the general public (in particular through brand owners retailers 
and fast food chains (for the case of service packaging). Our aim is to i) generate understanding of what BioSupPack 
seeks to achieve, ii) stimulate interest and support, and iii) motivate the collaboration of actors along the value chain 
as well as of the general public in order to boost the transition to the bio -based economy in EU. The BioSupPack 
communication campaign leverages one-way, bilateral, and multilateral strategic channels. Following a preliminary 
stakeholder analysis (which will be developed in Task 7.2), the target audiences of BioSupPack communication 
activities comprise; monomers & biopolymer suppliers, agro-food processors, plastic packaging manufacturers and 
converters, personal car e and food manufacturing industry and retailers, other packaging end users, consumers & 
consumer organizations, agricultural associations, public authorities, standardisation & safety 
agencies/organisations, scientific communities, and recycling & industrial composting companies. Particular efforts 
will be made to engage with and raise awareness of the general public. It is important to address consumers’ concerns 
by informing the public about our strong dependence on fossil -based conventional plastics to w hich renewably 
sourced, bio-based, high-performance, and cost competitive bioplastics can be the more sustainable alternative. The 
awareness raising actions carried out will aim to generate acceptance and open the path to building trust towards 
innovative biopackaging solutions, through optimal communication and transparency using appropriate language 
enabling EU consumers to make informed purchasing and consumption decisions. A set of key messages will be 
developed specifically to popularise complex subjec ts and to bring the issue closer to people’s lives by making it 
more understandable. The campaign will be rolled out through various channels and tools (figured in Fig.-14), with 
the following approach: 1. ‘Push’ communication (graphic identity, newsletter s, press releases, promotional 
materials, gadgets, etc.) and 2. ‘Pull’ communication and interaction (website, social media, liaison with other 
initiatives and projects, joint communication, etc). The fact that our demonstrators are broadly focused on consumers 
applications like standard and service packaging (which in turn was a prominent reason for their selection) will allow 
maximising the awareness of the impact of the bioeconomy, and indeed BBI programmes, on their everyday life. 
 
3. Implementation