1.3 Concept and methodology 
Overall concept 
Today resource-efficient plastics are present in an infinite range of products and applications helping us to save 
energy, carbon dioxide emissions, water and even food. They contribute to circularity, to health and safety and to 
mitigate climate change.  However, to make the most of these materials, challenges related to the EoL of certain 
products, and particularly plastic packaging , still need to be addressed.  The increasing use of biopolymers in 
packaging applications is aligned with this necessity, when alternative EoL to landfilling, incineration or mechanical 
recycling are considered, like biodegradability or compostability. But bioplastics are not only used for this purpose, 
but others like the use of non -fossil based raw materials. Linking both purposes and considering the fact that in 
Europe we still landfill nearly 40-50% of plastic waste15 and only the 25-31% is currently recycled, bioplastics are a 
good alternative to conventional polymers, covering the current EU´s policies in terms of the use of non-fossil based 
resources, the recyclability  rate increase of materials and packaging products (when  using non -
biodegradable/compostable bioplastics) or the look for the most favourable EoL according to the final application . 
BioSupPack project addresses these EU´s policies through the use of brewery waste, available in large amounts and 
with a suitable composition for the production of PHA based bioplastics in high yield fermentation processes16, but 
also goes a step further when considering EoL of the new biobased packaging, as it will boost recyclability of the 
biobased materials and products, by enzymatic recycling of the packaging waste. This EoL allows getting more value 
to the packaging materials compared to biodegradability or compostability, as precursors suitable for feeding the 
fermentation processes or even polymerize PHA, increasing circularity. In addition, BioSupPack addresses also the 
specific n eed for recyclability of current single use packaging (service packaging ) made of PE coated 
paper/cardboard, difficult to recycle due to the complex separation of both materials, by the use of PHA based 
coatings and the use of enzymes that degrade then aft er the packaging life , leaving the paper/cardboard 100% 
available for recyclability. Being paper and carboard the packaging material with the highest recycling rate in Europe 
(85,8% across the 28 EU countries)17, the project will allow integrating this waste stream in the recycling loop. 
The BioSupPack project will: 
1. Develop and produce at a demonstrative level  a range of  bio-based material formulations  with tailored 
properties for identified packaging applications, derived from available agri-food by-products (PHA/PHB based 
compounds) and from commercially available PHAs (wet coatings). 
2. Validate the use of the resulting biobased materials in several foods, cosmetic, homecare & beverage packaging 
and their environmental impacts and economic feasibility compared with existing benchmarks.  
3. Provide recommendations for suitable business approaches  for the new packaging materials and derivates 
from BSG, from an integrated bio -based value chain perspective including, among others, consumers & end 
users requesting more sustainable solutions, feedstock logistics and management and waste management bodies 
through a series of outreach activities exchanging knowledge between the relevant actors. 
The considered technologies are summarised in Table 2, together with their purpose.  
Table 2: BioSupPack bio-based materials, packaging and processes innovations to achieve project goals  
Life Cycle Step Technology to be applied Effect Addressed to 
Sourcing Non-thermal air cold plasma technology Increased BSG to sugar conversion yields in 
subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis. Efficient pre-
treatment at ambient temperature and pressure. 
Increase efficiency and 
sustainability of PHB 
production via enhanced 
BSG conversion into PHB, 
no chemical usage for BSG 
pre-treatment, and reduced 
energy requirements. 
Fermentation routes with extremophilic 
bacteria  
Reduced risk of contamination and energy 
demands. 
Extraction of PHB from bacterial biomass 
by ‘green’ and recyclable solvents and 
switchable anionic surfactants   
PHB extraction of high purity and yield and no 
Mw reduction via PHB degradation. 
Packaging 
production 
Air cold plasma technology Oxygen and water vapour barrier for food and 
cosmetic packaging, homecare.  
Improve packaging 
performance. 
PHA wet coating and wet coating grafting 
on pulp-based substrates 
Water vapour and fat/liquids barrier for service 
and prepared food packaging. 
Tailored PHAs compounds to be applied 
in packaging production. 
Squeezable packaging for sauces and cosmetics. 
Microwable packaging / Hot-filling properties. 
EoL Combination of several spectroscopic 
technologies (e.g. NIR and visible HSI) 
New sorting technology for PHA based 
BioSupPack packaging waste. 
Selective separation, 
increase recycling 
efficiency. 
Cold plasma technology Surface modification, reduced Mw of PHA used 
packaging for enzymatic hydrolysis. Increased 
used packages to 3HB conversion yields. 
Increase efficiency and 
sustainability in enzymatic 
recycling as EoL, 
with carbon source 
recycling and no chemical 
Exploit existing strains and currently 
available metagenomics libraries from 
Production of highly efficient PHB 
depolymerase for used PHB-based package 
 
15 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/plastic waste.htm 
16 Mussato, S.I. (2014) Brewer's spent grain: A valuable feedstock for industrial applications. J Sci Food Agric 94(7), 1264-1275. 
17 EU figures ahead Global Recycling Day 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 15 of 112 
extreme environments for selection of 
PHB depolymerase 
hydrolysis into 3HB monomers profitable by the 
industry. 
usage for PHA recycling, 
causing no damage to the 
environment.  Directed evolution and rational design of 
enzymes. Use of enzyme cocktails 
Increased PHA depolymerization rate of 
selected enzymes and enhanced 3HB production 
efficiency from used packages. 
Logistics along 
the value chain 
Blockchain Traceability from waste feedstock to end 
product. Increase transparency to stakeholders. 
Certify feedstock streams 
along the supply chain. 
QR code Tracing the information from the blockchain 
and the characteristics of the feedstock. 
Facilitate traceability 
information access to 
stakeholders. 
Eco-driving Reduction in a 20% of GHG generation: 17% 
due to the efficient conduction system, focusing 
on a less aggressive driving system and a route 
optimization; 3% due to an intelligent system by 
the incorporation of IoT. 
Reduction on climate 
impact and optimization of 
fuel and time consumption 
in transport operations. 
 
Shared logistics Shared routes and transport resources depending 
on the feedstock needed, the places where 
recollecting, and the destiny of the same. 
Smart management of 
transport resources. 
Cloud Platform Centralization of real-time information in a 
unique platform. 
Generate the blockchains 
and provide real-time info. 
about the available. 
In BioSupPack, our trans-disciplinary team, formed by 17 partners from 8 countries across Europe, combines all the 
relevant skills and organisations needed to address the full extent of the challenge of upscaling the production of  
innovative sustainable bio -based compounds and coatings in plastic packaging solutions. The consortium is very 
strong with mature suppliers pioneering bioplastic & packaging converting companies, innovative technology 
companies and RTDs, as well as SME and large end users. The participation of leading industry players proves the 
actual soundness of the concept to generate large impact and will maximize the consortium capability in creating and 
accelerating the market uptake of the new biobased materials and packaging.  The participation of key Stakeholders 
with specific expertise involved in an Advisory Board (AB), will provide high value to the project results and impacts, 
collaborating in different points of the value chain (details in section 4.5 and support letters annexed to section 5).  
Positioning of the project  
Most BioSupPack activities will be implemented starting at TRL5, and even some of them, like plasma technology 
for improving packaging performance or PHA based compounds production, start with a more advanced TRL6, with 
a target of a consolidated TRL7 and TRL8 respectively at the project end, when our technologies will be combined 
in the final project demonstrators to be produced first at RTDs pilot scale and finally at the industrial facilities of the 
plastic converters, with the subsequent validation by the end-users in operational environment. In the specific cases 
of the use of extremophilic bacteria in fermentation processes, the development of squeezable packaging, and the use 
of plasma technology in both BSG and packaging waste pre -treatment as well as the f ermentation routes for PHB 
production from PHB monomers from recycling, start at TRL4 and they will achieve a TRL6. Proposed innovations 
are based on prior research from involved partners for the same or other base biopolymers for packaging applications, 
and on technologies defined at the pilot level or in other industrial sectors, as Table 3 shows. 
Table 3: Summary of the TRL advancements through BioSupPack project  
Technology Initial 
TRL 
Final 
TRL 
Justification of current TRL 
Plasma technology for BSG pre-
treatment. 
5 7 PLT have successfully scaled their plasma power source from their commercialised lab unit 
(400W) to a commercial scale 5,000W design. This system will facilitate the TRL jump from 5 
to 7 for the proposed plasma bubble reactor for the pre-treatment of BSG. PLT has demonstrated 
its plasma -bubble reactor at small pilot scal e (TRL5). Bubble technology is an established 
technology in the chemical industries which will further support the development. 
Fermentation routes for PHB 
production using conventional 
meshophiles. 
5 7 AUA has participated in 4 national research projects focusing on PHB production (up to 5 kg) 
using crude renewable resources  (wheat milling, biodiesel industry  and fruit processing by -
products, and sugar beet pulp) with Cupriavidus necator and Burkholderia sacchari in 2 to 30 L 
fed-batch bioreactor cultures involving also technology transfer to industrially relevant 
environments (TRL5).  NFG has experience with the scale -up of PHB production from used 
cooking oil in its pilot plant (TRL8) where bioreactor up to 1500 L is used. NFG is involved in 
other H2020 project where fermentation of PHB from coffee oil will be scaled-up. 
Fermentation routes for PHB 
production using extremophilic 
bacteria. 
4 6 BUT has experience with utilizing various thermophilic bacteria for PHA production, showing 
the process feasibility in the lab-scale (5L fed-batch reactor) and the process has been described 
and published (TRL4). NFG will use its experience as described above to scale-up to TRL 6. 
Compounding for development 
and production of PHA based 
compounds for rigid packaging. 
6 7 SABIO has already designed and produced formulations suitable for packaging in pilot scale and 
industrial scale plant. Additionally, the packaging prototype obtained after scale -up, meet 
requirements validated in industrial environment. 
Plasma technology for barrier 
properties improvement. 
6 8 PLT have successfully scaled their plasma power source from the commercialised lab unit 400W 
to a commercial scale 5,000W design. PLT is highly experienced in engineering of atmospheric 
pressure plasma reactors. The system will drive the required treatment to reach TRL8.  
PHA coating in pulp-based 
packaging for moisture, liquids, 
5 7 The patented plastisol technology is established for different applications by CTB at TRL5. It 
will be tailored to application on fibre-based substrates. Developed coating will be applied in an 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 16 of 112 
fats protection. industrial pilot environment at GPI. 
Grafting of PHA coating for 
oxygen protection of pulp-based 
packaging. 
5 7 Paper grafting is industrially available. Bio -based grafting solutions currently developed in 
BionTop project for application on PLA will be tune d to application to paper and PHA coated 
paper in BioSupPack. Developed grafting will be applied in industrial pilot environment at GPI. 
Technology for squeezable 
packaging. 
4 6 ILAB has dealt with several lightweight projects in both ISBM and EBM technologies, producing 
packages with very thin layers, to the point of having self -collapsing bottles to empty the bottle 
by gravity, without compromising its structure.  
The materials developed from SABIOMATERIALS are already technology validated to produce 
several packaging items. Thus, developing tailored materials for squeezable packaging will 
satisfy the TRL jump from 4 to 6. 
EBM technology for PHA based 
bottles production. 
5 6 ILAB has been developing hundreds of bottles through EBM processes for over 20 years, 
experimenting with different materials, from traditional HDPE and PP to several PHA and PHB. 
Photonics technology for 
selective optical sorting of 
biobased materials. 
5 7 IRIS has already  developed a prototype for the discrimination of most abundant polymer in 
multilayer materials for sorting applications. The systems applied advanced data analytics 
merging ML and chemometrics for the proper data treatment. IRIS will extend the materials 
range of applications beyond the fossil -based ones and will train and optimize the models to 
increase the ability of the final device to be used in real industrial environment.   
Plasma technology for 
packaging waste pre-treatment. 
4 6 PLT have successfully scaled their plasma power source from their commercialised lab unit 
(400W) to a commercial scale 5,000W design. This system will facilitate the TRL jump from 4 
to 6 for the proposed plasma waste reactor. We have demonstrated our gas p lasma and plasma-
bubble reactors at small pilot scale (TRL4).  
PHB depolymerase enzyme 
selection producing 3HB 
monomers, engineering, cloning 
and development of 
recombinant expression strains. 
 
4 6 AUA and BUT have produced PHB-depolymerizing enzymes using existing microorganisms in 
lab scale (TRL4). AUA has developed metagenomics libraries from extreme environments 
containing various organisms, that will be used for the selection of organisms producing PHB 
depolymerase with 3HB producing ability (TRL4). AUA has expertise in enzyme cloning, 
expression, engineering and redesign, using rational and combinatorial methods (directed or 
random evolution approaches), development of recombinant expression systems ( E. coli) and 
metagenomic technologies in various R&D projects commercially oriented (TRL6).  
Enzyme production using 
recombinant expression strains. 
5 7 ASA has expertise in heterologous enzyme production using E. coli and P. pastoris strains at 
large scale using a 1.000 L reactor and will carry out enzymatic production in the project (TRL7). 
Bioprocess development for 
enzymatic hydrolysis of used 
PHB-based packages 
5 6 AUA has established expertise in the development of lab -scale enzymatic hydrolysis (e.g. 
amylase, protease, lipase, cellulase, xylanase etc.) and enzymatic biocatalysis processes using 
various crude feedstocks and crude or engineered  enzymes in various R&D projects in many 
cases commercially oriented (TRL5).  SAV will conduct the enzymatic hydrolysis process to 
produce at large scale 3HB monomer using a 1.500 L reactor, in an own pre-industrial bioprocess 
plant. This will allow SAV to set the requirements in an industrial environment (TRL6).  
Fermentation routes for PHB 
production from PHB 
monomers from recycling 
4 6 AUA has produced PHB from 3 -hydroxybutyric acid at lab -scale cultures (TRL4). NFG will 
validate the technology in the 300 L fermentor, reaching TRL6 within the project. 
 
National or international research and innovation activities linked to the project 
BioSupPack will build on prior research activities and IP belonging to several project partners. Table 4 lists the most 
relevant projects participated by the partners, derived expertise, methods or processes that will feed in this project. 
Table 4: Relevant research and innovation activities (additional ones can be found in the respective partner profiles) 
Project Partners 
involved 
Opportunity for carryover to BioSupPack 
LIFE Bread4PLA Demonstration Plan Project to produce Poly-lactic acid 
(PLA) Biopolymer from waste products of bakery (LIFE+) (2011-2014)  
AIMPLAS Proofs of feasibility to obtain LA and derived PLA 
from 3rd generation LA (bread waste). 
PHBOTTLE New sustainable, functionalize d, competitive PHB material 
based in fruit by -products getting advanced solutions for packaging and 
non-packaging applications (FP7-NMP-280831) (2012-2016) 
ILAB, 
AIMPLAS 
New PHB production from the wastewater from juice 
processing industries to produce PHB bottles, caps and 
sleeves prototypes. 
BIOBOTTLE Biodegradable solutions for packaging of liquid dairy 
products (FP7-SME-606350) (2014-2016) 
AIMPLAS New biopolymer blends development and processing 
for dairy packaging applications (pouches and bags). 
AGRIMAX Agri & food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible 
multi-feedstocks biorefinery processing technologies for new high added 
value applications (H2020-BBI-PPP-720719) (2016-2020) 
IRIS, 
AIMPLAS 
Bio-based blends and composites with PLA, PHAs, 
bio-based additives and natural fibres. 
RES URBIS: RESources from URban BIo -waSte (Grant Agreement 
730349; H2020-CIRC-05-2016) 
SABIO Integration into a single facility and to use one main 
technology chain for the conversion of several types 
of urban bio-wastes into valuable bio -based products 
(including PHAs polymers), while also minimizing 
any residual or consequent waste to be disposed of. 
USABLE PACKAGING (Grant Agreement No. 836884; 
BBI.2018.SO3.R10) 
SABIO Development of high -performance plastic packaging 
through a sustainable and fully circular value chain, 
where the biomass raw material sourcing derives from 
food processing. 
Valor plus: Development of processes for the production of 
polyhydroxyalcanoates (EC-FB7; 2013 – 2017) 
ASA Improving of bacterial strains and processes for the 
synthesis of PHA. 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 17 of 112 
BIOnTop Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and 
performance based on bio-based copolymers and coatings (BBI 837761) 
ASU, IRIS, 
AIMPLAS, 
CTB,ENCO 
Development of novel packaging in different formats 
using new copolymers based on PLA and other bio -
based diacids as well as innovative barrier coatings. 
NENU2PHAR Initiative to upscale production of PHA from renewable 
carbon sources at a competitive cost. (H2020-BBI-JTI-2019) (2019-2023) 
CTB Availability of PHA of different types. 
Utilization of bio -refinery concept for valorization of waste biomass of 
wood processing industry (COST CZ project LD15031)  
BUT Experience with conversion of lignocellulose - based 
substrates for PHA production.  
Evolutionary Engineering of Polyhydroxyalkanoates Producing Bacteria 
(Czech Science Foundation Standard Project GA 19-20697S).  
BUT Experience with development of strain for PHA 
biosynthesis, extremophiles for PHA production. 
Transfer of Hydal biotechnology to China (Technology Agency of the 
Czech Republic TF02000062) 
BUT, NFG Scale-up of PHA production to pilot scale. 
WaysTUP! - Value chains for disruptive transformation of urban biowaste 
into biobased products in the city context (H2020 -SFS-2018-2020) 
(2019–2023). 
NFG, SAV Experience in PHA p roduction from coffee oil 
extracted from spent coffee grounds  (NFG) and in 
lipids and proteins production from food and 
fertilizers from SCG (SAV).  
HOOP Hub of circular cities bo osting platform to foster investments for 
the valorisation of urban biowaste and wastewater (H2020 -FNR-2020) 
(2020–2024). 
NFG, SAV Promoting circular economy through the production 
of innovative bio-based products. 
Valorisation of agricultural sugar beet residues and sugar beet pulp for the 
production of PHA -based biodegradable packaging (2020 -2023, 
MIS5069983, GSRT. Greece) 
AUA Bioprocess development for PHB and PHBV 
production from sugar beet leaves and pulp at 2 to 30 
L bioreactor scale 
Valorisation of  wheat milling by -products for the production of PHB -
based biodegradable and active packaging (2018 -2021, MIS5032796, 
GSRT. Greece) 
AUA Bioprocess development for PHB production from 
wheat milling by-products at 2 to 30 L bioreactor scale 
TetraSOD® - food supplement enriched in the enzyme superoxide 
dismutase from microalgae Tetraselmis chui (www.tetrasod.com) 
AUA AUA has developed various enzyme -based products 
currently in the market via R&D commercially 
oriented projects funded by enterprises. Erwinaze(TM) and Pegcrisantaspase used as antileukemic drugs - the 
recombinant L-asparaginase from Erwinia chrysanthemi  
AUA 
SAFEBAG Novel continuous in -pack decontamination system for fresh 
produce  & MEATPACK A novel packaging system for meat safety and 
shelf-life extension (FP7-SME)  
IRIS Use of plasma technology for packaging 
decontamination and food shelf life extension. These 
projects allowed forming of PLT as a company. IRIS 
MULTICYCLE (H2020 SPIRE) Advanced & sustainable recycling 
processes and value chains for plastic-based multi-materials. 
IRIS, CTB, 
AIMPLAS 
Use of packaging SRM in textile, optical sorting, etc . 
Dissemination strategy around a Circular Plastic Helix 
that can help creating synergies. 
Development of enzymatic and microbial processes for the degradation of 
plastic compounds (BMWA; 2013 – 2016) 
ASA Searching for enzymes for the degradation of PET, 
PLA, PCL, PBS. 
BiogasEnzymes: Assessment of enzymes for the use in biogas plants from 
laboratory to industrial scale (BMBF, 2010-2013) 
ASA Optimization of the depolymerization of biopolymers 
in BSG. 
BIOICEP Bio innovation of a Circular Economy for Plastics (H2020 -
NMBP-BIO-CN-2019) 
AIMPLAS Pre-treatment methods for further biodegradation. 
Enzymatic plastic depolymerization. PHB upcycling. 
4EverGreen industry alliance to boost the contribution of fibre -based 
packaging in a circular economy. 
GPI Sustainability strategy especially in terms of 
substituting plastic coatings by biodegradable 
solutions. Recycling of fibre-based packaging. 
VALUEWASTE Unlocking new value from urban biowaste (H2020 CE-
SFS-25-2018 Grant Agreement 818312) (2018-2022) 
SAV System development for urban biowaste valorisation 
through the development of three value chains that can 
be integrated following a cascading approach.  
WaysTUP! Value chains for disruptive transformation of urban biowaste 
into biobased products in city context (H2020 SEP-210494567)  
SAV, NFG, 
AIMPLAS 
Establishment of new value chains for urban bio-waste 
with pilot demonstrations. 
HOOP Hub of circular cities bOOsting Platform to foster investments for 
the valorisation of urban biowaste and wastewater (2020) 
SAV Implementation of profitable bio -processes from 
private investments. 
PlastiCircle Improvement of the plastic packaging waste chain from a 
circular economy approachGrant agreement ID: 730292 (2018–2021). 
SAV Develop and implement a holistic process to increase 
recycling rates of packaging waste in Europe. 
RECOVER Development of innovative biotic symbiosis for plastic 
biodegradation and synth esis to solve their end of life challenges in the 
agriculture and food industries BBI JU (2020-2024) 
SAV Demonstrate and upscale novel bio -based approaches 
to dealing with the problem of agri-food waste plastics 
(AWPs). 
Overall approach and methodology 
BioSupPack is a 42-month project. The consortium has designed a work plan structured into 9 work packages (WPs). 
Figure 5 provides an overview of the content and interrelationships of the respective WPs and overall impact. WP1 
will upscale the production of new PHA based compounds and coatings. I n WP2, packaging prototypes will be 
produced at demo level. WP3 will focus on prototypes´ validation by the end-users, with participation of some of the 
stakeholders, also addressing consumer´s perception and acceptance issues. WP4 is a strategic WP focused on all the 
logistics aspects regarding the management of the brewery by-product for PHAs production and the new packaging 
waste for recycling and the creation of the new value chain. WP5 will optimize and demonstrate recycling viability 
of the new packaging (mechanical and enzymatic recycling) with participation of the stakeholders, and also upcycling 
of PHAs by reintroduction of derived monomers in the polymers production. The environmental and socio-economic 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 18 of 112 
impacts will be assessed in WP6. WP7, will address the Communication and Dissemination activities foreseen in 
the project , together wit h the main regulatory concerns . WP8 will manage the exploitation and business model 
activities, with a perspective of moving towards the commercialization process, based on the contributions of all the 
industrial partners in the consortium. WP9 will address the overall technical, administrative, legal and financial 
management of the project, as well as its oversight.  
 
Figure 5. Overview of the interconnected WPs and overall impact of BioSupPack 
How sex and/or gender analysis is taken into account in the project’s content 
Gender analysis concept is relevant to the content of the project in several aspects. To this end, innovation will 
consider the gender dimension and cater for the needs, motivati ons and differences of all genders where possible. 
Taking gender into account in the innovation activities will help yielding new results and spark creativity, opening 
new avenues for future research as recognized in the past for those who give it serious attention18. Gender analyses 
will be highly relevant in consumer perceptions for biobased solutions study (task 3.4) that would differ depending 
on gender and to the preponderant role of women in household waste pre-sorting. The outcome of the study will be 
used in the communication and dissemination context to ensure our message is appropriate to reach all genders. For 
example, the consideration of environmental factors, related to the source of new biobased materials and the new 
packaging EoL, is likely to vary depending on the gender. Women are predominantly involved both in the purchase 
and waste sorting of packaging at household level. In addition, female inputs to new business models will also be 
considered. Indeed, while the presence of females in the plastic converting sectors is traditionally lower than of males, 
there is a strong presence of females along the value chain of the bioeconomy industries where they play an 
increasingly prevalent role in consumer decision-making. 
The gender dimension of our consortium and our measures to align with article 16 of H2020 programme are presented 
in section 3.3. It will ensure education and training of the next generation of scientists, technologist s and others 
needed in the EU to foster the future of a circular bioeconomy and maximise its creativity and innovation potential.