3.3 Consortium as a whole ................................................................................................................................... 68
3.4 Resources to be committed ............................................................................................................................ 69 
Acronyms 
ACR: Agitated Cell Reactors; CAPEX: Capital expenditure; CFD: Computational flow dynamics; CWA: CENELEC 
Workshop Agreement; D&C: Dissemination & Communication; DoE: Design of Experiments; DSP: Downstream 
Processing; EAB: External Advisory Board; GHG: Greenhouse gas emissions; HMC: Hemicellulose s; HTP: High 
Throughput; ILCSA: Integrated Life cycle sustainability assessment; KPI: Key performance indicator; ML: Machine 
Learning; LCA: Life cycle assessment; NF: Nanofiltration; OPEX: Operational expenditure; PAT: Process Analytical 
Techniques; PC: Project Coordinator, PI: Process intensification; PSE: Process System Engineering; QA: Quality 
assurance; QC: Quality Control; REACH: Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals 
(Regulation EC/No.1907/2006); SDR: Spinning Disk Reactor , SSH: Socio-economic science and humanities ;  SOTA: 
State of the art; STR: Stirred Tank Reactor; TA: Target audience; TEA: Techno-economic assessment; TECBP: Training, 
Education & Capacity-Building Programme; WP: Work Package; 5 HMF: 5-hydroxymethylfurfural. 
 
1 ACA = Academic, Higher or secondary education establishment, IND= Industrial partner, NGO = Non -Governmental Organisation, 
PO=Public Organisation, RTO = Research & Technology Organisation, SME = Small to Medium sized Enterprise 
2 Affiliated to BIC via membership in the ‘Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Stajerska’, Slovenia 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  2 
Section 1: Excellence 
Lignocellulose is the type of biomass with the highest availability in the world, being of parti cular importance for 
the bio-economy as the sustainable source of raw materials for the production of bio-based chemicals and materials 
as well as advanced biofuels. In Europe alone, lignocellulosic biomass has an estimated annual potential of technical 
availability of 1372 million tonnes, which could be sustainably used by 20303, doubling the current usage. However, 
in order to reach the goal of 25 % bio -based chemicals in 2030  (2015:14%), a major increase of the usage and 
processing efficiency of lignocellulosic biomass for sourcing the chemical industry would be required 4. Indeed, for 
the bio-based economy to reach its full potential in  its drive to substitute fossil -based fuels and chemicals by  their 
bio-based counterparts, it is imperative that non -food biomass including lignocellulosic materials are utilised  
efficiently. Currently, processing inefficiencies often result in relatively high concentrations of impurities and 
inhibitors, which often complicate conversion and  lead to resource-intensive downstream purification steps, thus 
resulting in low biorefinery yields in general  and poor product grade in many cases. Furthermore, the use of harsh 
process conditions entails high costs caused by energy, water and/or raw materials requirements; higher risk 
mitigation for process safety and complexity of operations and maintenance due to significant fouling, plant size, 
hazardous materials; waste and residues generation.  
 
These inefficiencies are particularly acute for the treatment of hemicelluloses  (HMC). Current lignocellulose 
biorefineries are indeed mostly focused on the conversion of cellulose into biofuels. While processes are well 
established to valorise two of the three major components in lignocellulose, i.e. cellulose (for fibres) and lignin (for 
energy), with significant efforts directed at dev eloping thermo-catalytic, enzymatic and fermentation processes to 
extract and convert sugars from the cellulosic and lignin constituents of lignocellulosic feedstocks 5,6, HMCs which 
typically account for 20-30 % (w/w), are often not efficiently segregated, purified, converted and transformed 
into useful and application-ready compounds, and thus are relatively under-exploited7. 
 
The source of the explanation lies in the complex 
composition of the HMC streams, which contain s 
mostly water-soluble compounds, which are readily 
mixable with the inorganic fraction of the biomass 
and the decomposition products generated during 
the pre-treatment steps. This, coupled with the high 
dilution ratios used, makes the valorisation of HMC 
challenging, resource -intensive, and thus 
expensive. Multi-step downstream separation 
processes are necessary to obtain the formed sugar 
streams in their purest form. Conventional recovery 
and purification of such sugars entails the use of 
high-temperature energy -intensive evaporation, 
distillation and crystallisation processes, with 
generation of high volumes of waste water and by-products. The use of harsh process conditions and the presence of 
species prone to decomposition can also lead to equipment fouling. All these factors contribute to product degradation 
through processing, and low yields of each of the components in the mixture . Therefore, conventional processes 
performance, material and energy efficiency, sustainability, safety and overall economic feasibility is often 
compromised. As a result, HMC streams are deemed difficult to valori se. Process Intensification (PI) has the 
potential to contribute significantly to the resolution of the challenges identified for the efficient processing of HMC 
by making biorefining processes faster at lower footprints , more efficient, more integrated and better for the 
environment. 
 
BioSPRINT aims at  utilising and valorising hemicelluloses, pursuing intensified processing steps and 
technologies towards ‘zero-waste’ bio-based operations and applying an integrated biorefinery concept that 
embodies the cascading principle  to create new HMC -derived products, so as to maximise conversion of the 
lignocellulosic biomass feedstock and its by -products, side streams and  residual streams into higher added -value 
products. The BioSPRINT philosophy is based on valorising the previously-discarded or costly side streams (thus 
‘closing the loop’).   
 
3 Panoutsou et. al (2016) D8.1 Overview report on the current status of biomass for bioenergy, biofuels & biomaterials in Europe, S2Biom  
4 Objective set by the Bio-based Industries Consortium (BIC) in the 2017 Strategic Innovation and Research Agenda (SIRA). 
5 Tuck, C.O. et al. (2012), Science, 337 (6095), 695-699. 
6 Wu, W. et al. (2017) Scientific Reports, 7, 8420. 
7 Maki-Arvela, P. et al. (2011) Chem. Rev. 111, 5638–5666. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  3
1.1 Overall and specific project objectives 
1.1.1 Overall objective 
Following the PI concepts developed by researchers at the University of Newcastle (partner in BioSPRINT), in 
particular Kamelia Boodhoo 8, David Reay, Colin Ramshaw and Adam Harvey 9, and building on successful 
nationally-funded research projects ( Lignocellulose biorefinery and Lignoplast) as well as completed and ongoing 
EU-funded, H2020 and FP7 projects ( SelDES; ReInvent (BBI-IA-DEMO), IbD (SPIRE IA) , Carboprec (FP7), 
SteamBio (SPIRE, IA) and relevant assets, we will apply PI in the context of biorefining operations, so as to 
improve the efficiency of the  purification and conversion of sugars from the HMC fraction of lignocellulosic 
biomass and enable their transformation into new biorenewable resins for substituting fossil-derived polymers 
in a range of applications. The ultimate objective is to lead to a reduction in operation costs , feedstock and energy 
resources, GHG emissions and higher yields, while increasing operation safety by concentrating on PI technologies 
which can intensify biorefining processing methods and create an integrated biorefinery concept (Figure 1.1). 
BioSPRINT overall project objective: To develop, test and validate PI methods (up to TRL 4-5) for sustainable 
and cost-effective purification and conversion of sugars from the HMC fraction of lignocellulosic biomass to obtain 
biorenewable furan-based resins for novel polymeric applications. 
 
With regards to the targeted feedstock streams, of particular interest in BioSPRINT is the  realisation of our 
objective via application of the to -be-developed concepts and technologies for the exploitation and valorisation of 
HMC streams derived from hard wood and straw streams, from processes employed in the production of paper 
pulp or biofuels for example. Such streams are readily available from the pilot or large-scale production processes of 
research and industrial project partners respectively (Fraunhofer Center for Chemical -Biotechnological Processes 
(FhG) and UPM)  where they are usually not valorised  at all, or if they are, this is limited to biofuel and power 
generation uses. Additionally, a case study using HMC originating from Clariant, industrial partner associated to the 
project via participation in the project’s External Advisory Board (EAB) and provision of samples (see Letter of 
Support in Section 4),  will also be carried out. These existing streams have been specifically selected due to their 
industrial relevance, the opportunity they provide to work with different lignocellulosic feedstocks and processes, 
the variety of their characteristics, as illustrated in Table 1-1. Furthermore, working with industrial relevant streams 
allows us to validate the flexibility and modularity  of the BioSPRINT integrated and intensified biorefining 
technologies and processes. It also maximises the impact of the project, while facilitating the integration and scale 
up into existing processes. It will also greatly reduce the feedstock -to-waste and waste -to-energy flows in the 
biorefinery context.  
 
Table 1-1. BioSPRINT Hemicellulose Feedstock Streams: Specificities and Complementarity 
Process & Provider 
Indicative feed composition information 
pH Density Sugar Monomers Sugar Oligomers Acids Lignin Other compounds 
1. Germany-sourced 
hardwood streams 
(UPM) 
2-6 - 
~35-120 g/L 
Xylose, Glucose, 
Arabinose, Rhamnose 
85-500g/L 
(concentrated) 
Acetic, 
Uronic,   Large 
Amount 
5-HMF, Furfural, 
Pre-treatment 
Chemicals 
2. Hard wood (beech) 
stream from the 
Organosolv® process 
(FhG) 
2-3 1 g/ml 
10-30 g/L or  100-300 
g/L (concentrated) 
Xylose, Glucose, 
Arabinose, Rhamnose, 
Mannose 
50-150 g/L 
(concentrated) 
Acetic, 
Uronic, 
Aldonic, 
Lactioc, 
Sulfuric 
Traces 
5-HMF, Furfural, 
Ethanol 
 
8 Boodhoo, K. V and Harvey, A. (2013) Process Intensification for Green Chemistry, Wiley. 
9 E.g. as in the call topic: Reay, D. et al. (2013) Process Intensification, 2nd Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK. 
Figure 1.1. BioSPRINT Concept and Focus Areas  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  4 
3. Sunliquid process - 
Steam explosion of 
straw (Clariant) 
5 1,1 Glucose 60 g/l, Xylose 
30 g/l 
Arabinose max. 1,5 g/l 
- Acetic 
acid: 
4,5g/l 
Traces HMF  0,05 g/l 
Furfural 0,2 g/l 
With regards to processing technologies, BioSPRINT will focus on 4 activity areas (Figure 1.1): 1. Upstream 
purification 2. Catalytic conversion   3. Downstream purification   4. Polymerisation. 
In particular, BioSPRINT will investigate, develop and facilitate the integration and scale-up into existing processes, 
of integrated PI technologies for hemicellulose bio-refining operations. BioSPRINT will focus on:   
▪ An intensified and integrated purifi cation strategy  leveraging innovative anti -solvent precipitation and 
membrane separation methods in order to enhance the purification and concentration  of the C5 and C6 sugars , 
increase the selectivity of the process, minimise the amount of solvent used, and intensify the material and energy 
efficiency of the proposed processes. The membrane separations will be combined with spinning disc reactors (SDRs) 
for precise control over the precipitation reaction and properties of the particles formed. Water and solvent recovery 
steps will also be included for added-on sustainability.  
▪ Intensified dehydration of sugars to centralise the final products into furan -based monomers, in particular 5 -
HMF and furfural, making the most of all C5 and C6 sugars present whilst minimising further downstream 
purification needs. 
▪ Novel, intensified and integrated catalytic processes for dehydration of C5 and C6 HMC sugars into monomers 
for bio-based polymers. Development and formulation of heterogeneous catalysts based on super acid solids for 
sugar dehydration will be carried out via time-efficient, high throughput (HTP) screening methods in order to ensure 
maximum conversion and selectivity to functionalise the sugars towards the target furan-based products. Effort will 
be put into developing catalyst formulations that are tailored for the feedstocks in place, and integration with the 
solvent systems will be carefully designed, allowing simultaneous conversion of multiple sugar feeds.  
▪ Process intensification (PI) and recovery of reactive intermediate furans through extractive -reaction 
methods to isolate the reaction products from the reaction medium in situ. Cutting-edge Agitated Cell Reactors 
(ACRs) will be employed to intensify mass transfer rates and guarantee the yield of the extraction step. 
▪ Heterogeneous catalysts, intensified reactor and downstream purification design will be closely integrated to 
create a continuous processing cascade. The 
thermal unit integration of up -/downstream 
processing steps will be assessed in depth under 
operation. Liquid-liquid separation will be 
intensified using hydro cyclones and heat 
transfer through plate and compact heat 
exchangers, which will also minimise product 
degradation in distillation reboiling units.  
▪ Intensified p olymerisation of furan -based 
derivatives into novolac, resole and polyols will 
be conducted in a thin film spinning disc 
polymeriser capable of enhancing mixing and heat and mass transfer in the polymerizing film to produce a polymer 
resin with uniform properties such as chain length, whilst minimising further downstream purification needs. 
The BioSPRINT processing technologies will reach  TRL 5 for the majority of the technologies, and TRL 4 for the 
remaining ones, by the end of the project and then the overall improved biorefinery process will be validated up to 
TRL 5 via simulation using techniques such as Computational Flow Dynamics (CFD), process flow simulation and 
Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) solutions enhanced with machine-learning (ML) and virtual twins, etc.  
 
With regards to  new end-products, the intensified processes aim at purifying HMC streams and converting the 
sugar fractions into 5-HMF and furfural polymers for composite wood boards using resole and novolac-type resins 
and insulation polyurethane foams from polyols. The targeting of 5-HMF and furfural derived bio-based polymers 
and building blocks, obtained by conversion of C5 and C6 sugars by dehydration, seeks to enable the convergence 
of different feedstock molecules into similar monomers to allow maximisation of the final product yields. However, 
the concept can easily be extended and transposed into further sugar processing value streams.  The most promising 
products will then be selected and their synthesis replicated to optimise process conditions and assess average quality 
control (QC) properties, as well as their regulatory status (e.g. EU-REACH compliancy). Thus, BioSPRINT helps 
to create a new generation of bio -based materials and composites so  that higher-performance components can be 
produced and used in several industries. In  this way, BioSPRINT contributes to the desired increase in the market 
application of these materials. According to the latest market data compiled by European Bioplastics in cooperation 
with the research institute nova-Institute, global bioplastics production capacity is set to increase from around 2.11 
million tons in 2018 to approximately 2.62 million tons in 2023. For this to happen, it is vital to unlock new HMC-
based feedstocks and develop efficient and competitive refining processes, a vision that BioSPRINT fully supports. 
BioSPRINT will also promote an interdisciplinary and cross-sectorial approach to research and innovation: research 
and technology development will be complemented by cross-cutting activities including CFD modelling, process  
simulation, PAT, process optimisation using ML techniques, an integrated Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  5 
(ILCSA), techno-economic assessment (TEA), standardisation activities as well as impactful dissemination and 
exploitation activities. 
1.1.2 Specific objectives 
In order, to achieve the overall objective of this project, we have defined the following specific 7 interdisciplinary 
objectives (Table 1-2), which are SMART, i.e. Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic and Time bound. 
Table 1-2. BioSPRINT Objectives and Measurable Outputs 
Objective 1 (Research & Innovation): In upstream purification, to intensify the purification of sugars by removal 
of impurities present and/or generated in the lignocellulose fractioning steps. 
BioSPRINT KPI 1: Recovery of HMC from waste streams           
BioSPRINT KPI 2: Purity of the recovered HMCs              
BioSPRINT KPI 3: Energy consumption in upstream purification  
Target: 80% to 90% (excluding solvent).  
Target: 70 to 80 %  
Target: Reduced by 10 to 30% 
Sub-objectives (SO) Measurable results & targets 
SO1.1: To proceed with a thorough analysis of the three HMC 
feedstock streams and to determine quantitatively their 
variability by regular sampling and analysis. 
SO1.2: To investigate PI methods and develop innovative 
solutions for precipitation and solids handling so as to 
maximise HMC purity ensuring process flow and viability. 
SO1.3: To investigate PI membrane separation techniques for 
HMC hydrolysis. 
SO1.4: To devel op hybrid intensified, innovative, and 
continuous membrane and precipitation technologies as 
low-energy solutions to separate C5 and C6 sugars from small 
ions, inorganic species, small chain acids, extractives, lignin 
and other non-volatiles.  
SO1.5: To identify upstream challenges related to the scale-up 
of the concepts and technologies developed using process 
systems engineering tools, control and instrumentation via the 
development of virtual twins and instrumentation set -ups for 
the precipitation reactor and membrane separation units. 
SO1.6: To develop concepts and PI technologies for solvent 
and water recovery in the intensified upstream process to 
maximise recovery of sugars and reduce solvent costs. 
SO1.7 To undertake lab testing for the developed upstream 
technologies so as to confirm performance at TRL 4-5. 
▪ One comprehensive stream analysis technical 
report providing the composition of the three 
HMCs feeds, ready by M4. 
▪ One feedstock variability analysis and protocol 
technical Report by M30. 
▪ One review of the SOTA on available and 
innovative separation and purification 
technologies for HMC streams by M12. 
▪ Lab development and testing of PI technologies 
for (a) membrane purification and concentration 
of the HMC streams; (b) precipitation and solids 
handling systems for the maximised recovery of 
C5 & C6 sugars, completed by M24. 
▪ Two reports including KPI measurements and 
results of the lab tests on the performance of 
optimised hybrid purification and concentration 
process of the HMC streams (M12) and on 
precipitation and solids handling systems for 
maximised recovery of C5 & C6 sugars (M24). 
▪ Upstream PSE and scale -up recommendations 
and v irtual twin of the  processing unit and 
peripheral equipment with monitoring and 
control concept defined by M30. 
Related WP WP1: Intensification of Upstream Purification [M1-M30] 
Contribution to impacts Call’s Impacts 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11 (as shown in section 2.1). 
 
Objective 2 ( Research & Innovation ): In the catalytic conversion area, to investigate intensified reaction 
methodologies for dehydration of sugars into furans (furfural and 5-HMF) and optimise their production. 
BioSPRINT KPI 4: Conversion of sugars to furans without using critical raw 
materials catalysts and demonstrating prolonged (>100L processing) stability. 
Target: 100 % conversion, >80 
% selectivity to 5-HMF/furfural, 
and <1 h residence time 
Sub-objectives Measurable results & targets 
SO2.1: To accelerate catalyst development using HTP catalyst development 
methods, non -critical metals and green solvent selection, coupled with PI 
methods in a continuous pilot reactor. 
SO2.2: To optimise catalyst formulation and reaction conditions with ML 
predictive models so as to undertake ( 1) catalyst performance examination, (2) 
operating conditions optimisation (3) multi-scale modelling. 
SO2.3: To integrate innovative PI reaction technologies for multiple sugars in 
realistic streams. 
SO2.4: To develop intensified extractive reaction technologies via hybridisation 
of reaction and extraction techniques so as to enable in situ removal of highly 
reactive target products, avoiding further degradation in the reactor. Catalyst 
materials will target primarily non -conventional reaction mode , resorting to 
platinum group metals only when else fails.  
SO2.5: To identify catalytic conversion and reaction challenges related to the 
scale-up of the concepts and technologies developed using process systems 
engineering tools, control and instrumentation via the development of a virtual 
twin of the reactor and instrumentation set-up of the reactor equipment. 
▪ Implementation of HTP and 
ML methods for development 
of catalysts in a biorefining 
context by M14. 
▪ Reaction kinetic model of 
dehydration produced by M16. 
▪ Optimised furan production 
from sugars achieved by M28. 
▪ Intensification methods for  
conversion and separation of 
HMC sugars devised by M30.  
▪ Catalytic conversion PSE 
and scale-up recommendations, 
with monitoring and control 
concept defined by M30.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  6 
SO2.6 To undertake lab scale testing in continuous processing mode for the 
developed technologies so as to confirm performance at TRL 4-5. 
Related WPs WP2: Intensification of Catalytic Conversion [M1-M30] 
Contribution to impacts Call’s Impacts 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11 (as shown in Section 2.1). 
 
Objective 3 (Research & Innovation): In downstream purification, to develop methods to purify the converted 
sugar streams into non-aqueous functionalised furan monomer bulk/solutions and to create intensification strategies 
minimising furans degradation. 
BioSPRINT KPI 5: Reduction of waste (~20–90% C5 fraction wasted)  
BioSPRINT KPI 6: Reduction of GHG emissions (~0.1 kg CO2/kgmixture 
(mostly heating)) 
BioSPRINT KPI 7: Reduction of energy demand (~2000 kJ /kgmixture 
(removal of water)) 
BioSPRINT KPI 8: Reuse of solvents (maximally reused ~5 times) 
BioSPRINT KPI 9: Purity of furans (~40% (attained applying distillation)) 
Target: < 10% remaining C5 
Target: < 0.05 kgCO2/kgmixture 
 
Target: < 1000 kJ/kgmixture 
 
Target: > 20 times 
Target:>90% (extraction/distillation) 
Sub-objectives Measurable results & targets 
SO3.1: To undertake analytical studies regarding solvent(s) and 
unreacted sugars. 
SO3.2: To investigate the use of advanced continuous techniques 
for the removal of small chain acids, humins and other by -
products generated in dehydration reactions to guarantee 
maximum product quality downstream. 
SO3.3: To develop and integrate innovative PI reaction 
technologies with distillation and extraction methods for 
downstream purification and solvent recovery. 
SO3.4: To identify downstream purification intensification 
challenges related to the scale-up of the concepts and technologies 
developed using PSE tools, control and instrumentation via the 
development of a virtual twin of the reactor and instrumentation 
set-up of the reactor equipment. 
SO3.5 To undertake lab scale testing for the developed 
technologies so as to confirm performance at TRL 4 -5. 
▪ Methodology overview report on downstream 
purification, covering the downstream 
purification of furan -based monomer mix tures, 
ready by M15. 
▪ Report on downstream technology feasibility 
and the purity of outputs, which can be attained, 
prepared by M18. 
▪ Lab development and testing  of d ownstream 
unit operation design models, completed by M31. 
▪ Report on intensification of separations with a 
demonstrator on the intensification of liquid –
liquid separation, heat transfer, and efficient 
thermal integration, produced by M32. 
▪ Downstream PSE with post-BioSPRINT scale-
up recommendations with monitoring and 
control concept defined by M32. 
Related WP WP3: Intensification of Downstream Purification [M6-M32] 
Contribution to impacts Call’s Impacts 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11 (as shown in Section 2.1). 
 
Objective 4 (Research & Innovation): At the final polymerisation stage, to convert furans into resol and novolac-
type resins and polyols and formulate biorenewable resins to enable the convergence of different feedstock 
molecules into similar polymers, allowing maximisation of the final product yields for consumers products. 
BioSPRINT KPI 10: Polymerisation yield  
BioSPRINT KPI 11: Bio-based content of resins and polyols  
BioSPRINT KPI 12: Enhanced fire retardancy, chemical 
and hydrolysis resistance  
BioSPRINT KPI 13: Reduction in polymerisation times for 
polyols and resole-, novolac-type resins in continuous SDR 
processing 
Target: > 85% 
Target: > 65% 
Target: to be quantified 
 
Target: >50% reduction in processing time vs. 
batch processing of similar or higher throughput 
(1-3 kg typically) 
Sub-objectives Measurable results & targets 
SO4.1: To formulate novel resole and novolac -type resins and polyols 
based on the bio-based furan monomers produced and/or in combinations 
with fossil counterparts, check their suitability as replacement for crude-
oil based products in various applications, for use e.g. in wood laminate 
panels and rigid polyurethane foams. Pursue the most promising options. 
SO4.2: To investigate polymerisation intensification using co ntinuous 
processes and spinning disc reactors and d evelop corresponding 
innovative intensification technologies.  
SO4.4: To identify polymerisation challenges related to the scale -up of 
the concepts and technologies developed using PSE tools, control and 
instrumentation via the development of a virtual twin of the reactor and 
instrumentation set-up of the reactor equipment. 
SO4.5: To undertake lab scale testing for the developed technologies so 
as to confirm performance at TRL 5. 
▪ Synthesis and lab-scale production 
of REAC H compliant resins and 
polyols from furfural and 5 -HMF 
achieved by M20. 
▪ Optimised REAC H compliant 
resins and polyols from furfural, 5 -
HMF and their use in wood panels 
and rigid foams, respectively, realised 
by M32. 
▪ Optimised prototypes of laminated 
wood panels (TRL 5), ready by M33. 
▪ Optimised rigid polyurethane 
foams (TRL 5), ready by M33. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  7 
SO4.6: To pave the way for the establishment of a cross -sector 
interconnection between feedstock producers and biorenewable polymers 
manufacturing and thus the foundations of a new bio-based value chain. 
SO4.7: To ensure the developed products are REACH compliant and that 
other regu latory and product/process safety compliance aspects are 
properly addressed. 
▪ Report on intensification of 
bioresins polymerisation produced by 
M34. 
▪ Polymerisation PSE and scale -up 
recommendations, with monitoring 
and control concept defined by M34. 
Related WP WP4: Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation Intensification [M13-M34]  
Contribution to impacts Call’s Impacts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12 (as shown in Section 2.1). 
 
Objective 5 (Validation & Transferability):  To simulate the improved biorefinery concept and processes and 
compare them with SOTA, followed by integration and validation of the developed concepts and technologies for 
the 2 studied streams (FhG/UPM) and a transferability study for the Clariant stream. 
BioSPRINT KPI 14: Biomass losses  Target: reduction by ~20% (see section 2.1) 
Other KPIs: See impact KPIs detailed in section 2.1 
Sub-objectives Measurable results & targets 
SO5.1: To perform simulation and analysis of the 
existing and improved biorefinery process by defining 
process boundaries and collecting input data and building 
simulation models of the existing and improved 
biorefinery concepts. 
SO5.2: To undertake a performance analysis and 
optimisation of the improved intensified biorefinery 
concept and technologies. 
SO5.3: To integrate the relevant developed concepts and 
technologies for the UPM and FhG streams. 
SO5.4: To perform a transferability and replicability 
study for the Clariant stream. 
SO5.5: To optimise and proceed with first upscaling of 
the new integrated biorefinery concepts for UPM , and 
FhG. 
SO5.6: To produce 3kg of selected resins and polyols 
with optimised process at the lab units of UPM and FhG. 
▪ Simulation models of the existing biorefineries & 
KPIs baseline, ready by M13. 
▪ Simulation model of improved biorefinery concepts 
(PI technologies implemented) & report on KPIs, 
ready by M33. 
▪ Report on performance analysis and optimisation of 
improved biorefinery concepts completed by M44. 
▪ Pilot and validation report of intensification methods 
to process hardwoods based HMC from paper mill 
sources at UPM and the organosolv biorefinery (FhG), 
available by M43. 
▪ Technical report on sensibility and transferability of 
intensification methods for multiple feedstocks, 
prepared by M44. 
▪ Production of 3 kg of selected resins and polyols 
with optimised process parameters on the laboratory 
scale, realised by M44. 
Related WP  WP5: Validation, Process Simulation & Integration [M7-M44] 
Contribution to impacts Call’s Impacts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12 (as shown in Section 2.1). 
 
Objective 6 (Sustainability): To demonstrate the final processes and products’ sustainability  and safety ; to 
establish the economic feasibility of the BioSPRINT concepts and technologies via a thorough ILCSA 
Sub-objectives Measurable results & targets 
SO6.1: To set up a robust methodological framework 
for the BioSPRINT ILCSA by establishing 
definitions, settings and system descriptions. 
SO6.2: To perform an Environmental LCA. 
SO6.3: To undertake techno -economic assessment  
(TEA) and ensure the economic viability performance 
of the BioSPRINT concept and technologies. 
SO6.4: To perform a thorough process and p roduct 
safety assessment. 
SO6.5: To provide a 360° integrated sustainability 
assessment for the BioSPRINT integrated biorefinery 
concept and technologies. 
▪ Report on definitions, settings and system description 
for the BioSPRINT ILCSA by M 9, and final version 
ready by M33. 
▪ Report on environmental life cycle assessment 
produced by M45. 
▪ Report on technological assessment including c apital 
cost estimate and process economics of improved 
biorefinery completed by M45. 
▪ Report on socio-economic assessment by M45. 
▪ Report on product & process safety by M43.  
▪ Final Report on integrated sustainability assessment 
produced by M46. 
Related WPs WP6: Integrated Sustainability Assessment [M1-M46] 
Contribution to impacts Call’s Impacts 4, 5, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 and other impacts (as shown in Section 2.1). 
 
Objective 7 (Dissemination & exploitation): To fully exploit the project’s results by means of multidimensional 
Dissemination & Communication (D&C), stakeholder engagement, Training & Capacity-building, standardisation 
and business planning activities 
Sub-objectives Measurable results & targets 
SO7.1: To strategically plan, manage and implement 
multidimensional D&C and stakeholder engagement activities, 
aiming at reaching out to all stakeholder categories along the 
▪ Project website, standard templates and 
supporting documents, ready by M1. 
▪ BioSPRINT PEDR developed from M3. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  8 
BioSPRINT value chain as well as actively liaising with the BBI-
JU and other BBI and bioeconomy projects and initiatives. 
SO7.2: To plan, organise and deliver a TECBP around 3 pillars: a) 
Online modules delivered by end of Y2 with regards to the 4 areas 
of technological interest for BioSPRINT; b) Training and 
transferability workshops organised by UOULU, UNEW, NIC, 
FhG and AEP in Y3, c) Organisation of the BioSPRINT Summer 
School under the supervision of DEC in Y4.  
SO7.3: To identify early adopters for the concept and technologies 
of BioSPRINT and initiate contacts as to pave the way for the 
transfer and experimentation of the concepts an d technologies in 
industrial environments.  
SO7.4: To identify post -project opportunities so as to evolve the 
BioSPRINT concept and technologies from TRL 4 -5 to TRL 7-9 
and prepare a business plan.   
SO7.5: To contribute to existing and emerging standards related to 
PI, the BioSPRINT processes and products, with the establishment 
of a CENELEC Workshop Agreement (CWA) on ‘PI for 
Biorefining Processes ’ and participation of partners in  related  
CEN/CENELEC committees. 
SO7.6:   To pro-actively manage the innovation of the project and 
ensure IP is properly managed and protected. 
SO7.7: To leverage the BioSPRINT EAB so as to maximise the 
dissemination and exploitation strategy of the project. 
▪ By M 48, a robust  (D&C) strategy will 
have ensured the recognition of BioSPRINT 
as a reference RIA project for the 
bioeconomy.  
▪ At least 200 stakeholders trained as part 
of the 4 BioSPRINT TECBP workshops by 
M38, and 80 will have attended the 
BioSPRINT Summer School by M47. 
▪ By M45, industrial Case studies, journal 
papers an d other documents will be 
published (Table 2.5 on page 40).  
▪ By M47, early adopters and post-project 
opportunities will be in place and the 
protection procedures for the project ’s 
results will have been defined.  
▪ By M 48, key exploitable results and 
relevant IP is identified.  
▪  CWA established with CENELEC. With 
report on standardisation activities 
produced by M48. 
▪ By M48, t he EAB will also have made 
specific recommendations w.r.t. to the 
maximisation of the project’s impact. 
Related WP WP7: Dissemination and Exploitation [M1-M48] and WP8: Project coordination [M1-M48] 
Contribution to impacts Call’s Impacts 1-3 
 
The BioSPRINT objectives are well aligned w ith EU and other policy documents such as the 2017 Strategic 
Innovation and Research Agenda (SIRA)10 of BIC, the 2018 Bioeconomy strategy, the Communication ‘Accelerating 
Clean Energy Innovation’ (COM/2016/763 final), etc.
1.2 Relation to the BBI JU annual Work Plan     
Table 1-3 describes how BioSPRINT is addressing the scope and challenge of call H2020-BBI-JTI-2019. 
Table 1-3: Relation to call H2020-BBI-JTI-2019 
Topic’s Scope  How the proposal addresses the topic 
Develop and 
evaluate process 
intensification steps 
and schemes for an 
integrated 
lignocellulosic 
biorefinery to lower 
capital and 
operational costs 
for safely achieving 
high yields of 
desired products. 
BioSPRINT develops, tests and validates PI methods for (1) upstream purification (WP1), (2) 
conversion of sugars from the HMC fraction of lignocellulosic biomass (WP2), as well as (3) 
their downstream purification (WP3) and (4) Polymerisation (WP4) to obtain biorenewable 
furan-based resins for novel polymeric  applications. Figure 1.2 in section 1.3.1 (page 10) 
clearly identifies the process steps where BioSPRINT is targeting reduction in CAPEX (e.g. 
equipment size), reduction in OPEX (e.g. reduction in energy and material streams), and safety 
gains (studied in detail as part of T6.5 dedicated to product & process safety). Higher yields of 
high quality, high purity products (bioresins) ready for further valorisation in the speciality 
chemicals value chain are also accounted due to  the valorisation of a usually unvalorised 
biomass fraction  (HMCs) and innovative PI techniques (SDRs, extractive -reactive catalytic 
conversion, etc.) . The BioSPRINT KPIs indicated in Table 1.2 above supplement this 
information. BioSPRINT also evaluates and validates the integration of PI methods into end-
to-end biorefining implementation concepts (WP5) for 2 industrial streams from partners FhG 
and UPM, as well as undertakes a detailed transferability case stud y for a stream provided by 
Clariant (EAB member) . The qualitative and quantitative effect of applying BioSPRINT 
technologies and concepts into 2 industrially relevant streams will be studied in detail as part 
of WP6, which is dedicated to an ILCSA. The expected impact is detailed in section 2.1. 
When addressing 
the in situ recovery 
of targeted 
products, proposals 
should focus on 
technologies that 
will also enable the 
removal of highly 
In BioSPRINT, in situ recovery of 5 -HMF and furfural as target products will be achieved 
through hybridisation of reaction and extraction  technologies. Aqueous dehydration of 
sugars using homogenous catalysts leads to low selectivity towards 5 -HMF and furfural, as 
these highly reactive intermediates can undergo further decomposition reactions, even during 
downstream purification steps. In WP2, selective heterogeneous catalysts will be developed in 
an integrated fashion with extractive-reaction technologies for in situ recovery of the products. 
Once captured in the organic phase, the target products will be stabilised. This will also drive 
any equilibrium reactions forward to accelerate these. Additionally, mass transfer to the organic 
 
10 Strategic Innovation & Research Agenda, Bio-Based Industries for Development & Growth in Europe, BIC, May 2017. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  9 
reactive products 
and should 
consider a range of 
products including 
liquid and gaseous 
products. 
phase will be intensified through t he use of ACRs, which will enhance and decouple mixing 
from residence time, accelerating the removal of the target products from the aqueous phase. 
Furthermore, purification of the reactive intermediates to full isolation will also be intensified 
in WP3, p articularly for aqueous -organic phase separation and reboiling intensification in 
distillation units. Conventional separation of aqueous and organic phases through gravitational 
decanting is slow and it will be accelerated using hydrocyclones, which will q uickly remove 
the organic phase from contact with aqueous phase and solid catalyst straight at the outlet of 
the reactor due to the compact nature of the units. Additionally, thermal decomposition during 
distillation operations will be prevented by developing plate reboiling units, which can operate 
with minimal temperature driving forces, while offering intensified heat exchange rates. 
Proposals should 
address all 
requirements for 
RIA as shown in 
Table 3 of the 
Annual Work plan 
2019. 
The technology 
readiness level 
(TRL) at the end of 
the project should 
be 4-5 for the bio-
based value chain 
in question.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All requirements for RIAs detailed in the BBI Work Plan 2019 are being addressed: 
✓ BioSPRINT goes beyond SOTA by building on assets from previous projects listed on page 
19 of the proposal and further detailed in section 1.3.2.   BioSPRINT clearly demonstrates the 
benefits versus the SOTA both in terms of intensified processing technolog ies and product 
quality, including comparison with fossil-based counterpart resins. This demonstration will be 
further clarified by review of SOTA technologies which will inform the BioSPRINT 
technological agenda. The use of furfural and 5-HMF as building blocks will provide process-
related advantages. Being liquid at room temperature and characterised by low volatility, these 
can be easily added to the reaction mass through dropping funnels (on lab scale) or dedicated 
pipelines (on pilot and industrial sca le), without requiring dosing devices for solids (as it 
happens with paraformaldehyde). In this way, a more controlled and consistent concentration 
will be guaranteed. Moreover, 5 -HMF, being less toxic than formaldehyde, will show lower 
environmental and health risks during operations and ideally better labelling of the resulting 
products. Performance-wise, the unique chemical features of both furfural and 5 -HMF will 
contribute to the improvement of some important features of the target derivatives. In fact, their 
hetero-aromatic structure will increase the aromaticity of the resulting polyols, providing 
superior thermal and fire resistance with respect to formaldehyde-based ones. The replacement 
of the methylene bridge deriving from the use of formaldehyde/paraformaldehyde with an 
aromatic ring should help to improve mechanical properties (e.g. compression strength) when 
the final derivatives are formulated (e.g. rigid PU foams). 
✓BioSPRINT offers evidence, extracted from development up to TRL 3 which will be further 
up to TRL 4 -5, that the proposed biorefining technologies are more efficient and sustainable  
than current ones (see section 1.3.2 ‘Positioning of the BioSPRINT project on page 18).  
✓The BioSPRINT WP structure includes activities for value chain  stakeholder base building, 
BBI-JU engagement and liaison with other BBI and bioeconomy projects (ST7.1.3).  
✓ WP6 is dedicated to an Integrated Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment (ILCSA) according 
to ISO 14040/ISO 14044.  
✓BioSPRINT will undertake standardisation activities so as to establish a CWA on ‘PI for 
Biorefining Processes’ as well as participate in relevant standardisation technical committees. 
✓Compliance with relevant EU legislations will be addressed via a thorough assessment of 
safety challenges, including technical barriers as well as a rigorous assessment of product safety 
issues including regulatory aspects (e.g. REACH).  
✓ BioSPRINT also includes a techno-economic assessment (TEA) at T6.3. 
Proposals should 
clearly state the 
starting and end 
TRLs of the key 
technology or 
technologies 
targeted in the 
project. 
BioSPRINT will evolve processing technologies in four processing areas (Figure 1.1) which 
will reach TRL 5 for the majority of the technologies, and TRL 4 for the remaining ones, by 
the end of the project. Details are provided in section 1.3.2 ‘Positioning of the project’. 
Industry 
participation in the 
project would be 
considered as an 
added value (…). 
Industry participation in BioSPRINT is geared towards ensuring that the research and 
innovation of the project matches industrial and market needs and thus towards maximi sing 
their potential of being further evolved and integrated into actual production facilities.  
The BioSPRINT consortium counts industri al partners, in particular UPM  and PF R, and 
equally SME actors (AEP, IRIS), whose participation is aimed at improving their biorefining 
processes and connecting with other actors of the lignocellulosic feedstock provision and 
processing chains for valorisation of HMC streams, which currently are not optimally valorised 
at their sites. For increasing the engagement of industrial stakeholders in the project, the EAB 
counts industrial organisations such as Clariant (world leading specialty chemical company), 
ST1 (bioethanol producer), Sappi (provider of wood pulp, paper pulp, paper -based and 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  10 
biochemical solutions) and Johnson Matthey (catalyst manufacturing, process development and 
licensing).  
 
BioSPRINT also addresses the cross-cutting priorities of the Call (Table 1-4): 
Table 1-4. How the Proposal Addresses the Cross-cutting Priorities of call BBI-JTI-2019 
Socio-economic 
sciences 
BioSPRINT is characterised by interdisciplinary approaches, the combined and interlinked application of 
ideas and knowledge from various actors (academic and research institutions, industrial biorefining actors, 
SME technology providers, etc.). The approach (explained in section 1.3) aims at incorporating aspects related 
to disciplines such as economics, law, ethics , education, etc. EBOS will lead task (ST8.4.3) to objectively 
monitor and streamline Socio-economic science and humanities (SSH) topics, ensuring that SSH contributions 
are included at various stages of the project. Addressed in WP 1-7. Linked with Obj. 1-7. 
Key-Enabling 
Technologies (KETs) 
 
BioSPRINT hinges its research and innovation on a combination of cross -cutting KETs such a s industrial 
biorefining, advanced production and manufacturing systems (including PI, PSE, PAT, CFD, etc.). as well as 
activities in advanced materials as end -products. BioSPRINT is a RIA that actively supports the integration 
of KETs within biorefining operations, and aims at undertaking a number of activities closer to applications 
and the markets, such as through ILCSA that builds on a keen assessment of the environmental, social and 
safety-related impact of the project; a  TEA to ensure alignment of the  innovation with market needs, the 
identification of early adopters as well as a through validation exercise in complete partnership with industrial 
partners. Addressed in WPs 1-5. Linked with Obj. 1-5.
1.3 Concept and methodology 
 
1.3.1 Overall concept 
The BioSPRINT concept is to successfully research the implementation and transposition of PI methods, which 
have proved highly promising or successful in other industries, to the purification and conversion of sugars from 
the hemicellulose (HMC) fraction of lignocellulosic biomass into furan monomers, and to the production of 
new biorenewable resins for several applications, including polymer applications from the obtained furans.  
 
In the context of conversion of HMC waste streams to bioresins, BioSPRINT will investigate the purification of the 
HMC streams to obtain pure C5 and C6 sugars through removal of lignin, inorganic species, small chain acids and 
other pre-treatment generated and introduced chemicals. This will be followed by the catalytic d ehydration of the 
multitude of C5 and C6 sugars towards furan -based monomers, in particular 5 -HMF and furfural to converge the 
range of target products and maximise yields. Finally, purification of the monomers and polymerisation into novel 
resole and novolac-type resins and Mannich-polyols will be addressed. Figure 1.2 serves to illustrate the BioSPRINT 
concept and the envisaged PI technologies at each of the four process stages. For simplicity and clarity, only the 
process units that will be subj ect of PI activities or new products are shown.  Additional ancillary equipment and 
secondary process units were not included in the diagram (e.g. solids removal by filtration was not included). 
 
 
Figure 1.2. BioSPRINT Biorefining Concept  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  11 
In particular, the key operation units in the process pathway to convert HMC streams originated from lignocellulose 
fractioning pre-treatment is exposed, together with the associated inefficiencies in terms of CAPEX (i.e. large and 
expensive equipment), OPEX (i.e. low yields of products, large consumptions of chemicals, energy and large waste 
generation). The safety hazards are also highlighted. For comparison, the BioSPRINT intensified process route is 
shown too, highlighting reduction in CAPEX (i.e. small and cheaper equipment), OPEX (i.e. larger yields of products, 
reduced amounts of chemicals, energy and waste generation) and safety hazards. BioSPRINT will also make use of 
secondary processes and ancillary equipment, particularly biomass fractioning, solids handling and separation 
through standard filtration units, and hydrolysis of HMC into oligomers prior to upstream purification. However, as 
the aim of the project is to focus on the highest impact units for PI during HMC conversion, for simplicity and clarify 
of the proposal, such secondary and ancillary process steps, when performed through conventional technologies, will 
not be mentioned in this document as these will not be object of PI activities or other development work under the 
umbrella of BioSPRINT. T able 1-5 provides an overview of the envisaged technologies, industries (e.g. 
petrochemical, pharmaceutical , etc ) where they have been piloted/demonstrated for PI purposes, the potential 
identified for biorefining of HMC streams and the expected benefits from applying them in this context (e.g. lower 
costs, lower GHG emissions, etc.). 
Table 1-5. BioSPRINT Technologies, Potential for Biorefining of Hemicelluloses and Expected Benefits 
Technology Current reference application 
in industries 
Potential for biorefining concepts Expected benefits 
SDR 
Precipita-
tion 
Solvent-antisolvent precipitation 
in SDR has been demonstrated at 
lab scale for the recrystallisation 
of an Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredient of interest to company 
GSK11, precipitation of 
nanoparticles of starch12 and 
curcumin13. Applications: 
Pharmaceuticals, chemicals.  
Controlled precipitation of lignin from 
HMC streams. Precipitation of C5 and 
C6 sugars in cases where membrane 
purification is difficult. 
Reduced CAPEX, 
especially if SDR can be 
developed as a multistage 
process for precipitation 
and solvent recovery. 
Reduced amounts of 
solvent use and waste 
generation. Control over 
precipitated particle size 
and size distribution. 
Improved solids handling. 
Membrane 
technologie
s 
Wastewater treatment in pulp and 
paper industry. 
Hybridisation of separation 
technologies, decreased amount of unit 
operations, Possibility to valori se 
efficiently the low -value HMC side 
streams, increasing material efficiency. 
Purification of C5 and C6 su gars. 
Removal of lignin, inorganics and pre -
treatment chemicals.  
Reduced OPEX, Reduced 
energy consumption, 
Improved material 
efficiency, Reduced waste 
streams, Lower energy 
consumption than current 
distillation methods. Less 
degradation of sugars 
(higher yields). Removal 
of non-volatile species. 
HTP ML- 
Assisted 
Catalyst 
Develop-
ment 
Methodology proven for 
development of lab scale catalysts 
for hydrogenation of furans and 
oxidation of sugars. Applications: 
chemicals and biorenewables. 
Accelerated catalyst development and 
optimisation, with easy integration of 
sensitivities to feedstocks composition. 
Easy screening of formulations using 
affordable non-critical elements. 
Improved yields and 
sensitivities. Reduced 
catalyst development 
costs. Reduced catalyst 
costs.  
Extractive-
reaction 
The concept of integrating 
process functions such as 
extraction and reaction or reaction 
and separation in one hybrid step 
is one of the underpinning 
approaches to realising PI in 
practice14,15. Methodology 
successfully applied to biodiesel 
processes. Applications: 
chemicals, petrochemicals. 
Removal of furan reactive intermediates 
from sugar conversion. Technology can 
also be rolled into other applications , 
such as one-pot synthesis hydrolysis of 
xylans and galactans, followed by 
catalytic transformation in t he same 
reactor16. Promising lab scale 
developments of cellulosic and 
hemicellulosic transformations 
combined with in -situ product solvent 
Reduced CAPEX (2 
processes in 1 reactor). In 
situ removal of high 
reactive intermediates – 
larger yields. 
Reduced energy demand 
due to lower downstream 
purification requirements. 
 
 
 
11Brechtelsbauer, C. et al, (2000), Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 39, 2175-2182 
12S. Sana et al. (2019) Green Processing and Synthesis, 8, 510–518. 
13 Khan, W.H. et al. (2014) Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification, 80, 1-10 (2014). 
14 Reay, D. et al. (2013) Process Intensification, 2nd Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK  
15 Boodhoo K. and Harvey A ,(2013) Process Intensification for Green Chemistry, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, UK 
16 Delidovich I., Leonhard K. and Palkovits R. (2014) Energy Environ. Sci., 7, 2803-2830. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  12 
extraction13 have opened up the scope 
for demonstration of pilot scale systems.  
 
Agitated 
Cell 
Reactor 
(ACR) 
ACRs have been developed for 
lab, pilot and production scale of 
several reactions, particularly for 
multiphase systems including 
solids and flammables handling17. 
Applications: chemicals,  
biochemicals and pharmaceuticals 
Multiple applications in multiphase 
chemistry. Mixing intensification in 
multiphase systems where mass-transfer 
is limiting, and turbulence is difficult to 
achieve via flowrate/velocity increase. 
Extractive-reaction and 
heterogeneously catalysed systems. 
Decoupling mixing from residence time 
means flexibility to accommodate 
multiple kinetics in the same  system, 
and easy scale -up/production scale 
deployment. 
Lower CAPEX 
(intensified mass transfer 
& reaction). Lower OPEX 
(lower solvent needs). 
Improved safety (smaller 
hazardous inventories and 
milder process 
conditions). Feedstock 
and product flexibility 
(can easily accommodate 
different kinetics and 
residence times). 
Thermal 
system 
integration 
Limited integration exists. 
Applications: petrochemicals; 
chemicals. 
Integrating upstream, reactions and 
downstream (optimisation). 
Reduced OPEX. 
Merging 
unit 
operations 
Aqueous medium removal (dist.) 
Applications: Petrochemicals; 
chemicals. 
Removing the need for selected unit 
operations in a cascade. 
Reduced CAPEX, OPEX. 
Modulari-
sation 
Non-modular. Applications: 
Stranded gas wells. 
Flexibility/adaptability/scaling. Reduced risks. 
Hydro 
cyclones 
Proven at industrial scale for 
water-oil separation in oil 
extraction rigs. Applications: 
petrochemicals. 
Intensification of separation of aqueous 
and immiscible organic phases in 
multiple applications, leading to 
minimal footprints (hydrocyclones are 
compact units, only a few cm diameter. 
Lower CAPEX (small 
equipment footprint), & 
OPEX (less 
maintenance), Improved 
safety (minimal 
hazardous inventory). 
Plat heat 
exchangers 
and heat 
pipes 
Proven at industrial scale in food, 
pharmaceutical, chemical and 
petrochemical applications. 
 
Applications: Food, Pharma, 
chemical, petrochemicals, etc. 
Heat transfer intensification and 
integration. Particularly useful where 
isothermalisation and minimal driving 
forces are desirable to avoid degradation 
of products. Easy to integrate with 
available streams. Robustness to handle 
fouling fluids and variable heating 
duties (specially plate heat exchangers). 
Lower CAPEX (compact 
units, and passive in the 
case of heat pipes), Lower 
OPEX (easy cleaning), 
Flexibility to handle 
variable production rates 
and feedstocks. 
SDR 
Polymerisa
tion 
SDR is used for challenging 
polymerisation reactions (e.g free 
radical polymerisation of styrene 
and acrylics, step-growth 
polymerisation of unsaturated 
polyesterifications18). 
Applications: Petrochemicals, 
Polymer. 
Step- growth polymerisation 
mechanisms for resole- and novolac-
type resins and polyols will also benefit 
from the intensified mixing and 
heat/mass transfer capabilities of SDR 
to enhance polymerisation rates.  
Enhanced polymerisation 
rates and reduced 
processing times.  
Up to 15% energy saving 
potential.  
Reduced inventory of 
hazardous materials and 
improved process safety. 
PSE tools Wide application throughout 
process industry. Applications 
mainly in food & pharma sectors. 
Prevent scale-up shortcomings. 
Establish reference process control & 
quality asssement methods. 
Reduce upscaling risks. 
Maximise operability and 
intrinsec QA. 
 
The following sections detail the concept of BioSPRINT in each of the focus technological areas. 
 
1.3.1.1 Upstream Purification of Hemicelluloses Streams 
 
In BioSPRINT, the key PI strategy will be the development of hybrid membrane technologies  as low-energy 
solutions to remove soluble non -sugar components and concurrently achieve higher concentration of 
hemicellulosic sugars. The membrane technologies can be combined with e.g. adsorption to ensure high purity of 
the target sugars. The aim is to increase the TRL level from 3 to 5. 
 
Two major challenges arise in the upstream purification phase: 1) separation of C5 and C6 sugars from inorganic 
species, small chain acids and other small molecules; 2) separation of sugars from extractives, lignin & non-volatiles. 
Membrane technologies (micro- (MF), ultra- (UF) and nanofiltration (NF), reverse osmosis (RO) and pervaporation 
 
17 https://www.amt.uk/application-technical-notes.  
18 (a) Boodhoo, K et al (2000) ., Appl.  Therm. Eng. 20(12), 1127 -1146 (b) Boodhoo, K. et al. (2003) ACS Symposium  Series No. 847, 
Washington DC (c) Boodhoo, K. et al. (2000) Green Chemistry, 2(5), 235-244 (d) Boodhoo et al. (2006) J. Appl. Poly. Sci., 101 (1), 8-19.  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  13 
(PV)) combined with absorption will be studied in the removal of inorganic species, short chain acids and other non-
volatile impurities from C5 and C6 sugars from the d iluted aqueous and organosolv streams before catalytic 
conversion. In membrane technologies, the components can be fractioned by molecular weight, charge, diffusivity 
or vapour pressure. Therefore, the best separation result can be achieved by combining e.g. MF, UF, NF, RO and/or 
PV in series. To achieve high purity, membrane purification can also be operated in diafiltration mode. The membrane 
separation can also be combined with adsorption and photocatalysis or another advanced oxidation process to purify, 
recover and reuse both the process water and the valuable compounds included. A photocatalytic membrane unit 19 
developed at UOULU will be utili sed in the water recovery. Up to present, one technical challenge concerning the 
membrane separation technologies has been poor resistance of the majority of the membranes towards the prevailing 
operation conditions, such as extreme pH values, high temperatures or aggressive solvents20. Fouling of membranes 
and concentration polarisation can hinder their performance in both the short and long term. Hence, in BioSPRINT, 
close attention will be paid to factors affecting those phenomena. The composition of the feedstock streams will be 
analyzed in detail, thus enabling the selection of the most suitable membranes  and operation conditions for the 
purification. Prefiltration will be used to remove the solid particles that can cause mechanical abrasion or form a cake 
layer on the membrane surface. DoE techniques will be utili sed in selecting the optimal membrane materials an d 
properties as well as in optim isation of the operation conditions affecting the separation efficiencies and fluxes. 
Membranes coated with a photocatalytically active layer21 have been observed to reduce fouling. CFD will be applied 
in optimizing of the hydrodynamics of the processes further preventing fouling and concentration polarisation.   
 
Alongside the removal of impurities, membrane technologies may allow concentration of streams using considerably 
lower power-inputs in comparison to traditional techniques via replacement22,23 or hybridisation24,25. For instance, the 
intensified hybrid separation processes have been proved to reduce energy consumption of seawater desalination by 
14–39%26,27 and in alcohol or solvent dehydration more than 40%28. The intensified hybrid separation processes can 
reduce energy consumption of the upstream purification step at least by 30% 29 when compared with current 
distillation processes used to remove pre-treatment solvents and precipitate the lignin. In addition, some calculations 
show that hybridisation of the separation processes can reduce the total separation costs by 25 –60% compared to 
conventional processes 30.The membrane technologies also have a positive impact on operational safety as lower 
temperatures and decreased usage chemicals are preferred 31. The target of the upstream purification process is to 
obtain pure concentrated sugar fractions with at least 80 –90% recovery of the HMCs present in the waste stream 
representing an increase in total lignocellulose biomass recovery for valorisation of 20%. 
 
Additionally, PI methods for precipitation  will be used and coupling HMC hydrolysis with the separation 
processes will be investigated as strategy to aid recovery . The objective is to intensify the upstream purif ication 
stages by combining the unit processes into a (semi)-hybrid process demonstrating modularity of the technology.  
Additional PI methods for precipitation of lignin will be investigated in conjunction with membrane separation, 
particularly for the UPM stream where the lignin content can be high. Here we envisage applying solvent-antisolvent 
precipitation concepts to extract and precipitate the soluble lignin out of the aqueous phase. Particle uniformity and 
controlled rates of formation are essential to ensure product quality and easiness of solids recovery. To achieve 
uniformly sized particles from precipitation/crystall isation, controlling a uniform supersaturation level throughout 
the system is key. The Spinning Disc Reactor (SDR), by virtue of its rapid micro mixing in the high-shear thin film 
environment, has the capability to meet these requirements. By providing the opportunity for a homogeneous reaction 
environment in terms of concentration, temperature and mass transfer, the SDR will enable a tight control of 
precipitation rates and particle sizes, leading to high product purity. Several studies of precipitation processes in the 
SDR by Boodhoo’s research group at UNEW have indeed validated these expectations32. Therefore, BioSPRINT will 
build on that previous experience. By varying operating conditions in the SDR such as disc rotational speed, ratio of 
 
19 Rathnayake B. (2015). The Removal of Bisphenol A from Wastewater by Photocatalytic Degradation and Hybrid Photocatalytic Membrane 
Technique. Master’s Thesis. University of Oulu, FI. 
20 (a ) Lee K. et al. (2015)  Journal of Membrane Science, 478, pp. 75–84. (b) Schlesinger R. et al. (2006), Desalination, 192, pp. 303–314; (c) 
Weber R. et al. (2003), Desalination, 157, pp. 113–125. 
21 Juholin P. Hybrid membrane processes in industrial water treatment. Doctoral Thesis. University of Oulu. 
22 Drioli et al, 2011, Journal of Membrane Science, 380, 1-8 
23 Haerens K. et al. 2010, Green Chem. 12, 2182-2188. 
24 Abels C et al. (2013) Journal of Membrane Science, 444, 285-317. 
25 C. A. M. Afonso et al. (2007), Green Separation Processes: Fundamental and Applications, eds., 978-3-527-30985-6, p. 263 
26 Wang Q. et al. Journal of Membrane Science 581, 439–452. 
27 Choi J. et al. 2019 Desalination 462, 19–28. 
28 Roza M. et al. (2006) IChemE Distillation and Absorption 2006 Symposium Series 152. ISBN 9780852955055. 
29 Internal data from FhG. 
30 Fontalvo J. et al. (2005) Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 44, 5259-5266. 
31 García V. et al (2014) J Chem Technol Biotechnol 89, 803–813. 
32 (a) S. Sana et al. Green Processing and Synthesis, 8, 510–518 (2019); (b) Mohammadi S. et al. (2014) Chem.  Eng. J. 258, 171–184.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  14 
solvent to antisolvent flowrates and disc texture, we can tailor the size of the precipitated lignin particles to facilitate 
their removal by membrane filtration further downstream. 
 
1.3.1.2 Catalytic Conversion of Hemicellulose Sugars into Monomers 
In BioSPRINT, we will investigate, apply and integrate catalysis, kinetics and in situ separation methods of 
reactive intermediates into a single intensified process step to maximise sugar conversion, reduce generation of 
waste by-products, minimise hazardous solvent inventory and energy consumption, and improve process safety. 
The catalytic conversion of sugars will be developed via dehydration to 5-HMF and furfural, two platform molecules 
of high economical interest33. Several challenges are encountered in this process step, related to feedstock and process 
complexity, and instability of the reactive intermediates that constitute the target species of interest for downstream 
use34. Due to the existence of such challenges at feedstock at multiple process levels and scales, BioSPRINT ‘s 
intention is to address a number of inefficiency issues in this step using a holistic approach.  
In this area, the BioSPRINT work will focus on integrating into a single intensified process step three processes: (1) 
Catalysis, (2) Kinetics and (3) In-situ separation of reactive intermediates. Emphasis will be put into coupling 
conversion of multiple sugar species into a single stage process  by optimisation of reaction conditions, green 
solvent selection and use of ACRs as PI methods to intensify mixing and tightly control conversion and selectivity.  
Additionally, intensification via hybridisation of reaction and extrac tion techniques will also be investigated to 
enable in situ removal of highly reactive target products avoiding further degradation in the reactor. Integration 
between catalyst and reactor design will be achieved using HTP and ML methods for catalyst development, leading 
to more selective processes using less harsh process conditions. This will lead to an efficient reactor design, reducing 
reactor and downstream separations footprints. 
 
The first key challenge in catalytic convers ion of sugars from HMC streams is to address simultaneous conversion 
of multiple sugars undergoing chemical reactions at different kinetics. Due to the complexity of the mixtures which 
contain several different C5 and C6 sugars, there is the potential to generate a wide range of side products and tuning 
of catalyst selectively is compromised. The multitude of sugars present also leads to different conversion rates, and 
it is often necessary to extend the residence times in the reactors to allow sufficient conversion for slower reactions. 
Consequently, faster reactions can progress beyond optimal selectivity points, leading to degradation of the target 
molecules of interest. Current processes are scarce and mostly restricted to single sugar conversion (i.e. f ructose or 
glucose via fructose isomerisation). In BioSPRINT, we will address these specific challenges making use of HTP 
and ML methodologies to drive and accelerate catalyst development. HTP methodologies developed at UNEW35 will 
allows to create and test  catalyst libraries based in such materials in a short time period, whilst including activity, 
selectivity and stability enhancing elements such as add info here. Such techniques will allow the exploration of a 
wider range of process conditions and feedstock compositions than what is conventionally possible. ML algorithms 
and analytics prediction models developed by UOULU and eBOS, respectively, in the FUNBARK and CHARIOT 
projects, will be employed to create predictive ability between experimental data and accelerate catalyst optimisation. 
This will lead to fast identification of catalysts with maximum activity for conversion of complex sugar mixtures 
with optimal selectivity towards the key products of interest, with the objective being to obtain a catalyst wit h 85% 
selectivity towards 5-HMF and furfural, resulting to 20% reduction in by-products generation. 
In parallel, a detailed kinetic analysis employing multi-scale process modelling will be carried out by NIC.  
 
The kinetics of dehydration and by-products generation will be determined for the different sugars in the system 
using they key catalytic systems of interest. A kinetic model for the system will be established to allow determination 
of optimal operation points, paying particular attention to the coupling of reaction with separation as described below. 
Starting from idealised micro -kinetic models36, the objective shall be to translate the methodology to the realistic 
process operations through multi -scale mechanistic modelling developed at NIC37, improving the yield of 
functionalised bio-based furans (furfural, HMF, etc.) by 5–10% considering mineral acid-catalysed benchmark. First, 
the objective will be to proceed from unrecyclable mineral (Brønsted) acids, such as H 2SO4, which are applied 
presently, to solid catalyst materials, having a tuneable Brønsted/Lewis site number, acidity and distribution, which 
inherently also shifts the equilibrium of reactions. This will allow for higher furan yields, a more circular process 
(catalyst being recyclable), as well as PI facilitation (an easier acid maintenance in 1 phase only, e.g. by 
immobilisation). Secondly, the objective will relate to the application of the multi-scale process models to complex 
feedstock mixtures, which will allow for a quantitative operation description, especially considering the interactions 
of components, opening the door to optimisation. As an example, even upon applying solid acid catalysts, 
formic/levulinic acids as unwanted reaction products shift the  pH of media, thus inherently inducing a variation in 
catalysis as well. The third particular objective is related to the intensification by reactive extraction process. 
 
33 E4Tech, LBNet (2017) UK Top Bio-Based Chemicals Opportunities, Lignocellulose Biorefining Networkd, BBSRC, UK. 
34 Rosatelly et al. (2011) Green Chemistry, 13, 754-793. 
35 https://www.ncl.ac.uk/sustainability/funding/awardedprojects/rational%20catalyst%20development/ 
36 Nikbin et al. (2012) ChemCatChem, 4(4), 504-511 and Yang et al. (2015), ChemSusChem, 8(8), 1334-1341 
37Šivec, Grilic and Likozar (2019) Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, In Press, DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.9b00898 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  15 
Combining the latter with detailed mechanistic model, which will consider input feedst ock composition, 
thermodynamic equilibrium compositions, chemical reaction kinetics, mass transfer resistances and biphasic 
distribution coefficients will allow for optimising the yield of furans. This will not only improve the performance of 
reactive bio-refining operation, but will lessen the burden on downstream unit operations as well. 
 
A second key challenge in this process step is the reactive nature of 5-HMF and furfural in the dehydration pathway. 
Unless isolated in a timely fashion, 5-HMF and furfural can react further and degrade. This has led to development 
of expensive and complex processes that rely on the use of vast amounts of extraction solvents and which require 
large capital and operation costs to run multiple large extraction and distillat ion units to separate the products and 
recover the large amounts of solvent. Alternatively, current demonstration processes in place employ costly high 
pressure and high temperature hydrothermal routes 38. PI techniques play a crucial role in addressing this  second 
challenge in the system. In BioSPRINT we will exploit the use of extractive reaction processes 39 to isolate the 5 -
HMF and furfural reactive intermediates from the aqueous reaction medium. In this process, a solvent immiscible 
with water will be used to selectively extract the target reaction products from the aqueous phase, preventing further 
dehydration. Solvent selection will address the use of green solvents whenever possible, and it will focus on 
integration of in-situ extraction processes for multiple reactive intermediates into a single process, while optimising 
selection for rejection of the multiple sugars and by-products present in the aqueous medium. Solvent selection will 
be closely linked with activities at FhG to ensure easiness of solvent recovery and product purification downstream.  
In addition to PI through hybridisation methods to create an extractive-reaction process, the multiphase nature 
of this system leads itself to further intensification of combined solid-liquid reaction and liquid-liquid mass transfer 
rates through enhancement of the shear and mixing processes within a hybrid reactor-separator unit. In BioSPRINT, 
mixing intensification which is expected to enhance both reaction and subsequent extraction step will be tested using 
different technologies, including ACRs. 
In ACRs, the oscillatory nature of mixing disrupts established flow patterns, leading to intensification of mixing, heat 
and mass transfer. More specifically, the aim will be to increase liquid -liquid interfacial areas which will enhance 
mass transfer rates, allowing the reduction of the amount of extraction solvent used, resulting in small reaction vessels 
and lower separation costs downstream. 
 
1.3.1.3 Downstream Purification of Furan Monomers 
In downstream purification processes, a key BioSPRINT project focus will be the recovery of product(s), solvent(s) 
and unreacted sugar feedstock. Additionally, it might be necessary to remove short chain acids, humins and other 
unwanted by-products, generated in parallel dehydration reactions , to guarantee maximum product quality 
downstream. Similarly, to the upstream purification  units, emphasis will be directed towards integration and 
intensification of technolog ies capable of minimising net energy consumption and product degradation, 
greenhouse gas emissions and costs, associated with downstream separation processes. 
The following diagram (Figure 1-3) illustrates our concept for downstream purification of HMC streams: 
The development of downstream unit 
operations will revolve around producing 
different furan chemicals or mixtures (furfural, 
5-HMF and homologues) for the final product 
formulation by polymerisation, which shall 
ensue. The objective will be to attain the 
appropriate monomer purity  for poly -
condensation following. The reactor–
extractor unit upstream will provide the 
extraction of the furan molecules from the 
aqueous into the organic solvent medium in 
order to elevate the yield of products beyond 
single (water) phase thermodynamic 
equilibrium yield, whi le this extracting phase 
shall be the one to be treated downstream. 
A key challenge in this process section will be to achieve separation of the furans from the extraction solvent used 
and from other by-products formed upstream in a reliable and efficient way, while guaranteeing the required product 
purity. A continuous distillation process is anticipated to play a central separation role as this will provide the most 
efficient purification, in order to attain furfural, HMF or a mixture of derivatives, these being non-aqueous, as water 
would inhibit the kinetics/thermodynamics of polymerisation. 
 
Within BioSPRINT, downstream process operations will be developed, based on the bench scale determination of 
equilibria (Figure 1.4), which will be supported by quantitative structure–activity relationships (QSAR), both of 
 
38 http://www.ava-biochem.com/pages/en/technology.php 
39 Boodhoo K. and Harvey A. (2013) Process Intensification for Green Chemistry, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, UK 
Figure 1.3. Process Intensification of Furan Monomers 
Production 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  16 
these playing a role in developing the use 
of pilot separation equipment  (Figure 
1.5) to deliver pure furan monomers. As 
the behaviour of the bio -based furan 
compounds during distillation, extraction 
or evaporation is not very well described to 
date, especially for  mixtures, the 
BioSPRINT approach shall also provide 
valuable thermodynamic data, as well as 
the equations of state, which will be 
translatable even beyond the BioSPRINT 
for emerging bio -refining downstream. 
Pilot scale campaigns, supported by 
simulations, shall be designed in a way, so 
as to examine the flexibility of the 
operation in terms of envisaged feedstock 
variability. As this is one of inherent bio-refining characteristics, dynamic process operation will also be examined, 
both in terms of simulations, as well as brief experimental campaigns, aiming at unchanged product quality. 
 
A second key challenge in this process section is to minimise both the amount of energy required and the degradation 
of reaction products during the high-temperature distillation processes. This will be achieved through a combination 
of energy integration and PI strategies. The implemented process integration of downstream shall consist of three 
main aspects, which are listed below:40 
• Thermal system integration (between distillation and other available streams, including reactive-extraction and 
pre-treatment streams available at UPM and FhG) will play a comparatively important role, as distilling will be 
energy-intensive; consequently, heat recuperation strategies will be duly implemented; 
• Merging unit operations by circumvented distillation and proceeding to polymerisation under the same solvent 
used for extractive-reaction; 
• Miniaturisation/modularisation/flexibility: the design of equipment will be revisited looking into parallelisation 
rather than scaling, whenever possible; distillation will be tested/operated dynamically. 
 
Various operation strategies (also linking pre -treatments upstream of the BioSPRINT process, reaction and 
polymerisation) shall be assessed in a multi -scale simulation manner.  Different unit operations will be linked in 
piping and instrumentation diagram (P&ID) models , analysis the effect of overall downstream integration, 
including energy integration with existing pre -treatment streams. Minimisation of the d egradation of react ion 
products during the downstream separation will be achieved using intensification strategies for water -organic 
separation and heat transfer intensification. Firstly, the separation of the immiscible water -organic phases upstream 
of the distillation proc esses will be achieved using hydrocyclones. In contracts with gravitational decanting units 
where long water-aqueous separation time would allow the reaction products to contact with the catalyst and aqueous 
phase, and hence undergo degradation, hydrocyclones make use of centrifugal force fields and are extremely compact 
units (centimetres in diameter) greatly enhancing the separation of phases with different densities. In this way, very 
short residence times (<1 min instead of hours) are attained avoiding the use of large footprint and slow decanting 
units in the process. Secondly, thermal degradation of reaction products in the distillation unit reboilers will be 
avoided by exploiting the use of plate heat exchangers and heat pipes. Plate heat exchangers m ake use of short 
diffusion distances and compact (but large) heat transfer areas to increase heat transfer rates, while making use of 
minimal driving forces, which allows precise temperature and over-heating control. Plate heat exchangers are much 
more efficient than traditional shell and tube reboiling units, typically having 80 -90% smaller hold -up volumes, 
which translate in smaller costs and hazardous inventories, 30% higher efficiency, better fouling resistance 41. Plate 
heat exchangers can operate with driving forces as low as 2 C, minimising the temperature of the contact surfaces 
and reducing product degra dation42. Also, heat pipes which act as passive devices where thermal conductivity is 
combined with latent heat transfer effects and isothermalisation, will be exploited. 
 
1.3.1.4 Polymerisation 
At the final polymerisation stage, resole and novolac-type resins and Mannich polyols will be synthesized based on 
the purified bio-based monomers produced , when necessary  in combinations with fossil reagents. Polymerisation 
intensification methods will be investigated so as to achieve continuous processes using spinning disc reactors (SDR).  
 
 
40 Stankiewicz andYan (2019) Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 58, 9212-9222. 
41 https://www.alfalaval.co.uk/gphe?gclid=EAIaIQobChMIn-KS2dD74wIViK3tCh3zwg_OEAAYAiAAEgKE3_D_BwE 
42http://www.biofuelsdigest.com/bdigest/2015/11/01/alfalaval-lowers-pressure-drop-improves-heat-transfer-with-no-change-in-pressure-
with-next-gen-heat-exchangers/ 
Figure 1.4. A system for evaluating gas or 
fluid phase thermodynamics,  located at 
NIC, to examine solubility, miscibility, etc. 
Figure 1.5. One of pilot 
separation setups (FhG) to 
be used within BioSPRINT 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  17 
In BioSPRINT, we will assess the usability of the HMC streams in wood laminates and panels and polyurethane rigid 
foams. In particular, the furan derivatives obtained from the catalytic conversion of sugars (e.g. furfural and 5-HMF) 
will be used as building blocks and functionalised to polymeric structures, as follows: 
a) Furfural and 5-HMF will be used in combination with petro-derived or bio-derived phenolics to develop novolac- 
or resole-type polymers; 
b) 5-HMF will be tested under Mannich-condensation conditions (in combination with phenol, guaiacol, cardanol, 
nonylphenol and alkanolamines like ethanolamine, diethanolamine, d i-isopropanolamine) to develop self-catalytic 
polyols suitable for 2K PU systems (e.g. rigid PU foams); 
c) The resulting furfural - and 5 -HMF-derivatives will be compared to similar products obtained from 
formaldehyde/Paraformaldehyde and used as fully-petro based benchmarks; 
d) The polyols thus obtained will be further functionali sed (e.g. by alkoxylation with EO, PO, ethylene carbonate, 
propylene carbonate or glycerin carbonate) recovering polymeric polyether polyols characteri sed by functionality, 
viscosity and reactivity thanks to the presence of different types of hydroxyl groups (phenoxy, primary, secondary). 
All the process conditions, raw materials selection and relative stoichiometric ratios, will be tuned and optimi sed 
during the project to guarantee the best yields and process efficiency as well as maximi sed bio-content. All the 
derivatives recovered will be characterised for their QC properties (e.g. viscosity, water content, acid value, hydroxyl 
value) and their synthetic processes replicated to define preliminary tentative specs. In addition to physico-chemical 
properties, average molecular weight distribution will be determined by GPC, in order to also define their regulatory 
status. In particular, EU-REACH prescriptions and polymer definition will be taken into account since the 
design of the molecular structure, therefore targeting new derivatives exempted from the registration process. 
Once characterised, above derivatives will be preliminary screened for their potential applicability as wood adhesives 
and in polyurethane applications in rigid PU foams, aiming at validating the technology at TRL5. Suitable 
commercial products (screened on the basis of their average QC properties and similar chemical backbone) will be 
selected as benchmarks, allowing a direct comparison to the possible advantages and limitations deriving from the 
use of furfural and 5 -HMF as polymer b uilding blocks. In particular, nonylphenol Mannich polyols, phenol - and 
cresol-based novolacs and resols, cardanol based novolacs and Mannich polyols will be selected and tested in 
reference formulations in parallel with the novel derivatives developed within the project. The aim of the comparison 
is not only to introduce a certain bio-content in the final polyurethane matrix, but also to overcome the status of the 
art by increasing thermal stability and fire performances, thanks to the introduction of the hetero-aromatic portion 
deriving from furfural and 5-HMF. 
 
With regards to intensifying the polymerisation processes for the above-listed products and derivatives, BioSPRINT 
will research the application of SDRs in view of achieving a continuous polymerisation process, which would 
replace the current batch-based approaches. 
 
The SDR technology 43, developed at UNEW and available at lab - 
and pilot -scale, will be evaluated for its ability to enhance the 
kinetics of the polymerisation to novolac-type resins and Mannich-
based condensation polymeri sation to polyols and to tailor the 
polymer properties to requirements. Centrifugal fields in a reactor 
may be generated by the rotation of the reactor surface or chamber 
whereby accelerations (=r.2) of the order of 100 g or 103 ms-2 may 
be achieved. Within such high acceleration environments, intense 
mixing and mass transfer capabilities have been reported44. The SDR 
has been shown to be a superior reactor for performing a range of 
polymerisation reactions including step-growth polymerisation45 and 
heterogeneous Lewis acid catalysed cationic polymerisations 46. 
The formation of furan -based polymers, particularly the polyols, 
investigated in this project is an equilibrium -controlled process 
which is driven by continuous removal of water molecules from 
the polymeri sation. Carrying out such a polymeri sation in a cont inuous thin, intensely mixed film on a rapidly 
spinning disk enables more efficient water removal and hence faster kinetics . Removal of water becomes 
especially challenging as the viscosity of the mixture increases and mass transfer rates slowdown in conventional 
agitated reactors. Here, we aim to maintain high water removal rates from the SDR film even at high conversions. A 
key aspect of the SDR technology is its ability to efficiently remove heat of reaction via the internal heat transfer 
system inherent in its design (as depicted in Figure 1. 6). This will enable uniform temperatures to be maintained 
within the processing film in order to safely conduct the polymerisation reaction. 
 
 
43 Ramshaw and Cook (2005) The Chemical Engineer, 774(5), 42-44 (2005) 
44 Boodhoo and Harvey (2013) Process Intensification for Green Chemistry, Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford. 
45 Boodhoo, and Jachuck (2000) Green Chemistry, 2(5), 235-244. 
46 Boodhoo et al. (2006) J. Appl. Poly. Sci., 101 (1), 8-19 (2006) 
Figure 1.6. Schematic of a spinning disc reactor 
with internal heat transfer (Ramshaw and Cook 
(2005) The Chemical Engineer, 774(5), 42-4. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  18 
1.3.2 Positioning of the project in relation to Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) 
The project combines research and innovation activities for developing and evaluating PI steps and schemes for an 
integrated lignocellulosic biorefinery that processes HMC, so as to lower capital and operational costs for efficiently, 
sustainably and safely achieving high yields. Building on existing assets from previous projects, presented in Table 
1-6 below, BioSPRINT will transpose and validate the following new and improved process technologies reflecting 
a ‘TRL gain’, illustrated in Figure 1.7 below, from TRL 2-3 (project start) to TRL 4-5 (project’s end) as follows:  
▪ Precipitation process for hemicelluloses purification. It will be intensified by using technologies such as spinning 
disc precipitators for energy efficient and controlled precipitate formation, evolving from TRL 3 -4 to TRL 4 -5. 
Solvent-antisolvent precipitation in SDR has been demonstrated at lab scale in the  pharma processing industry for 
the recrystallisation of an Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient, curcumin and starch nanoparticles production. Applying 
similar principles, the TRL for the SDR precipitation of lignin will move from TRL 3 to 5 by the end of the  project 
when testing industrially relevant input streams 
▪ Membrane purification and concentration technologies for upstream purification of hemicellulose . 
BioSPRINT will investigate the precipitation  of sugars by purification and concentration of the HMC streams by 
membrane technologies, which will evolve from TRL 3 to TRL 5.  
▪ Solvent & water recovery processes. BioSPRINT will investigate water & solvent purification and reuse using  
membrane technologies, and solvent distillation processes currently in place  and photocatalysis (a photocatalytic 
membrane equipment47 developed at UOULU can be utili sed in simultaneous oxidation/precipitation and filtration 
of the impurities from the water). The TRL of the water reuse will be elevated from TRL 3 to 4-5.  
▪ Process for catalytic valorisation of sugars to furans . The catalytic conversion process will be intensified, 
continuous, scaled and integrated, evolving from TRL 3 to TRL 5 . Heterogeneous catalysts synthesis methods will 
be limited to currently commercially available technology for facile scalable fabrication and commercial ion 
exchange resins will be tested for comparison. Experience in operating intensified plant handling solids in the 
completed IbD project will be used.  
▪ Technologies for downstream purification processes will evolve from TRL 3-4 to TRL  5. The production of the 
bio-based furan chemicals from diluted mixed streams relates to downstream as well. BioSPRINT will intensify unit 
configuration, integrating them thermally, by merging, when possible, and by modularisation. 
▪ Polymerisation technologies . The most promising bio -based polymer formulations will be intensified in a 
continuous thin film flow spinning disc reactor which is already positioned at TRL 3-4 for polymerisation processes. 
With BioSPRINT, the development of the intensified SDR technology specifically applied to bio -based 
polymerisation will enable TRL 5 to be reached. 
▪ Upon the completion of the project, the ILCSA and exploitation activities will  confirm that the BioSPRINT 
processing technologies have the potential to be integrated into current industrial landscapes or existing plants, and 
thus within a 2-3 year horizon after the end of the project to be deployed and scaled up at large-scale to apply industry-
wide. For this reason, post -project opportunities will be identified to allow for the BioSPRINT processing 
technologies to be further evolved from TRL 5 to TRL 7 via  demonstration activities, and later TRL 9. The initial 
individual exploitation of the partners (Table 2-7) reflect the commitment to further progress the technologies on the 
TRL ladder. The economic performance check will also pave the way for the elaboration of a business plan. Section 
2.2.1.1.5 provides an overview of our market-oriented strategy for BioSPRINT. 
 
47 Rathnayake B. 2015. The Removal of Bisphenol A from Wastewater by Photocatalytic Degradation and Hybrid Photocatalytic Membra ne 
Technique. Master’s Thesis. University of Oulu, FI. 
Figure 1.7. BioSPRINT Project Positioning 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  19 
 
 
 
1.3.3 Links with national and international research and innovation activities 
Table 1 -6 below lists completed or ongoing foundational projects as well as the technical, technological and 
methodological assets leveraged in BioSPRINT, resulting from recent projects, studies and research related to PI, 
biorefining, process and chemical engineering, the circ ular economy and industrial technologies . It indicates the 
research or innovation focus and states potential  or planned use of these assets to BioSPRINT whilst highlighting 
areas of differentiation. There are already concrete opportunities for adoption of project results, because of existing 
contacts from partners. Hence, it is easy to establish collaboration and build on background SOTA.  
 
Table 1-6. Reference Research Projects and Related Baseline Assets 
Part
ner(s
) Previous Relevant  
Projects related to the 
Assets 
Existing Assets from to 
be used and/or extended 
in the project 
Relevance to BioSPRINT. 
How assets will be used and/or extended in 
BioSPRINT 
Projects and assets related to existing biorefining installations. 
FhG ‘Lignocellulose 
Bioraffinerie’, national 
project, 2010-2014. 
Organsolv pilot plant 
facilities for fractionation 
of biomass and 
processing. Reactors for 
lignocellulose treatment, 
lignin precipitation, 
solvent recovery, 
filtration, and distillation 
units.  
BioSPRINT will research technologies and develop a 
new biorefining concept that intensifies the 
functioning of this pilot plant. Validation will occur in 
WP5, (Task 5.3 for the organosolv stream) 
Projects and assets related to processing technologies for upstream purification & polymerisation. 
UNEW, UOULU, ADSC, IRIS 
IbD - H2020, SPIRE, 
2015-2018.  
Spinning Disc and other 
PI Equipment for 
crystallisation, 
precipitation, extractive 
reaction and 
polymerisation. 
 
Holistic platform for 
facilitating PI in processes 
in which  
solids are an intrinsic part 
Spinning Disc Reactors (SDRs) will supplement 
membrane separations (see assets of UOULU) and 
will be used to provide an intensified route for direct 
comparison against the conventional/benchmark 
processes in HMC sugars purification via lignin 
precipitation and/or sugars crystalli sation. SDRs will 
also be used to provide a continuous process route for 
polymerisation reactions, enhancing mixing, reaction 
rates and na rrowing product specifications. 
BioSPRINT deals with solids handling processes in 
the purifica tion and reaction of the biobased raw 
materials. PI technologies and know -how developed 
within the IbD project will be applied in BioSPRINT, 
where they will evolve from TRL 3-4 to TRL 4-5. 
Projects and assets related to the BioSPRINT processing technologies for upstream purification 
UOULU 
SelDES -  ERDF, 2018-
2021. 
 
Membrane separation of 
traces of cellulose, HMC 
and other impurities from 
viscous solution of Deep 
Eutectic Solvent. 
The knowledge gained from applying membrane 
technologies in SelDES will be utili sed in the 
separation of HMC as well as other saccharides and 
impurities. Membrane technologies will be applied to 
HMC streams and evolve from TRL 3 to TRL 5. 
FuBio 1 & 2 –national 
projects, 2009–2011 & 
2011–2014. 
Dehydration of solvents 
used in dissolution of 
cellulose. 
The pervaporation technology used in FuBio for the 
dehydration of ionic liquids will be further 
investigated for the removal of volatiles from the 
HMC streams and evolve from TRL 3 to TRL 5. 
HYMEPRO – national 
project, 2011–2014. 
Development of hybrid 
separation processes for 
mining water treatment. 
The knowledge can be utilised in the hybridisation of 
the upstream purification proces ses for the HMC 
sugars, evolving from TRL 3 to 5. 
FERMET –national 
project, 2010–2012. 
Intensification of 
bioprocess chains. 
The experience gained from the project will be utilised 
in the intensification of the BioSPRINT upstream 
purification. 
Projects & assets related to the BioSPRINT processing technologies for catalytic conversion / reaction  
UNEW 
Rational Catalyst Design - 
A Novel Approach 
Combining HTP and 
Modelling Methods for 
Accelerated Rational 
Catalyst Development, 
HTP platform for catalyst 
synthesis and testing with 
application to Conversion 
of Biomass Waste into 
Biorenewable Fuels and 
Chemicals 
Heterogeneous catalysts for C5/C6 sugars dehydration 
will be developed using the HTT platform to optimise 
catalyst formulation in line with reactor development 
and coupling with furans extraction solvents to obtain 
optimal catalysts. The experimental methodology will 
be coupled with ML algorithms (UOULU, EBOS). It 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  20 
 
1.3.4 Methodology 
 
1.3.4.1 Overall approach and 
methodology 
 
The approach of the BioSPRINT project 
(Figure 1.8) is based on the development and 
validation of innovative processing 
technologies for upstream purification, 
catalytic conversion / reaction, downstream 
purification of HMC and production of 
biorenewable resins.  Scientific activities 
cover detailed analysis of the industrial 
streams selected for validation as well as 
literature research on SOTA technologies 
currently applied in the 4 application areas of 
the BioSPRINT processing technologies, as 
well as in-depth development and tests in lab 
Institute for Sustainability, 
Newcastle University.   
will be applied to HMCs and evolve from TRL 3 to 
TRL 5. 
FhG Bio-Olefines - BMBF,  
Lignoplast – national 
project, 2013-2016. 
Scale-up and continuous 
hydrothermal conversion 
of biomass streams 
The catalytic conversion technologies from LignoPlast 
will be applied in BioSPRINT and adapted to HMC 
streams. They will evolve from TRL 3-4 to TRL 5 
NIC 
ReaxPro, H2020, NMBP, 
2019-2023. 
Reactive process design 
beyond trial-and-error 
experimentation and 
reactor design utilising 
empirical kinetics. 
Chemical reaction (micro)kinetics will b e developed 
for various HMF mechanisms, which can 
consequently be readily integrated with BioSPRINT 
reactor model simulations executed. TRL will be 
increased from 4 to 7 upon finishing. 
REWOFUEL (NIC 
subcontractor), H2020, 
LCE, 2018-2021. 
Demonstration of 
performance, reliability, 
and sustainability of the 
entire biofuel value chain. 
The approach to the novel reactor design for biomass-
derived biofuel intermediates ( i.e. isobutene) was 
developed, both through modelling, as well as the 
piloting of thermally -integrated exothermic reactors. 
TRL will be increased from 5 to 7 upon finishing. 
Chemical Reaction 
Engineering, national 
project, 2015-2019. 
Catalysis; chemical 
reaction engineering; 
reactors; transport 
phenomena; biomass 
transformation. 
Basic research activities, covering the chemical 
reaction, reactor and process engineering of biomass -
derived bio -based chemicals, which are a subject o f 
BioSPRINT (furfural, HMF, etc.). TRL is maintained 
within 1–3 (basic research). 
Projects & assets related to the processing technologies for downstream purification 
FhG 
SteamBio – H2020 
SPIRE, 2015-2018; 
KomBiChemPro – 
National project, 2015-
2018; Align – National 
project, 2018-2021. 
Downstream processing 
technologies; separation 
and isolation of sugars, 
furans, acids and phenols 
from biomass mixtures 
The downstream purification technologies app lied in 
SteamBio, KomBiChemPro and Align, will be further 
adapted to HMC streams and be advanced from TRL 
3-4 to TRL  5.  
NIC nextBioPharmDSP, 
H2020, LEIT-BIO, 2015-
2019. 
The scope of the project is 
the optimisation of 
downstream process 
(DSP) for the production 
of biopharmaceuticals. 
The approach to the PI implementation of downstream 
unit operations (e.g. membranes) was developed, both 
through modelling, as well as the piloting of 
(integrated) separations. TRL was increased from 5 to 
7 upon finishing. 
Projects & assets related to the polymerisation technologies for & production of biorenewable resins 
AEP ReInvent - BBI-IA-
DEMO, 2018-2022. 
Industrial expertise in the 
development of 
commercial bio-polyols 
for targeted industrial 
applications 
AEP will adopt the most efficient synthet ic strategies 
to the specific characteristics of the available 
monomers extracted from HMC. The polymerisation 
strategies will be evolved to reach TRL 5 in the case 
of furans from HMC streams.  
Projects & assets related to the machine learning and advanced (data) analytics’ 
UOULU FUNBARK, national 
project, 2015-2019. 
Algorithms for data-driven 
modelling 
The ML algorithms will be applied to HTP catalyst 
development, thus evolving from TRL 3 to TRL 5. 
EBOS CHARIOT - H2020, 
2018-2020. 
Predictive models and data 
analytics techniques 
The Analytics predictive models and data analytics 
techniques will be applied to catalyst development, 
and evolve from TRL 3 to TRL 5. 
Figure 1.8. BioSPRINT Methodology 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  21 
and pilot-scale validation environments to reach TRL 4-5. Other scientific activities cover the legal, safety, 
standardisation part such as existing norms, laws or obstacles to overcome when thinking ahead of the project time. 
BioSPRINT overall approach will be grounded on the application of proven and mutually reinforcing  
methodologies for: a) Agile s cheduling; b) Feedstock s tream and further characteri sation and evaluation; 
c)Experiments in lab installations d) Definition of optimal process conditions using CFD, ML and predictive models; 
e) Lifecycle sustainability assessment; f) Multi-scale modelling and Techno -economic assessment; g) Compliance 
with existing regulations. 
 
a) Project scheduling 
The work flow in this project has been planned according to a model based on the agile methodology (parallel 
execution of WP 1 -4) with an important milestone being the completion of the lab tests of the BioSPRINT 
technologies before moving to the integration and validation (WP5)  of the technologies. As for WPs dedicated to 
project management, dissemination and communication, life cycle assessment, they crosscut through the project so 
that project’s results are continuously monitored, exploited and evaluated. The work plan therefore combines groups 
of parallel and consecutive WPs. DEC, as project coordinator, will ensure the execution of the project proceeds as 
per time plan. The WP structure (see section 3) ensures work is properly assigned, delegated and controlled to ensure 
on time, on-quality and in-scope delivery. W.r.t scheduling, the project will be executed over three contiguous and 
sequentially aligned phases (Figure 1.9). 
b) Detailed analysis of the feedstock compositions and variability  
WP1 will start with a detailed analysis of the composition of the feedstock streams that we will work with.  The 
analysis will be repeated before the technological integration for specific streams (WP5) start so as to cater for small 
variations encountered after the start of the project. This is necessary to ensure that a  co-creation approach with 
industry will be implemented and that the BioSPRINT PI technologies are developed with relevant, real -life 
applications in mind . In addition, i n biorefineries, the feedstock ’s natural variability throughout the seasons and 
available stock of tree species at different geographic coalitions means the process must be demonstrate flexibility to 
handle fluctuations in feed composition over time. Such disturbances can affect both the nature of the sugars presents 
and also how those sugars are bound to each other. The latter is influenced not only by the type of feedstock used but 
also by the lignocellulos ic biomass fractioning treatments. In such treatments, the HMC is solubilised but  often 
incompletely hydrolysed, and the streams often comprise a range of HMC oligomers displaying different degrees of 
polymerisation, with oligomers often including acetyl, formyl and uronic acid groups. The variability of the feedstock 
streams will ther efore be studied in detail. The detailed offline/online analysis of feedstocks will be achieved via 
different microscopic, spectroscopic, and chromatographic methods that are available . Fourier-transform infrared 
spectroscopy ((FT)IR) and Raman microscopy will be applied for potential solid residues. For liquid phase 
evaluation, gas chromatography (GC) will be applied for different volatile components, h igh-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) for non-volatiles, such as sugars or oligomers, while gel permeation chromatography (GPC) 
will be used for polymers. Microscopy shall be applied to residue. 
 
c) Experiments in lab installations  
For each focus area, the experimental tests will be planned so as to demonstrate an outperformance of the BioSPRINT 
intensified processing technologies in comparison with the SOTA conventional technologies as detailed in section 
1.3 above. An experimental plan including given feedstock, challenges, and aimed results in terms of reference and 
target KPIs will be prepared. Iteration loops will be initiated and will finally lead to op timised system setups and 
operation strategies. This includes more specifically:  
Figure 1.9 BioSPRINT Project Phases 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  22 
• Analytical measured specification of heat and mass transfer resistances, reaction kinetics, losses and process 
energy requirement (different temperature and heat flow measurements, pressure, flow, etc.); 
• Definition of different process steps (which will in most extensive unit operation scenario be considered); 
• Reference benchmarking tests (applying standard feedstock composition or defined equipment operation); 
• Technological analyses, tests and campaign implementation (based on the evaluation of scenarios); 
• Test campaign evaluation considering the intensification of technologies (base case comparison); 
• Regular information exchange between process operation engineers, chemical development experts, etc. 
At a later stage, the BioSPRINT technologies will be evaluated and integrated specifically for the 3 streams studied 
so as to evaluate whether they perform well for each of the streams and are suitable for the conversion to polyols, 
novolacs and other resins of interest for the end-product producers of the consortium. 
 
d) Detailed definition of process conditions for each of the biorefining steps  (from upstream purification to 
polymerisation) using Process Systems Engineering (PSE) tools 
In alignment with the BIC SIRA, BioSPRINT considers that ‘ICT and related technologies can make producing and 
managing bio-resources more efficient, improve information exchange along the value chain, and by using advanced 
sensors, monitoring and control paradigms, can increase productivity and resource and energy efficiency’. Therefore, 
the experimentation part of the project will consist of the development and validation of technologies in 4 areas for 
which ideal process conditions will be defined and controlled using PSE tools and PAT as well as ML-based 
prediction models. Together, these initiate a rapid development of PI technologies and allow for better prediction 
of upscaling. CFD models will be developed in order to identify scale -up bottlenecks such as fouling tendency in 
intensified processing equipment, un even mixing, heat and concentration distributions, preferential flow patterns, 
concentration polarisation phenomena in membrane separation, and solids handling issues. The CFD models of the 
respective PI technologies with a validation process using experim ental results will lead a “virtual twin” of these 
technologies. PI may lead to situation where process control and monitoring encounter new challenges48. Therefore, 
an integrated process and control design approach is preferable to identify and solve the op erability bottlenecks 
arising in the development of new processes . UOULU, UNEW, ADSC , IRIS already have experience of applying 
such an integrated process design concept (IbD project 49). The sensitivity between the main operational process 
parameters, disturbances and critical quality parameters will be defined with Response Surface Methods from the 
laboratory results and CFD simulations, therefore providing a model-based approach for the process control, 
optimisation, and scale-up. Accordingly, the integrated approach will reveal the monitoring needs for the upstream, 
reaction, downstream and polymerisation processes, in particular related to the feedstock natural variability 
throughout the seasons and available stock of tree species at different geographic coalitions which means the process 
must be demonstrate flexibility to handle fluctuations in feed composition over time. The required instrumentation, 
in conjunction with the additional challenges by the PI technologies, will be evaluated and novel PAT solutions for 
the biorefining environment will be selected, adapted, and robustly employed . The monitoring approach will be 
complemented by advanced data visualisation and data analytics techniques contributed and developed by EBOS and 
IRIS, including data fusion strategies for maximising the information quality obtained from the different 
instrumentation and monitoring devices. ML techniques will be investigated for establishing a decision support 
system based on rule induction and case-based reasoning strategies for predictive maintenance and optim isation in 
terms of energy- and material efficiency. The advanced intelligence dashboard will be used for both understanding 
processes and for post data analytical purposes to assist in the refinement and improvements of their performance. 
This approach will warrantee: 1) Adaptability to the varying feedstock composition; 2) Standard isation of the 
outcome materials while optimising cycle time, as important parameter to support actual PI and  acceptance of the 
new monomers; 3) Verification of the actual removal of unwanted species . Finally, the process flow simulations 
carried out in WP5 will contribute to determine the plant-wide model (see point e below). 
 
e) Multi-scale modelling and Validation 
BioSPRINT is a project inspired by the need, highlighted by the BIC SRIA, to identify and use the right pathways 
for ‘making the best possible use of feedstock and energy resources, while linking all processing steps into an 
integrated biorefinery setting’. This is the reason why the validation of the BioSPRINT technologies to TRL 5 relies 
on modelling the entire integrated BioSPRINT biorefining concept and system from intake of feedstock and energy 
to output of products, taking into account the different integration and tailor-made paths for each specific feedstock 
– from feedstock intake and preparation, through the processing steps to the end product(s). The BioSPRINT models 
will simulate and assist in designing those pathways that wil l ensure the best possible utilisation of the various 
feedstocks, through the required chemical, physical and biotechnological processes to the desired products. MAT 
will be responsible for the development of these models using numerous sources such as lab oratory benchmarking 
of processes in terms of material and energy input/output, etc. The modelling will first focus on the current processes 
and then in the BioSPRINT integrated and intensified biorefining concept to enable performance, efficiency and 
sustainability comparison, leading to specification the ‘optimal use’ of the feedstock, in terms of the environmental, 
economic and social sustainability and the effects of processes and products. 
 
48 Nikačević, et al. (2012) Chem.Eng. Process. 52 (2012) 1–15, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2011.11.006. 
49 Ohenoja, et al. (2018) Chemical Engineering and Processing - Process Intensification, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2018.07. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  23 
BioSPRINT will then validate its intensified concept via the in tegration of PI methods into end -to-end biorefining 
implementation concepts (WP5) for 2 industrial streams from partners FhG and UPM. A detailed transferability case 
study for a stream provided by Clariant (EAB member)  will also be undertaken, in view of c onfirming the 
performance of the concept and its applicability / transferability / replicability to current and future industrial 
environments. 
 
f) Methodological performance assessment using Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment (ILCSA)  
A thorough ILCSA50 will consider effects of the PI methods selected in BioSPRINT along the HMC valorisation 
value chain and demonstrate the sustainability advantage across its technical, environmental, social and economic 
dimensions and hence increase adoption potential. The BioSPRINT ILCSA, taking into account the environmental, 
economic and social dimensions, will be carried out by IFEU using standard, certified and validated approaches.  
A dedicated analysis, led by UOULU, will look at improvements in process and product safety (decreased inventory 
of hazardous materials, less harsh process conditions, etc.). The ILCSA results will help the process developers to 
identify and quantify optimization potentials which improve the environmental performance of the produc ts. The 
ILCSA will also take into account the UNEP/SETAC 51 recommendations based on environmental and social LCA 
as well as LCC, since it is essential to use precise analysis of the impacts to back up the decrease in GHG emissions; 
increase in resource and energy efficiency and decrease in CAPEX and OPEX. The LCA  methodology will follow 
ISO 14040 and 14044 covering the entire life cycle of the involved products using a three -step approach: (1) Goal 
and scope of the specific system for the different validation cases will be defined in order to enable a scientific 
comparison of different technology alternatives; (2) Detailed life cycle inventory data on energy consumption, 
material use, and emissions, will be gathered as foreground data from the project partners using partner -specific 
questionnaires as well as from literature. The life cycle inventory models will be set up in a dedicated LCA software 
and connected to background inventory data from the global Ecoinvent v3 database14. The respective indicators will 
be calculated, such as the contribution to climate change by the emission of GHG based on the IPCC52 global warming 
potentials with a time horizon of 100 years, non -renewable primary energy demand53, and a set of further midpoint 
indicators that cover a range of resource categories and emissions such as eutrophi cation, acidification and 
stratospheric ozone depletion. In addition, newly devised impact assessment methods for capturing phosphate 
resource depletion, occupation of natural land and a new methodology (aLUC, attributive land use change) to 
overcome limitations of assessing indirect land use change (iLUC) will be used; (3) Based on a contribution analysis, 
environmental hotspots will be identified and positive impacts from reducing GHG and resource consumption will 
be quantified. The results will demonstrate the sustainability advantages of using the BioSPRINT technologies. Data 
from the pilots will be extrapolated to allow an assessment at industrial scale, thus estimating the overall sustainability 
potential of BioSPRINT for the European economy.  
 
g) Techno-economic assessment (TEA) 
The multi -scale modelling will also enable a detailed techno-economic assessment (TEA) of the integrated 
BioSPRINT biorefining concept, for which MAT will also be responsible. A TEA method will be used for an early 
concept evaluation at the beginning of the project. It will estimate the production costs of the process concept from 
the raw materials of the process to the final products (biorenewable resins). The results of the ‘light’ TEA will support 
the experimental research by identifying the key economic parameters and factors. A more detailed TEA, carried out 
at the end of the project, w ill result in a production cost estimate for the main product, which includes annuali sed 
capital cost estimate. Production cost will be divided to variable and fixed operation costs and capital costs. Variable 
costs and revenue estimates will be calculated  on the basis of operation and performance data. Fixed costs are 
estimated by using factors available in the literature and also based on project partners’ expertise. Investment costs 
of equipment are obtained from the project partners. Total investment cost will be estimated using factorial method 
for cost estimation. Suitable economic indicators may also be used to estimate the feasibility, like return on 
investment (ROI). Sensitivity of the production cost to the main cost components will be analysed. 
The TEA will include an economic viability performance check of the processes developed, including value chain 
and market analysis to assess the economic viability of the processes and explore cases for replicating the use of the 
PI approach for sugars biore fining and beyond. In addition, these efforts will guide the positioning of the bioresin 
products in later commercialisation stages. Such studies will also allow comparison with current benchmarks (target 
is to reduce costs and biomass losses by at least 10%). The industrial feasibility, as well as the cost competitiveness 
for the newly developed polymers will be investigated. 
 
h) Compliance with applicable national and European regulations  
 
50 Keller, H. et al. (2015) Applied Energy, 154, 1072–1081. 
51 UNEP/SETAC (2011). Towards a life cycle sustainability assessment: making informed choices on products. UNEP DTIE Sustainable  
Consumption and Production Branch. 
52 IPCC. (2013). Climate Change 2013: The physical science b asis. Contribution of working group I to the fifth assessment report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. 
53 Frischknecht et al. (2007) Implementation of Life Cycle Impact Assessment Methods. Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  24 
The effective validation of novel processing technologies for intensification of HMC biorefining operations requires, 
throughout the project , to consider the wider applicable regulatory landscape. An overview of the most relevant 
regulations, mostly European directives,  which will have to be taken into account , together with their national 
transpositions, is provided below. A thorough review will be undertaken as part of WP6 (T6.5 dedicated to process 
and product safety, led by UOULU) so as to derive process and product regulatory requirements. 
 
Directive 1999/13/EC ‘REACH’. BioSPRINT extraction & purification processes will lead to the production of two 
substances, furfural and 5 -HMF molecules, which have a full registration (10.000 – 100.000 MT/year)  and a  
registration for “intermediate use only” respectively for REACH. On that basis, BioSPRINT will aim at g enerating 
derivatives that are exempted from registration, i.e. that are “polymers” according to the definition of ECHA . AEP 
and PFR  will undertake periodical reviews of the REACH status (exemption), of the “polymers” end-products as 
part of T6.5. 
Directive 2008/50/EC regarding concentrations of major air pollutants; It sets legally binding limits for 
concentrations in outdoor air of major air pollutants that impact public health such as particulate matter (PM10 and 
PM2.5) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), possibly encountered in BioSPRINT. 
Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED). It aims at achieving a high level of protection of human health 
and the envi ronment taken by reducing harmful industrial emissions across the EU, in particular through better 
application of Best Available Techniques. It is applicable to biorefining operations. 
Directive 2012/27/EU on energy efficiency. It sets targets for energy savings obligation in end use and incudes rules 
on metering and billing of thermal energy; on monitoring efficiency levels in new energy generation capacities. It is 
relevant to BioSPRINT which aims at achieving energy efficiency gains. 
ATEX Directive 2014/ 34/EU related to potentially explosive atmospheres . It covers equipment and protective 
systems intended for use in potentially explosive atmospheres and defines the essential health and safety requirements 
and conformity assessment procedures, to be applied before products are placed on the EU market. It is relevant as 
it is applicable to the environments in which the BioSPRINT concept will be tested and validated. 
Directive 2006/42/EC on machinery; It promotes high level of protection for EU workers and citizens when using 
machinery. Operational, occupational, process and product safety are relevant to BioSPRINT scope and work. 
Other: Regulation (EC) 1272/2008 on classification, labelling and packaging (CLP) of substances and 
mixtures; Local legislation & regulatory frameworks 
 
i) Existing and emerging standards  
PI methods in general and specifically 
for biorefining operations have not 
featured strongly in the vast standards 
literature. However, examining the 
Standards and Guidance Documents 
prepared or under consideration by the 
CEN/CENELEC Technical 
Committees, it is possible to identify a 
significant number where they will impact the bioeconomy from the equipment, process, safety and /or environmental 
aspects. Given the timeframe of the project (4 years) and the opportunity to build on the PI Roadmap for 
standardisation developed as part of the IbD project, the consortium aims at making a strong contribution to the 
elaboration of such standards with: the establishment of CEN Workshop Agreement (CWA) for the establishment of 
a working group dedicated to ‘PI for Biorefining Processes’ and (b) contribution of DEC, UNEW, UPM, PFR and 
AEP in Technical Committees dealing with Product standards, Installation standards, Recycling standards as well as 
Handling & Transport standards (e.g. CEN/TC 383 CEN T/C 114; CEN/TC 462; CEN T/C 193). The consortium’s 
standardisation activities (Figure 1.10) will be coordinated by DEC as part of T7.4.  
 
1.3.5 Interdisciplinary Approaches and Stakeholder Knowledge 
The BioSPRINT project involves strong inter-disciplinary considerations, as it involves various natural (physics, 
chemistry and biology), social (business, communication, economics), as well as applied sciences (chemical,  
electrical and mechanical engineering branches). These are interwoven  within the BioSPRINT activities.  A broad 
range of interdisciplinary skills are present in the consortium, including : ✓PI expertise ✓Innovation engineering 
expertise ✓ILCSA expertise ✓PSE and PAT expertise ✓ML, data analytics, visualisation and data fusion  
✓CFD, computer -aided simulation expertise  ✓Expertise on market analysis, economics, techno -economic 
assessment.  
✓Expertise on industry-related business, quality, legal, gender and ethical considerations.  
✓Expertise from socio-economic and legal disciplines (e.g. education, sociology).  
✓Expertise on commercialisation, business management, marketing of innovation in the industrial sector. 
Together, the partners have the skills to develop the required biorefining technologies, integrate and validate the 
integrated concept up to TRL 4-5, and exploit the results of the project. The consortium has the relevant knowhow 
(as evidenced in Section 3, Figure 3.4) to carry out the interdisciplinary aspects of the project, integrating knowledge 
from also external stakeholders via the EAB. 
 
Figure 1.10. Multi-directional contribution to standardisation 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  25 
1.3.6 Gender Aspects, Sex & Gender Analysis 
We are convinced that ‘an in-depth understanding of men and women's needs, behaviours and attitudes can improve 
the scientific quality and societal relevance of the produced knowledge, technology and/or innovation’  (EC 
Vademecum on Gender Equality ). As such, it also leads to enable innovation in products, processes  and services 
better suited to pot ential markets, an aspect particularly important for BioSPRINT, which is geared towards a 
commercialisation trajectory. At proposal stage, given that the object of the project is not directly related to persons, 
no special gender dimensions have been identified with regards to technical development. However, our innovation 
and the project will consider the gender dimension in relation to our capacity-building, D&C & exploitation activities 
and jobs creation. G ender will be considered in the training & education materials and the target groups of the 
Training, Education and Capacity-Building programme (WP7) as well as in the exploitation strategy of the project 
(WP8). Regarding gender balance issues as part of the consortium, specific information is provided in section 3.3.
1.4 Ambition 
1.4.1 Progress beyond the state-of-the art (SOTA) and innovation potential 
The overall ambition of BioSPRINT is to establish its integrated biorefining process from hemicellulose (HMC) 
to biorenewable resins as the technological, economic, environmental and social reference for the valorisation 
of the HMC fraction of lignocellulosic biomass , allowing transition from batch to continuous processing, 
coupling of previously distinct processes , as well as generating important efficiency gains  through process 
intensification (PI) and new products.  
Through the transposition and implementation of advanced, novel and integrated PI methods  to biorefineries, 
covering the entire span of the HMC biorefining process , from upstream to downstream till the final 
polymerisation stage, BioSPRINT aims at creating promising interconne ctions in the value chain and at opening 
opportunities for business, income and jobs in the bio-based economy.  
 
Through the extensive literature and practices review from international sources, scientific articles, publications, 
projects and initiatives, it is evident that that only limited attempts at the valorisation operations of the HMC fraction 
of lignocellulosic biomas s were identified, with PI being most often overlooked . It should be noted that the great 
majority of the identified relevant activities, projects, approaches and initiatives in the context of lignocellulosic 
biorefineries were focusing in cellulose conver sion to biofuels, with more recent developments including lignin 
valorisation, leaving the HMC fraction untouched or only used for energy generation . This represented a biomass 
loss of 25 -30% of the total lignocellulose in hardwood materials. Moreover, HMC purification and conversion 
processes, were constrained to the single unit operation level, using conventional batch, stirred tank and distillation 
methods, leading to high equipment and space costs, and low process efficiencies Finally, although platform  
molecules from sugars have been identified and studied for quite some time, the process have mostly focused on 
delivering monomeric products, and customer/final market available products. 
 
Contrary to the SOTA approaches , BioSPRINT intends to take a holistic approach by sequencing and 
integrating the best available technologies for each individual step to create a complete value stream from 
waste HMC side streams to biorenewable resins, and deliver PI gains along the enti re HMC biorefining 
process at both individual unit operations and at the entire plant level. 
  
This leads to the conclusion that the realisation of BioSPRINT will have a revolutionising impact on the entire 
HMC biorefining process and, by extension, to a large portion of biorefineries and wood and pulp industries 
processing lignocellulosic biomass , where HMC is one of the fractions extracted,  if not currently valorised . Its 
original and pioneering approach is implemented through the use of beyond the state-of-the art technologies and the 
development of appropriate intelligent tools.  
 
BioSPRINT will provide new and innovative pathways in addre ssing materials, energy, cost and at large, resource  
efficiency questions, and new market ready products in biorefineries valorising HMC by incorporating novel 
methodological approaches and technologies that make BioSPRINT a pioneer in four dimensions: 
▪ Dimension 1: Upstream purification using spinning disc precipitation and hybrid membrane technologies; 
▪ Dimension 2 : Catalytic conversion  using agitated cell reactors for intensified catalytic reactive -extraction 
methodologies for dehydration of sugars into furan monomers; 
▪ Dimension 3 : Downstream purification processes of converted sugar streams, streamlined, improved and 
intensified by acc eleration of liquid -liquid separation and leveraging the integration of thermal units, their 
potential merging, and modularisation for the advanced furan monomer purification methods for the (economical) 
maximisation of final product yields; 
▪ Dimension 4: Polymerisation and production of novel advanced bio-renewable resins using continuous intensified 
reactor technology. 
 
The SOTA and the analysis of the pioneering work within these streams is presented in the following paragraphs. 
 
1.4.1.1 Innovation Stream 1: Upstream Purification using SDR and hybrid membrane purification methods.  
SOTA: Currently, the most commonly used method for upstream purification of C5 and C6 HMC streams involve 
lignin precipitation, dilution and concentration. Existing tools and methods present the following limitations: 
▪ Energy intensive due to the use of high-temperature processes, e.g. distillation; 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  26 
▪ Generation of very diluted streams via addition of large amounts of solvent to precipitate lignin; 
▪ Limited resistance of the membranes towards the prevailing operation conditions (particularly pH and fouling); 
▪ Low water and solvent recovery rates. 
Concerning the lignin precipitation using SDRs and anti-solvent methods, this method of precipitation is less energy 
intensive and more easily scaled -up compared to traditional techniques of cooling or evaporative methods 54 for 
achieving high supersaturations to initiate precipitation. However, dependi ng on the desired size of particles, the 
provision of good levels of either micromixing (or mixing at the molecular level) or macromixing (mixing at the bulk 
scale which affects residence time distribution) is key when contacting the solvent and antisolven t streams55. The 
SDR offers significant flexibility in achieving either mixing conditions in thin films with large contact surface area 
through high shear micromixing and plug flow regime. It is also easily scaled up to process higher volumes of material 
without sacrificing the benefits of thin films and large surface areas. It is envisaged that these processing advantages 
of the SDR applied in conjunction with antisolvent techniques for lignin precipitation can lead to the implementation 
of an efficient, flexible, continuous process whereby the lignin particle size can be tailored to meet the needs of the 
downstream filtration step for high recovery of C5 and C6 sugars.  
The membrane technologies allow selective removal of the impurities and HMC concentration without additives, at 
milder operation conditions, with lower energy consumption and with easy scale up. Hybridisation helps to overcome 
the challenges of the individual separation technologies while intensifying the total separation. Differe nt separation 
mechanisms of the separation technologies and different membrane types allow high separation of different 
compounds, thus increasing selectivity and producing the target HMC stream with high purity. Fractionation of the 
compounds enable their further reuse. 
 
With regards to water and solvent waste, closing the water and solvent loops decreases the environmental load of the 
biorefineries as well as benefits the economy of the industry. Currently, the potential water and solvent recovery rates 
are established at 60% and 80% on average, respectively.  BioSPRINT aims to improve the water efficiency by 
increasing the recovery and reuse rates of the process waters by 90%. The process water also contains valuable 
compounds to be recovered, e.g. residua l sugars, furfural, 5 -HMF and aldaric acids. The hybrid membrane 
technologies enable the efficient recovery and recirculation of process waters and valuable compounds back to the 
processes inside the biorefineries, aiming at zero liquid discharge.  
 
BioSPRINT ambition for upstream purification : T o realise an efficient, integrated membrane/precipitation  
process operating in continuous mode to maximi se recovery of valuable sugars/oligomers , water and resource 
efficiency by increasing the recovery and reuse rate of the process water and of solvents to 80-90%. 
 
The following table (table 1-7) provides an overview of the SOTA and BioSPRINT progress. 
Table 1-7. Advance Beyond the State-of-the-art Description for Upstream Separation Processes 
Upstream separation processes 
State-of-the-art State-of-the-technology BioSPRINT progress 
Membrane unit operation frequently 
lacks the demonstration in an 
appropriate pilot scale and time-on-
stream, therefore, having limited 
number of optimi sation studies.  
Experiments have often been performed 
using model compounds.  UF and NF 
processes are extensively studied to 
fractionate and concentrate HMCs from 
process liquors and process waters ,56. 
Ethanol precipitation is also studied57 in 
concentration and recovery of HMCs. 
Electrodialysis has become an 
interesting alternative to the 
demineralisation of organic matter 
solutions. 
The individual technologies 
already exist and thus the main 
goal is to further optimise with 
respect to energy efficiency of 
these techno logies for the 
studied ap plication areas.  
Membrane systems have been 
installed in wood and pulp and 
paper in dustries up to 
thousands of square meters, 
mostly for environmental 
purposes. However, in the 
industrial scale biorefineries, 
separation processes used in 
the upstream purification have 
been poorly reported. 
BioSPRINT targets realistic industrial 
(waste) stream, integrating hybrid 
separations to collect concentrated 
sugar streams. The aim is to develop 
and optimi se existing technologies 
further and to build hybrid systems to 
form a feasible purification and 
concentration pro cess in the 
biorefineries. The target is to recover 
80-90% of the HMC sugars with a 
purity of at least 60-80%. The role and 
need of other separation technologies 
in impurities/fouling abate ment will 
also be studied for water recycling and 
purification, to >90% water recovery.  
 
1.4.1.2 Innovation Stream 2: Catalytic conversion using agitated cell reactors for intensified catalytic 
reactive-extraction methodologies for dehydration of sugars into furan monomers  
 
54 Fern, J. C. W. et al. (2018) Int. J. Pharm., 543, 139– 150. 
55 Mersmann, A., (199) Chem. Eng. Process. 38, 345–353. 
56 (a) Persson T. et al. (2010) Bioresource Technology, 101, pp. 3884–3892. (b) Persson T. et al. (2010) Chemical Engineering Research and 
Design, 88, pp. 1548–1554 (c) Persson T. et al. (2007). Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 137, pp. 741–752 
57 Liu et al. (2011) Bioresource Technology, 102(2), 1264-1269 and Liu et al. (2011) Bioresource Technology, 102(20), 9613-9618.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  27 
SOTA: The catalytic conversion of sugars into furans (furfural and 5-HMF) bio-based monomers of sugars currently 
relies on dehydration steps in which a homogeneous acid catalyst is used to convert a single type of sugar, e.g. 
fructose or glucose pre-isomerized into fructose58. While such processes are well known, the selectivity is often poor 
and current industrial demonstration units make use of hydrothermal technology, which although more selective, is 
also more expensive, hazardous and energy intensive. Alternative processe s coupling solvent extraction with the 
dehydration reaction for in situ isolation of the reactive intermediates have also been reported in literature, however 
again only for pure glucose/fructose feedstocks at lab -scale using batch processes 59. Existing too ls and methods 
present the following limitations: 
▪ Non-linear relationship between catalyst properties and performance of the conversion process makes prediction 
of optimal catalyst formulations challenging; 
▪ The reactive nature of the target products leads to rapid product degradation due to important gap between reaction 
and separation steps; 
▪ Hydrothermal methods conditions are harsh on common heterogenous catalyst materials and supports, leading to 
fast catalyst degradation; 
▪ Catalysts and solvent extractio n methods for mixtures of sugars and non -glucose/fructose feedstocks have not 
been widely addressed; 
▪ Mixing and mass transfer tend to be poor in batch and conventional continuous processes. 
 
Improvement of catalytic processes such as those proposed in the sugar conversion processes is a complex task and 
involves catalyst design to address both conversion of a multitude of sugars present in the feedstocks, and operating 
conditions optimisation. Catalyst and process design should therefore be carried out simultaneously because changing 
operating conditions or feedstock composition may also change catalyst behaviour. Along the operating conditions, 
catalyst performance depends on many factors and thus finding the best or even a suitable catalyst for processes may 
not be an easy task. However, the relationship between catalyst properties and performance is usually nonlinear and 
not clear. Thus, a lot of time -consuming experimentation is needed if one desires to map this relationship  properly 
optimising the processing conditions in the same time. BioSPRINT overcomes this issue by applying a combination 
of rapid, HTP catalyst screening and ML algorithms to select the catalyst with the best characteristics in a time -
efficient manner for further processing and validation in scaled-up process development.  
Product degradation can occur at high operating temperatures and pressures and when in prolonged contact with  
catalyst/solvents in the reaction medium. Sugar conversion based on reactive extraction technological concepts offers 
the opportunity to rapidly remove the product from the reaction medium, thereby limiting the product  degradation 
for maximum selectivity and recovery of the targeted chemical building blocks such as furans. A detailed kinetic and 
liquid-liquid equilibrium thermodynamic analysis will allow BioSPRINT to precisely identify optimal windows of 
operation for conversion and separation of multiple sugars and products. The use of PI methods, particularly ACRs, 
will allow enhancement of mixing and mass transfer rates, while decoupling this from residence time and conversion, 
while will allow not only intensification of the extraction step to boost product recovery, but also displacement of 
equilibrium, solvent savings, selectivity gains, resulting in higher yields.  
 
During the process design, the operability issues of the continuous process i.e. smooth transition between operating 
points and sufficient disturbance rejection properties, are often neglected or considered only after the process design, 
thereby constraining the process control design. More importantly, PI may lead to situation where process control 
and monitoring encounter new challenges. Therefore, an integrated process and control design approach is preferable 
to identify and solve any operability bottlenecks arising in the development of new processes. ADSC, UOULU and 
UNEW, already have experience of applying such an integrated process design concept for industrially relevant solids 
handling applications as part of the recently completed IbD project. 
 
BioSPRINT ambition for Catalytic conversion: 
1. To surpass the leading existing conversion processes for HMC sugars by developing new catalysts , which 
can robustly function in various media, feedstocks and process conditions;  
2. To intensify key conversion and in situ separation processes and avoid their development in isolation , thus 
lead to an operational cascading process whereby biorefinerie s can convert not only the main input of biomass 
feedstock, but also the primary and subsequent side streams.  
 
The following table (Table 1-8) provides an overview of the SOTA and BioSPRINT progress. 
Table 1-8. Advance Beyond the State-of-the-art Description for Catalytic Conversion Processes 
Catalytic conversion 
State-of-the-art State-of-the-technology BioSPRINT progress 
5-HMF synthesis using 
homogeneous and heterogeneous 
solid acid catalysts proven at 
laboratory scale, although catalyst 
 5-HMF synthesis mostly done 
in batch processes or 
continuous energy -expensive 
hydrothermal process. 
Robust catalyst development spanning a 
wide range of materials, feedstock 
compositions, and process conditions, 
integrated with reactor and process 
 
58 Rosatella et al. (2011) Green Chemistry, 13, 754-793 
59 Tong et al. (2010) Applied Catalysis A, 385, 1-13 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  28 
formulation most often focus in a 
singly type of materials and narrow 
space of investigation.  5-HMF 
synthesis using hydrothermal 
processes proven at demonstration 
plant scale. Furfural produced from 
HMCs at industrial scale with 
extremely low yields. 
Catalyst, reactor and 
extraction technolo gy not 
developed to cope with sugar 
mixtures. 
ACR concept developed for 
multiphase reaction systems in 
speciality and pharma 
industries (lab, pilot and 
industrial scale). 
development. PI via hybrid reaction -
extraction technology development, 
including additional intensification of 
mixing and mass transfer decoupled from 
reaction kinetics and residence times for 
optimal in situ  isolation and recovery of 
reactive intermediates.  ACR technology 
transfer to biorefining applications. 
 
1.4.1.3 Innovation Stream 3: Downstream Purification Processes of Converted Sugar Streams.  
 
SOTA: Commercial furfural production processes present comparatively poor yields (3 –10%), high energy-
consumption (wood distillation) and combust the rest of biomass (under-valorisation). The downstream purification 
processes used to convert pentose/hexose sugars into the monomers of furan-based polymer materials is presently 
non-existent, while assorted biomass -based 5 -HMF production operation  currently relies on the numerous 
purification techniques, which aim at isolating 5-HMF alone separately.60 The downstream purification processes of 
HMF include dewatering, extraction and crystallisation, which, e.g., would not be possible using a mixture of sugars 
due to the differences in the precipitation of various furan chemicals (furfural, HMF, homologues, etc.). Analogously, 
pure furfural is being produced worldwide, while it relies on pure feedstock streams, ordinarily thorough selective 
HMC decomposition, utilizing the rest of biomass mostly for energy only. 61 In these cases, however, process side 
streams are not considered for valori sation, while whole biomass resource, often wood, is rather considered as the 
feedstock for furfural, practically excluding any industrial symbiosis with existing paper and pulp industry or bio -
refining. Dewatering and distil lation are the downstream separation process of choice for isolating furfural and 5 -
HMF. Such processes involve the use of large process units, are slow and due to the use of high temperatures and 
long processing time, incur large energy costs and product degradation, leading to low yields. While these mentioned 
methods/technologies are key to achieving specialised furfural/HMF production, these are difficult to combine with 
waste streams. Whereas there are some limited reports on sugar mixture dehydration, 62 examining how to tackle 
downstream for realistic side/waste stream feedstock resources. These streams are not only complex in composition, 
but they tend to vary over time, which lead to process fluctuations from upstream, reactor, downstream, all the way 
to final polymer product quality specification. Therefore, processing bio-refining side streams presents the following 
noted limitations to downstream: 
▪ Existing downstream technologies are developed for comparatively pure streams63; 
▪ As there is no prevalent need for integration, intensification64 is rarely applied; 
▪ There is practically no available data considering real complex streams/mixtures; 
▪ Long processing times and high temperatures lead to product degradation. 
BioSPRINT addresses all these challenges. BioSPRINT will introduce 3 different PI approaches downstream. It will 
generate realistic technical data, translatable to (other) bio-refineries, and make use of plate PI methods to accelerate 
liquid-liquid separation and heat transfer, while minimising the temperature of the contact surfaces. Separating furans 
from low -boiling organic media due to implementing reaction –separation ( PI) is presently at TRL 1 –3, while 
BioSPRINT downstream process with integration and intensification will elevate it to TRL 5. 
 
BioSPRINT ambition for downstream purification: To develop the needed downstream processing for realistic 
dehydration product mixtures. By doing so, to develop  new downstream technologies, capable of minimising 
integrated energy consumption, GHG and costs, associated with downstream separation processes, while intensifying 
separation rates and minimising product degra dation Lastly, to develop, engineer and validate  the first 
downstream, suitable of producing polymer grade furans. 
 
The following table (Table 1-9) provides an overview of the SOTA and BioSPRINT progress. 
Table 1-9. Advance Beyond the State-of-the-art Description for Downstream Purification Processes 
Downstream purification processes 
State-of-the-art State-of-the-technology BioSPRINT progress 
Solubility of furfural scarcely 
reported 
Solubility of HMF limitedly 
reported 
Furan separation processes limited 
Pure furan streams are reported but 
Furfural separated by distilling 
HMF separated by extraction 
HMF purified by 
crystallisation. Pure furan 
streams are treated . 
Intensification is rarely seen.  
Only distillation is needed for all.  Furan 
solubility data will be attained.  Extreme 
purification will be omitted.  
Mixed/realistic side streams are treated. 
Hydrocyclones technology will be 
transferred and further developed for 
 
60 Ava Biochem (http://www.ava-biochem.com/pages/en/home.php; accessed June 2019). 
61 Dalvand et al.(2018) Biomass and Bioenergy, 115, 56-63. 
62 Zhang et al. (2014) Bioresources 9(3), 4194-4204. 
63 Luo et al. (2019) Catalysis today, 319, 14-24. 
64 Stankiewicz and Yan (2019) Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 58, 9212-9222. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  29 
mixtures are not reported at all. 
Separation of reaction medium and 
extraction solvents done using 
standard gravity decanting 
processes. 
Distillation units are powered by 
conventional reboiling technology. 
Hydrocyclones demonstrated 
for water -oil separation in oil 
industry. Plate heat exchangers 
(PHEs) demonstrated in food 
and pharma industries for 
fouling fluids. 
intensification of phase sepa rations in a 
biorefining context. PHE technology will 
be used to intensify heat transfer in 
biorefining applications while 
minimising product degradation and 
facilitating maintenance and handling of 
fouling fluids. 
 
1.4.1.5 Innovation Stream 4: Polymerisation and Production of Novel Advanced Bio-Renewable Resins Using 
Continuous Intensified Reactor Technology    
SOTA: In order to be competitive, the customer price of the final product has to be equal or lower compared to the  
conventional products, or alternatively, the quality of the BioSPRINT products has to be higher than in commercial 
benchmarks. Public acceptance of new products and processes, even the environmentally friendly, is also not self-
evident. BioSPRINT contributes on sourcing the chemical industry with bio-based building blocks. This will support 
the growth of public awareness of more sustainable consumer products with smaller carbon footprint and 
environmental impact. BioSPRINT will prove the sustainability of the proposed value chain in WP 6 and pay special 
attention to wide dissemination of the outcome. This ensures products with high public acceptance. Polycondensation 
reactions such as those proposed in this project are typically mass transfer limited processes where the volat ile 
condensation product such as water or some other small molecule must diffuse out from the increasingly viscous 
polymer mixture into a controlled atmosphere, usually vacuum or nitrogen. The influence of the diffusional process 
on the reaction kinetics is well established from early literature65. The reactor technology commonly used in industry 
is still based on the conventional batch stirred tank technology which has modest mass transfer and mixing 
characteristics. The residence times are high, often in e xcess of 10 hours at larger scale and controlling the product 
quality relies on implementation of tightly controlled operating conditions such as controlled reagent addition and 
reactor temperature and pressure.66  
 
With regards to the polymerisation processes, they present the following limitations: 
▪ Rapid viscosity buildup with increasing monomer conversion, giving greatly reduced mixing, mass transfer and 
heat transfer capabilities as polymerisation progresses.  
▪ Non-uniformity in temperature at higher viscosity causes broadening of the molecular weight distribution and 
consequently poor product quality.  
▪ In extreme cases of total loss in temperature control, runaway reactions can occur causing significant safety issues.  
 
BioSPRINT addresses these limitations: 1) BioSPRINT will evaluate the benefits of continuous thin film processing 
in the SDR in order to maintain high mixing, mass and heat transfer rates and achieve higher and controlled rates of 
polymerisation e ven at high monomer conversions. 2 ) BioSPRINT will aim to generate polymers with uniform 
properties which should be easily tunable by varying the operating conditions in the continuously operated SDR. 3) 
With the reduced processing volume of hazardous materials in the intensified SDR, BioSPRINT will provide a much 
safer process technology.  
 
BioSPRINT ambition for polymerisation: To formulate resole and novolac-type resins and polyols that present 
distinct market advantages over their fossil -based equivalents, also making the production more efficient by 
leveraging PI methods that accelerate polymerisation and reduce energy needs. 
 
The following table (Table 1.10) provides an overview of the SOTA and BioSPRINT progress. 
Table 1.10. Advance Beyond the State-of-the-art Description for Polymerisation Processes 
Polymerisation processes 
State-of-the-art State-of-the-product / technology BioSPRINT progress 
Synthesis of novolacs from furfural and 5-
HMF reported in literature 
 
 
 
Novolacs based on furfural and 5 -
HMF used as polyols in rigid PU 
foams and as binders in phenolic -
lignin thermosetting formulations 
Synthesis of novel, REACH 
compliant polyols from 
furfural and 5 -HMF and self-
catalytic Mannich polyols 
from furfural and 5-HMF 
Diffusion limitations in equilibrium -
controlled process can negatively impact 
on polymerisation rates; can be severely 
limited at high monomer conversions.  
High temperatures are employed to speed 
up polymerisation rates which can result in 
loss of reactant by degradation or 
volatilisation. A distillation step 
Stirred tank operating in batch 
mode to produce resoles, novolacs 
and polyols, often operating under 
vacuum to assist removal of 
volatile product and drive reaction 
forward. These are less than ideal as 
they suffer from mixing and mass  
and heat transfer limitations which 
Thin film polymerisation in 
SDR will enhance mixing and 
transport rates for a more 
efficient, well -controlled and 
safer polymerisation process. 
The controlled removal of the 
by-product by devolatilisation 
from the thin film will allow a 
 
65 (a) Pell et al (1973) J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. Ed., 11, 1671; (b) Secor (1969) AIChE J., 15, 861; (c) Campbell et al. (1970) J.Polym. Sci., 
14, 1025. 
66 Odian, G. Principles of Polymerisation. 3rd ed. Wiley-Interscience, Chapter 2 (1991). 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  30 
immediately following the polymerisation 
step allows removal of the volatile material 
whist minimising loss of reactant.  
also have a detrimental impact on 
polymer properties. 
hybrid reactive -distillation 
process to be developed.   
 
A polymerisation yield > 85% will be targeted as it will guarantee minimum amount of residuals and waste products, 
maximised final polymers performances and REACH compliancy of the resulting products. All the new derivatives 
will be designed and developed trying to maximise their final bio-content, targeting at least a 65% bio-based content. 
Final bio-content will be initially estimated on the basis of each product recipe/composition and then confirmed 
accordingly to ASTM D6866 (quantification of 14C) applied on the most promising candidates selected on the basis 
of their performances when tested in reference formulations. More indicators will be used to validate the key features 
of the new derivatives developed within the project, with particular attention to their thermal stability, fire resistance, 
chemical and hydrolysis stability and processability (e.g. low viscosity for easy handling during processing). In this 
case, thermal stability will be monitored by thermo -gravimetric analysis (TGA) determining the maximum 
temperature at which a certain weight percent loss occurs (e.g. 20%). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC; ASTM 
D3418) will be adopted as well, to determine glass transition temperatures and polymers crystallinity, if applicable. 
Fire resistance will be assessed as per vertical UL -94, targeting a V0 (burning stops within 10 seconds after two 
applications of ten seconds each of a flame to a test bar and without any flaming drips). Chemical and hydrolysis 
resistance will be measured accordingly to ASTM methods (ASM D543 and ASTM D570). In all the cases, 
commercial benchmarks will be selected as references. Processability will be mainly defined on the basis of physic-
chemical properties of the selected candidates, for instance considering low viscosity values (as per ASTM D2196) 
and reactivity (ASTM D2471 and ATM D7487 for thermoset resins and polyurethane systems, respectively). 
 
1.4.2 BioSPRINT Value Chain 
BioSPRINT covers the 
whole HMC 
valorisation value 
chain, from 3 HMC 
waste side feedstock 
streams, upstream/ 
reactor/downstream 
equipment, technology 
and know -how 
suppliers, and end -
users. The BioSPRINT 
value chain  is 
schematically 
presented in the Figure 
1.11. It involves (a) the 
provision of raw 
materials and 
sustainably sourced feedstock;  (b) The design, engineering, testing and  validation of biorefining processes for 
upstream purification, catalytic conversation, downstream purification and polymerisation;  c) The design, 
manufacturing, installation and testing of biorefining PI equipment as well as computer -aided modelling and P AT 
solutions; d) Potential intermediary and final end-users, in particular resin producers and polymer manufacturers. 
In addition, through the production of new biorenewable resins, BioSPRINT establishes a promising cross -sector 
interconnection between providers of various biomass-derived streams (UPM, FhG and associate partner Clariant) 
on the one hand, and polymer formulation specialists (AEP, PFR) on the other hand, with specific prospects for new 
business, employment and income opportunities.  
 
Market demand & opportunities. Currently, bioplastics represent about 1% of the ~335MT of plastic produced 
annually. But as demand is rising and with more sophisticated biopolymers, applications, and products emerging, the 
market is continuously growing 67. According to the latest market data compiled by European Bioplastics in 
cooperation with the research institute nova -Institute, global bioplastics production capacity is set to increase from 
around 2.11MT in 2018 to approximately 2.62 MT in 2023. Innovative biopolymers are the main drivers of this 
growth in the field of biobased  plastics, which are used in an increasing number of markets, from packaging  (~65 
percent (1.2MT) of the total bioplastics market in 2018 ), catering products, consumer electronics, automotive, etc. 
At the end of the value chain (end -users), the economic value of the worldwide markets that could be accessed by 
the target products (novolac-based resins, bio-based polyols and bio-based foams) of BioSPRINT project is therefore 
 
67 Plastics Europe Facts and Figures 2017, Bioplastics market data: www.european-bioplastics.org/market/. 
 
Figure 1.11. The BioSPRINT Value Chain 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  31 
extremely large: €29bn for fibreboards68, €23bn for rigid PU foams69). Industrial applications represented by the end 
users of BioSPRINT (AEP, PFR) have been experiencing increasing market demand of bio-based consumer products: 
the fibreboard market grew at 11 % CAGR in the period 2010 -2017, and a further  +54 % increase is expected by 
202370. AEP and PFR will therefore have the opportunity to co-create, ‘co-design’ and also industrialise (through 
joint-venture or licensing of technology) the production of  high performance bio-based polymers (bio -polyols are 
growing at CAGR of 9.5% from 2016 to 202171, phenolic resin market is expected to grow at a CAGR of 5.0% from 
2017 to 202272, with increasing shares of bio-based ones) for further industrial applications. Replacing formaldehyde 
with 5-HMF (non-toxic) or furfural in resol and  novolac resins could poten tially access a market of 10 Mtons in 
Europe and 44Mtons worldwide, expected to increase at 4,8% CAGR in 2017-202673. 
 
1.4.3 Patent Search and Freedom to Operate 
For a project like BioSPRINT to be successful, it is important to secure and conserve Freedom to Operate. 
BioSPRINT recognises that patents play a key role to gain a competitive edge and also acknowledges that it is 
Freedom to Operate (FTO) that secures the ability to perform a particular commercial activity of technologies and 
services wit hout infringing third party’s valid Intellectual Property (IP) rights.  The BioSPRINT consortium has 
therefore carried out an FTO search at proposal stage in each technological focus area of the project to become aware 
of third-party IP which are enforceabl e in a specific country in which the foreseen BioSPRINT innovation may be 
commercialised. Among others, the patent search returned patents US7,683,142B2 (March 2010); US 2010/0166870 
A1 (July 2010) ; US 7,615,096 (November 2009) ; US7,273,570 (Sept 2007); WO0218328 (2002); WO0048728, 
WO0048729, WO0048731, WO0048732 (2000) which are either not held in the EU (China, Australia, United States) 
or not considered as blocking due to their scope. Furthermore, there is currently no protected concept on a HMC-
focused biorefining concept. Thus, at proposal stage, no blocking patent was identified . FTO will be monitored 
throughout the project (Task T8.3). In addition, our IP management strategy includes intentions to file patents, which 
will serve to protect the strategic IP brought forward by BioSPRINT (Table 2-8 Patent filing intentions on page 45). 
 
 
Section 2: Impact
2.1 Expected impacts  
BioSPRINT is directly aligned with the fundamental priorities of the BIC SIRA for advancing towards a competitive, 
innovative and sustainable Europe leading the transition towards a bioeconomy, while decoupling economic growth 
from resource depletion and environmental impact . BioSPRINT is a high impact project hinged on intensifying 
biorefining operations for the conversion of hemicelluloses (HMC) so as to i mprove competitiveness, resource & 
energy efficiency; reducing GHG emissions, CAPEX, OPEX as well as for fostering commercial innovation and 
education while being responsive to social factors . As such, BioSPRINT contributes significantly to the expected 
impacts of call  BBI-JU-SO2-R6 ‘Improve biorefinery operations through process intensification and new end 
products’ as described in Table 2-1. Other impacts (OI) are outlined in Table 2-2 on page 37. 
 
2.1.1 Impact set out in the Work Programme 
Table 2-1 BioSPRINT Contribution to The Expected Impacts from the Call Text 
Expected Impacts linked to BBI JU KPIs 
▪ contribute to KPI 1 – create at least one new cross-sector interconnection in the bio-based economy; 
BioSPRINT contributes to the reali sation of BBI -JU KPI 1 by  establishing new forms of cooperation between 
companies in BBI value chains as well as with actors from different sectors. BioSPRINT is a project which will: 
1. Connect partner UPM, the lab plant team of the Center for Chemical-Biotechnological Processes CBP (partner 
FhG) as well as associate actor Clariant, which are primarily related to the Raw materials and forest-based 
industries’ sector, to AEP, PFR, foremost belonging to the Chemicals industries’ Sectors. The connection is 
aimed at valorising otherwise discarded HMC streams for bio-resins and foam applications.  
Result = 1 new feedstock-focused interconnection 
2. Connect AEP with potential final end-users of the developed polymers (PFR), for further valorisation and bio-
based formulations  and benchmarking of the proposed new products  against existing  commercials ones; 
specifically: chemicals, resins and industrial wood adhesives. 
Result = 1 new product/market-focused interconnection 
3. Connect PI equipment and process engineering partners (e.g. UNEW, NIC, UOULU.) with providers of 
simulation, modelling and computer-aided optimisation experts (ADSC, IRIS, EBOS). These interconnections 
 
68 Global Medium-Density Fibreboard (MDF) Market 2018-2023, ResearchAndMarkets.com, April 2018 
69 Bio-based Polyurethane Market - Segmented by Product Type, Application, and Geography - Growth, Trends, and Forecast (2018 - 
2023), Mordor Intelligence, March 2018 
70 Global Medium-Density Fibreboard (MDF) Market 2018-2023, ResearchAndMarkets.com, April 2018 
71 Green and Bio Polyols Market, marketsandmarkets.com, April 2017 
72 Phenolic Resin Market Report. Trends, Forecasts and Competitive Analysis. ResearchAndMarkets.com, February 2018 
73 Formaldehyde Market - 2017 – 2026. Transparency Market Research, January 2018 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  32 
will enable the introduction of advanced techniques such as innovative PAT, ML and data analytics so as to 
improve the efficiency and predict maintenance behaviour of the PI processes. 
Result = 1 new technology-focused interconnection 
4. Connect MAT, a consulting and techno-economic analysis firm, with industrial partners UPM and Clariant so 
as enable the techno -economic assessment of the BioSPRINT biorefining concepts and their demonstration / 
replication potential at industrial sites. 
Result = 1 new business-model-focused interconnection 
5. Encourage further cross-sector interconnections by maximising the impact of the project via the Dissemination, 
Communicating and Capacity-Building activities of the project, which will communicate demonstrated post-
project industrial symbiosis possibilities, also allowing for BioSPRINT sustainability after finalisation. 
Expected results: At least 5 new feedstock, technology, product markets, regions or business model -
focused interconnections. 
BioSPRINT will thus contribute to BBI -JU KPI 1 with  4 newly-created and validated  cross-sector 
interconnections that cover feedstock, product/markets, technology and business model through the first four 
above-listed activities . BioSPRINT also has the potential to foster >5 new interconnections in the bio -based 
economy via the exploitation of its project results (fifth above-listed activity). 
These interconnections are new in the sense that the actors have not engaged with each other in cooperation or 
business in the biorefining value chain before. They are meaningful in the long term in the sense that they connect 
actors with tangible business, income, employment or partnership opportunities. 
▪ contribute to KPI 2 – set the basis for at least one new bio-based value chain; 
Traditionally, the wood industry has always been directed to the production of cellulose in order to produce paper 
or other cellulose derivatives. The rest of the components related to HMC, lignin, and other compounds have usually 
been regarded as having only energy value and used as fuel in most of the industries. As far as HMC is concerned, 
it is still to date a relatively unexploited or under-exploited type of feedstock, from which valuable products can 
however be converted into valuable chemicals. 
BioSPRINT sets the basis of an entirely new bio -based value chain for the recovery and transformation of 
HMC and sugars present in the wood  treatment process of three biomass-derived streams to produce more 
valuable components which will form the raw materials necessary for the development of new bio renewable resins 
and polymers.  The use of compounds initially meant for energy valorisation in the production of high value 
polymers will increase the interest in using natural substances for the production of chemicals usually derived from 
petrochemicals, thus opening the opportunity for the optimal use of renewable sources. 
The new BioSPRINT value chain (described in section 1.4.2, Figure 1.11) spans from raw materials (provided by 
UPM, FhG ad Clariant) to product application, undertaken by AEP and PFR. In this new value chain, not only is 
the biomass feedstock new (in the sense that is wasn’t valorised before) but also the processing (leveraging PI 
techniques and concepts which haven’t been applied in biorefining before and will be advanced using UNEW, NIC, 
UOULU expertise) as well as the end product and application (novolacs, resoles, polyols for wood adhesives and 
PU foam usage). The BioSPRINT new value chain will test and validate its resultant (new) product up to TRL 5, 
thus ensuring it is ready for further demonstration as well as a specified and accepted market application. 
Furthermore, t he BioSPRINT techno -economic and life cycle sustainability assessment will ensure that the 
foundation of the new value chain is economically viable and fulfil all relevant sustainability criteria.  
contribute to KPI 8 – validate at least one new and improved processing technology reflecting the ‘TRL gain’ 
since the start of the project. 
BioSPRINT elevates and validates the level of readiness for 4 groups of PI technologies for upstream purification, 
catalytic conversion, downstream purification and polymerisation to TRL 4/5. As explained in section 1, most 
intensified technologies have been developed to higher TRL levels corresponding to full industrial or demonstration 
scale implementation in non-biorefining applications (chemicals, petrochemicals, food and pharmaceutical), while 
the conventional separation and reaction biorefining methods to be intensified are currently at TLRs 2-3. Therefore, 
by merging PI methods with biorefining applications, the technologies will reach TRL 5 for the majority of the 
process steps, and TRL 4 for the remaining ones, by the end of the project, after simulation, integration  and 
validation for industrial HMC streams in WP5. Details for each group of technology are provided in section 1.3.2.2 
‘Positioning of the project’. Additionally, the process route exploited where HMC sugars are purified and converted 
into furan-based resins is a new technology, alternative to the use of pure sugar feedstocks based on glucose and 
fructose from 1st generation biorefining processes, which compete with food production. 
 
Environmental impacts: 
▪ decrease biomass losses by at least 10% 
BioSPRINT aims to decrease biomass losses by at least 20% from the existing and the most widely used 
pulping processes: Kraft hardwood pulping - currently used by UPM and Organosolv hardwood pulping 
which is investigated by FhG.  For both process types HMC  will be recovered, from the residual streams - 
spent/black liquor streams, at the rate of close to 100%.   
Kraft pulping is the most popular chemical pulping method being used in the pulp and paper mill. This method 
generates high amounts of produced kraft spent liquor, where producing one ton of pulp is accompanied by about 7 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  33 
to 10 tons of spent liquor , which originates from the pulp washing  step. The spent liquor, generated by a typical 
hardwood Kraft pulping, contains about 130 g/l of total dry solids (TDS), volatiles and non-volatiles. About 80% of 
TDS are organic compounds which originate from lignocellulosic biomass, mainly: dissolved lignin, organic acids 
and HMC in a form of hydrolysed monosaccharides (glucose, xylose and arabinose) and their oligomers. Other 20% 
of TDS are inorganic chemicals. T he spent liquor is burnt in the recovery boiler to generate small amounts of 
electricity and steam and to recover the inorganic chemicals for reuse in the pulping unit. The heating value of HMC 
is 21% lower compared to lignin; thus, greater benefit could be derived if HMC is instead used to make higher value 
products such as bio-based polymers or biorenewable resins. 
Considering the above outlined characteristics of a typical Kraft process the concentration of organic compounds in 
spent liquor can be calculated: 
𝑂𝑟𝑔𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐. (𝑔
𝑙 ) =  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐. (𝑔
𝑙 ) × 𝑂𝑟𝑔𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 (%) = 130 (𝑔
𝑙 ) ∗ 80 % = 104 (𝑔
𝑙 ) 
Organics in the spent liquor represents the total biomass which is lost in the spent liquor stream i.e. combusted for 
energy.  
The concentration of hemicelluloses in spent liquor is about 25 g/l, which makes up about 24 % of the total organics. 
By implementing BioSPRINT technology for recovery of high purity HMC from the spent liquor stream and in line 
with BioSPRINT KPI 1: Recovery of HMC from waste streams > 80%; reduce biomass losses by at least 20%: 
𝐻𝑀𝐶 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 (%) =
𝐻𝑀𝐶 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑. (𝑔
𝑙 )
𝑂𝑟𝑔𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐. (𝑔
𝑙 )
× 𝐻𝑀𝐶 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑦 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 (%) 
𝐻𝑀𝐶 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 (%) =
25 (𝑔
𝑙 )
104 (𝑔
𝑙 )
× 85 (%) = 20.4 % 
which also represents the decrease of biomass losses in the existing kraft pulp and paper mills.  
In organosolv pulping process HMC recovery from the spent liquor is often not economical  therefore, in most 
cases, it is converted into low value product s such as animal feed or it is digested to produce biogas. HMC makes 
up about 35% of hardwood biomass. During the organic solvent pulping process all the HMC is extracted from the 
biomass. About 60% of HMC ends up in spent liquor - waste stream. BioSPRINT technology can recover close to 
100% of the HMC present in the waste stream and convert it to value products. This valorised HMC represents about 
21% of total lignocellulose biomass. Therefore, BioSPRINT technology will be capable to decrease HMC losses 
from the waste stream of the organosolv pulping process by 100% and to decrease total lignocellulose biomass losses 
by at least 20 %.   
▪ increase the overall resource efficiency; 
Compared to existing biorefining concepts, the BioSPRINT biorefining concept is expected to achieve significant 
increase of resource efficiency by:   
• Increasing biomass efficiency of the existing pulp and paper mills and biorefineries . ~20% of lignocellulo sic 
biomass which is devalued or lost in residual streams will be recovered and upcycled into high value products;  
• Replacing the conventional (batch) stirred tank reactors (STR) with spinning disk reactors (SDR) in the upstream 
purification step and the polymerisation step. A 30% decrease of electricity consumption per weight of processed 
mixture is expected 74.     
• Replacing the conventional (batch) stirred tank reactors with agitated cell (ACR) reactor in the catalytic 
conversion step. A decrease up to 80% of electricity consumption per weight of processed mixture is expected75. 
Replacing STR with SDR and ACR will also result in about 50% reduction of solvents use for precipitation and 
extraction steps which is likely to result in about 50% less steam used for recovery of these solvents per weight 
of processed biomass . Furthermore, an almost 90% reduction of solvents used for cleaning of the reaction 
equipment is expected, which will also reduce the amount of effluent which needs to be treat 
• By applying SD R technology instead of STR for precipitation of lignin in the upstream purification of 
hemicellulose. The consumption of water for this purpose is expected to be reduced by 50%.  
Furthermore, small pulp mills that use non -woody feedstock cannot afford the capital-intensive system in order to 
process the black liquor for energy production and recycling of pulping chemicals. Therefore, many of these small 
non-woody mills are forced to discharge their effluents with no treatments into the DSP. Some of them try to treat 
these effluents with secondary biological treatment and then discharge them downstream 76 . In such BioSPRINT 
technology could bring significant benefits by recovering and converting black liquor chemicals into valuable 
products and increasing the overall resource efficiency.    
▪ reduce the amount of energy required for separation and purification of the targeted products; 
 
74  (a) Pask, S. et al (2012). Polym. Chem ., 3. 2698 -2707. 10.1039/C2PY20237A (b) Appamana W. et al (2019) . Journal of Che mical 
Engineering of Japan. 52, (6): 545-553. 
75 (a) Case Study 5: Intensification of Chemical Processing Involving Solid Reagents, University of Leeds, UK; AM Technology, Runcor n. 
(b) Jones E. et al (2012) Chemical Engineering Research and Design 90(6):726–731.  
76 (a) Zainab AL-Kaabi, et al. (2018) AIMS Energy. 6(5):880-90 (b) Hubbe, M., et al. (2019). BioRes. 14(1), 2300-2351.  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  34 
Major energy savings, comparing to the benchmark solutions, are expected in all processing step s of 
BioSPRINT biorefinery concept. By replacing the energy intensive evaporation with membrane technology (see 
section 1.3), ~10-30% of energy savings in the upstream purification step (BioSPRINT KPI 1) are expected. These 
assumptions are based on previous experience from FhG and numerous examples in food industry e.g. milk powder 
production or fruit -juice concentrations, w hich show that a single effect evaporation system and a five -effect 
evaporation system consume as much as 600 kWh and 50 kWh per tonne of water removed, respectively. On the 
other hand, revers osmoses (RO) system which is used for water removal, consumes only 10 – 20 kWh per tonne of 
removed water77. Considering the technologies for DSP alone, the reduction of the amount of energy is envisaged 
from ~2000 kJ/kgmixture (the removal of water) to < 1000 kJ/kgmixture (BioSPRINT KPI 7) due to the application 
of reaction–extraction, targeting the polar organic solvents with lower boiling points to shift the equilibrium beyond 
aqueous phase yields. The reduction of energy will also result on account of applying downstream Process 
intensification 1 (see Figure 1.3 on page 14) , namely the thermal unit integration in terms of reactor, as well as 
distillation. For diluted bio -refining streams , only this  grants break -even. The energy saving potential from 
implementing high gravity field technol ogies such as SDRs in the European fine chemicals industry have been 
estimated to be 1-3 PJ of energy per annum and are primarily based on 50% reduction in feedstock, solvents etc. in 
5% of fine chemical processes through more efficient processing. 78 More specifically for polymerisation, the SDR 
has shown promising potential for energy saving of 64% in when converting an industrial scale process for 
polymerisation of styrene from batch to semi-continuous, with a stack of 3SDRs implemented in the high monomer 
conversion stages79. For precipitation processes, the SDR has been demonstrated to significantly improve the product 
properties (almost 2-fold yield increase for TiO2 precipitation) compared to conventional stirred tank reactor (STR) 
at similar power dissi pations80. This implies that same amount of product may be achieved at much lower power 
input in the SDR than in an STR. A similar analysis between T-mixers and SDR highlight the latter to be associated 
with 3 orders of magnitude lower power dissipation wit h little adverse impact on micromixing and nucleation 
kinetics81. The use of plate heat exchangers and heat pipes in distillation column reboiling and condensation units 
can reduce energy consumption in DSP separation by up to 30%82.  
▪ reduce GHG emissions associated with downstream process steps within the biorefinery operations. 
Concerning the technologies for DSP, the reduction of GHG is envisaged from ~0.1 kgCO2/kgmixture (mostly heating) 
to < 0.05 kgCO2/kgmixture (BioSPRINT KPI 7) due to the application of reaction–extraction, targeting the polar organic 
solvents with lower boiling points to shift the equilibrium beyond aqueous phase yields. The reduction of GHG will 
also result on account of applying downstream Process intensification 1, namely thermal unit integration, as well as 
Process intensification 2  (see Figure 1.13 on page 14) , where distillation would be circumvented completely, 
reducing GHG even more substantially. The reduction of GHG emissions from reduced energy consump tion will 
also be complemented from GHG emissions from reduction of solvent use, reduction of waste water, etc.  
Economic impacts: 
▪ decrease overall costs associated with biorefinery processes by at least 10% (…); 
Upstream purification step: In conventional biorefining approach  (see above), HMC and lignin are separated by 
adding about 2 volumes of water to the process stream in order to precipitate lignin. From the remaining liquid 
fraction pre-treatment solvent is recovered by distillation and HMC is concentrated by evaporation. Energy costs of 
the distillation and evaporation units represents the major part of the OPEX of the upstream purification step83. By 
combining SDR and membrane technology to concentrate the liquid fraction and HMC, BioSPRINT will achieve 
significant energy reduction in the upstream purification step comparing to a conventional process. E.g OPEX 
associated with removing 1 tonne of water by 5-effect evaporation system come at cost of about €3.1, while OPEX 
of removing 1 tonne of water by reverse osmosis (RO) system are estimated at about €0.62. Estimated capital cost 
per tonne/hour of water removal for the evaporation system is about €55k, while for RO system is about 30 
k€84.These figures indicate that BioSPRINT technology can potentially reduce OPEX of the upstream 
purification by 80% and CAPEX by about 45% comparing to the existing solutions for HMC purification. 
These potential cost savings are based on the assumption that the same amount of solvent (water) will be removed 
 
77 (a) A.K  Pabby et al. Handbook of Membrane Separations: Chemical, Pharmaceutical, Food, and Biotechnolgy, (b) F. Lipnizki  (2010) 
Membrane Technology. ISBN: 978-3-527-31482-9; (c) Jevons, K et al., (2010). Desalination. 250. 961-963. 10.1016/j.desal.2009.09.081. 
78 Reay et al. “Process Intensification: Engineering for Efficiency, Sustainability and Flexibility”, 2nd Ed., Chapter 2 (2013).  
79 Ghiasy, D. et al. Ch. 15 in Process Intensification for Green Chemistry: Engineering Solutions for Sustainable Chemical Proce ssing (Eds. 
K.V.K. Boodhoo and A.P. Harvey), Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, 2013. 
80 Mohammadi S., et al. (2014) Chem.  Eng. J. 258, 171–184. 
81 L.M. Cafiero et al. (2002) Ind. Eng. Chem.Res. 41, 5240–5246. 
82 www.alfalaval.co.uk/gphe?gclid=EAIaIQobChMIn-KS2dD74wIViK3tCh3zwg_OEAAYAiAAEgKE3_D_BwE 
83 A. García et al (2010) 20th European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering – ESCAPE20.    
84 (a) A.K  Pabby, et al. Handbook of Membrane Separations: Chemica l, Pharmaceutical, Food, and Biotechnolgy, (b) F. Lipnizki (2010) 
Membrane Technology. ISBN: 978-3-527-31482-9; (c) Jevons, K et al (2010). Desalination. 250. 961-963. 10.1016/j.desal.2009.09.081. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  35 
as in the conventional step. Nevertheless, the use of SDR for precipitation reaction could pote ntially reduce the 
consumption of the solvent (water) by at least 50% 85, which means that the above-mentioned cost reductions are 
likely to be even higher.      
Catalytic conversion & Downstream processing (DSP) step : BioSPRINT technology for converting HMC to 
chemical intermediates (functionalised bio-based furans) and their recovery in the DSP is also expected to achieve 
significant reductions in OPEX/CAPEX, compared to the conventional biorefining approach. Use of ACR will 
enable catalytic conversion of HMC and extraction of chemical intermediates to occur simultaneously, thus replacing 
the conventional approach of having separate catalytic conversion reactor and the extraction column. ACR has the 
potential to accelerate catalytic conversions due to enhanc ed mass transfer. Faster reaction times will result in 
significantly smaller equipment and make the large -scale production more economically feasible. 86 It has been 
shown in several case studies of catalytic conversion and sugars oxidase that ACR, comparing to conventional STRs, 
can achieve overall energy savings between 88% and 91% estimated on a cost per tonne basis for a typically sized 
production plant. Furthermore, these case studies show that: the consumption of solvents is reduced by 50%, excess 
reactant consumption is reduced by 50% to 70% and estimate that ACR is 3 times more productive per volume 
comparing to STR 87. Use of ACR will also require les s solvent for the extraction which will result in: a) smaller 
equipment for the DSP and b) less energy requirements for recovering the chemical intermediates.  ACR and the 
DSP section are expected to be at least one order of magnitude, in terms equipment footprint and size, smaller than 
the existing conversion and DSP systems. With this downscaling it is expected that the CAPEX of BioSPRINT’s 
catalytic conversion and DSP section will also drop at least 20% to 30%. Furthermore, the energy requirements 
of the DSP, due to smaller volumes of the process streams and milder processing conditions (see section 1.3), are 
expected to reduce from about 2000 kJ/kg mixture (the removal of water) to < 1000 kJ/kg mixture, which is 50% 
reduction of energy. Assuming that energy costs make up about 50% of all operating costs of catalytic conversion 
and DSP step, we conclude that total OPEX of this processing stem will be reduced at least by 25% compared to 
catalytic conversion and DSP solutions of the biorefining benchmark.  
Downstream Purification: replacing the gravity decanter with a hydrocyclone will cut down the residence time in 
the liquid-liquid separation unit for, 30-60 min to <1 min, corresponding to 30-60-fold reduction in equipment size, 
footprint and materials costs. The use of plate heat exchangers in distillation column reboilers can lead up to 30% 
reduction in energy costs, 90% reduction in footprint costs and 50% reduction in equipment costs, 
Polymerisation step: Several studies have reported the benefits of usin g SDR for polymeri sation reactions. 
Significant reductions in processing times, reaction volumes, solvent use and energy requirements are observed in 
comparison to conventional STR technology as well as reduced consumption of the solvent is reduced by as much 
as 50%. In many cases of synthesis of pharmaceutical ingredients SDR offers distinct advantages, in comparison to 
the batch process. At identical production capacity per year: reaction time is reduced by 99.9%, reactor volume by 
99%, and impurity level by 93%.88 In the polymer industry, by replacing typical batch reactors with SDR technology 
it was possible to synthesise the same amount of polyurethane product in 60% less time, using 60% less energy and 
almost hundred times less solvent to clean the reactor91. In case of polymerisation of styrene, replacing batch reactor 
with SDR could reduce energy consumption by 64%. In biodiesel production use of SDR was 8.5 more efficient 
than mechanically stirred reactors 89 . In all examples from the literature SDR achieved higher yields and higher 
purity of the product. Based on these examples the overall OPEX of the polymerisation step is expected to decrease 
by at least 35% - assuming that energy and consumables such as cleaning and reaction solvents costs, which make 
up to about 60% of the OPEX, can be reduced by at least 60%. For CAPEX of the polymerisation step, using the 
same, conservative, assumption as in case of catalytic conversion , it is expected that reactor and product recovery 
can be reduced by at least one order of magnitude resulting in about 20% to 30% of CAPEX reduction. In summary, 
the Estimated cost reductions are as follows: 
BioSPRINT Processing step Estimated cost reductions comparing to existing biorefinery benchmark 
Capital costs (CAPEX) Operating costs (OPEX) 
Upstream purification 45% 80% 
Catalytic conversion & DSP >20% 50% 
Polymerisation  >20% >35% 
 
▪ when addressing fermentation processes, reduce production costs associated with the targeted products by 
at least 20%2 as compared with the state of the art; 
 
85 Reay et al. “Process Intensification: Engineering for Efficiency, Sustainability and Flexibility”, 2nd Ed., Chapter 2 (2013). 
86 Jenkins G., Process Intensification of Industrial Biocatalysis, , RSC Symposium 2016, ChemSpec Europe, Basel 
87 (a) Case Study 5: Intensification of Chemical Processing Involving Solid Reagents, University of Leeds, UK; AM Technology, Runcorn, 
UK. (b) Biocatalytic oxidase: Batch to continuous June 2012Chemical Engineering Research and Design 90(6):726–731 
88 Oxley, P et al. (2000). Ev - IND ENG CHEM RES. 39. 10.1021/ie990869u. 
89 (a) Pask, S. et al (2012). Polym. Chem .. 3. 2698 -2707. 10.1039/C2PY20237A.  (b) Appamana W. et al (2019). Journal of Chemical 
Engineering of Japan. 52, (6): 545-553. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  36 
Fermentation processes are not part of the biorefining process route, Therefore, contribution to this economic impact 
is not relevant for BioSPRINT. Nevertheless, BioSPRINT hemicellulose purification technologies could easily be 
coupled with fermentation processes for C5 and C6 sugars and lead to costs reductions in such biorefining scenarios. 
▪ increase income and business opportunities for stakeholders and actors (includin g primary producers) in 
the bio-based sectors. 
BioSPRINT is based on sound business opportunities along the value chain addressed, and within an economic 
context in which the replacement of fossil-based components with bio-based ones has become an irreversible trend. 
➔ Regarding suppliers of raw biomass,  it must be noted that important income and business opportunities are 
expected to be created for sourcing the biomass in view of its transformation into bio-based polymers and plastic 
materials from renewable sources. The majority of biopolymers are currently manufactured using starch and 
cellulose (from maize, potatoes, and cassava, but also arrowroot, barley, some varieties of liana, millet, oats, rice, 
sago, sorghum, sweet potato, taro, and wheat) 90. By establishing an intensified, sustainable and viable biorefining 
process for HMC into bio-based polymers, BioSPRINT will basically create a new market for the producers of 
lignocellulosic biomass, and more specifically for its HMC fraction, which will be complementary to (not 
substituting) the existing one for the valorised fraction. This is specifically true for the Germany-based hardwood 
and straw producers which supply the lignocellulosic biomass for UPM, FhG CBP and associate partner Clariant.  
Considering that distances and the use of regionally available resources make business more sustainable  and 
environmentally friendly , UPM sources its wood within  a maximal distance of 300km around its planned 
biorefinery91. All job opportunities will therefore be located in rural forest areas. Considering as an example the  
sunliquid® Clariant plant with an annual capacity of 50,000 tons requires approximately 227,000 tons of straw, one 
can measure the extent to which the primary producers of straw could realise new business and income. Based on 
10 percent land use, this gives rise to an area of some 4,700 km² or a collection radius for straw of a good 35 km 92. 
With the HMC fraction now being fully valorisable, BioSPRINT will also contribute to increasing the economic 
value of the raw biomass. 
➔ In the area of industrial biotechnology, significant income and business opportunities are also likely to arise for 
partners providing engineering solutions , consulting  and services as we ll as intensified bio -refining equipment 
manufacturers to biorefining plants, including partners UPM, FhG and EAB member Clariant . Knowhow and 
services will be applicable to multiple biomasses and exploitable through different business models, which include 
licensing of technology, equipment manufacturing and exporting services and knowledge. For example, UNEW, 
NIC and UOULU will be positioned to market PI consulting and engineering services. ADSC and IRIS plan to use 
the know-how and expertise obtained from the analysis, optimisation and scale-up of the main unit reactors such as 
purificators, catalytic convertors, and polymerisation units (WP1-4) to offer services to improve similar equipment 
or industrial processes to companies in the European market. The advantage of using modelling tool such CFD once 
there is a validated model of a process, the analysis of similar processes can be performed in a short period of time. 
Industrial biotechnology currently provides almost half a million jobs in the EU and over € 31 billion in added value. 
By 2030 it may account for between 900 ,000 and 1.5 million jobs and € 57 to 99 billion in added value 93. The 
BioSPRINT partners intend to be active contributors to – and beneficiaries of - the growth of this sector.  
At the end of the value chain (end -users), the economic value of the worldwide markets that could be accessed by 
the target products is extremely large, as indicated in section 1.4.2 (Market demand and opportunities). 
Social impacts: 
▪ improve the operational safety aspects linked to biorefinery operations; 
Inherent safety approaches 94 comprise (a) intensification (less amount of materials, reduced equipment size), (b) 
attenuation (reduction in process conditions), (c) substitution (material, chemistry, processes), (d) simplification 
(remove design complications), (e) limitation of effe cts (design and conditions) and (f) error tolerance (improve 
equipment or handle variations). BioSPRINT introduces 4 key process innovations to address not only a  safer, but 
also more efficient operation. (1) PI technologies designed to operate in continuous mode are associated with smaller 
processing volumes and milder process conditions compared to batch processes, having positive effect on process 
safety (related to all approached a-f). For instance, the application of membrane separations usually means operating 
at ambient temperatures, rather than at the boiling temperatures required for distillation and evaporation processes  
and decreased use of chemicals. In the SDR proposed for antisolvent precipitation and polymerisation, the thin films, 
typically of the order of 50-300 m, represent a very small inventory of material in the reactor at any instant which 
is a beneficial consideration when handling hazardous materials at high temperatures. These films also provide a 
high surface area to volume ratio, typically in the range 5000 -15000 m2/m3, to promote high rates of heat transfer 
from the disc in order to achieve good temperature control in exothermic processes. ACRs will reduce the hazardous 
inventory in reactions and DSP by >50% through combination and extraction technologies, and by enhancement of 
 
90 Ruamsook K. et al., Market opportunity for lignocellulosic biomass, Multi-tier Market Reference Framework, May 2014 
91 Wood –the Number One Natural Resource for the Bioeconomy, UPM position Paper, 2018  
92 https://sunliquid-project-fp7.eu/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/factsheet_sunliquid_en.pdf 
93 Jobs and growth generated by industrial biotechnology in Europe, EuropaBio (European Association for Bioindustries), 2016 
94 M. Athar et al.(2019) Journal of Cleaner Production. 209. 1907-1318. 10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.10.281. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  37 
mass transfer rates by at least on order of magnitude leading to >50% reduction in solvent consumption. 
Hydrocyclones will reduce the hazardous inventory in liquid -liquid separation by 30 -60-fold and plate heat 
exchangers will reduce the vapour volume in reboilers and condensers up to 90%. (2) Applying PAT, especially 
infrared spectroscopy probes, to measure compositions online (analysis response times ~1 –10 s), thus leading to 
higher process control ( and operational safety due to knowledge gained) . (3) M ulti-scale process simulations, 
provides not only the detailed mechanistic insights into bio-refining units’ design, but also, even more importantly, 
addressing swift (~1–10 min) online mitigations upon encountering the complex unexpected fault in operation. (4) 
In a broader societal sense, operation is safer as an unwanted bio-refining stream is valorised to the products on site 
as opposed to having to be treated by a wastewater treatment plant. Major safety improvements are also achieved by 
introducing new bio-based polymers and biorenewable resins which are less toxic to humans and the environment 
comparing to the existing petroleum -based counterparts. Furfural and 5 -HMF will replace formaldehyde which  is 
highly toxic and volatile and represents direct health and safety hazard to plant operators and product end -users. 
Furthermore, new formulations of resins and polyols will allow a reduction of at least 10% of flame -retardant 
additives, some of which are known to pose a risk of harm to human health and wild animals - persistent organic 
pollutants.95 
▪ create new job opportunities in the bio-based sector, particularly the rural, coastal and/or urban areas. 
Similarly, and in parallel to income and business opportunities, the BioSPRINT project has the potential to be a net 
creator of job opportunities. At the beginning of the value chain (suppliers of raw biomass materials) , particularly 
in the rural areas where the feedstocks are produced , jobs are expected to be created in view of sourcing, growing, 
harvesting, packaging and transporting the biomass from renewable sources. Job opportunities are also foreseen for 
the sustainable management of the forests and woody areas. By offering a new m arket for the producers of 
lignocellulosic biomass, and more specifically for its HMC fraction, BioSPRINT should be the starting point of a 
large job creation phenomenon. After the end of the project, it is estimated that 1 new job per €200k turnover created 
(provision of HMC feedstock) will be created in this area, therefore about 50-100 new jobs could be created. In the 
area of industrial biotechnology , significant job opportunities will also be created so that the  partners providing 
engineering solutions, consulting and services as well as intensified bio -refining equipment manufacturers , can 
sustain the increased demand for their products and services . Those will be highly qualified jobs, either based in 
urban or rural areas. As part of the project, ~5 FTE positions are about to be created and, the plan is to maintain and 
multiply those after project’s end once the exploitation plan of the project is fully implemented . At the end of the 
value chain (end-users), highly-qualified jobs for polymerisation specialists, resin formulation specialists, specialty 
chemists, will be created so as to fully exploit the opportunities of valorising HMC streams into novolac-based 
resins, bio-based polyols and bio-based foams). Given the growth of the sector and the demand for such products, 
for which acceptance is constantly growing, numerous possibilities will arise. As part of the project , BioSPRINT 
will lead to 4 FTE creations in this area, with a high domino effect once th e market, distribution and further use 
possibilities are fully explored and pursued. 
2.1.2 Other impacts (OI) 
Table 2-2. BioSPRINT contribution to other impacts 
OI1: Product engineering impact: creation of new bio-based materials to replace fossil-based materials 
BioSPRINT is a project oriented towards the development (TRL3), lab -scale production (TRL4) and validation 
(TRL 5) of new bio -based materials. BioSPRINT indeed sets the basis for the industrial production of bio-based 
resoles, novolacs and polyols as speciality chemicals , to be used in  wood laminates and panels and in  rigid PU 
foams (e.g. for thermal insulation, structural foams, packaging foams). These bio-based materials have the potential 
to replace fossil-based materials and, via the BioSPRINT ILCSA, will have a proven overall better sustainability. 
Indeed, they are foreseen to present:  ✓ Equal or improved efficiency  ✓ Reduced GHG emissions  ✓Durability 
✓Recyclability. In addition, other improved functionalities during use or reuse will be taken into account during 
the ILCSA carried out under the leadership of IFEU (WP5). The TEA undertaken by MAT will aim at supporting 
the market adaptbility and social acceptance for these new materials by showing they meet a clear market demand 
and fulfil all technical, safety and regulatory requirements, are economically viable and match all relevant 
sustainability criteria. 
OI2: Contribution to the European bio -technology and bio -economy sector’s growth , D ecoupling from 
resource depletion and environmental impact 
Bio-based industries are hugely important to Europe. According to the BIC SIRA, the European bioeconomy taking 
in the food, feed, beverage and primary sectors, has an annual turnover of €2.1 trillion. Bio -based industries 
(relevant chemicals, plastics, pharmaceuticals, paper and paper products, forest -based industries, textile sector, 
biofuels and bioenergy) account for €600billion of this total. Moreover, the European bioeconomy provides jobs 
for 18.3 million Europeans, over half of them in primary biomass production (agriculture, forestry and fisheries). 
 
95https://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/pdf/persistent_organic_pollutants_towards_pops_free_future_FB19_en.pdf 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  38 
Bio-based industries furthermore employ 3.2 million people96. Industrial biotechnology – an important pillar of the 
bio-based industries – provides almost half a million jobs in the EU and over €31 billion in added value.  
By 2030 it may account for between 900 000 and 1.5 million jobs and €57 to 99 billion in added value97.  
By optimising efficient processing for integrated biorefineries through a multidisciplinary research and innovation 
effort, BioSPRINT intends to make a contribution to the growth of the European bioeconomy, and more specifically 
the bio-technology sector. The expected impacts of the project include: 
▪ To decrease overall costs associated with biorefinery processes (see expected economic on page 34) compared 
with current processing solutions; thus, spurring competitiveness gains which can translate into sustainable growth; 
▪ To create tangible income and business opportunities for stakeholders and actors (including primary producers) 
in the bio-based sectors.   
This impact would be achieved in a sustanable way, that decouples growth from resource depletion and 
environmental impact. At the heart of the transition to a Green Economy 98, defined as one resulting in ‘improved 
human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities’, 
lies the decoupling of human well-being from resource consumption. This decoupling is actually recognised as the 
key indicator of positive trends in sustainability and resource efficiency 99. Considering the benefits to be 
achieved in BioSPRINT, i.e. reduction in production costs, reduction in capital costs, reduction of GHG emissions 
and waste, increase in resource and energy efficiency, it is easy to understand how BioSPRINT will translate into 
economic, environmental and social benefits and showcase the enormous impacts in terms of 
competitiveness. 
 
OI3: Contribution to Europe’s raw material security  and red uced dependence on non -renewable 
unsustainable fossil-based resources 
BioSPRINT is a project oriented towards the benefit of Bio-based industries that make use of European biomass 
sources and sustainable European  supply chains. As such, BioSPRINT has the capacity to contribute to lower 
Europe’s dependency on imports and contribute to the EU raw material security. With 90 % of Europe’s chemical 
industry feedstocks for non-energy use coming from fossil resources100, access to alternatives such as biomass is an 
important strategic issue. By creating opportunities for the creation of novel biorenewable resole & novolac resins 
and polyols for high volume productions (wood laminates, PU rigid foams),  BioSPRINT certainly contributes to 
reducing the dependence on fossil-based petroleum-derived materials vastly used at present for these products. All 
biomass used in BioSPRINT present the following characteristics:  (a) non-food competing biomass (b) 100% 
sourced from forests a nd plantations certified and 100% traceable;  (c) not harvested from tropical rainforests or 
plantations that were formerly rainforest. (d) not harvested from indigenous lands. (e) sourcing and forestry sources 
that cause zero deforestation. 
 
OI4: Contribution to the realisation of European climate goals 
By replacing fossil -based products with bio -based products, which have a  smaller carbon footprint, BioSPRINT 
inserts itself in the Europe -wide effort to achieve the objective of  a 20% reduction  in GHG emissions by 2020 
(compared to 1990 levels). BioSPRINT will in particular contribute in sectors (chemicals, plastics) for which bio-
based materials have the potential to make a strong statement towards decarbonisation by offering the replacement 
of fossil-based carbon with renewable carbon as raw materials. As an illustration, bio-based plastics can save 26 kg 
of CO2 equivalent per kilogram of plastic compared  with petrochemical-based plastics 101 and BioSPRINT will 
demonstrate the extent of which PI can help realise this impact for bioren ewable resins. The expected impact of 
BioSPRINT includes to reduce GHG  emissions associated with biorefining process (see expected environmental 
impact on page 34). 
 
OI5: Contribution to improving the innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge 
The BBI JU Work Plan emphasises the need to ‘optimise efficient processing for integrated biorefineries through 
research, development and innovation’, and also highlights that the need to ‘analyse and communicate the impact 
and the added value of the BBI [ projects] to a wide audience of stakeholders’.  A strong scientific impact is 
expected from BioSPRINT. The technical work of the project requires an interdisciplinary approach that can only 
be provided by a combination of researchers, industr ial actors, end -users and support organisations. The 
BioSPRINT consortium was developed in order to balance the contribution of academic scientific contributions 
(FhG, UNEW, NIC, UOULU ), industry -driven innovation ( UPM, AEP, PFR, Clariant), enabling  technology 
providers (ADSC, IRIS, EBOS ) and support organisations (DEC, MAT , IFEU). BioSPRINT provides a cross-
sectorial and transdisciplinary opportunity for all stakeholders to collaborate and share technical knowledge 
and market expertise.  
 
 
96 Bioeconomy in figures (2013), BIC, 2016. 
97 Jobs and growth generated by industrial biotechnology in Europe, EuropaBio (European Association for Bioindustries), 2016. 
98 UNEP (2011) Decoupling natural resource use and environmental impacts from economic growth. 
99 Sustainable Industry: Going for Growth & Resource Efficiency, European Commission, DG Enterprise & Industry, Unit B1 
100 CEFIC, Measuring Bio-Based raw materials use in the chemical industry, 2014 
101 www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/the-newplastics- 
economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  39 
2.1.3 Potential Barriers to impact and measures taken to overcome them 
Table 2-3 Counter Measures to deal with Potential Barriers to Impact
2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
Our vision is to lead the application of PI in the context of biorefining operations, so as to improve the efficiency of 
the purification and conversion of sugars from the HMC fraction of lignocellulosic biomass and their transformation 
into biorenewable resins, and thus contribute to the development of sustainable and competitive bio-based industries 
in Europe . In order to realise this vision, dissemination and exploitation pathways have already been carefully 
planned. The impact of the project will be maximised by the implementation of a Plan for the Exploitation and 
Dissemination of Results (PEDR) , communication, capacity -building and standardisation activities that will 
bring greater visibility to the project and allow its outputs to be leveraged by identified target audiences (TAs), 
listed, with their interests, in Table 2-4. The initial PEDR has been devised to increase the scientific, innovation and 
business outcome from the project as well as its economic, environmental, and social impacts.  
Table 2-4 Target Audience Groups for BioSPRINT 
TA Interest in the project 
END-USER TAs 
A- Academic and RTOs in the 
area of biorefining, chemical 
process engineering and PI 
• Advancing own or collaborative research / innovation work post-project; 
• Training personnel & students on BioSPRINT biorefining concept 
• Incorporating BioSPRINT TECBP outputs into own curricula 
B- Bioeconomy industrial / SME 
actors (Biorefineries, resin 
producers, etc.)   
• Utilising project's results in R&D activities 
• Pursuing adaptation to operational environments, further demonstration; 
• Blending BioSPRINT results with in-house artefacts; 
• Connecting with innovative organisations; fostering cooperation; 
• Getting inspired to apply PI in the Bioeconomy.  
C- Biotechnology solution 
providers, OEMs, Process 
Engineering consultants 
• Supporting, promoting, accelerating the adoption of PI in biorefining contexts; 
• Helping clients make the most of technologies when revamping plants 
(retrofitting) or designing / installing new industrial plants. 
OTHER TAs 
D- BBI-JU & BIC members • Identifying common topics of interest; 
• Establishing synergies and collaborations for results promotion; 
• Co-organising awareness and support events. 
E- Consortia from BBI-SO2-2019 
calls, BBI & other relevant 
projects 
• Contributing to advances towards a process-efficient bioeconomy;  
• Gathering and sharing knowledge  and tools for the development and use of 
novel solutions for intensifying biorefining operations.  
F-Private & public funding 
institutions for bioeconomy  
• Identifying most promising innovation; Bringing innovation to market; 
• Investing in cutting-edge technologies 
Barrier 1:  High risk investments with long Return on Investment (ROI) timeframes 
One of the main obstacles to accelerating resource efficiency impact in the biorefining industries is the high CAPEX 
necessary for any change in the established process base with long ROI. → BioSPRINT will overcome this barrier 
by performing a strong techno-economic a ssessment and I LCSA which will demonstrate that the BioSPRINT 
biorefining concepts are technically feasible and, most importantly , economically viable. The D&C, TECBP and 
exploitation activities will ensure that a broad community of stakeholders learn s about the project’s results and 
identify exploitation opportunities, including transferability & replicability potential. Furthermore, the technologies 
leveraged in the BioSPRINT biorefining concept can be adopted gradually, thus reducing this barrier. 
Barrier 2: Regulatory complexity and policy enabling framework 
Regulations and standards can represent a massive ally for the implementation of new technologies related with the 
intensification of the Bioeconomy. Regulatory aspects can , however,  also be a barrier to process innovation, 
especially in highly regulated industries like Bio-chemicals. In addition, a supporting and inducing policy framework 
is necessary for fostering reduction of GHG emissions, energy and resource efficiency initiatives, and the creation 
of green growth and jobs. → An overview of the most relevant regulations for BioSPRINT is provided on page 23. 
T6.5 will specifically include a review of regulatory requirements to ensure future compliance. We have also 
included, as part of our D&C efforts (WP7), engagement and outreach efforts towards policy makers considering 
that possible public incentives will be key in enabling the adoption of the BioSPRINT research & innovation.  
Barrier 3: Lack of consumer awareness and acceptance for bi o-based products and applications:   
Understanding and responding to consumers’ needs, concerns and perceptions about  bio-based products and 
applications is key to achieve better awareness and acceptance for bio-based products. ➔ BioSPRINT reckons that 
establishing a high level of transparency  is important. This is the reason why the ILCSA will aim at  recording 
certified (positive) impacts of the BioSPRINT bio-based products and processes, together with information on the 
full value chains from feedstock  cultivation to application, and their benefits in terms of sustainability, etc., and 
make these results publicly availab le, preferably in databases, where possible. We have also included, as part of 
our communication efforts (WP7), to reach out to the media and general public  and the possibility to cluster with 
CSAs looking into these topics (e.g. BIOBRIDGES). 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  40 
G-Key policy-making 
institutions; Relevant EU-wide 
initiatives (e.g. ETPs). 
• Evaluating the project's techno-economic and regulatory aspects; 
• Defining future innovation directions;  
• Selecting incentives and policy mechanisms for a strong EU bioeconomy. 
H-Standardisation bodies  • Developing roadmaps for standards development; 
• Receiving, gathering and consolidating inputs for standardisation.  
I-Media & General public • Informing the general and specialised publics about recent innovations and 
expected impacts on their lives / operations; 
• Stimulating innovation in unexpected groups of society;  
• Understanding / Utilising the value of EU-funded innovation.  
 
Dissemination strategy. The dissemination strategy is pivotal to the project’s success and will be established and 
managed by WP7 leader Ms. Sarah FUCHS (DEC) acting as the D&C Manager. A detailed dissemination strategy 
and plan will be developed and maintained in task 7.1. DEC has extensive experience in managing the dissemination 
of results from multi -disciplinary, collaborative innovation projects and is well positioned to outreach and  engage 
with the European Bioeconomy actors. DEC will be supported through the co -operative work of the BioSPRINT 
partners who will participate and have been allocated effort to promote the project results within their respective 
communities with great att ention paid to complementarity and multi -dimensionality of actions.  Dissemination 
activities will be reviewed, evaluated and refined throughout the project to ensure the effectiveness of each individual 
action. There is a strong mutuality between dissemination of project results and communications activities (described 
in Section 2.2.4). We will employ both traditional channels such as conferences (presentations, papers and posters), 
publications in peer -reviewed and open access journals, dissemination in industry magazines, newsletters and on -
line platforms, as well as mor e vanguard channels, such as social media platforms ( Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, 
ResearchGate, Academia.edu, YouTube), etc.  
 
Dissemination practises. The consortium commits to the following practices: 
▪ All presentations, contributions and publications, even partially funded by the project, shall include the project 
logo and prominently acknowledge the EU H2020 grant under which the project is funded. 
▪ Details of all publications, even partially funded by the project, shall be uploaded to spe cific and agreed 
bibliographic networks such as Mendeley, ResearchGate, GoogleScholar. Every publication will carry an agreed tag 
specific to the project, e.g ‘BioSPRINT’. An explanation of how to access such publication lists by tag will be added 
as a reminder in every report. Additionally, whenever bibliographic networks allow for a catalogue of publications 
to be retrieved by tag or published as an RSS feed, the project's website will expose such a catalogue. 
▪ All project-related presentation materials shall be published on the project's web site under a Creative Commons 
license or another appropriate license and made available through social data-sharing channels (e.g. SlideShare). 
▪ Datasets shall be published, when appropriate, on the EU Open data portal and linked from the project's website. 
▪ All publications shall be published in line with the project’s Data Management Plan (DMP) and the project’s IP 
Management Strategy, described below, thus ensuring protection for the project’s IP, personal data, etc. 
 
Target audiences and key dissemination activities & means 
Dissemination activities and means are outlined in Table 2. 5 and tailored to their interests. A major element of 
dissemination relates to the liaison with the BBI-JU, BIC consortium and other EU -wide initiatives. Six (6) 
BioSPRINT partners (DEC, AEP, UOULU, FhG, NIC, UPM ) are (full or associate) members of BIC. A 
Representative from the BIC Board will also be invited to participate in BioSPRINT’s EAB.  
Table 2-5 Dissemination Activities & Means  
TAs  Key Indicative Dissemination Activities & Means 
Partners  Each partner will internally disseminate the project’s findings to its staff, and significantly contribute to 
the increase of the business & technical know-how of their experts. 
All partners will also present the project to students / colleagues when internally-organised seminars and 
workshop are organised (e.g. UOULU’s Bioeconomy research community events;) 
A- Academic 
and RTOs in the 
area of 
biorefining, 
chemical 
process 
engineering and 
PI 
During and after the project, academic & research partners DEC, FhG, NIC, UOULU and UNEW will 
be involved in the preparation and publication of articles in scientific journals, peer -reviewed 
publications, privileging, as much as possible green open-access journals (indexed in ISI Web of Science 
and SCOPUS) to disseminate the knowledge gained during the project. These partners will also attend 
scientific and academic R&D events and conferences. 
Scientific journals:   Chemical Engineering Journal, Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process 
Intensification; Applied catalysis B-environmental, Journal of catalysis, Chemical Engineering Journal; 
Chemical Engineering Science; Journal of Membrane Science, Journal of Chemical Technology and 
Biotechnology, Separation and Purification Technology, Proceedings of R&D Conferences (see below), 
etc. R&D Conferences:   IPIC, International Symposium on Catalysis and Multiphase Reactors, 
International Conference on Bioenergy and Biorefineries, Nordic Wood Biorefinery Conference  
European or World Congress of Chemical Engineering, ISCRE 26/APCRE 9, WCCE11, AIChE Annual 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  41 
Meeting, Euromembrane 2021, IFAC Symposium on Advanced Control of Chemical Processes 
(ADCHEM 2021) , PRAXIS forum Downstream Processing, European Workshop on 
Lignocellulosics and Pulp, ACHEMA, etc. 
Target values:  12-18 scientific publications; 12-15 participation to R&D conferences.  
B- Bioeconomy 
industrial / 
SME actors 
(Biorefineries, 
resin producers, 
etc.)  
C- 
Biotechnology 
solution 
providers, 
OEMs, PSE 
consultants 
During and after the project, industrial and SME partners AEP, ADSC, EBOS, IFEU, IRIS, MAT, PFR 
and UPM  will attend industrial exhibitions , business conferences and fairs in order to present the 
BioSPRINT biorefining concept and the project results. These will also be presented in form of white-
papers and industrial case studies.  
Industrial Exhibitions and Business Conferences :  Commercialisation of Disruptive Sensor 
Technology, European Biomass Conference & Exhibition, European Conference on Spectroscopy  of 
Biological Molecules , UTECH Europe Conference, Foam Expo Europe conference , ACHEMA 
Exhibition; AIChE Conference; etc. Publication of Industrial case studies: 3 industrial case studies will 
be prepared by DEC in collaboration with UPM, FhG and associate partner Clariant. Those will present 
the publishable, non -confidential results of the BioSPRINT case studies . They will be widely 
disseminated via electronic methods (e.g. project newsletters, DEC’s network) 
Target values:  12-15 participation to Industrial/Business conferences, 3 industrial case studies.  
All end -user 
Target 
Audiences ( A, 
B & C) 
Delivery of the BIioSPRINT Training, Education & Capacity Building Programme (TECBP) (T7.2). 
A gender-balanced audience of bioeconomy stakeholders, covering the academic, research, industrial  
communities) will be targeted. The TECBP will be designed and delivered under the leadership of NIC 
(Prof. Blaž Likozar as Capacity-Building Manager) and with participation of UOULU, FhG, UNEW and 
AEP. The TECBP will be aimed at enhancing the skills of the participants and promoting the adoption 
of the BioSPRINT results by potential end-users. Specifically, the following will be implemented: 
Preparation and delivery of the BioSPRINT o nline TECBP: It will consist of a  web-based suite of 
training materials and guidance for practical training, also available to support inclusion in academic 
courses (4 web modules, one per BioSPRINT focus area). It will be prepared by NIC with support 
of EBOS. The online TECBP will be delivered in Y2 of the project; the modules will remain 
available even after the end of the project . Organisation of 4 capacity-building workshops, focusing 
on one or several of the  biorefining focus areas of BioSPRINT. In year 3, UOULU, UNEW, NIC and 
AEP will each organise 1 one -day workshop with 50 participants each. Total participants: 200. 
Organisation of the BioSPRINT Summer school , focusing on the whole BioSPRINT biorefining 
concept. In year 4, DEC will each organise this one-week event with 80 participants in cooperation with 
NIC mainly. Target values:  300 TECBP participants; online modules and workshops in English. 
D- BBI-JU & 
BIC members 
 
G-Key policy-
making 
institutions   
Policy makers at the European, national and local levels help to form favourable business and innovation 
policy framework for  making advances towards a sustainable bioeconomy. The BioSPRINT Project 
Management Board will therefore disseminate high -level project results to these 
institutions/organisations, highlighting key policy challenges encountered and recommendations for 
policy work. In addition, during the project, partners will aim at disseminating project results of interest 
specifically to the BIC consortium and its members, in particular via: 
Liaison activities with BBI-JU PPP: The BioSPRINT dissemination activities will intersect with 
dissemination strategies of the BBI-JU PPP, via participation of a BBI-JU Board member to the 
BioSPRINT External Advisory Board as well as the 6 partners (DEC, AEP, UOULU, FhG, NIC, UPM) 
who are active BIC members. European and national conferences: All partners will take part in events 
such as the BBI -JU Stakeholder Forum, International Conference on Industrial Biotechnology and 
Bioprocessing, EFIB European Forum for Industrial Biotechnology and the Bioecon omy, European 
Biotech Week, BioHorizon events, SusChem events, etc. Liaison activities with EC & SusChem ETPs: 
liaison with the EC will be undertaken by the Project Coordinator DEC and, by DEC and NIC for the 
ETP for Sustainable Chemistry - SusChem; Liaison with national & local policy-makers: All partners 
will undertake liaison activities with their respective national and local policy-making institutions  
Target values: Participation in at least 8 BBI-JU events and 6 European conferences by M48. 
E- Consortia 
from BBI -SO2-
2019, BBI & 
other relevant 
projects 
Topics addressed by the BBI Work Programme form a coherent and integrated package. Therefore, we 
will aim at liaising with the CSAs called upon to cut across topics and establish synergies with other 
IAs/RIAs in the BBI-SO2 and other relevant calls. 
Target values: Min. 3 collaborations with BBI or other relevant projects by M48. 
F-Private and 
public funding 
institutions for 
bioeconomy 
innovation 
 
Funding from both private and public institutions is one of the ways spurring development and adoption 
of technologies. It will therefore be critical for BioSPRINT to disseminate its results to such institutions 
in order to ensure its sustainability and identify further funding opportunities to further evolve the 
BioSPRINT biorefining concept to a higher TRL after the project’s end. Partners involved in T7.3 
‘Identification of early adopters and post-project opportunities’, i.e (MAT, UPM, DEC and IRIS),  will 
aim at reaching out to private organisations such as Venture Capitalist Funds as well as public 
organisations such  as the  German Federal Ministry of Education and Research  (BMBF),  Business 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  42 
 
How the proposed measures will help to achieve the expected impact of the project.  
Through dissemination and communication activities, BioSPRINT’s underpinning purposes are to : 1. Increase 
awareness about the tangible and intangible outputs (knowledge, technologies, cooperation, etc.) of the BioSPRINT 
RIA; 2. Make these outputs available to TAs best placed to build upon them and advance their technological, 
scientific, business or policy work; and 3. Broaden their impact beyond the original project focus. In this way we 
aim to avoid duplication of efforts, and c ontribute to knowledge building and advancement of innovation in 
Europe’s bioeconomy. Particular attention will be paid to ensure the relevance and application of the BioSPRINT 
biorefining concept to bioeconomy actors, starting from biorefineries. In addition, all dissemination activities will 
be developed with an eye towards the exploitation of the project results by other parties, to lay down the basis for 
subsequent innovation actions as well as other private initiatives which can accelerate the uptake o f PI solutions in 
general and the BioSPRINT outputs in particular.  The fact that the BioSPRINT PEDR includes multidimensional 
actions aimed at training & education (the BioSPRINT TECBP, spanning three years of the project with materials 
remaining available and exploitable after the end of the project), standardisation (the CWA is aimed at evolving 
towards a Technical Committee on its own after the end of the project), regulatory compliance, wide dissemination 
through publications, workshops, conferences, is a testimony of our commitment to maximise the impact of the 
project while giving due consideration to its follow-up. 
The partners’ own contribution to D&C activities, in which all partners are involved, and for which all partner s 
have been allocated effort, will help achieve the expected impact of the project. One key aspect of this relates to the 
strong industry engagement in BioSPRINT which is truly aimed at contributing to the exploitation and deployment 
of results. The following table indicates the industry engagement for the maximisation of the BioSPRINT impact: 
Table 2-6 Contribution to exploitation and deployment of results 
Company Contribution to exploitation and deployment of results 
PFR Interest in applying the BioSPRINT biorefining concept into polymerization activities. 
Financial contribution to the project: €412,875. 
UPM Interest in applying the BioSPRINT biorefining concept into biorefining plant under 
planning. Financial contribution to the project: €322,750. 
Clariant Interest in intensifying the valorisation of currently undervalorised HMC stream from straw 
stream explosion In-kind contribution to the project, provision of samples: €5,000. 
Sappi Leveraging expertise in process development and scale -up, potential use of C5 sugars and 
derivatives in value added markets and quality requirements. 
Johnson Matthey Interest in evaluating the possible scale-up of the BioSPRINT concepts and technologies. 
St1 Interest in broadening the side-product portfolio to improve competitiveness. 
 
2.2.3 Business Plan – Beyond the Project’s Lifetime 
The BioSPRINT biorefining concept is inspired by a ‘ holistic process intensification (PI) philosophy’ which we 
strongly believe will support a paradigm shift in the refining of HMC streams in the European bioeconomy . The 
relevance of the project’s innovation to a wide range of target audiences (see section 2.2, Table 2. 4) underpins the 
commercial exploitation of BioSPRINT, beyond the project’s lifetime. In addition to developing a unique intensified 
biorefining concept for HMC streams, the project also aims to pave the way for realising a direct economic benefit 
through the identification of early adopters and post-project opportunities as part of T7.3 in WP7. This is the reason 
why the task will also include, by M48, the development of a business plan for the exploitable results of BioSPRINT. 
The following sections aim at presenting our approach and initial thoughts for the implementation of a strategic 
business plan that can drive long-term commercial viability beyond the project’s lifetime. All partners will contribute 
to deliver high impact exploitation pathways in line with their activities and business strategies (Table 2.7, page 42). 
The core exploitation activities will focus on the B ioSPRINT intensified biorefining concept, for which a business 
plan ( D7.10) will be developed , as part of T7.3 . This task will study  customer segments (e.g. enterprise users, 
consultants, equipment manufacturers, research & academic institutions) , describe a  product and services with 
investor and end-user credibility, and expand on aspects such as sales strategy, marketing strategy, explicit channels 
to market, pricing strategies. It will be validated with data from industry participants in the project (e.g. willingness 
to pay & revenue model validation, customer segments validation / market validation, and channels validation) which 
have commercialisation experience (e.g. UPM, PFP, IRIS), under the leadership of MAT . The partners who will 
primarily own the BioSPRINT foreground IP, i.e. mainly UNEW, NIC, FhG, UOULU and UPM, are committed to 
Finland ,  the Slovenian Research Agency, etc.). Target values: > 2 opportunities for further funding 
identified and explored, as part of the project, by the Innovation & Commercialisation Board. 
H-Standards 
bodies  
 
BioSPRINT aims at participating to the establishment of standards related to process intensification and 
the bioeconomy. To this end, the project’s outputs related to standardisation will be disseminated to 
CEN/CENELEC, ISO, etc. A CEN Workshop Agreement (CWA) on ‘PI for Biorefining Processes’ will 
be established. Mr. Mavroyiannos, Standards officer, Cyprus Organisation for Standardisation, member 
of the EAB, will support these efforts. The CWA will remain active even after the end of the project.  
Target value: CWA established by M46. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  43 
support the task and deliver support for the outputs beyond the end of the project. Formal cross-licensing agreement 
will be investigated / created to support the project’s business plan. 
Table 2-7. Initial exploitation intentions of BioSPRINT consortium partners 
DEC Leverage the results of BioSPRINT to support the chemical process industry as well as the pulp and paper industry 
processing lignocellulosic biomass with new value chains for underexploited sugar containing side s treams. Exploit 
the results of the CWA so as to contribute to future BREFs and EU Standards regarding process efficiencies. 
AEP Exploit the BioSPRINT results though further collaborative research; licensing of optimised recipes for the production 
of novel bio-based resins and polyols. Prioritise exploitation activities towards exploitation of a complete technology 
platform for the conversion of HMC into bio-based resins and polyols. 
ADSC Generate further knowledge and R&D efforts on biomass systems that would help increase expertise in this 
competitive sector. Integrate the knowledge gained into its portfolio of engineering services for analysis, optimisation 
and scale-up of biorefining equipment. 
EBOS Extend the capabilities and functionalities of EBOS ML algorithms for predictive maintenance and apply those to 
other applications. Advance its knowledge in industrial technologies, thus extending the company’s R&D activities 
through further collaborative and own research. 
FhG Exploit the project’s results via further internal and/or collaborative research, expanding its expertise mainly in the 
field of downstream processing and isolation/purification of valuable compounds from sugar and wood and producing 
publications and/or patents related to the investigations made by FhG CBP. 
IFEU Exploit the BioSPRINT results in view of improving and expanding its ILCSA methodology. Leverage the knowledge 
and expertise gained in new collaborative projects which require an ILCSA and/or provide it as a service to industrial 
R&D endeavours.  
IRIS Undertake further internal research on monitoring technologies applied to bio-based processes, products and streams, 
thus increasing IRIS know-how (knowledge and IP) in this area. 
NIC Proceed with further internal research/collaborative research: exploring the synergies with other BioSPRINT project 
partners, commonly addressing (development) challenges. Efforts will take the form of new projects commercial 
industrial services in multi-scale process modelling or PI; publications and patent applications. 
MAT Expand its portfolio of modelling, simulation, process design and techno -economic feasibility studies and services, 
targeting public and private companies which run biorefineries or plan to invest in biorefineries and PI technologies 
such those developed in BioSPRINT.    
UOLU Exploit the knowledge and IP via further internal and collaborative research in which separation techniq ues and 
advanced data analysis methods are developed and applied to develop novel bioproducts . Publications as well as 
development work on separation processes (R&D) with companies (biorefineries, paper mills, chemical industry etc.) 
for global markets. Transfer the research results into its education materials for BSc and MSc programmes.  
PFR Exploit existing know - how in development of tailor - made resins for creation of bioresins according to real 
requirements of the market for PF resins. Check suitability of actual utilisation in the industry for construction, 
insulation or industrial application   
UNEW Establish a long -term collaboration with the industrial partners in and beyond the project. Contribute to the 
development of a technology transfer and IP exploitation plan in collaboration with other project partners and exploit 
the knowledge and IP gained via consultancy contracting and R&D projects.  
UPM Further evaluate the efficiency and economic gains that would be made possible by transposing the BioSPRINT 
biorefining concept into its biorefining plant under construction. Investigate the incorporation of the BioSPRINT 
results into industrial activities either via collaborative or self-funded demo and prototyping activities at large-scale. 
 
Key exploitable results. The primary exploitable result of BioSPRINT is the technologies, in 4 focus areas, which 
intensify the valorisation of HMC streams into added-value compounds and products. The following sections provide 
an initial overview of the opportunity.  Competitive Landscape & Market Opportunity. Currently, there are 224 
biorefineries in Europe102 out of which 25 are wood-based biorefineries (excluding pulp for paper only) producing 
 pulp, tall oil, specialty cellulose or bioethanol and 5 produce cellulosic fibre or bioethanol from other lignocellulosic 
feedstock such as wheat straw, Miscanthus or switch grass . This creates a strong European market for biorefining 
technologies in Europe. At global scale, t he global market for Biorefinery technologies will grow from ~€423.5 
billion in 2016 to ~€648.6 billion by 2021, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8.9% for the period of 
2016-2021103. Similarly, with Europe, it can be assumed that l ignocellulosic biorefineries currently represent ~ 10-
14% of all biorefineries globally. Thus, the market can be estimated as representing ~€66.9 billion by 2021. This is 
sizeable yet realistic market for BioSPRINT. As for new products, recent analysis projects the market share of bio-
based chemicals in the global chemical industry to increase from 2% in 2008 to 22% by 2025, and the market potential 
for bio-based chemicals will reach ~€17.8 billion by 2016104. The need to substantially deliver smaller, cleaner, safer 
and more energy -efficient technology that allows to ‘close the loop’ a nd also v alorise sugars from HMC, into 
innovation bio-based chemicals, is one important priority for the European bioeconomy. BioSPRINT is in a unique 
 
102 Biorefineries in Europe 2017, BIC: https://biconsortium.eu/news/mapping-european-biorefineries.  
103 E. Gobina, Biorefinery Technologies: Global Markets, July 2016 (link) 
104 Market Assessment for Bioproducts Development, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, link 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  44 
position to deliver results that answer this need. Business Model Canvas. We will implement the business model 
canvas method of Osterwalder (Figure 2.7, on page 45) to fast track the business modelling of the project. Our model 
provides the top-level details of our target customer, our revenue model, key propositions etc. The detailed business 
plan (task 7.4) will expand the proposition into a full-scale model by M48 of the project with an outlook towards the 
next 5 years . The consortium has identified clear customer segments that we want to target with several Unique 
Values Propositions (UVPs). The consortium has a particularly strong network (direct consortium members, BIC 
members etc) which will be leveraged to commercially exploit the project’s results. As for financial projections, even 
though revenue streams have already been identified, those will be developed as part of T7.4 as the project is ongoing. 
 
2.2.2 Knowledge management and IP Protection Strategy 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Management during the project. For the success of the project it is essential 
that all project partners agree on explicit rules concerning IP ownership, access rights to any Background and Results 
for the execution of the project and the protection of intellectual property rights (IPRs) and confidential information 
before the project starts. Therefore, such issues will be addressed in detail within the Consortium Agreement (CA). 
The main purpose of the CA is to establish a legal framework for the project in order to provide clear regulations for 
issues within the consortium related to the work, IP  ownership, Access Rights to Background and Results for the 
duration of the project and any other matters of the consortium’s interest.  
Access Rights to Background and Results. In order to ensure a smooth execution of the project, the project partners 
agree to grant each other royalty-free Access Rights to their Background and Results for the execution of the project. 
The CA will define further details concerning the Access Rights to Background and Results, after the project’s end.  
IP ownership. In line with the default for H2020, results shall be owned by the partner carrying out the work leading 
to such results. If any result is created jointly by at least two partners and it is not possible to distinguish between the 
contribution of each of the partners, such work will be jointly owned by the contributing partners. Any joint results, 
including inventions and all related patent applications and IP will be jointly owned by the co ntributing parties. In 
order to further the competitiveness of the EU market, and to enhance exploitation of the consortium results, each 
contributing party to jointly created IP shall have full freedom of action to independently exploit the jointly create d 
results as it wishes (e.g. right to transfer results to their affiliated companies without prior notification to the other 
project partners), while always protecting and assuring the Access Rights of the other project partners. Such use of 
results will encourage competitiveness of the EU market by creating broader uses of the results and opening up the 
markets for the Consortium’s results in all markets, thus supporting the goals of the consortium towards seeing 
commercial outputs evidenced from the BioSPRINT project.  
Knowledge Management and IPR activities  will be addressed by T 8.4 ‘Innovation, IPR & Data Management  ‘, 
led by MAT (Mr. Mladen Crnomarkovic as Innovation & Transferability Manager). The task will develop and finalise 
a detailed Knowledge Management and IPR Strategy, which will be followed throughout the project and closely 
interconnected with the exploitation and dissemination activities paving the way for post -project exploitation. The 
overall BioSPRINT IPR strategy will be to promote the sustainability of project results, considering that any 
interested party can commercialise them while protecting the rights of the consortium partners. An integrated 
approach will be followed for t he identification, capture, retrieval, distribution, sharing, use and reuse of generated 
information and knowledge assets. This will be essential to drive the value and benefits of these assets, and contribute 
to maximising the innovation impact of the action. Knowledge management sessions will take place regularly during 
project meetings. Partners will receive IP training from the Innovation & Transferability Manager  and will sign 
declarations of compliance with the CA IP policies and procedures. Complianc e will be driven by WP leaders, the 
Innovation & Transferability Manager and the project’s Technical Manager. At the earliest possible stage, every 
Figure 2.7. BioSPRINT Business Model Canvas 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  45 
partner will appoint a responsible person for their IPR tasks, to guarantee that all rights needed for explo itation 
purposes are collected and communicated to the CoP. 
Open access strategy & Data Management Plan. We will take part in the pilot for open access to research data in 
H2020 and develop open educational resources ( Training, Education and Capacity-building program under task 
T7.2). The above acknowledge the importance to Europe that future projects build on previously funded efforts as 
well as open dissemination. We are also committed to Open access to scientific publications, and as such will commit 
an important proportion of project publications to open access, considering the need to balance openness and 
protection of scientific information, commercialisation and IPR, privacy concerns, security as well as data 
management and preservation questions. The consortium will also use an Institutional Open Repository to store and 
provide access to scientific publications and researchers profiles and automatically feed OpenAIRE with articles to 
ensure the largest possible impact among researchers, policy-makers and businesses. For all project outcomes with 
public level of dissemination, the DMP will determine how wider distribution can be considered, following the H2020 
guidelines (Deliverable D8.1). With respect to data expl oitation, the DMP will determine how other stakeholders 
may exploit the data and how the data can be verified after it has been deposited. We will use established standards 
and non-proprietary formats for data collection as far as possible, to support future exploitation of the data either by 
partners or by external organisations where open access is implemented.  
IP Protection through patents. BioSPRINT partners NIC, UNEW and AEP also intend to file patents on IP which 
they will identify in cooperation with MAT. Strategic IP filings will be directly managed by these IP owners in a way 
that will not impede the underlying aspirations to open science. Consequently, the consortium partners have agreed 
not to pub lish confidential or restricted results under Open Access, regarding all scientific publications produced 
along the project lifecycle, until IP filings have been confirmed in the identified strategic and commercially sensitive 
areas. Specifically, special attention and consideration will be given to IP, information and data characterised as EU 
CONFIDENTIAL, guided by the Innovation & Transferability Manager, in close consultation with the PC. 
Table 2-8. Partner Patent Filings Intentions 
NIC: 1–3 potential patent applications, in the field of furfural/HMF production on (a) pure feedstock streams (b) 
realistic input resources  and (c) downstream separation processes, related to the use of known purification 
technologies in the isolation of polymer grade furans, based on bio-refining 
UNEW: Filing of one patent in the area of catalyst development 
AEP: In case of significant enhancement of performance properties, AEP envisages to file 1 -2 patents related to 
the end applications covering new PU formulation based on furfural/5-HMF derivatives for higher performance 
rigid PU foams and/or new thermosetting formulations for wood adhesives. 
 
2.2.4 Communication Activities  
Communication Strategy. Under the leadership of Ms. Sarah FUCHS (DEC), we will  deliver a comprehensive 
communications programme aimed at informing and promote the project and its results and successes by providing 
targeted information to stakeholder groups and audiences, as indicated in Table 2-4 on page 39. This will include 
communication to the media and the general public, in a strategic and effective manner, also engaging them in a bi-
directional exchange. The communication plan and associated activities (e.g. development of the project’s identity, 
brand, website and social channe ls) will be developed in detail under WP 7, as part of the PEDR . The plan will 
incorporate specific objectives and key messages addressed to relevant target communication audience  groups, 
setting out clear descriptions and timings for each activity. The aim will be to ensure the visibility of BioSPRINT 
and its results, ensure they can be understood even by non-specialists, and thus multiplied. The project website 
(developed by EBOS) will be operational by M1 as well as the project’s four social media channel s (Facebook, 
LinkedIn, Twitter and YouTube).  Communication objectives. Based on the target audiences (TAs)  identified in 
Figure 2-6 and their expected interest in the project, the objectives of communication strategy and their relation to 
the TAs are to (a) Provide a clear view of the project, its goals and results (b) Create awareness of the project among 
the full range of stakeholders impacted by the results and engage those in a co-creation approach (c) Create interest 
from an active community of potential end-users (d) Prepare the ground for the dissemination of project's results (e) 
Establish liaisons with other projects, initi atives and bodies for knowledge and innovation transfer  (f) Support the 
commercial exploitation of results. (g) Recognition of the results among audiences beyond the immediate project’s 
reach (standards bodies, policy-making institutions, ETPs, etc.) h) Demonstrate how EU funding tackles societal and 
economic challenges. Communication activities and channels. The integrated approach to communication adopted 
by BioSPRINT combines a mix of traditional and disruptive communications channels as listed in Table 2 -9. All 
activities will be organised in communications campaigns. Communications activities targeting large numbers of 
stakeholders will use “push” communication chan nels with broad reach (e.g. social media, project’s website, 
newsletters) while activities targeting smaller group of stakeholders (e.g. policy-makers, funding organisations) will 
use targeted “pull/interactive” channels such as workshops (invitation-only), restricted meetings, targeted electronic 
communications, etc. A set of modern communication and knowledge management tools will be used along with 
four social media platforms (LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook, YouTube) as well as document-centric communities and 
forums that have pan-European visibility (e.g. MS Sharepoint, IBM Connections). 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  46 
Table 2-9 BioSPRINT Communication Activities and Channels 
 
Section 3: Implementation
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, Deliverables  
Work Packages Timing and Key Dependencies. WP dependencies are shown in Figure 3.1 (PERT chart). Figure 
3.2 (Gantt chart) displays the timing of the project. Milestones and deliverables are represented with MS# and letters 
(D), respectively.   
 
Overall Structure of the Work Plan: The project is organised in seven (7) Work Packages (WPs), and coordinated by 
project management activities (WP8). WPs are listed in Table 3-1a and described in Table 3-1b below. Each WP is 
led by a project partner experienced in the corresponding area, so as to ensure the best practice and work efficiency. 
 
Table 3-1a: List of Work Packages 
WP# Work Package Title Leader Person-
Months Start Month End Month 
WP1 Intensification of Upstream Purification  UOULU 94 1 30 
WP2 Intensification of Catalytic Conversion  UNEW 100 1 30 
WP3 Intensification of Downstream Purification  NIC 79 6 32 
WP4 Development of Biorenewable Resins and 
Polymerisation Intensification  AEP 90 13 34 
WP5 Validation, Process Simulation & Integration  UPM 114 7 44 
WP6 Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment  IFEU 73 1 46 
WP7 Dissemination and Exploitation  DEC 81 1 48 
WP8 Project coordination   DEC 61 1 48 
Total person- months 692  
Figure 3.1. PERT Chart and WP Dependencies 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  47 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  48 
 
 
 
Objectives:  
• To perform the analysis of feedstocks (sampled for variation), establishing technical composition specifications, 
and analytical comparisons by exchange of measuring methods between the partners (ring trial); 
• To obtain a stream free of solids suitable to be fed to membranes systems; 
• To reduce unit size, consumption of chemicals and waste amounts by intensification of the precipitation processes 
during purification of hemicellulose (HMC) using SDRs and anti-solvent methodologies; 
• To establish a hybrid membrane purification system for the removal of inorganic and organic impurities and 
concentration of HMC, recovering of at least 80–90% of the HMC weight; 
• To develop robust systems for handling of viscous and solid streams in the process; 
• To enhance water and solvent reuse strategies inside the processes guaranteeing 80-90% recovery; 
• To generate experimental data for the validation of the process system engineering tools.  
Task 1.1 – Analysis of treated hemicellulose (HMC) streams (NIC, DEC, FhG, UOULU, UPM). HMC-rich 
streams, currently produced as non -valorised side/waste streams, will be supplied to the diverse stages in this 
project. UPM will supply a hardwood HMC stream from pilot biorefinery operations. FhG will supply an 
Organosolv stream from a pulping of beech wood pilot plant. A third stream, generated from steam explosion of 
residual wheat straw, will also be supplied by Clariant, from the Sunliquid® demonstration plant. All streams are 
available at monthly to quarterly time intervals in quantities from 10-500L per batch to allow scalability test. The 
characteristics of these streams determine the need, feasibility and selection of upstream separation processes. 
Therefore, the physicochemical properties of the HMC feedstock streams will be determined. HMC sugars and 
degree of oligomerisation, decomposed oligo-/monomer sugars, furans, biomass-derived organic acids, lignin and 
inorganics (ashes) will be quantified using standardis ed wet, spectroscopic and chromatographic methods. 
Transient spectrophotometric data (particularly IR) will also be acquired, processed and correlated with the other 
offline methods for the development of in-line PAT. Additional physicochemical properties required for equipment 
design purposes, such as density, viscosity and surface tension, will also be determined. Data will be collected to 
assess the variability of the streams over plant operation cycles, or the changes of raw material composition, so 
that variability can be accounted for in purification and reactor engineering design tasks, simulation and piloting 
in WPs 2–5. The potential for the valorisation of HMC will be determined by analysis of the whole resource -to-
market chain, based on variable f eedstock compositions, the possibilities for recovery and feasibility. Technical 
feedstock specifications will be generated for the supply of raw HMC streams, processing and quality of the 
purified input batches for the use in applications, developed in WP 4. Inputs will also be provided for the ILCSA 
in WP6. NIC will undertake the analysis of streams which will serve as foundation for further technical work in 
the project, assess robustness. DEC will liaise with UPM, FhG and Clariant. UOULU will specifically leverage its 
existing expertise in PAT, providing time-on-stream information to the operators of bio-refineries.  
 
Task 1.2 – Precipitation and solids handling (UNEW, UPM, FhG). HMC streams can contain large amounts of 
lignin, which is typically removed through dilution -precipitation, or in the case of FhG, through distillation -
concentration. Such methods generate large amounts of waste water, are energy intensive, and offer poor control 
of particle size and morphology, cr eating difficulties for solids handling. Intensification of lignin and/or HMC 
removal from the feedstock will be achieved using SDRs (for control of particle size) and anti-solvent precipitation 
methods (to minimise the amounts of waste generated ). The pre cipitation and solids handling processes will be 
designed by UNEW in close collaboration with FhG and UPM. 
ST1.2.1 Benchmark tests using dilution and distillation precipitation processes [FhG]: Current HMC purification 
methods developed at FhG will be used. Precipitation of the pre-treatment extract through ethanol distillation for 
water concentration will be used as a benchmark for comparison with intensified processes in WP1. 
ST1.2.2 Intensification of precipitation using SDRs [UNEW]: Green antisolven ts and salting agents will be 
selected. The selection will be studied, benchmarked and optimised for product purity. Intrinsic kinetic information 
will be measured for use in simulation studies in WP5. The anti-solvent precipitation methods will be intensified 
using SDRs to create a compact and zero -heat process. Reactor configuration will be developed for continuous 
processing. Operation conditions will be screened to enable scale up. The nature of the precipitates will be analysed 
using spectroscopic and chromatographic methods and correlated with the process design and operating conditions. 
ST1.2.3 Optimisation of particle formation for enhanced solids recovery [UNEW]: Optimisation of experimental 
conditions will be done using DoE methods. Solvent and sal ting agent amounts will be minimi sed, product 
WP number WP1 Lead beneficiary UOULU Start month 1 End month 30 
Title Intensification of Upstream Purification  
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  1 0 8 0 9 0 12 9 0 30 0 21 4 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  49 
recoveries maximised. Particle size and morphology will be tuned to relieve solids handling challenges in the SDR 
precipitation process to allow the stream to pass through the SDR for as long and uninterrupted durations as 
possible, easy filtration for solids removal, and also minimise fouling in downstream of the SDR in the membrane 
purification step (T1.3). Particular attention will be paid to maximise recovery and sugar segregation.  
 
Task 1.3 – Hybrid membrane purification and concentration of HMC sugars (UOULU, FhG, UNEW, UPM). 
T1.3 will focus on membrane purification as an intrinsically intensified separation technology. The objective is an 
efficient recovery and purification of the HMC sugars. To prevent membrane fouling and to ensure the efficiency 
of membrane separation process, removal of undissolved wood fibres and any pre-precipitated lignin by filtration 
will also be tested. The targeted feed streams for membrane purification will contain sugars, dissolved HMCs, 
organic acids, and small amounts of soluble lignin, hydrocarbons,  volatiles and inorganic compounds. The 
purification needs and the methods for individual streams will be evaluated. The FhG HMC stream is relatively 
pure, requiring only the removal of acetic acid and residual ethanol, and concentration through water removal. The 
HMC stream from UPM stems from solid -liquid separation after the pre -treatment step without any additional 
purification. Hence, it contains large amounts of soluble lignin, furans, organic acids, soluble ash, and pre -
treatment chemicals. T1.3 will be led by UOULU in collaboration with FhG, UPM and UNEW. Membranes will 
be tested alongside conventional precipitation processes to create hybrid system and intensify purification. 
Feedback will be received from WP2 to enhance the removal of catalyst inhibitors. Sustainability aspects will be 
considered when selecting separation units and feed into WP6. Attention will be paid to minim isation of energy 
and reduction of the number of units. 
ST1.3.1 Identification of suitable purification process es [UOULU]: Different membrane materials available at 
UOULU and FhG will be tested and evaluated, and the best will be selected. Micro-, ultra- and nano filtration or 
reverse osmosis membranes will be screened, and optimal performers further tested for lifetime and fouling. The 
effect of pH adjustment will be investigated since most of the membranes do not tolerate relatively low pH . The 
pH of most HMC streams can be as low as 2 or 3. In addition to C5/C6 sugar purification, such developments will 
also allow us to challenge the conventional lignin removal methods and test membrane purification for the 
precursor streams without lignin precipitation, concentration and dilution precipitation. 
ST1.3.2 Hybridisation of the upstream purification [UOULU]: Hybrid processes where membrane purification is 
combined with conventional purification processes may be needed. We will explore how the streams may be 
fractioned by combining micro-, ultra- and nanofiltration in series (UOULU) and different membrane steps with 
distillation and extraction methods (FhG),  thus enabling the recovery and valorisation of the other value -added 
products.                                         
ST1.3.3 Optimisation of the process conditions [UOULU]:  The process operating conditions (e.g. temperature, 
pressure, superficial flow velocity, disturbing compounds ) will be evaluated and optimi sed, utilizing a MODDE 
DoE software to quickly and comprehensively find out the combined effects of different variables. 
 
Task 1.4 – Identification of upstream scale-up challenges via process systems engineering (PSE) tools (IRIS, 
ADSC, UOULU, UPM). The upstream purification processes resulting from the lab experiments (T1.1-T1.3) will 
be analysed using PSE tools. The CFD model will be utili sed to design the process hydrodynamics to prevent 
concentration polarisation and fouling of the membranes and to enhance mixing in SDRs. Control analysis and 
PAT techniques will be used to identify scale -up recommendations. Together, these PSE tools can prevent 
shortcomings of the scale-up of the intensified units from laboratory to pilot scale. A set of recommendations for 
the successful scale-up process will be formulated. T1.4 is led by IRIS, with CFD/PAT and industry expertise from 
ADSC, UOULU and UPM.  
Task 1.5 - Solvent and water recovery (UOULU, FhG) 
ST1.5.1 Solvent recovery [FhG]: Following optimisation of solvent amounts in S1.2.3, solvent recovery and reuse 
will be investigated using membrane and distillation processes. Solvent degradation and accumulation of inerts 
and undesirable species over multiple operation cycles will be investigated. 
ST1.5.2 Water recovery [UOULU]: To improve the water efficiency , the recovery and reuse of water streams 
originated from different stages of the purification process will be investigated by UOULU in collaboration with 
FhG. Simultaneously, the v aluable compounds (e.g. residual sugars, furfural, 5 -HMF) will be recovered and 
circulated back to the process.  Hybrid separation technologies such as membrane technologies, adsorption and 
advanced oxidation processes (e.g. photocatalysis, catalytic wet -air oxidation) will be evaluated to ensure zero 
liquid discharge and oxidise small quantities of harmful organic molecules and precipitate harmful cations (e.g. 
heavy metals). A photocatalytic membrane unit developed at UOULU will be utilised.  
 
Role of the main partners: UOULU leads WP1, overseeing the PI of upstream purification, mainly supported by 
UNEW, NIC and IRIS. Justification of resources: UOULU and UNEW will assign 2 persons over a 30-month 
period 50% time). NIC and IRIS will assign 1 person @ ~5PM/person/year. 
 
Deliverables: 
D1.1 Feedstock stream analysis technical report [NIC, M 4] This report will  contain the key characteristics for 
consequent upstream processing ((hemi)cellulose, decomposed oligo -/monomer sugars, furans, biomass-derived 
organic acids, lignin, inorganics (ashes), density, viscosity, mixture surface tension, etc.). 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  50 
D1.2 Report on feedstock variability analysis [NIC, M30] Feedstock variability analysis and immediate upstream 
implications will be collected. The technical protocol will be described so as to ensure bio-refining replicability. 
D1.3 Screening of the precipitation and solids handling processes [UNEW, M12]. This deliverable is a preliminary 
report on processes considered for the maximum recovery of C5 and C6 sugars.  
D1.4 Performance report of the optimised precipitation and solids handling processes. [UNEW, M24] The report 
includes recommendations on solvent systems, information of precipitation kinetics and SDR operation strategies. 
D1.5 Screening of the purification and concentration of the hemicelluloses [UOULU, M12] A preliminary report 
on the performance of the processing units with the synthetic samples. 
D1.6 Performance report of the optimi sed hybrid purification and concentration process of the HMC [UOULU, 
M24] A report of the optimised performance of the processes with industrial HMC streams. 
D1.7 Upstream PSE and scale -up recommendations [IRIS, M 27]. It includes recommendations based on the 
reactor’s virtual twin, identified disturbance & control variables and instrumentation setup for reactor equipment. 
D1.8 Technical report on the efficiency of the solvent recovery  and water reuse processes [UOULU, M27] The 
deliverable includes the results from the optimisation experiments from T1.5.    
Milestones: MS2: Initial Feedstock analysis completed (M4); MS4: Initial screening of intensification of upstream 
purification processes completed (M12); MS6: Performance of intensified and optimised BioSPRINT upstream 
purification processes assessed (M24) 
 
 
 
 
Objectives:  
• To develop robust predictive models for catalyst composition and performance with at least 95% prediction 
accuracy through combination of ML and HTP catalyst development methods; 
• To develop scalable catalysts for simultaneous C5/C6 sugars dehydration (selectivity >90% and full conversion) 
• To develop kinetic models to describe the conversion and aqueous-organic partition of multiple C5/C6 sugars; 
• To intensify the dehydration reaction by integration of the conversion of multiple C5 and C6 sugars to furans in 
a single unit, while limiting side products to a maximum of 40%; 
• To reduce losses of furan reactive intermediates by 20% through intensification of the dehydration reaction step 
by development of a continuous extractive-reactor unit; 
• To investigate the effect of upstream purification efficiency in catalyst lifetime and production yields; 
• To develop strategies for integration of recycled solvent streams from WP3. 
 
WP number WP2 Lead beneficiary UNEW Start month 1 End month 30 
Title Intensification of Catalytic Conversion  
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  1 0 15 4 0 0 2 30 0 18 0 30 0 
Task 2.1 - Catalyst Development using HTP Methods (UOULU, EBOS, NIC, UNEW). Due to the complex 
nature of HMC sugar systems where multiple C5/C6 sugars are present, individual sugar isolation and conversion 
is not feasible. BioSPRINT will deliver robust catalyst formulations for integrated conversion of C5 and C6 sugars 
into a single reactor, coupled with extraction of reactive furan intermediated. Attention will be drawn to catalyst 
scalability, poison resistance, hydrothermal resistance, lifetime and use o f affordable and abundant chemical 
elements. HTP and ML methods will be used to develop predictive models that can accelerate catalyst development, 
identify non-obvious optimal formulations and easily allow catalyst tuning for different feedstock compositions. 
ST2.1.1 Creating of catalyst libraries for testing [UNEW]: Libraries of solid acid heterogeneous catalysts will be 
created by UNEW though HTP synthesis methods. This will be complemented by testing of commercial ion 
exchange resins for comparison. The process will follow an iterative approach to build on foundation formulations, 
and add catalyst functionality through use of promoters, in parallel with testing in ST2.2.2 and predictive modelling 
development in ST2.2.3. The materials created will be char acterised (e.g. using spectroscopy, X-Ray Diffraction, 
Ion-Coupled Plasma Spectroscopy, and physi/chemi-sorption methods) and a library of measured catalyst properties 
and literature/calculated molecular descriptors will be generated to feed into the ML algorithms in ST2.1.3.       
ST2.1.2 HTP Testing [UNEW]: Catalysts will be screened using HTP methods to measure catalyst performance in 
conversion of the C5 /C6 sugars identified in the feedstocks used in this project. Feedstock composition , reaction 
conditions and the effect of extraction solvents in the reaction mixture will be screened. Reaction products will be 
measured using GC and HPLC methods. Data sets and performance results will be generated as inputs for ST 2.1.3.   
ST2.1.3 Development of ML predictive Models [UOULU, EBOS]: ML algorithms including variable selection, 
evolutionary optimisation, intelligent model identification and model validation will be developed by UOULU and 
EBOS based on assets from FUNBARK and CHARIOT  projects. The resulted models will be employed to create 
predictive ability between experimental data and accelerate catalyst development and optimisation. This will lead to 
fast identification of catalysts with maximum activity for conversion of complex sugar mixtures with optimal 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  51 
selectivity towards the key products of interest, with the objective being to obtain a catalyst with >90% selectivity 
towards 5-HMF and furfural/leading to max 40% reduction in by-products generation.                                                                                                 
Task 2.2 – Reactions for realistic stream mixtures (NIC, UNEW). While there has been extensive work done on 
the dehydration of sugars, this is rarely considered for realistic stream mixtures, which are complex. Based on 
compositions (from WP1), a DoE will be prepared, including conventional and novel homogeneous approaches (e.g. 
with H 2SO4), introducing solid acid catalysts, evaluating the process in terms of kinetics, using simple but also 
complex mixtures, also considering the effect of intermediates, impurities (e.g. lignin-based) and inhibitors. 
ST2.2.1 Chemical kinetics determination, modelling & simulations [NIC]: These will be evaluated for synthetic-, as 
well as for realistic feedstock mixtures, analysed in WP1 , in order to establish reaction structure –activity 
relationships, which will in tur n be plugged into reactor unit simulation, optimisation, as well as the WP5 -based 
overall integration. An as comprehensive mechanistic scheme as possible will be applied, to not only describe a mix 
of reactants, but also the potential inhibiting effect of impurities (as notable constituents of feedstock). 
ST2.2.2 Integration using synthetic sugar mixtures [NIC]: Synthetic sugar mixtures will be applied before 
proceeding to realistic feedstock compositions in order to individually establish the interactions between the former, 
at first excluding the influences of impurities. Considered sugar mixtures will introduce model pentose-, as well as 
hexose sugars, their type, quantity and ratio being determined based on the upper/lower concentration levels 
determined at WP1. The DoE will consist of 10–20 runs, these also representing a database for ST2.2.1. 
ST2.2.3 Effect of intermediates, impurities & inhibitors [NIC]: Analogously to the main reactant components, 
namely sugars, the key determined (WP1) impurities wil l be added as a spike to the (selected) ST2.2.2 mixtures, 
individually assessing their respective role (inhibiting or promoting). Consequently, realistic feedstock streams will 
be subjected to modelling, collecting the data of the previous subtasks, finalising mechanistic model descriptions, 
ideally independent on the provenience of resource. Stream composition will serve as input in addition to operating 
process conditions (e.g. temperature). 
ST2.2.4 Optimisation for real complex streams [UNEW]: Previously collected data, input into model, will be used 
to optimise the reactions for real complex streams. Optimisation will be executed based on sole reactor objectives 
(conversion, yield, productivity, etc.) (1), considering immediate upstream or downstream ( e.g. the purification of 
by-products) (2), while, as a plug in for WP5, simplifications will be superimposed for integration (e.g. considering 
just principle component impurities) (3). 
Task 2.3 – Development of extractive reaction intensification (UNEW, DEC, NIC). PI via extractive-reaction 
will allow the in situ isolation of reactive intermediates (i.e. 5-HMF and furfural). Selective solvent extraction of the 
furans from the aqueous reaction medium will prevent degradation and increase yields. Reaction-separation coupling 
will allow reduction in capital cost and in hazardous solvents inventory. NIC will focus on solvent selection for 
maximum recovery of target products, while UNEW will ensure optimal integration with the dehydration reaction 
and downstream purification in WP3. Mixing intensification to increase the rates of liquid-liquid mass transfer and 
enhancement of contact with the solid catalysts will be addressed through the use of ACRs which will provide a size 
reduction in process scale and continuous flow. NIC will responsible for the application/extension of the modelling 
from the purely reactive mechanisms to intensified reaction –extraction operation, where biphasic thermodynamic 
equilibria will be more relevant. Existing modelling framework will be  upgraded by component distribution 
coefficients, which will determine the desired mass fluxes of e.g. HMF from the aqueous - to extractive organic 
medium to shift equilibrium. UNEW,  will design the process as a whole.  DEC will ensure  optimal knowledge 
transfer towards WP7 and TECBP. Solvents will be screened, basing their consequent selection on EHS/LCA 
(following e.g. Green Chem., 2007, 9, 927) (1), water/medium 5-HMF partition coefficients (2), as well the potential 
direct implementation of polymerisation (WP4), addressing the proposed PI (WP3), omitting distillation (3).  
ST2.3.1 Extraction Solvent Screening /Evaluation/Selection [NIC]: Solvents will be screened, basi ng their 
consequent selection on EHS/LCA (following e.g. Green Chem., 2007, 9, 927) (1), water/medium 5-HMF partition 
coefficients (2), as well the potential direct implementation of polymerisation (WP4 activities), addressing the 
proposed Process intensification 2 (WP3), omitting distillation (3).                                                         
ST2.3.2 Reaction and Extraction Coupling [UNEW]: UNEW will integrate all operations into a single stage of 
extractive reaction.  ACRs (or Coflore) will be used to enhance mixing, promote plug flow performance and control 
the system selectivity. Reactor residence time distribution and mass transfer chara cterisation techniques will be 
employed to determine the reactor operational performance. Flow information, operational data and kinetic models 
will be experimentally coupled to understand the effects of operatory conditions in the reaction selectivity and yield. 
ST2.3.3 Optimisation of Process Conditions [UNEW]: DoE methodologies will be used in conjunction with CFD 
modelling (T2.4) to optimise ACR geometries & operating conditions, leading to minimal pressure drops and energy 
inputs while maximising mixing & mass transfer efficiencies, leading to higher recovery of target reaction products.  
ST2.3.4 Integration of recycling streams [UNEW]: The product stream leaving the extractive-reactor will consist of 
an aqueous and an organic phase, which will be purified as described in WP3. The re-use of solvent streams recycled 
from the downstream purification will be investigated to identify impact of solvent quality on extractive -reaction 
performance over several cycles. Accumulation of inert or undesired species will be addressed and feedback to the 
development of downstream purification units in T3.2 and scalability studies in T3.4. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  52 
Deliverables: 
D2.1 Technical report on catalyst development methods and formulation [UOULU, M14] The report will present 
the catalyst formulation and predictive modelling outcomes of T2.1.  
D2.2 Reaction kinetic model of dehydration [NIC, M16] A report, containing reaction kinetic model, and all key 
parameters, linking the effects of stream composition, operating process conditions, and products distribution. 
D2.3 Optimised furan production from sugars [NIC, M 28] A report, covering the various optimisation scenarios 
for sole reactor objectives (conversion, yield, productivity, etc.). 
D2.4 Technical report on PI methods for conversion and separation of HMC sugars [UNEW, M30] This report 
provides PI strategies for sugar conversion operations using hybrid reaction-extraction technologies and ACRs.   
D2.5 Catalytic conversion PSE and scale -up recommendations [ADSC, M 30]. The deliverable includes 
recommendations for scale-up, the virtual twin of the reactor and control strategies and instrumentation setup. 
Milestone: MS7: Performance of BioSPRINT intensification methods for conversion and separation of 
hemicellulose sugars assessed (M30) 
 
 
Objectives: 
• To separate main, secondary and trace reaction components to a commercial chemical specification; 
• To transfer the already-obtained separation parameters to downstream simulation program ( e.g. CHEMCAD), 
validating the models for reprocessing; 
• To proceed with laboratory, intermediate and pilot PI experiments to recover at least 90% of the weight of 5-
HMF, furfurals by thermal, physical and physical –chemical separation techniques (distillation or rectification 
primarily considered; liquid/liquid extraction or membrane filtration operation assessed in silico ) from the 
organic/aqueous reaction solutions of WP2; 
• To reduce liquid-liquid decanter size by one order of magnitude through intensification using hydrocyclones; 
• To reduce distillation, reboiler/condenser unit size by 80-90% and energy consumption by 35% through the use 
of compact heat exchangers; 
• To generate high TRL (4 –5) experimental data to validate purification process scaling (unit energy/mass 
balances, following lifecycle studies and BioSPRINT exploitation)  
 
Task 3.1 – Preparatory processing actions for downstream  (FhG, AEP, NIC, UNEW) . From WP2, various 
material streams contain ing unreacted sugars, but predominantly 5-HMF/furfurals, will be provided . T3.1 will 
analyse, qualify and quantify the selected valorised products in solutions. Primarily, isolated 5 -HMF and furfural 
will be targeted, while the mixtures of different furan homologues will also be considered. 
ST3.1.1 Integration of downstream with WP2 activities [UNEW]: Differently-composed streams will be transferred 
from WP2 to WP3 to assess separations/purifications in parallel. ST3.1.1 will execute a process sensitivity analysis 
considering composition. UNEW will provide the samples and respective documentation. 
ST3.1.2 Reaction composition analysis for downstream [NIC]: While principal reaction components will be 
measured continuously within WP2, exact composition analyses will be more detailed for the last operation sample, 
corresponding to the composition of the product. Gas chromatography analysis will be implemented, while mass 
spectroscopy will be for more detailed assessments (e.g. impurities and suspected of inhibiting polymerisation). 
ST3.1.3 Process design simulation of distillation [FhG]: Distillation will be considered as the primary separation of 
choice for the WP2 reaction products in the extraction medium. FhG will develop distillation simulation models as 
a preparation for T3.2. Composition data generated in ST.3.1.2 will be used as inputs, specifically, applied organic 
media, as well as the content of 5-HMF/furfurals or/and the presence of impurities. 
  
Task 2.4 – Identification of reaction scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools (ADSC, IRIS, 
UOULU). The reaction and extraction processes will be analysed using CFD tools at lab-scale. Using lab experiment 
results from T2.1-T2.3, the objective is to  provide a set of recommendations on how to scale -up an intensified 
reaction and extraction reactor. These will include the thermo -fluid behaviour of the reactor using CFD tools, the 
control analysis and PAT techniques on the later-on pilot plant equipment. The task will be undertaken by ADSC in 
close collaboration with UOULU, IRIS and with PI expertise provided by NIC and UNEW. 
 
Role of the main partners:  UNEW leads WP2, overseeing the intensification of catalytic conversion, mainly 
supported by UOULU, NIC and ADSC. Justification of resources: Over a 30-month period, UNEW and NIC will 
assign 1 person (full time) while UOULU and ADSC will provide 1 person (50% time).                                                                                                                                                 
WP number WP3 Lead beneficiary NIC Start month 6 End month 32 
Title Intensification of Downstream Purification  
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  1 1 8 0 15 0 4 28 0 11 0 11 0 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  53 
Task 3.2 – Development of distillation (with/w/o extraction) (NIC, FhG). Reaction data from T3.1 will be input 
into a process simulator (CHEMCAD or Aspen Plus) to proceed with design and costing of downstream units. WP2 
product streams will be separated on a lab scale unit (TRL 3–4) by FhG. Batch and continuous operation modes to 
separate fura n products and recover solvent will be tested. FhG has the know -how for the separation of 
furfural/carboxylic acids from mixed biomass streams. For this, the (vacuum) rectification/ distillation in L/kg scale 
are also available. Also, liquid/liquid -extraction can be performed to selectively separate the furan derivatives 
especially HMF. An optimised process concept will be developed to minimise energy, waste and emissions. 
ST3.2.1 Bench scale tests of downstream [FhG]: FhG will implement the 1 st set of downstream separation 
experiments, separating primarily 5-HMF/furfural from the extractive-reaction solvent, applied in WP2 (including 
the selection of media ). UNEW will continuously  report on the use of these to facilitate the development of 
distillation to follow thereafter. Based on solvent/furfurals boiling points, the implementation of distillation will be 
considered as either batch or continuous in terms of rectification – depending on final product purity, as well as 
energetics. 
ST3.2.2 Modelling validation, simulation and optimisation [NIC]: The modelling of distillation will be executed in 
order to expand the range of conditions, compositions and purities to be predicted by simulations. Conditions, media 
and products will be rated in terms of energy/mass balance equations, thermodynamics (e.g. the equations of state) 
and available equipment characteristics (e.g. dimensions). In addition to single step distillation, a combination with 
extraction will be considered solely in silico in order to evaluate potential processing benefits in terms of purity, 
energetics or costs – specific local optima will be validated (ST3.2.1). 
ST3.2.3 Scale-up to pilot unit operation [FhG]: Initial modelling (NIC) will provide a support to the scale-up to TRL 
4–5 operation (FhG), as factors, such as fluidics, monitoring and control will be considered. Pilot scale validation 
will be impl emented by FhG, based on multi -scale modelling simulations, started by NIC  and finalised by FhG. 
ST3.2.3 will feed into T3.3, as well as, the unit scale-up considerations beyond BioSPRINT (T3.4). Resulting pilot 
data will be evaluated via plant simulation software, already used in previous WPs. Results will be transferred to 
WP5 for energy/mass balance, technology lifecycle and operation cost studies. An aim will be to prepare the reaction 
conversion solutions with the described downstream processes through  piloting; products will be able to be used 
directly/in the sufficient batch quantities by the users for applications (WP4). 
 
Task 3.3 – Intensification of downstream purification processes  (UNEW, DEC, FhG, NIC). Intensification of 
downstream purification will be focused in two key areas: a) the reduction in foot print and hazardous inventory for 
the liquid-liquid decanter unit that separates the aqueous and the organic phases originating from the extractive -
reaction unit and b) intensification and integration of heat transfer in distillation units. 
ST3.3.1 Intensification of Liquid-Liquid Decanting [UNEW]: Decanting of liquid-liquid mixtures is a slow process 
dependent on the acceleration of gravity, requiring long residence times and large decanter volumes. Hydrocyclones 
will be used to exploit the increased acceleration fields due to centrifugal forces and to cut down on residence time 
by at least an order of magnitude. 3D printing methods, guided by CFD designs, will be used for fast prototyping of 
geometrical shapes to optimise liquid-liquid separation. 
ST3.3.2 Heat transfer intensification with integration [ FhG]: Reboilers and condensers in distillation columns are 
energy intensive. Additionally, some of the reaction products, e.g. 5-HMF, decompose easily at high-temperatures. 
Therefore, it is important to minimise reboiler residence times and temperature driving forces. This will be achieved 
via PI using plat heat exchangers and heat pipes (UNEW). Strategies for near -isothermalisation will be developed 
using these devices. Plate geometries will be developed to enhance phase -change rates. Thermal unit integration, 
applying the data of pilot separation campaigns will be performed by FhG. Integration with the reaction upstream 
will be considered, primarily in terms of recuperating the energy for the latter from rectification.  
 
Task 3.4 – Identification of downstream scale-up challenges (UOULU, IRIS, ADSC). Downstream purification 
processes will be analysed using the CFD tools at lab scale operation  (T3.2). Along with CFD, the results from 
control/PAT techniques, performed herein will be used to identify scale-up recommendations. Together, these PSE 
tools can prevent some typical shortcomings of the scale-up of the units from the lab to larger scale. Finally, a set of 
the recommendations for the successful scale-up process of downstream purification processes/separation PSE will 
be formulated. T3.4 activities will be undertaken by UOULU in close collaboration with ADSC and IRIS. 
Role of the main partne rs: NIC leads WP3, overseeing the intensification of downstream purification, mainly 
supported by FhG and UNEW. Justification of resources: NIC will assign ~1 person (full time) over a 26-month 
period while FhG and UNEW will assign 1 person (@~5-7PM/person/year). 
Deliverables:  
D3.1 Methodology overview report on downstream purification [NIC, M1 5] A report, covering the downstream 
purification of furan-based monomer mixtures, where various separation strategies are considered. 
D3.2 Initial downstream unit distillation operation design models [NIC, M 18] A document, containing the 
description of the initial downstream unit operations by modelling and experimentation. 
D3.3 Final downstream unit distillation operation design models [NIC, M3 1] A d ocument, containing the 
description of the downstream unit operations by modelling and experimentation. 
D3.4 Report on intensification of separations [UNEW, M32] A technical report document with a demonstrator on 
the intensification of liquid–liquid separation, heat transfer, and efficient thermal integration. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  54 
D3.5 Downstream PSE with post-BioSPRINT scale-up recommendations [UOULU, M32]. The report will include 
the recommendations elaborated at T3.4. 
Milestone:MS8: Performance of BioSPRINT intensification methods for downstream purification assessed (M32) 
 
 
 
Objectives:  
• To convert the monomers obtained in WP3 (furfural, 5-HMF) into novel novolac-and resole-type resins (500 g 
scale) for most promising applications e.g. in wood laminates and panels; 
• To convert 5-HMF into novel Mannich-base polyols (500 g scale) for rigid polyurethane foams; 
• To characteri se key properties of the various types of resulting bio -based polymers benchmarking versus 
commercially available counterparts in reference formulations; 
• To intensify the processes for the production of resins and polyols; 
• To optimise and replicate the best reaction syntheses (1-3 Kg/batch) to enable further process upscaling 
 
During the early stages of the project, PFR and AEP will use commercially available counterparts of the mentioned 
monomers to synthesise the new polymers and polyols, shifting to the monomers purified in WP3 as soon as they 
will be available in progressively increasing amounts, starting from M15. The comparison based on QC data of 
different monomers’ batches will allow synthetic protocols optimisation as well as the definition of raw materials’ 
average specifications. The polymers and polyols thus obtained will be tested in reference formulations, addressing 
wood laminate panels and polyurethane rigid foams, according to reference recipes and benchmarks of industrial 
use. A first upscaling (1-3 Kg/batch) of the best syntheses will be carried out, fine tuning the recipes, when necessary, 
to determine the process parameters and provide data to WP5. 
Task 4.1 - Development and testing of novolac-and resole-type resins and their applications in wood laminates 
(PFR, AEP, NIC). Furfural and 5-HMF, once characterised for their purity, will be used as potential replacements 
for formaldehyde in the synthesis of resole and novolac-type derivatives. Furfural and 5 -HMF charge will b e 
adjusted to evaluate their contribution to final polymers’ physico-chemical properties (e.g. color, viscosity, average 
molecular weight distribution) and reaction kinetic (e.g. conversion monitored by chromatography methods). 
Reagents’ purity contributio n to process conditions and resulting polymers average QC properties will be 
investigated using model syntheses to verify if a drop-in approach is possible or if tailored adjustments are required. 
At the same time, furfural and 5-HMF will be compared to the same molecule already commercially available, used 
in the same recipes; the average QC properties of the resulting derivatives as well as any significant variation to 
reaction conditions will be then compared to determine if any significant difference ha s occurred. The newly 
developed resins will be characteri sed for their QC properties (residual water content, hydroxyl value, viscosity, 
pH), reproducibility and regulatory status (REACH compliancy) and tested in reference industrial formulations for 
thermosetting wood adhesives. Biorenewable resins will be compared to existing products for different applications. 
For most suitable application dedicated resin will be developed and checked  in respect to processability and 
properties of resulting material. 
 
Task 4.2 - Development and testing of bio-based polyols and their applications in rigid PU foams (AEP, PFR, 
NIC). A similar approach will be adopted for the development of polyols for PU applications, where furfural and 5-
HMF will be used in the synthesis of novolac -type and Mannich -type polyols. Novolac -type polyols will be 
synthesised following similar conditions as above, but adding an alkoxylation step (preferably in liquid phase with 
the use of ethylene, propylene or glycerine carbonates) to introduce different types of reactive hydroxyl groups 
(primary or secondary). Self-catalytic Mannich polyols will be also prepared by reacting 5 -HMF with phenol-type 
monomers (petro or bio -derived) and suitable  alkanolamines (e.g. diethanolamine, ethanolamine, 
diisopropanolamine), through a one -step (direct alkanolamines addition on phenols) or a two -step ( through an 
oxazolidine intermediate) route. An alkoxylation step (still in liquid phase) will eventually be added, if necessary, 
to tune final polyols’ reactivity. Following the same principle as described in T4.1, the same recipes will be used, 
but replacing furfural and 5-HMF with formaldehyde (or paraformaldehyde). In this way, a direct comparison of 
possible advantages or limitations deriving from the replacement of reference materials (e.g. formaldehyde) will be 
accomplished. All products will be characterised for their QC properties (residual water content, acid value, hydroxyl 
value, viscosity), reproducibility and regulatory status (REACH compliancy).  
 
Using reference formulations from industrial applications (e.g. thermal insulation, structural and packaging foams), 
the new polyols will be benchmarked versus commercially available fossil-derived polyols characterized by average 
similar QC properties, in order to quantify their advantages and easily connect them to market demand. The best 
WP number WP4 Lead beneficiary AEP Start month 13 End month 34 
Title Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation Intensification  
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  1 22 10 0 0 0 12 12 0 2 16 15 0 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  55 
formulations will be used to prepare lab scale demonstrators representative of real rigid PU foams, which will be 
characterized for their performance properties, like reactivity, density (ASTM D1622), dimensional stability (ASTM 
D2126), compression strength (ASTM D1621), wat er absorption (ASTM C272), thermal conductivity (ASTM 
C177), fire reaction properties (UL-94 horizontal and vertical burning tests).  
 
Task 4.3 - Process intensification of bio-based polymer production (UNEW, DEC, AEP, PFR, NIC). Based on 
the formulations at T4.1 and T4.2, which will be studied in conventional batch STR technologies, protocols will be 
developed to transfer the optimised formulations to a continuously operated polymerisation process with a view to 
upscaling the production of selected polymers from grams to kg scale. We will evaluate the performance of a thin 
film SDR for both types of polymerisations. The enhanced mixing, heat and mass transfer capabilities enabled by 
the intense fluid dynamics of the thin film flow should encourage more intimate contact between the reacting species 
especially in highly viscous polymer environments. Polyols are particularly promising candidate reactions for PI in 
the SDR. As an equilibrium -controlled process which is driven by continu ous removal of water or other small 
volatile molecules from the polymerisation, the polyol formation step can benefit from processing in the SDR. The 
continuous, easily controllable thin film formed on the rapidly spinning disk should enable more efficient  water 
removal and faster kinetics, especially if the viscosity of the mixture increases at high monomer conversions. We 
will thus exploit the SDR thin film characteristics with its well-established intense gas-liquid mass transfer rates to 
speed up and optimise the rate of the polymerisation reaction by continuous, selective evaporation of water to drive 
the reaction to completion . This will be investigated at a range of disc temperatures identified in the formulation 
tests and with a counter current flow of inert gas such as nitrogen to aid removal of water. UNEW labs are equipped 
with a range of SDRs of disc diameters between 0.1 to 0.3 m representing lab scale to pilot scale units which will be 
used for this study. Various disc surface geometries will be  tested (smooth, grooved, and mesh layers) under 
conditions of a single or multiple disc passes. It is envisaged that optimised conditions (geometry, operating 
temperature, feed liquid flowrate, inert gas flowrate) will be thus be identified which gives th e maximum 
improvement in the performance of the polymerisation reactions in terms of higher yield, lower operating 
temperatures and faster reaction times. We will apply similar considerations to promote the efficient mixing of liquid 
reagents employed in t he novolac-type polymer resin formation in order to enhance the polymerisation kinetics. 
Attention will be paid to the potential fouling of the surfaces in contact with the polymer; fouling mitigation 
strategies involving for example the incorporation of a non-stick surface compatible with the processed reagents will 
be considered during the design of the surface geometry to be implemented in the SDR. 
Task 4.4 - Identification of polymerisation scale -up challenges via PSE tools (IRIS, ADSC, UOULU). The 
polymerisation processes will be analysed using CFD tools at lab -scale. Recommendations on how to scale -up an 
intensified polymerisation reactor will be formulated and include the thermo-fluid behaviour of the reactor using 
CFD tools, the control analysis and PAT techniques on the later-on pilot plant equipment. T4.5 will be undertaken 
by IRIS in close collaboration with ADSC, UOULU and with industrial expertise provided by AEP and UNEW. 
 
Role of the main partners: AEP leads WP4, overseeing the intensification of the polymerisation stage and the 
production of bio renewable resins, supported primarily by UNEW, NIC & IRIS. Justification of resources: Over 
21 months, AEP will assign 1 FTE while UNEW, NIC & IRIS will assign 1 person (@7-9PM/person/year). 
 
Deliverables:  
D4.1, D4.2 First / Optimised synthesis of REACH compliant novolac-and resole-type resins from furfural and 5-
HMF [PFR, M18, M32]. First / optimised synthesis of the BioSPRINT targeted end products.                                                                                                                                   
D4.3, D4.4  – First / Optimised Synthesis of REAC H compliant bio -based polyols from furfural and 5 -HMF 
[AEP,M18, M32]. This deliverable realises the optimised synthesis of the BioSPRINT targeted end products     
D4.5 Technical and Methodology report on PI of bioresins polymerisation [UNEW, M34] . It will detail the 
protocol for converting the batch formulations into a continuous intensified process involving SDRs. 
D4.6 Polymerisation PSE and scale-up recommendations [IRIS, M34]. The report includes recommendations for 
scale-up, the virtual twin of the reactor, proposed control strategies and instrumentation setup. 
Milestone: MS9: Performance of BioSPRINT intensification methods for polymerisation and production of 
biorenewable resins assessed (M34).                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
 
Objectives:  
• To integrate each process step into a full process through process simulation; 
• To analyse and simulate the existing and BioSPRINT biorefinery processes; 
WP number WP5 Lead beneficiary UPM Start month 7 End month 44 
Title Validation, Process Simulation & Integration  
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  4 5 6 4 8 0 4 12 21 3 4 17 26 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  56 
• To integrate the developed concepts and technologies for the UPM and FhG Organosolv streams; 
• To perform a transferability and replicability case study using the stream of Clariant; 
• To proceed with optimisation and first upscaling of the best synthetic products; 
• To validate the developed technology sequences with >100L of feedstock to TRL5. 
 
Task 5.1 – Simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes (MAT, EBOS, FhG, 
UOULU, UNEW, UPM). Led by MAT, T5.1  focuses on assessing and improving the overall performance of the 
BioSPRINT PI biorefinery concept. Process simulation models of existing and new biorefineries will be developed 
for FhG Organosolv, UPM, and Clariant’s Sunliquid. The simulation models of the existing biorefinery (ST5.1.2) 
will be the benchmark for KPIs of the intensified biorefinery concepts. The KPIs will be established in ST5.1.1 and 
will be used to monitor the improvements achieved in the PI concepts, specifically the reduction of OPEX, CAPEX, 
energy and water consumption, and the yield improvements. Simulation models of the improved biorefinery 
concepts will be developed in ST5.1.3, and used for performance analysis and technoeconomic optimisations during 
the ST5.1.4. Task 5.1. will closely interact with WPs 1-4, which will provide the inputs to develop and validate the 
simulation models. The results will in turn valuably support the process development in WP1 -4. This interactive 
approach will focus R&D where improvement matters, saving experiments and pilot tests. T5.1 will interact closely 
with T6.3, where the biorefinery cost model will be developed. UOULU, UNEW  and EBOS will support the 
development and testing of the models, and assist in linking the results from the plant-wide biorefinery simulations 
and work conducted in WP1 -4 and WP6 -7. The Clariant model will be built by collecting publicly available 
information on Sunliquid process105,106. FhG and UPM will provide the information necessary to model their 
biorefinery process as close as possible to the facilities under study. 
ST5.1.1 Defining biorefinery process boundaries & collection of input data [MAT]: Standard biorefinery process 
will be described in terms of technology, products, wastes stream, process conditions and energy consumption.  
Process boundaries will be setup to include key technological steps relevant for BioSPRINT. Physical properties 
data will be collected for nonconventional compounds. MAT will source data from literature and its own database 
as well as relevant information provided by industrial partners UPM and FhG, whose teams will guide in preparing 
the initial process flow diagram and mass and energy balances. KPIs will be established and defined.     
ST5.1.2 Building simulation model of the existing biorefinery (baseli ne) [MAT]: Using results from ST5.1.1. a 
simulation model of the baseline biorefinery will be developed and validated using industry standard software 
AspenPlus. The KPIs for the baseline biorefinery will be calculated by the simulation model (D5.1).      
ST5.1.3 Building simulation model of improved biorefinery (PI technologies implemented) [MAT]: Simulation 
models of the intensified biorefinery concepts will be developed. These will be robust models capable of detailed 
mass and energy balances accounting for variable feedstocks, plant capacity, wide range of process conditions and 
different scenarios combining multiple PI technologies. The KPIs of the new biorefinery concepts will be calculated, 
and performance analysed to optimi se the design in ST 5.1.4. The main outputs will be: Overall mass and energy 
balance (process, waste and utility streams); Insight in technology; Identify limitations, risks and opportunities of 
different technology implementation and upscaling; Support for scale-up activities, process parameter optimisation 
and control strategy; Preliminary equipment design of process and non-process (outside battery limit) for full scale 
capital cost estimate; Capital investment costs, fixed and variable costs per process; Identification of cost dr ivers; 
Input for risk analysis (technological, technical, economic); and Base for energy analysis/optimisation. 
ST5.1.4 Performance analysis and optimisation of improved biorefinery [MAT]: The simulation models developed 
in ST5.1.3 will be used to analyse the performance of the new biorefinery concepts under different operating 
conditions and for different capacities. Various configurations of technologies across the entire process will be 
assessed for technological and economic viability. The analysis will  focus on identifying risks, limitations and 
optimisation opportunities of the PI technology. These studies will provide quantitative targets which new PI 
technology needs to meet to be economically viable and to provide the required improvements in energy and water 
footprints, operational safety and costs. The results will support the evaluation of business opportunities in T6.3.           
 
Task 5.2 – Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream (UPM, AEP, IRIS, MAT, 
NIC, UOULU, UNEW). The individual technologies developed in WP1 -4 will be integrated to process >100L of 
UPM feedstock. The best concept of intensified technologies (determined in T5.1) will be sequentially tested using 
the pilot equipment available at each par tner. The KPIs and process simulation models established in T5.1 will be 
validated at pilot scale. The scale-up challenges identified at T1.4, T2.4, T3.4 and T4.5 will be addressed and data 
to deploy further scale-up activities in future exploitation proje cts will be collected. UOULU, UNEW, NIC, AEP, 
IRIS and MAT  will support the integration of upstream, reaction and downstream processes according to their 
expertise in WPs 1-4. Due to nature of UPM pre-treatment and current process, emphasis will be put into validation 
of the upstream purification technologies for removal of lignin and potential catalyst inhibitors. Upon completion, a 
technology-transfer report will be produced. 
Task 5.3 – Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for Organosolv stream (FhG) (FhG, AEP, 
ADSC, MAT, NIC, UOULU, UNEW). This task will follow a similar aim, ambition and structure to T5.2, but using 
 
105 Novy V et al. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2015;8:46. Published 2015 Mar 18. doi:10.1186/s13068-015-0232-0 
106 Biofuel Digest, January 23, 2017. Dr. Markus Rarbach, Head of Biofuels & Derivatives, Clariant 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  57 
FhG feedstock. Due to the nature of the FhG Organosolv process, emphasis will be put into validation of reaction 
and downstream purification technologies. Upon completion, a technology-transfer report will be produced. 
T5.2 and T5.3 follow the same subtask structure, indicated below: 
ST.5.2.1, ST5.3.1: Pilot and validation of Intensified Sugar Purification [FhG]: Feedstocks produced at UPM/FhG 
will be pilot tested for lignin precipitation at FhG/UNEW, and membrane purification at UOULU/FhG using the 
best technologies and operating procedures developed in WP1 and T5.1, adjusted for stream composition.  
ST5.2.2, ST5.3.2 Pilot and validation of intensified monomers production and purification [UNEW]: The purified 
sugar streams generated in ST5.2.1/ST5.3.1 will be pilot tested by UNEW and NIC using the ACR technology and 
best operating procedures developed in WP2 and T5.1 will be adjusted for stream composition. For these sub-tasks, 
the pilot kit will be stationed at FhG to allow seamless integration with the downstream purification processes. The 
reaction product streams will be processed at FhG on the best distillation technology available as specified in WP3 
and T5.1, out of the various pilot plants available, which have 1-100 separating stages, and can process 1–63 L/h. A 
100 L liquid/liquid extraction plant with counter current flow is also available. 
                     
Task 5.4 – Transferability case study with Clariant Sunliquid® stream (DEC, MAT, NIC, UOULU). A case 
study report on processing the Clariant stream with the recommendations on the integration of the most efficient 
process operation variants will be produced. It will be elaborated choosing the best PI technology options, catalytic 
reaction processes, and downstream unit operations, including and analysis of industrial symbiosis possibilities. 
ST5.4.1 Feedstock variability study with comparison [DEC] : All key characteristics for consequent 
upstream/reaction/downstream processing ( HMC, decomposed oligo -/monomer sugars, furans, biomass -derived 
organic acids, lignin, inorganics (ashes), density, viscosity, mixture surface tension, etc.) will be compared to those 
of the previously analysed streams in order to pinpoint the most vital differences to consider.  DEC will collect the 
data from WP 1–4 activities, in order to prepare a summary characteristic comparison. 
ST5.4.2 Transferability tests for intensified technologies [UOULU]: An assessment of the possibility of replication, 
transfer or adaptation will be prepared. Process sensitivity analyses will be performed in silico  by varying the 
different operating conditions or compositions for an integrated upstream/reactor/downstream unit operation series, 
inputting Clariant specifics. If needed, selected intensif ied runs will be performed to more accurately assess 
transferability. All attained outcomes will be communicated to Clariant continuously to get feedback on constraints. 
Task 5.5 – Scale-up of optimal product formulations (AEP, IRIS, UNEW, PFR) The most promising polyols, 
pre-polymers and resins produced by AEP and PFR will be  selected, characteristics benchmarked,  and their 
developed syntheses replicated through the multiple repeatable batches in small–medium bench scale (1–3 kg) in 
order to analyse optimal process conditions, assess average standard QC properties, and define preliminary tentative 
specification, thus setting the premises for the scale-up to a near-industrial pilot level. Data will be shared with 
T4.4/4.5 to support the modelling, simulation and scale-up of polymerisation reactor units, for pilot plant engineering 
and optimisation enduing. 
ST5.5.1 Pilot resins validation using UPM feedstock [AEP]:  Optimal WP4 resin formulations, based on UPM 
feedstock will be considered, focusing on batch scaling/ repeatability robustness, as well as encountered deviations.  
ST5.5.2 Pilot resins validation using FhG feedstock [AEP]:  Optimal WP4 resin formulations, based on FhG 
feedstock will be considered, focusing on batch scaling/ repeatability robustness, as well as encountered deviations. 
ST5.5.3 Optimisation of polymerisation intens ification technology [UNEW] : Intensified polymerisation 
implementation will be paralleled to non-intensified ones comparing key performance indicators. 
Role of the main partners: UPM leads WP5, overseeing the Validation, Process Simulation & Integration of the 
BioSPRINT processes, mainly supported by MAT and UNEW. Justification of resources: Over 37 months, UPM 
will assign 1 person (@~9PM/person/year) while UNEW and MAT will assign 1 person @~5-7PM/person/year. 
 
Deliverables: 
D5.1 Simulation models of the existing biorefineries & KPIs baseline [MAT, M13] Description of the simulation 
model of the baseline biorefining processes, at UPM, FhG and Clariant, including defined KPIs. 
D5.2 Simulation model of improved biorefinery concepts (PI technologies implemented) & report on KPIs [MAT, 
M33]. Description of the simulation model of improved biorefinery processes including KPI analysis.                                                                                                                            
D5.3 Report on performance analysis and optimisation of improved biorefinery concepts [MAT, M4 4] The 
analysis will identify risks, limitations and optimisation opportunities.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
D5.4 Pilot and validation report of PI methods to process hardwoods of HMC from paper mill sources [UPM, 
M43] Report on the outcomes of the pilot, validation and technology-transfer assessment for UPM stream.  
D5.5 Pilot and validation report of PI methods to process hardwoods of HMC from Organosolv biorefineries [FhG, 
M43] Report on the outcomes of the pilot, validation and technology-transfer assessment for FhG stream. 
D5.6 Technical report on sensibility and transferability of intensification methods for multiple feedstocks [DEC, 
M44]. Report on the outcomes of the Clariant case study and transferability study to other feedstocks.     
D5.7 Production of 3 kg of selected resins and polyols  [AEP, M44]. This deliverable also includes optimised 
process parameters on the laboratory scale                                                                                                                                      
Milestones: MS10 Start of the integration of developed concepts for UPM & FhG streams with launch of case 
study for Clariant Sunliquid stream (M34); MS11: Completion of the integration of developed concepts for UPM 
& FhG streams and of the case study for Clariant Sunliquid stream (M44) 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  58 
 
 
Objectives:  
• To assess and maximise the sustainability impacts of the BioSPRINT processes and products through provision 
of objective information regarding all important sustainability aspects using scientific, transparent and 
reproducible methodologies. 
• To assess the sustainability and techno -economic feasibility of the BioSPRINT processes and products along 
their entire life cycle in a streamlined and comprehensive manner. 
• To provide an iterative feedback to the process developers  (WP1-4) in the form of preliminary LCA/LCC and 
TEA results, which will be used to further optimise the processes in the course of the project. 
 
Task 6.1 – Definitions, settings and system description (DEC, IFEU, MAT). T6.1 provide the goal and scope of 
the ILCSA as well as all initial definitions, settings and system description, including technological parameters. 
ST6.1.1 Definitions and settings for the sustainability assessment: IFEU will provide the goal and scope definitions 
and settings for the ILCSA assessment, which will be used by T6.2 to T6.6 to guarantee a coherent analysis.  Key 
questions to be answered by the assessment will be defined. The scope definition covers a description of the 
investigated system, defines the system boundaries, functional unit s, etc. The settings for the life cycle inventory 
(LCI) analysis will define the technical reference, geographical and time -related coverage and the co -product 
handling. The results will be discussed and agreed upon at an internal project workshop in conjun ction with a 
progress meeting to ensure the optimal execution of the ILCSA. 
ST6.1.2 Qualitative system description: DEC, supported by MAT, will produce qualitative process flow diagrams 
(PFDs) for the BioSPRINT value chains, as well as for all relevant ref erence systems. Thereby, a qualitative 
description of the entire BioSPRINT concept will be provided. The system description will be continuously updated.   
ST6.1.3 Quantitative system description: MAT, supported by DEC, will compile mass and energy balance s for all 
BioSPRINT products as well as for all reference systems identified above. For this purpose, the process models 
developed in WP5 will be used. These data sets will form the foundation for all elements of the ILCSA (WP6). 
Task 6. 2 – Environmental Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) (IFEU). This task will evaluate the environmental 
impacts associated with the targeted BioSPRINT products in comparison to all selected reference products  and 
address the environmental aspects and potential environmental impacts (e.g. use of resources, environmental 
consequences of emissions) of the products/processes. A wide range of impact categories will be covered (e.g. 
climate change, ozone depletion, acidification, eutrophication and resource depletion), providing a comprehe nsive 
picture of the environmental implications. The assessment includes the product’s entire life cycle from raw material 
acquisition through production, use, end-of life treatment, recycling and final disposal. Screening LCAs following 
the guidelines of ISO 14040/14044 on product life cycle assessment will be carried out. Moreover, EN 16760 (Bio-
based products – LCA) as well as the ILCD handbook will be considered. This task uses the mass and energy 
balances compiled in T6.1.3 and provides input for T6.6 (quantitative indicators for key environmental aspects such 
as energy and GHG emission savings). 
Task 6.3 – Techno-economic assessment (MAT, EBOS, UPM). Economic models of the improved biorefinery, 
with PI technologies implemented, will be developed by MAT with the Aspen Process Economic Analyzer. The 
economic models will be linked to the simulation models developed in T5.1.3, for interactive equipment sizing and 
estimation of capital and operating costs (ST6.3.1). This integrated model approach will enable a fast and a detailed 
economic assessment of different configuration of the improved biorefinery process es, particularly i mportant for 
T5.1. The results of the economic model will also be used in ST6.3. 2 to assess the financial performance of the 
improved biorefinery project at different production capacities, in particular to calculate return on investment (ROI) 
or payback period or minimum selling price of new products made from the waste streams, etc. This task will provide 
input for T6.6 (quantitative indicators for key economic aspects such as ROI, payback period and NPV). EBOS will 
contribute to the task with modelling techniques and tools, leveraging advanced data analytics and data visualisation 
techniques. DEC will ensure that the results of the tasks feed into WP1-4 as well as WPs5 and 7. UPM will provide 
relevant economic data and other technical information related to the operations of its biorefining plants. 
ST6.3.1 Capital cost estimate of improved biorefinery (PI implemented ) [MAT]: ST6.3.1 focuses on the 
development of biorefineries’ economic models (new and baseline), which will be linked to simulation models for 
interactive capital cost estimate and the evaluation of operating costs. These will interactively calculate plant's 
CAPEX/OPEX at different production scales, varied operating parameters, different process configurations, etc. 
WP number WP6 Lead beneficiary IFEU Start month 1 End month 46 
Title Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment (ILCSA)  
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  5 2 0 2 0 28 0 0 21 7 2 0 6 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  59 
ST6.3.2 Economic and financial assessment of improved biorefinery project [MAT]: ST6.3.2 performs a detailed 
analysis of the economic and financial performance of the improved biorefinery project. For the selected biorefinery 
configuration ROI or payback period of a new project will be calculated. Furthermore, minimum selling price of the 
new products made from HMC streams will be calculated and benched marked against their fossil-based equivalents 
which they intend to replace.   
ST6.3.3 Technological assessment [MAT]: Technological performance and possible risks associated with all 
systems identified in WP5 will be analysed against parameters such as efficiency, state of development, scalability 
issues or process safety risks (investigated in T6.6 and considered here). This will result in a complete description 
of all technological aspects and deliver semi-quantitative and qualitative indicators to the tasks sustainability 
Task 6. 4 – Socio-economic assessment (MAT, IFEU). Socio-economic impact will be assessed by measuring 
BioSPRINT’s contribution to economic and social well-being. T6.4 will assess whether there are any direct risks to 
society e.g. health, safety, economic and environmental security, posed by the implementa tion and uptake of the 
project and target products. Economic well-being indicators will be quantified by estimating: a. Job creation: number 
of jobs which could potentially be created in Europe by BioSPRINT; b. Value creation - monetary value which 
BioSPRINT could create through different revenue streams such as technology development, licensing, engineering, 
product sales, export, etc.  Where applicable social well -being will be qualified by assessing the impact of 
BioSPRINT on: a. Health b. Quality of life  c. Security. BioSPRINT stakeholders e.g. potential technology users, 
product end-users, will be engaged by means of surveys / interviews to provide their input and views on the above. 
Task 6.5 – Process and product safety assessment (UOULU, AEP, MAT)  
ST6.5.1 Process safety, including assessment of technical barriers [UOULU]: The inherent safety of the intensified 
process will be analysed by UOULU. The starting point of the analysis are the chemical compounds, process designs, 
and process conditions ide ntified in the former WPs. Relevant and up -to-date process safety legislation and 
directives will be used as basis for the risk assessments. In addition, ISO 45001 (Occupational health and safety) 
gives overall guidelines and EN ISO 12100 (Safety of machinery - General principles for design - Risk assessment 
and risk reduction) will be utili sed while evaluating the machinery used in the process. The analysis will utili se 
quantitative and qualitative risk assessment techniques such as fault tree analysis, ma chinery safety criteria and 
Hazop (hazard and operability study) to identify potential process safety risks and occupational accident and health 
hazards. Existing risk classification models will be used to define identified risks and their impacts. T6.5 will 
produce a list of identified safety hazards and an analysis focusing on their risk assessment. 
ST6.5.2 Product safety including regulatory (e.g. REACH) compliance assessment [AEP]: AEP will assess the safety 
of new bio-based products, taking into account also their production processes. The use of less hazardous reagents 
and/or solvents (e.g. less volatile, more environmentally friendly, having lighter labelling) will be considered and, 
for each optimised production process, a safety protocol will be prepared, providing the operators with a list of 
instructions and personal protective equipment (PPE). A toxicity prediction of the optimised novolacs and polyols 
will be carried out using up -to-date software based on (Quantitative) Structure -Activity Relationship ([Q]SAR) 
models (e.g. ProTox-II, Osiris). Finally, to remove a severe barrier to commercial exploitation of results, AEP will 
check the REACH status of the new bio-based building blocks (resins, polyols), using HPLC-GPC techniques. If 
the given building block isn’t be compliant to the definition of “polymer”, the synthetic protocol will be modified 
to obtain a new version which – as a “polymer” - is exempted from registration. 
 
Task 6.6 – Integrated life cycle sustainability assessment (IFEU, DEC, MAT). In T6.6, the results from the 
previous analyses ( T6.2-6.5) are integrated to identify and depict the most sustainable pathways among the 
BioSPRINT value chains compared to all reference systems. IFEU will use a multi-criteria evaluation software tool 
following the innovative methodology of ILCSA covering all sustainability indicators chosen. From these analyses, 
the most sustainable pathways will be depicted as well as all optimisation pote ntials. As one central element of 
ILCSA, potential barriers against and unintended side -effects of the implementation of those scenarios that have 
been identified to be in principle sustainable will be analysed. This will lead to conclusions and recommenda tions 
on strategies for a sustainable implementation of the targeted BioSPRINT products. 
Role of the main partners: IFEU leads WP6, overseeing the LCSA, supported primarily by MAT. Justification of 
resources: Over 46 months, IFEU and MAT will assign 1 person @ 5 & 7PM/person/year respectively) 
 
Deliverables:  
D6.1, D6.2 Initial / Final report on definitions, settings and system description for the ILCSA [DEC, M9, M33]          
The reports define the initial / final methodological framework for the BioSPRINT ILCSA.                                                                                                                                
D6.3 Life cycle assessment of HMC-based products [IFEU, M45]. The deliverable provides the final results of the 
environmental assessment carried out at T6.2.    
D6.4 Technological assessment of HMC-based products [MAT, M45]. It includes capital cost estimate, process 
economics of improved biorefinery concepts and a detailed analysis of their economic & financial performance.    
D6.5 Socio-economic assessment of HMC-based products [MAT, M45]. It provides the final results of T6.4.                                                                                                                          
D6.6 Integrated sustainability assessment of hemicellulose -based products [UOULU, M4 3]. The deliverable 
provides the final results of the product & process safety assessment carried out at T6.5.                                                                                                                                                  
D6.7 Integrated sustainability assessment of HMC-based products [IFEU, M46]. The overall and final results of 
the project’s ILCSA.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  60 
Milestones: MS3: Definitions, settings and system description  for the ILCSA  ready (M9); MS12: BioSPRINT 
ILCSA completed (M46) 
 
 
Objectives:  
• To develop multidimensional dissemination & communication (D&C) plan, to deliver D&C activities;  
• To undertake stakeholder base building and engagement activities via the BIC consortium and BBI-JU; 
• To develop and deliver scalable training and capacity-building activities to underpin skills development;  
• To identify early adopters and post-project opportunities; 
• To contribute to existing and emerging standards. 
 
Task 7.1 – Multidimensional D&C and stakeholder engagement activities (DEC, ALL PARTNERS). This task, 
led by DEC and to which all partners participate, will deliver effective D&C and stakeholder engagement activities 
as per outline in section 2.2. DEC will work across the technical WPs to identify, develop and publish agreed 
dissemination materials to the identified target audiences (TAs) in a timely manner.  
ST7.1.1 Dissemination plan and activities [DEC]: DEC will develop, implement, monitor and update the Plan for 
Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (PEDR) a document setting the strategic directions of the dissemination 
activities in order to reach the project ’s goals and involve the TAs. Dissemination actions will be developed to 
maximise the promotion of non-confidential results and knowledge generated during the project to as many relevant 
actors as possible. As indicated in Table 2-5 on page 40, we foresee the preparation and publication of scientific 
publications / papers, participation in R&D and business conferences, etc.  
ST7.1.2 Communication plan and activities [DEC]: A series of strategic and targeted communication activities, 
described in Section 2.2, will promote BioSPRINT and its results to multiple TAs, using all appropriate channels, 
to reach stakeholders, raise awareness, and encourage engagement with BioSPRINT. This will require a range of 
‘push’ and ‘pull’ communications approaches, and facilitation of two-way exchange of views and information with 
stakeholders, including: the creation, maintena nce and update of (i) the project identity/brand [ by EBOS], (ii) the 
project’s public website and portal [by EBOS]; (ii) Set-up and management of 4 social media groups and channels 
(Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, YouTube) and production of content including promotional videos (1/year by DEC); 
(iii) implementation of all communication campaigns, including production and distribution of quarterly newsletters, 
regular social media posts, factsheets, success stories, brochures, press releases, etc.  
ST7.1.3 Value chain stakeholder base building, BIC/BBI-JU engagement and liaison with other BBI and 
bioeconomy projects [DEC]: DEC. with support from other BIC members (i.e. AEP, FhG, NIC, UOULU, UPM) 
will promote the interests of BBI -JU to address the needs for a strong and efficient bioeconomy, in particular the 
goals of the BIC SIRA 2017. DEC will also ensure timely dissemination of the results and findings from the project 
via the B BI-JU’s newsletter, workshop sessions, and events. In addition, liaison activities will be undertaken  to 
identify common interests with other BBI and bioeconomy -related projects, in view of organising joint events and 
clustering results and efforts.  
Task 7.2 - Training, Education & Capacity Building programme (TECBP) (NIC, DEC, AEP, EBOS, UOULU, 
UNEW). This task, led by NIC and with participation of academic, research and industrial partners UOULU, UNEW, 
DEC and AEP, will deliver the BioSPRINT TECBP as outlined in Section 2.2. Materials will be developed in line 
with best practises in this area , and will also consider results from the SusChem Educate to Innovate initiative. 
Activities include delivery of 4 online modules, 4 training & capacity-building workshops as well as the BioSPRINT 
Summer School. NIC will also ensure the materials are suitable for inclusion in relevant academic courses. When 
delivering the TECBP, attention will be paid to select a broad gender-balanced audience among academia, industry 
and other BBI JU stakeholders. EBOS will support the task with computer-aided tools and ICT development. DEC 
will support the task in organizing the events (online and onsite). 
ST7.2.1 TECBP plan & strategy [DEC]: DEC will develop, implement, monitor and update the TECBP plan and 
strategy, setting the strategic directions of the programme in order to reach the project goals and involve the TAs. 
ST7.2.2 BioSPRINT online TECBP [NIC]: In this subtask, implemented during the 2nd year of the project, NIC, 
together with the WP1-4 leaders and EBOS, will develop, implement and deliver 4 online-access training modules 
in English  language, introduced via live webinars, to a large academic, research and industrial audience.  The 
modules will focus on one or several of the BioSPRINT focus areas for PI of biorefining operations. 
ST7.2.3 TECBP workshops [NIC]: In this subtask, implemented during the 3rd year of the project, NIC, togethe r 
with the WP1-4 leaders, will organise 4 TECBP workshops, in 4 countries: FI, IT, SI and UK. A large academic, 
research and industrial audience, gender-balanced, will be targeted with min. 20 external participants in attendance 
WP number WP7 Lead beneficiary DEC Start month 1 End month 48 
Title Dissemination and Exploitation 
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 11 12 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  26 3 1 10 1 1 2 13 7 2 1 8 6 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  61 
for each workshop, which will focus on one or several of the BioSPRINT focus areas for PI of biorefining operations. 
They will take place at the partners’ lab sites, whenever possible. 
ST7.2.4 BioSPRINT Summer School [DEC]: In this subtask, implemented during the 4th year of the project, DEC, 
together with the WP1-4 leaders, will organise, at the premises of DEC, a 5-day Summer School which will provide 
advanced training and transferability potential  studies on the 4 four focus areas studied in BioSPRINT.  A large 
academic, research and industrial audience, gender-balanced, of min. 80 participants, will be targeted.  
Task 7.3 – Identification of early adopters, post-project opportunities and business plan (MAT, DEC, IRIS, 
UPM). Under the leadership of MAT, assisted by DEC, IRIS and UPM, this task aims at expanding the initial 
business model into a feasibility study and elaborate business plan – which will be partly validated via the project’s 
partners. It aims at understanding past, present and future industry trends, approaches and tactical/strategic responses 
and at producing a detailed SWOT analysis, paving the way for the realisation of a feasibility and business plan. As 
for continuity of funding routes and commercial sustainability, partners will aim a t sustaining the effort in 
BioSPRINT beyond M48 with the required third -party actors across Europe, as well as reaching out to potential 
investors, venture capitalists and European acceleration catalysts. Partners will work at identifying opportunities for 
financing the post-project work necessary to progress the technologies and processes to TRL 7, and later TRL 9. 
Task 7.4 - Contribution to existing and emerging standards (DEC, AEP, UNEW, UPM). Building on the 
Roadmap for PI standardisation developed as part of the completed IbD project, T7.4 seeks to make an impactful 
contribution to relevant industry standards. Several consortium partners are members of standardisation bodies and 
can influence the standardisation process by preparing factual data, proposals, and draft protocols for adoption by 
technical committees (TCs). This will be supported by Mr. Mavroyiannos, Standards officer, EAB member.                                                             
ST7.4.1 PI Standards – CWA [DEC+UNEW]: Under the leadership of DEC, the consortium will establish a CWA 
on ‘PI for Biorefining Processes ’. TM UNEW will also contribute so as to ensure contribution to standardisation 
follows a bottom-up approach from the technical WPs, particularly in relation with PI equipment and processes.  
ST7.4.2 Product Standardisation [AEP, UPM]: Contributions to standard s related to products, i.e. resins, polyols 
and polymers will also be made by AEP and UPM. 
Role of the main partners: DEC leads WP7 primarily supported by NIC and EBOS, and with contribution from 
all partners. Justification of resources: Over 48 months, DEC will assign 1 person (50% time) while NIC and EBOS 
will assign 1 person (25% time).  
 
Deliverables:  
D7.1 Project website, standard templates and supporting documents [EBOS, M1]. The deliverables will establish 
the project’s website and provides initial materials to support internal and external communication activities.  
D7.2, D7.3 Initial / Final BioSPRINT PEDR [DEC, M3, M45]. The deliverable consists of the project’s initial / 
final PEDR identifying key stakeholder groups with engagement strategies and tactics for each group.  
D7.4 Summary report on PEDR implementation [DEC, M25]. The deliverable consists of an interim evaluation of 
the implementation of the PEDR.                                                                                                                                 
D7.5 Published industrial case studies [DEC, M48] Publishable case studies developed with UPM, FhG & Clariant.  
D7.6 TECBP plan and strategy [NIC, M14] . The deliverable , continuously updated  afterwards, presents the 
TECBP implementation objectives, means, strategic selection of TAs and planned activities.                                                                                                                            
D7.7 Online TECBP modules [NIC, M26]. The deliverable consists of a  suite of 4 web-hosted context-based 
learning modules. 
D7.8 BioSPRINT TECBP workshops [NIC, M3 8]. The deliverable provides a quantitative and qualitative 
assessment report of the 4 BioSPRINT TECBP workshops.                                                                                                                                 
D7.9 BioSPRINT Summer school report and Final assessment on TECBP [NIC, M47].  The deliverable consists 
of a quantitative and qualitative assessment of the BioSPRINT Summer School and the whole TECBP. 
D7.10 Report on early adopters , post-project opportunities & business plan [MAT, M47]. The report identifies 
early adopters, potential and confirmed post-project opportunities and also includes the project’s business plan.                                                                                                                                     
D7.11 Report on standardisation activities including CWA assessment [DEC, M46]. The deliverable consists of 
the final report on all standardisation activities undertaken as part of BioSPRINT, including the CWA. 
Milestones:  MS1: Initial PEDR ready, launch of D& C activities (M3); MS5: TECBP plan and strategy ready, 
launch of TECBP activities (M14)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
WP number WP8 Lead beneficiary DEC Start month 1 End month 48 
Title Project coordination 
Partic. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of partic.  
DEC 
AEP 
ADSC 
EBOS 
FhG 
IFEU 
IRIS 
NIC 
MAT 
UOULU 
PFR 
UNEW 
UPM 
PM  21 1 0 18 0 1 0 5 8 1 0 5 1 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  62 
Objective:  
• To coordinate all project activities by (a) Ensuring the project meets its contractual commitments (deliverables, 
quality, etc.); (b) Providing sound Technical Management; (c) Performing sound Quality Assurance (QA) & Risk 
Management (RM); (d) Planning and performing Innovation and Data management. 
 
Task 8.1 - Project coordination and reporting (DEC, AEP, IFEU, NIC, UOULU, UNEW, UPM) 
Overall day-to-day contractual, financial and administrative management of the project incl. resources allocation.  
ST8.1.1 Overall Project coordination and financial reporting [DEC]: The Project Coordinator (PC) will be assisted 
by the WP leaders and Proj ect Steering Team (PST) members to manage the operation of all WPs ensuring their 
compliance to the time plan. Activities include: (a) Preparation of bi -annual management reports as described in 
Section 3.2, ( b) Budget controlling and accounting, ( c) Organisation of meetings and minutes keeping, and ( d) 
Monitoring of the progress according to the contractual schedule.  
ST8.1.2 Liaison with EC and BBI-JU, preparation and submission of deliverables, review reports and questionnaires 
[DEC]: This subtask is dedicated to liaison with the EC, the submission of high-quality deliverables, the organisation 
of the review meetings as well as the preparation and submission of continuous reporting and periodic progress 
reports. Furthermore, this task will coordinate the preparation of the answer to the annual BBI JU questionnaires. 
ST8.1.3 EAB management [DEC]: W.r.t the EAB, under the coordination of DEC, it will help steer the commercial 
and scientific direction of the project. It is composed of 6 external experts as indicated in Section 3.2. Physical 
meetings will be organised in M1, M12, M24, M36 and M48 with virtual teleconference meeting in M6, M18, M30 
and M42. Minutes will be produced including a review of the technological, policy, legal or security challenges and 
needs uncovered during the EAB meetings. 
Task 8.2 - Technical Management (UNEW, NIC). Due to the technical complexity of the project as well as the 
breadth of the validation efforts to be undertaken, technical management will be undertaken b y UNEW (PI 
expertise). UNEW will: (a) Monitor the technical progress of the project according to contractual schedule, (b) Liaise 
with the EAB on technical matters, (c) Monitor the preparation of technical deliverables, (d) Prepare technical 
project reviews and deliver Technical Reports. (e) Provide expertise in the technical WPs, while also assisting in the 
technical soundness and feasibility assessment of all the project’s tasks. Any slowdown or technical/technological 
problem will be rapidly addressed and risk mitigation strategies issued. 
 
Task 8.3 - Quality Assurance (QA) & Risk Management (RM) (EBOS, DEC). This task, led by EBOS, executes 
the QA & RM processes for the project. W.r.t QA, EBOS will establish and implement QA procedures with 
particular focus on monitoring review activities built into the WPs and submitting quality reports annually. The 
quality plan specifies the quality procedures, internal and external peer reviews, control, monitoring and reporting 
activities. W.r.t RM, EBOS will establish and implement a plan and procedures for RM and reporting, covering both 
the project operational risks and  the framework barriers/risks, and monitor the progress to ensure that proactive 
measures are taken to mitigate risks. Attention was taken during the proposal’s elaboration to ensure that no more 
than 3 deliverables will be delivered per month. 
Task 8.4 – Innovation, IPR & Data Management (MAT, EBOS). W.r.t. Innovation Management, MAT, 
supported by EBOS, will identify and manage innovation from the project, advising the PC and partners on the scope 
and potential of the innovations arising and paying attention to discerning IPR at regular checkpoints. Work includes 
the monitoring of the progress of development of innovative tools/services throughout the project.  
ST8.4.1 Innovation and IPR management  [MAT]: To ensure sustainability, exploitation and marketability of the 
project’s results, MAT designs the IPR protection strategy, considering aspects defined in Section 2.2 and establishes 
IPR management procedures and associated activities. All IP produced is monitored and the potential IPR attached 
to them (e.g. copyright, patent, etc.) are verified and cleared for the project's good execution. MAT also ensures that 
confidentiality agreements and all the partners’ defined IPRs (foreground and background) in the Consortium 
Agreement (CA) are fully respected. MAT also advises on  IPR protection activities, in view of strategically 
protecting the most compelling innovation from BioSPRINT.  
ST8.4.2 Data management plan and monitoring [ EBOS]: W.r.t. Data Management, EBOS will be responsible for 
preparing and monitoring the implementation of the Data Management Plan (DMP), determining how innovation 
and research data are handled during and after the project, the application of the data privacy and pseudo -
anonymisation techniques, privacy preserving data mining, security and consent management which will be applied 
to data collected in the project. The DMP will contain information related to the types of data the project will generate 
/ collect (including personal data if applicable), the data standards to be used and how partners might exploit the 
data, thus setting robust management procedures and supporting GDPR compliance. 
ST8.4.3 Ethics, Gender and cross-cutting priority monitoring [EBOS]: This subtask led by EBOS, ensures that (a) 
project’s activities are ethically sound and that data from participants is stored according to EU and  national 
regulations to ensure data privacy; (b) Monitors Gender & the cross -cutting priorities of the project . W.r.t Ethics, 
under the coordination of EBOS, the task identifies and addresses ethical concerns responsibly and produces an 
information sheet and informed consent form (drafts provided in Annex 3).   
Role of the main partners: DEC leads WP8, overseeing the management and execution of the project , primarily 
supported by the PMB. Justification of resources: Over 48 months, both DEC and EBOS will assign ~1 person 
part-time (50%). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  63 
Deliverables:  
D8.1 Project management handbook (continuously updated) [DEC, M1]. It provides procedures and instructions 
for reporting and using the project management tools set up by the PC (e.g. self-hosted NextCloud).  
D8.2, D8.3 Interim / Final Technical report [UNEW, M25, M48]. The deliverable consists of the interim  / final 
technical report, highlighting technical issues faced and resolution procedures. 
D8.4 QA procedures & templates  [EBOS, M3] . The deliverable provides the QA procedures and templates 
established for the project. 
D8.5, D8. 6 Interim / Final  QA & RM report [EBOS, M2 5, M48] The report consists of the interim / final 
assessment of all quality and risk management issues. 
D8.7 Data management plan [MAT, M6]. The deliverable consists of the project’s DMP. 
D8.8, D8.9 Interim / Final Data management, Innovation & IPR management report [MAT, M23, M47]. The 
deliverable consists of the interim / final assessment of data, IPR and innovation management activities.  
Milestone: MS13: Successful completion of project (M48) 
 
List of Deliverables (Table 3-1c)  
To support knowledge dissemination and impact creation, the project deliverables will be freely published on the 
project website for any user, as long as they are labelled as ‘Public’. In all other cases, a publishable version of the 
document will be produ ced and shared. Also, the project’s website and its content will be available after the 
conclusion of the project for at least 2 years.  For public deliverables marked with an asterisk  (*), the deliverables 
will include specific PI strategies and the method ology to apply these PI strategies and technologies in biorefining 
contexts. However, the process data  and details, will not be made public but provided to the EC on a confidential 
basis and released only after the DMP clears confidentiality matters related to such information. 
Table 3-1c: List of Deliverables 
 
107 D# = Deliverable number. Dates are measured in months from the project start date ( M 1). Code for deliverable type and dissemination 
level correspond to the one provided in the Proposal Template. 
D#107 Deliverable name 
WP# Lead 
Part. Type DL Delivery 
date 
D1.1  Feedstock stream analysis technical report 
WP1 
NIC R CO 4 
D1.2  Report on feedstock variability analysis NIC R CO 30 
D1.3 Screening of the precipitation and solids handling processes UNEW R PU* 12 
D1.4 Performance report of the optimised precipitation and solids handling 
processes UNEW R PU* 24 
D1.5  Screening of the purification and concentration of the hemicelluloses UOULU R PU* 12 
D1.6 Performance report of the optimi sed hybrid purification and 
concentration process of the hemicelluloses UOULU R PU* 24 
D1.7 Upstream PSE and scale-up recommendations IRIS R CO 27 
D1.8 Technical report on the efficiency of the solvent recovery  and water 
reuse processes  UOULU R PU* 27 
D2.1 Report on catalyst development methods and catalyst formulation  
WP2 
UOULU  R  PU* 14 
D2.2 Reaction kinetic model of dehydration NIC OTHER PU 16 
D2.3 Optimised furan production from sugars NIC OTHER PU 28 
D2.4 Report on PI methods for conversion & separation of HMC sugars UNEW R CO 30 
D2.5 Catalytic conversion PSE and scale-up recommendations  ADSC R CO 30 
D3.1 Methodology overview report on downstream purification 
WP3 NIC R PU 15 
D3.2, D3.3  Initial /Final downstream unit distillation operation design models NIC  OTHER PU 18, 31 
D3.4  Report on intensification of separations UNEW R PU* 32 
D3.5 Downstream PSE with post-BioSPRINT scale-up recommendations UOULU R CO 32 
D4.1, 
D4.2  
First / Optimised Synthesis of REACh compliant novolac and resole -
type resins and application products 
WP4 
PFR DEM CO 18, 32 
D4.3, 
D4.4  
First / Optimised s ynthesis of REACh compliant polyols and 
application products AEP DEM PU 18, 32 
D4.5  Technical and Methodology report on PI of bioresins polymerisation UNEW R PU* 34 
D4.6  Polymerisation PSE and scale-up recommendations IRIS R CO 34 
D5.1  Simulation model of the existing biorefinery & KPIs baseline  
WP5 MAT OTHER CO 13 
D5.2  Simulation model of improved biorefinery concepts & report on KPIs MAT OTHER CO 33 
D5.3  Report on performance analysis and optimisation of improved 
biorefinery concepts MAT R PU 44 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  64
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  
3.2.1 Organisational Structure and Decision Making  
The successful implementation of a collaborative project such as BioSPRINT, with 12 partners from 8 countries, 
requires efficient, well -documented and structured project management procedures. The BioSPRINT project 
management structure, as shown in Figure 3. 2, is designed to meet the objectives of all stakeholders, including the 
EC, by creating responsiveness to the evolving needs of the project.  
In particularly, it will: (a) Ensure that the project meets its contractual obligations. This will entail continuous 
progress monitoring, managed by the Project Coordinator (PC), communication and a shared understanding of roles 
& responsibilities. (b) Facilitate the delivery of high-quality research and innovation. Central to achieving this will 
be the coordination of the activities of the technical partners and the integration of their results ; and (c) Maximise, 
measure and validate the impact of the system on the target audiences, both within and beyond the technology 
enhanced learning research and industry communities. 
The management structure, whose management functions, roles and procedures are part of the CA, consists of:  
• Council of Partners (CoP). Chaired by the PC, the CoP includes representatives from each and every partner, 
having the authority to make decisions on behalf of their respective organisations in terms of overall strategy and 
D5.4, 
D5.5 
Pilots and validation report s of PI methods to process hardwoods of 
HMC from paper mill sources / from Organosolv biorefineries 
UPM, 
FhG 
DEM
, R CO 43, 43 
D5.6 Technical report on sensibility and transferability of intensification 
methods for multiple feedstocks DEC R PU 44 
D5.7 Production of 3 kg of selected resins and polyols AEP DEM CO 44 
D6.1, D6.2  Interim/Final reports on definitions, settings & system for ILCSA 
WP6 
DEC R CO 9, 33 
D6.3  Life cycle assessment of HMC-based products IFEU R PU 45 
D6.4  Technological assessment of HMC-based products MAT R CO 45 
D6.5  Socio-economic assessment of HMC-based products MAT R PU 45 
D6.6  Process & product safety assessment of HMC-based products   UOULU R PU 43 
D6.7  Integrated sustainability assessment of hemicellulose-based products IFEU R PU 46 
D7.1 Project website, standard templates and supporting documents 
WP7 
EBOS DEC PU 1 
D7.2 BioSPRINT PEDR DEC R CO 3 
D7.3 Summary report on PEDR implementation  DEC R CO 25 
D7.4 Published industrial case studies DEC DEC PU 48 
D7.5 Final version of BioSPRINT PEDR DEC R CO 48 
D7.6 TECBP plan and strategy NIC R PU 14 
D7.7 Online TECBP modules NIC DEC PU 26 
D7.8 BioSPRINT TECBP workshops  NIC DEC PU 38 
D7.9 BioSPRINT Summer school report and Final assessment on TECBP NIC R PU 47 
D7.10 Report on early adopters, post-project opportunities and business plan MAT R PU 47 
D7.11 Report on standardisation activities including CWA assessment DEC R PU 46 
D8.1 Project management handbook  
WP8 
DEC R PU 1 
D8.2, D8.3 Interim / Final Technical reports  UNEW R PU 25, 48 
D8.4 QA procedures & templates EBOS R CO 3 
D8.5, D8.6 Interim / Final QA & RM reports  EBOS R PU 25, 48 
D8.7 Data Management Plan  MAT R CO 6 
D8.8, D8.9 Interim / Final Data, Innovation & IPR management reports  MAT R CO 23, 47 
Figure 3.3. Project Management Structure 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  65 
resources allocated to the project. The CoP appoints the EAB. The CoP meets every six months. The meeting agenda 
includes: (a) Report by the PC, (b) Report by the QRM Manager on quality and risks issues, (c) Reports by the WP 
Leaders on technical implementation issues, (d) Approval of annual and final reports, (e) Approval of year ly 
implementation plans, and (f) Decisions on specific items. 
Project Steering Team (PST). The PST consists of the managers of the project, as listed in Table 3-2c below, who 
bring a wealth of experience in coordinating EU projects. The PST ensures that the project will achieve its objectives 
and satisfy the needs of the EC, the consortium and the Bioeconomy as a whole. The PST focuses on consortium 
management issues, including Technical Management, QA, the Consortium Agreement (CA), roles and 
responsibilities, audit certificates, ethics, gender issues, societal questions and liaison with 3rd parties and the EC.  
• Work Package Leaders (WPL) . WPLs lead a given WP from WP1 to WP 7 and report to the PC, who is the 
leader of WP8. Tasks include: to produce detailed work plans and progress reports, to guard the timely and effective 
execution of the WP work and ensure that deliverables meet the quality standards. WPLs also review WP results and 
flag up any underperformance. They provide input to management reports and represent the WP at the PST. Names 
of the WPL are listed in Table 3-2c below. 
• External Advisory Board (EAB). The EAB will offer impartial scientific advice, support the PST and advise the 
consortium on social, environmental, technologi cal, legal and economic factors that may influence the innovation 
management of BioSPRINT. It will be chaired by one of its members, elected upon the EAB’s first meeting in M1. 
The following persons have confirmed their interest in and willingness to participate in the BioSPRINT EAB through 
Letters of Support provided in Annex 2 (from page 130): 1. Dr. Tom Granström, Head of St1 Research, ST1 OY, 
Finland; 2. Dr. Markus Rarbach , Head of Business Line Biofuels & Derivatives , Clariant, Germany. 3. Dr. Ed 
Marshall, General Manager Biorefinery R&D, Sappi Biotech Limited, United Kingdom;  4. Mr. Marios 
Mavrogiannos, Standards Officer, Cyprus Organisation for Standardisation, Cyprus. ; 5. Mr. Darren Gobby , 
Principal Process Engineer, Johnson Matthey, UK; 6. The 6th seat of the EAB is reserved for a member of the Board 
of the BIC consortium.  
This management structure was deemed appropriate for BioSPRINT for the following reasons: (a) It ensures strategic 
management and decision making (PST) as well as appropriate interfacing with the EC (PC); (b) It provides effective 
management of the day -to-day running of the project (WPL) and its resources ; (c) It manages the overall 
technological development and its potential risks in an integrated manner (Technical Manager & WPLs, Quality & 
Risk Manager); (d) It clearly attributes and distributes responsibilities for implementing work, reporting progress, 
controlling the deliverables and the milestones (Table 3 -2a, page 66), and managing and mitigating risks (Table 3 -
2b, page 67); (e) It addresses the interdisciplinary aspects of the project (technological, innovation, legal, ethical, 
etc.); (f) It provides decentralised management (appointment of qualified managers) to ensure we deliver high impact. 
Management member roles: Listed in Table 3-2c below. The CVs of personnel named are listed in Section 4, 
verifying their competence and expertise in leading these roles.  
Table 3-2c: Project Roles and Assigned personnel  
Role Assigned personnel Partner Sex 
Project coordinator & WP8 leader Dr Jochen Michels DEC M 
Technical Manager Dr Kamelia Boodhoo  UNEW F 
Innovation & Transferability Manager Mr. Mladen Crnomarkovic MAT M 
D&C Manager & WP7 leader Ms. Sarah Fuchs DEC F 
Capacity-Building Manager Prof. Blaz Likozar NIC M 
Quality Assurance & Risk Manager Ms. Gotelenne Piaton EBOS F 
WPL Dr. M. Ohenoja (WP1, UOULU, M), Dr. F. Russo Abegao (WP2, UNEW, M), Dr. M. Grilc (WP3, NIC, M), 
Mr. A. Minigher (WP4, AEP, M), Dr. N. Rimmel (WP5, UPM, F), Mr N. Rettenmaier (WP6, IFEU, M) 
 
3.2.2 List of Milestones (Table 3-2a) 
MS# Milestone name WP Date Means of verification 
1 Initial PEDR ready, Launch of D&C activities 7 M3 D7.2 
2 Initial Feedstock analysis completed 1 M4 D1.1 
3 Definitions, settings and system description for the ILCSA ready  6 M9 D6.1 
4 Initial screening of PI for upstream purification processes 
completed 1 M12 D1.3, D1.5 
5 TECBP plan and strategy ready, launch of TECBP activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7 M14 D7.5 
6 Performance of intensified and optimised BioSPRINT upstream 
purification processes assessed  1 M24 D1.4, D1.6 
7 Performance of BioSPRINT intensification methods for conversion 
and separation of hemicellulose sugars assessed 2 M30 D2.3, D2.4 
8 Performance of BioSPRINT intensification methods for 
downstream purification assessed 3 M32 D3.3, D3.4 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  66 
9 Performance of BioSPRINT intensification methods for 
polymerisation and production of biorenewable resins assessed 4 M34 D4.2, D4.3, D4.4 and 
D4.5 
10 Start of integration of developed concepts for UPM & FhG streams; 
Launch of case study for Clariant Sunliquid stream 5 M34 D5.2 
11 Completion of the integration of developed concepts for UPM and FhG 
streams and of the case study for Clariant Sunliquid stream  5 M44 D5.3, D5.4, D5.5, D5.6 
12 BioSPRINT ILCSA completed  6 M46 D6.7 
13 Successful completion of project 8 M48 D8.3, D8.6, D8.9 
 
Progress reporting 
Internal (within Consortium): Every beneficiary commits to write bi-annually a management report, which will 
describe the technical and management project work done, listing effective time  spent on the project , mention 
difficulties, milestones and deliverables (or contributions to deliverables in case of joint deliverables) that have been 
reached, publications, travel and visits. The PC will be able to track both overall budget burn rates, as well as identify 
potential problems with individual organisations as a result of this report.  
External (to BBI JU): The PC will coordinate, consolidate and submit to the EC the periodic (e.g. M18, M30) and 
final reports (due 2 months after end of grant term), deliverables and the financial reports as needed.  
Project communications and meetings : The consortium recognises that a vital factor towards the successful 
management of BioSPRINT, is effective communication. A kick-off meeting (KOM) is planned in M1. PST face-to-
face project meetings will be convened every 6 months. CoP meetings and PST meetings will coincide in time, in 
which case the day before the CoP meeting, PST members will gather to present  an overview and table any critical 
decisions to be taken at the CoP. Additional cross -team, meetings at WP level, and face to face meetings will be 
organised when necessary, and teleconferences will be arranged at much frequent time intervals, as needed. Thus, in 
total 9 face-to-face PST/CoP meetings (i.e. in M1, M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36, M42 and M48) are anticipated. 
Daily communications will primarily use email and VoIP/Skype/GoToMeeting tools. A project mailing list will be 
established; WPLs may also set up their own distribution lists. Contact details for all personnel involved will be 
available from the tools established by the PC, where information, ideas and documents will be shared.  
Consortium agreement (CA): It will be concluded between all members of the consortium, as dictated by EU rules, 
prior to the signature of the Grant Agreement (GA). The CA will be based on the common DESCA model and will 
supplement the Description of Action, covering topics that are important for the delivery of the project and the 
management of knowledge between partners, but are not specific to the consortium’s contract with the EC 
Decision-making mechanisms & conflict resolution: In the course of the project, the consortium will have to agree 
on and develop technic al, scientific and commercial ideas and specifications. Most decisions about the work to be 
carried out have been made at proposal and so will be subject to the GA signed with the EC. Decision making will 
strive for consensus: agreement will usually be reached, followed by official confirmation via electronic mail, letter 
or written minutes. For important issues, the agreement may take the form of a short report , signed by those 
responsible for decision-making. Conflict prevention techniques will be used to  avoid problems. Where consensus 
cannot be reached, conflict resolution procedures will be actioned. The specific roles described above will resolve 
and/or implement the necessary actions, according to the following process: (1) Issues will first be addressed within 
the relevant WP through discussion chaired by the WPL. (2) If this fails, the issue will be presented by the WPL 
either to the PC, TM or the CoP depending on the nature of the problem (i.e. administrative, technical or 
business/strategic). (3) The relevant board will resolve the issue through a majority vote, with the board chair holding 
a casting vote. The EAB will be involved in case of high-level scientific disputes. (4) Conflicts that cannot be resolved 
through those principles will be mediated by an external expert in view of reaching consensus. (5) As a last resort, 
disputes will be handled according to the dispute resolution provision set forth in the CA. 
 
3.2.3 Innovation Management  
The Innovation, IPR & Transferability Manager (IM), Mr. Mladen Crnomarkovic will be responsible for Innovation 
management as part of T 8.4. Specific measures to engender an innovation culture within the project will be: (a) 
Project meetings will include sessions on emerging technologies/approaches to generate novel ideas for research and 
to ensure applied knowledge transfer to industrial partners, and inform future research decisions, and (b) To foster a 
commercial exploitation culture among partners to maxim ise the identification, assessment and execution of 
opportunities to deliver impact from research outputs. In addition, the EAB will be responsible for continuous review 
of the research progress , being provided with reports at 6 -month intervals from the CoP,  in order to identify new 
opportunities for innovation, grow the engagement with industrial partners, and seek new collaborations. 
 
3.2.4 Critical Implementation Risks and Mitigation actions (Table 3-2b) 
The project implementation plan, produced at the start of the project, is subject to revision in the course of the project, 
in accordance with the procedures for project re-planning outlined in this section. One of the main reasons that project 
re-planning may be necessary is as a result of regular risk assessment in the project. The initial list of risks presented 
in Table 3 -2b is a start to this process; more detailed assessment of risks will  be carried out regularly, based on 
practical experiences in running the project. Risk management will be  the responsibility of the QRM (Gotelenne 
Piaton, EBOS) in collaboration with the PC, TM and IM, and WPLs . The management of risks will be part of the 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  67 
regular PST meetings. Table 3-2b describes a representative set  of the risks, their probability (P) and impact (I) 
(L=Low, M=Medium and H=High) and proposed risk mitigation measures 
Table 3-2b: Critical risks for implementation 
Description of risk Proposed risk-mitigation measures P Ι WP 
Frequent / important fouling of 
membranes and surfaces 
A thorough analysis of all three HMC streams will reveal the typical 
foulants. Efficient prefiltration step in lab tests will be conducted to remove 
them. CFD model will help prevent concentration polarisation and fouling 
by optimizing the process hydrodynamics and using photocatalytic 
degradation and/or precipitation of the foulants. 
L M 1 
The upstream purification is not 
as effective or efficient as desired. 
Screening experiments and availability of different membranes and 
materials (ceramic, zeolites) ensure that the best purification methods can 
be selected. The purification can also be improved by hy bridisation with 
other separation method(s). In addition, DoE tools will be used to select the 
process parameters (T, p, pH, etc.) optimizing the purification efficiency. 
M M 1 
Green antisolvents and salting 
agents used in SDR encourage 
sugars to precipitate alongside 
lignin thus reducing effectiveness 
of separation. 
A number of antisolvents and salting out reagents will be carefully screened 
for their ability to preferentially isolate lignin from the C5/C6 sugars. 
Appropriate data (e.g. solubility, metastable zone) of relevant species will 
be gathered experimentally or from literature and used in a decision matrix 
to select the most effective ones.  
M H 1 
Poor Data quality in the  
machine learning catalyst design 
Prior to experimental work, the possible error sources will be identified and 
their impact to collected data will be minimised. The ML methods are 
selected and adapted based on data quality and may incorporate pre -
processing techniques or simpler model str uctures in order to utilise the 
information content as efficiently as possible. 
L M 2 
Extraction-reaction coupling in 
sugar dehydration step may 
increase process complexity due 
to hybridisation step. 
A good understanding of the influence of operation parameters will be 
developed during the modelling of this hybridisation step to allow 
technology development and performance optimisation.  
M L 2 
Sugar conversions to 
furans take excessively 
long times. 
Different reactor technologies will be evaluated for their suitability, with 
those providing the best residence times being selected for 
implementation in the pilot scale development unit. 
L L 3 
Preceding reactor activities are 
lagging behind schedule, which in 
turn delays the development of 
downstream. 
Downstream separation development is initially performed on model 
reaction mixtures, which may be anticipated, based on input reactor 
compositions, as well as some ideali sed operation (equilibri um, non -
intensified, etc.), thus reducing time to development. 
M M 3 
Purity of furfural and 5 -HMF is 
not high enough for the efficient 
synthesis of resins and polyols. 
Feedbacks from WP4 will facilitate iterative steps for the choice of the best 
combination of streams, catalytic conversion processes and downstream 
purification providing the required purity. 
M M 2,3,
4 
First round resins and polyols are 
not REACH compliant. 
A REACH assessment will be carried out to check the compliancy with the 
REACH definition of ‘polymer’. In case of non-compliancy, the synthesis 
protocols are modified to meet the ‘polymer’ definition. 
L H 4 
The bio-based polyols and foams 
do not meet the required industrial 
specifications and performances 
related to end applications. 
Bio-based polyols will be optimi sed and validated against commercial 
benchmarks. Proper formulation is foreseen to improve the foams’ 
properties while maximizing their bio -based content, also through the 
synergistic addition of bio-polyols from other sustainable sources 
L M 4 
The kinetics of the polymerisation 
step for the novolac resin may be 
too slow for significant monomer 
conversions to be reached in a 
single pass in the SDR. 
Temperature can be increased to enable faster kinetics. A recirculation loop 
can also be implemented to enable multiple passes in the reactor. In the 
worst-case scenario, a pre -polymerising step can be implemented so that 
the SDR can be more beneficially a pplied in the finishing and often more 
challenging stages of the process. 
M M 4 
No or low-quality data available 
for the ILCSA  
Generic data based on specific literature and expert judgements from both 
project partners and external experts will be used instead. M L 6 
Participants for the TECBP 
cannot be recruited. 
The participation of all partners in the D&C activities minimise the risk of 
reaching out to an insufficient number of participants. Recruitment will 
start early so as to intensify if targets are not met. 
L L 7 
Consortium has difficulty 
agreeing on a cross -licensing 
scheme. 
The project partners have discussed IPR issues and reached a  preliminary 
agreement. However, cross-licensing agreements cannot be discussed now. 
This risk is mitigated by the fact that some outputs of the technical WPs 
can be exploited individually, if partners fail to agree on a common 
exploitation strategy. 
M L 8 
Delays in WPs  
and reporting of the 
Project progress meeting and regular WP discussions will be used to 
monitor the progress and early on warn about delays. Any delay will be 
discussed within the consortium in order to find an adequate solution and 
get back on track. Conflict resolution will be managed by the PC which has 
M M  
All 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  68
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
 The BioSPRINT consortium has been mobilised around the requirements of the call to intensify biorefining 
operations for lignocellulosic feedstock. 
Geography. The consortium comprises 12 partners from 8 European countries from all 4 main European regions: 
Northern Europ e (9%), Western Europe (50%), Eastern Europe (9%), and Southern Europe (32%). It involves 
research, innovation and industrial organisations, with discernible domain expertise in the technology areas, which 
are being researched and leveraged into BioSPRINT. 
 
Complementary expertise. The BioSPRINT consortium (Figure 3.4) unites the necessary multidisciplinary 
knowledge, expertise, skills, and resources to constitute a representative value chain of actors, which together are 
capable of achieving the project’s ambitious objectives. These organisations have a strong applied approach to their 
research and 6 of them are members of BIC and committed to working closely with the European Bioeconomy for 
realising an efficient and sustainable transition to a greener economy . There is no conflictive overlap among the 
consortium and each participating organisation has a clearly defined role in the project. The consortium is made of: 
• Academic and research technology organisations (DEC, UOULU, FhG, UNEW, NIC) capable of providing 
the PI, biochemistry, PSE, and dissemination  expertise necessary to exercise an applied research push within the 
project. The aim is to leverage existing assets from previous research and further advance these assets in collaboration 
with industries and SMEs. DEC is an experienced H2020 PC with an established reputation of excellence, which has 
guided dozens of successful collaborative projects across Europe.  
• Industrial actors (UPM, PFR, AEP), representing the feedstock provision and intermediary end -user sides of 
the value chain, taking charge of providing HMC feedstock streams (UPM), leading the validation and integration 
into value chains of the BioSPRINT biorefining concept (UPM) and the development of innovative bio renewable 
novolac and resole-type resins (PFR) and bio-based polyols (AEP), well-suited to replace fossil-based counterparts 
in the near future.  
• Biotechnology, process simulation, engineering, control and ICT SMEs ( ADSC, IRIS, EBOS ) with 
complementarity expertise, high technological capacity  and market orientation. These partners can contribute the 
technology push (especially in the context of scale-up, integration and validation of the results), but also absorb the 
knowledge generated, in order to quickly industrialise the project’s outputs.  
• Two modelling, TEA and LCA SME actors (MAT, IFEU ) with strong modelling , LCA  and consulting 
experience, in order to undertake the TEA, ILCSA, Innovation & IPR management and pave the way towards 
commercial exploitation. 
Strong presence of SMEs. There is a strong presence of SMEs (46% of consortium members) leading a number of 
tasks especially in the technical development, absorbing 39% of the total budget, (Figure 3.4).  
Gender balance aspects. BioSPRINT is also fully committed to promoting and fostering gender balance in research 
teams and project decision -making bodies. The BioSPRINT project team  includes 37% of women . In addition, 
BioSPRINT will aim at achieving gender balance for its TECBP and will take all necessary measures to encourage 
and secure equal participation of women. A number of the key management and decision -making positions within 
the project organisational structure have been assigned to highly qualified women ( Dr. Boodhoo as Technical 
Manager, Ms. Fuchs as D&C Manager, Dr. Nina Rimmel as WP5 leader, Ms. Piaton as QRM).   
 
 
 
deliverables; Management issues 
arise in relation to the coordinated 
execution of the technical WPs  
 
long experience in coordination and management of large consortia.  
Conflicts and disputes between the partners will be resolved immediat ely 
to avoid further escalation and impact on the project. 
A partner exits the consortium. 
The consortium was carefully assembled to represent complementary skills 
and expertise. Exit of a partner would be a serious setback. The PC will 
undertake immediate acquisition actions to find a replacement partner. 
Potential candidates have been discussed as part of contingency planning. 
L H All 
Figure 3.4. BIOSPRINT consortium and complementarity of partners 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  69 
In short, BioSPRINT unites sufficient reputable actors from the academic & scientific fields, as well as from 
the biotechnology and biorefining, in order to realistically implement the ambitious work plan, protect the 
knowledge and plan for its exploitation.
3.4 Resources to be committed 
In relation to the project budget, it has been built using a bottom-up methodology, whereby it is based on actual costs 
for staff, equipment depreciation and other goods and services. There is a logical budget distribution among the 
partners and each has mobilised the necessary staff/person months (Table 3.4a) to get the job done in a competitive 
timeframe. Subcontracting is only foreseen in relation to the establishment of the CWA and UOULU analysis costs. 
In relation to personnel costs, differences in costs between the different EU regions, reflect differences in the cost of 
living. There is sufficient budget for mobility of developers and industrialists between sites which is important for 
knowledge exchange, as well as for practi cal on-site validation. There is an appropriate budget allocated to D&C, 
knowledge management and project coordination activities. Considering that there are 12 partners, and a competitive 
48-month work plan, a requested EC Contribution of € 4,998,015 and a total budget of € 5,740,640, with in-kind 
contributions estimated at €353,200 and additional investments estimated at >€300M; a good value for high impact. 
Furthermore, the budget of industrial partners PFR and UPM equal €742,625 (with 0% funding rate) or 13% of total 
budget. 
Personnel (Table 3-4a). 
 
Other direct costs (Table 3-4b). The table below lists the participants whose sum of other direct costs exceeds 15% 
of the personnel costs. On average, other direct costs amount for 18.8% of the total requested contribution.  
 
108 The total effort for UOULU corresponds to 62PM from researchers of the UOULU Faculty of Technology and 12PM of effort for a PhD 
student fully funded by the Professorship in Biorefinery Measurements in UOULU (Faculty of Technology & Kajaani University Consortium) 
as in-kind contribution (table 3.5 below) . The total effort for UNEW corresponds to 65PM from researchers of the PI Group and 42PM of 
effort for a PhD student whose work will be fully funded by a Research Council UK DTP scholarship as additional investment (table 3.6 below) 
 WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 Total per participant 
DEC 1 1 1 1 4 5 26 21 60 
AEP 0 0 1 22 5 2 3 1 34 
ADSC 8 15 8 10 6 0 1 0 48 
EBOS 0 4 0 0 4 2 10 18 38 
FhG 9 0 15 0 8 0 1 0 33 
IFEU 0 0 0 0 0 28 1 1 30 
IRIS 12 2 4 12 4 0 2 0 36 
NIC 9 30 28 12 12 0 13 5 109 
MAT 0 0 0 0 21 21 7 8 57 
UOULU 30 18 11 2 3 7 2 1 74108 
PFR 0 0 0 16 4 2 1 0 23 
UNEW 21 30 11 15 17 0 8 5 107111 
UPM 4 0 0 0 26 6 6 1 43 
Total PM 94 100 79 90 114 73 81 61 692 
DEC  Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 49,000 25k for project meetings; 24k EAB meetings  
Other goods & services 15,000 10k for materials, room rental for the BioSPRINT Summer school; 5k CFS;  
TOTAL 100,000  
AEP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 19,000 19k for project meetings 
Other goods & services 37,500 4k workshop and summer school, 3.5k conferences ; 30k consumables  
(Aluminium pans, HPLC-GPC columns, Glassware, Lab Consumables 12.5k) 
TOTAL 56,500  
FhG Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 17,000 17k Travel costs (inland 4k & abroad 13k) 
Large research 
infrastructure 
14,490 FhG’s HHI methodology for declaring the costs for LRI has been validated and 
approved by the EC on 23/08/2016. 
Other goods & services 87,000 20k Polymer/ceramic membranes for experiments, 10k for maintenance, spare 
parts for membrane unit; 35k maintenance, spare parts, TÜV (inspection) of 
distillation unit, 13k Analytics, solvents, cleaning; D&C costs: 9k 
TOTAL 118,490  
IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 19,000 19k for project meetings: 19 meeting in 4 years, 1,000 per meeting. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
BioSPRINT                                        Part B - Sections 1-2-3                            Page  70 
In-kind contributions & Additional investments. In-kind contributions have been declared in the personnel and/or 
other direct costs of partners in their budget but have been subtracted from their requested EC contribution. 
Table 3.5 - In-kind Contributions Indicative Value  
AEP: Installation of a new chemical laboratory and purchase of equipment (new chemical reactor, 
ancillary and testing instruments). EUPO patent filling costs (1-3 patents @ ~€20k/ patent). 
€140,000 
MAT: AspenONE software for simulation and economic evaluation of existing and new 
biorefinery processes. Software license ~€18,000 per year for 4 years = 72,000) 
€72,000 
NIC: Equipment and materials for HPLC, UPLC, IR, UV and Vis spectroscopy. In addition, NIC 
will cover any patent filing costs as additional investments.  
€103,700 
UOULU: A PhD student (12PM) funded by the Professorship in Biorefinery Measurements in 
UOULU (Faculty of Technology and Kajaani University Consortium) will support the PSE tasks. 
€37,500 
Total €353,200 
 
Table 3-6 Additional Investments (not declared in BioSPRINT budget) 
 
Activity & Contribution to BBI-JU objectives Private 
investment (€) 
Public 
investment 
(€) 
Other EU 
funding  
AEP Participation in BBI JU project (ReInvent). Development of bio-
based polyols from plant oils; project co-funded by AEP (50%). 
152,000 304,000  
Values proportional for 2020-2022. 
UPM Construction of new biorefinery in Germany (pending final 
approval by Board of Directors) 
~€300M tba tba 
UNEW A PhD student (42PM in WP1-3) funded by a Research Council 
UK DTP scholarship and allocated and approved by UNEW for 
3.5 years. 
 86,000  
IRIS or VISUM 
(IRIS Group) Participation in URBIOFIN project Testing novel advanced 
sensors for monitoring process parameters in organic waste 
biorefinery. 
405,460.00 661,540.00 N/A 
Participation in BIOnTop project. Development of suitable 
monitoring system(s) for automatic sorting of biopolymers. 
16,811.25 543,563.75 N/A 
Participation in ECOAT project (Plasma pre-treatment).  39,959.50 359,719.00 N/A 
 
Other goods & services 42,500 2k D&C; 30k Materials (sensors, optomechanics, casing, etc.) for building PAT 
solutions in WP1 and WP4; 10.5k Laboratory consumables 
TOTAL 61,500  
UOULU Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 22,500 15k for project meetings; 7.5k for research visits (3 visits @ 2,5k).  
Other goods & services 25,500 5k for materials, room rental, catering for 1 TECBP workshop; 7.5k: Conference 
participation (3 x 2,5k); 1k CFS; 12k for open access publications 
Equipment 30,000 9,5k membranes; 11.4k analytical services; 1.5k Other purification equipment 
TOTAL 78,000  
UNEW  Cost (€) Justification 
Travel 80,459 39.9k for attendance to project meetings, 39.9k for attendance to international 
conference and other dissemination events, €659 for interview travel expenses. 
Equipment 180,700 62.3k for an ACR reactor, 81k for chromatography equipment, 37.4k for high-
pressure cells for HTP rig. 
Other goods & 
Services 
114,900 68.5k for consumables and materials, 24.9k for analytical services, 9.3k for 
equipment maintenance services, 7.5k for open access publications, 4.7k CFS. 
TOTAL 376,059  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 71 
 
 
 
Biorefining of sugars  
via Process Intensification 
 
Research and Innovation action (RIA) – Horizon 2020-BBI-2019-SO2-R6 
Improve biorefinery operations through process intensification and new end products 
 
Sections 4-5 
 
Table of Contents 
Section 4: Members of the consortium .................................................................................................... 73
4.1 List of Participants .......................................................................................................................... 73 
4.1.1 DECHEMA GESELLSCHAFT FUER CHEMISCHE TECHNIK UND BIOTECHNOLOGIE E.V. .... 73 
4.1.2 AEP POLYMERS SRL ............................................................................................................................ 77 
4.1.3 DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL ................................................................................. 81 
4.1.4 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD ................................................................................................................ 84 
4.1.5 FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V.
 ........................................................................................................................................................................... 88 
4.1.6 IFEU - INSTITUT FUR ENERGIE UND UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH .............. 91 
4.1.7 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA ............................................................. 96 
4.1.8 KEMIJSKI INSTITUT ........................................................................................................................... 100 
4.1.9 MATURUS OPTIMI BV ........................................................................................................................ 104 
4.1.10 OULUN YLIOPISTO ........................................................................................................................... 108 
4.1.11 PREFERE RESINS GERMANY GMBH ............................................................................................. 112 
4.1.12 UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE ................................................................................ 113 
4.1.13 UPM GMBH ......................................................................................................................................... 117
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) ....................... 119 
4.2.1 DECHEMA GESELLSCHAFT FUER CHEMISCHE TECHNIK UND BIOTECHNOLOGIE E.V. .. 119 
4.2.2 AEP POLYMERS SRL .......................................................................................................................... 120 
4.2.3 DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL ............................................................................... 120 
4.2.4 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD .............................................................................................................. 120 
4.2.5 FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V.
 ......................................................................................................................................................................... 120 
4.2.6 IFEU - INSTITUT FUR ENERGIE UND UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH ............ 120 
4.2.7 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA ........................................................... 120 
4.2.8 KEMIJSKI INSTITUT (National Institute of Chemistry) ...................................................................... 120 
4.2.9 MATURUS OPTIMI BV ........................................................................................................................ 120 
4.2.10 OULUN YLIOPISTO ........................................................................................................................... 121 
4.2.11 PREFERE RESINS GERMANY GMBH ............................................................................................. 121 
4.2.12 UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE ................................................................................ 121 
4.2.13 UPM GMBH ......................................................................................................................................... 121 
Section 5: Ethics and Security ................................................................................................................ 122
5.1 Ethics ............................................................................................................................................... 122 
5.1.1 Meeting national requirements ............................................................................................................... 124 
5.1.2 Data collection ........................................................................................................................................ 125
5.2 Security ........................................................................................................................................... 126
5.3 Declarations from participants regarding Ethics and Security ................................................ 126 
5.3.1 DECHEMA GESELLSCHAFT FUER CHEMISCHE TECHNIK UND BIOTECHNOLOGIE E.V. .. 126 
5.3.2 AEP POLYMERS SRL .......................................................................................................................... 126 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 72 
 
5.3.3 DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL ............................................................................... 126 
5.3.4 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LIMITED (EBOS) ........................................................................................ 127 
5.3.5 FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V.
 ......................................................................................................................................................................... 127 
5.3.6 IFEU - INSTITUT FUR ENERGIE UND UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH ............ 127 
5.3.7 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA ........................................................... 127 
5.3.8 KEMIJSKI INSTITUT (National Institute of Chemistry) ...................................................................... 127 
5.3.9 MATURUS OPTIMI BV ........................................................................................................................ 127 
5.3.10 OULUN YLIOPISTO ........................................................................................................................... 128 
5.3.11 PREFERE RESINS GERMANY GMBH ............................................................................................. 128 
5.3.12 UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE ................................................................................ 128 
5.3.13 UPM GMBH ......................................................................................................................................... 128 
Annex 1: External Advisory Board ........................................................................................................ 129 
Annex 2: Letters of Support from the EAB Members ......................................................................... 131 
Annex 3: Ethics Supporting Documents ................................................................................................ 140 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 73 
 
 
Section 4: Members of the consortium
4.1 List of Participants 
Partners indicated with an asterisk * next to their short name are full or associate members of the Bio-based 
Industries Consortium (BIC), representing the private sector in the Bio-based Industries Joint Undertaking.  
 
Part. Participant organisation name Type1 Short Name Country 
P1 DECHEMA GESELLSCHAFT FUER CHEMISCHE 
TECHNIK UND BIOTECHNOLOGIE E.V. RTO DEC* DE 
P2 AEP POLYMERS SRL SME AEP* IT 
P3 DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL SME ADSC ES 
P4 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD SME EBOS CY 
P5 FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG 
DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V. NGO FhG* DE 
P6 IFEU - INSTITUT FUR ENERGIE UND 
UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH SME IFEU DE 
P7 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD 
LIMITADA SME IRIS ES 
P8 KEMIJSKI INSTITUT (National Institute of Chemistry) RTO NIC*2 SI 
P9 MATURUS OPTIMI BV SME MAT NL 
P10 OULUN YLIOPISTO ACA UOULU* FI 
P11 PREFERE RESINS  IND PFR DE 
P11 UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE ACA UNEW UK 
P12 UPM GMBH IND UPM* DE 
 
4.1.1 DECHEMA GESELLSCHAFT FUER CHEMISCHE TECHNIK UND BIOTECHNOLOGIE E.V. 
Short Name DEC 
 
Country Germany 
Type Research Organisation 
Website www.dechema.de 
Short Profile 
DECHEMA Gesellschaft für Chemische Technik und Biotechnologie e.V. (Society for Chemical Engineering and 
Biotechnology), (DEC) brings together experts from a wide range of disciplines, institutions and generations to 
stimulate scientific exchange in chemical engineering, process engineering and biotechnology. DEC identifies 
and evaluates emerging technological trends and facilitates the transfer of research results into industrial 
applications. DEC aims to boost the competitiveness of Germany and Europe as a pre-eminent business location 
for chemistry and biotechnology, to position chemical engineering, process engineering and biotechnology in the 
public and political spheres as important key technologies and problem solvers, and also to increase awareness of 
the benefits of these disciplines for society.  
 
DEC is also the hub of an interdisciplinary network of topic -oriented committees, organizing events and 
professional development courses for all who are interested in a specialized subject area. DEC’s network has over 
5.800 members – individuals, institutions and companies - and is the place where future trends in research and 
technology are identified, debated in-depth and promptly translated into recommendations for action. 
 
DEC is the expert network for chemical engineering and biotechnology in Germany. This non-profit professional 
society represents these fields in science, industry, politics and society. Around 100 subject divisions and working 
parties offer a forum for knowledge exchange among experts, based on trust.  
  
 
1 ACA = Academic, Higher or secondary education establishment, IND= Industrial partner, NGO = Non -Governmental Organisation, 
PO=Public Organisation, RTO = Research & Technology Organisation, SME = Small to Medium sized Enterprise 
2 Affiliated to BIC via membership in the ‘Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Stajerska’, Slovenia 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 74 
 
DEC will involve its Biotechnology Section and ProcessNet, the joint platform for chemical engineering, which 
are the forums where scientists, engineers, students, companies and institutions meet for knowledge exchange and 
discussion. Biotechnology and the bioeconomy have been focus areas of DECHEMA since the early 1970s. The 
DECHEMA Biotechnology Section has more than 1,800 members  and promotes scientific exchange in 
biotechnology, chemical engineering, and process engineering. DEC seeks out and evaluates new technological 
trends and provides support for translating research results into industrial applications. 
 
DEC’s involvement will be steere d by the group " Research and Project Coordination " which analyses and 
evaluates innovative developments in all fields of technology, facilitates the partner -brokerage for project 
definition and subsequently offers coordination projects and management of pr ojects. This group is working at 
both the national and European level.  The Group will leverage DEC’s 25+ years of experience in identifying and 
closing technological gaps, in facilitating communication between research, industry and the public sector and in 
supporting the market uptake of innovation, organizing a broad range of events, from specialists’ workshops to 
large international conferences with 3000 and more participants, setting-up online resources such as the knowledge 
base on nanomaterials  funded and supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), 
and, broadly, facilitating and disseminating research and innovation in the chemical and biotechnology sectors on 
a daily basis. DEC also has experience with innovation management and grant application for numerous 
bioeconomy-related projects and has been working together with partners such as FNR (Agency for Renewable 
Resources) and DBU (Deutsche Bundesstiftung Umwelt). 
 
DEC has extensive experience with coordinating European projects - DEC is/has been the Coordinator of eight 
projects, in the areas of chemistry, bio economy, process industry and energy efficiency, including, among others:  
- KETBIO: ‘A novel cluster model to bring KE Y ENABLING BIOTECHNOLOGY research closer to 
markets and society’, 5 Partners, (01/10/2017 - 31/03/2020); 
- RoadToBio: ‘Roadmap for the Chemical Industry in Europe towards a Bioeconomy’, 4 Partners, 
(01/05/2017 - 30/04/2019); 
- WaterWatt: ‘Improvement of energy efficiency in industrial water circuits using gamification for online 
self-assessment, benchmarking and economic decision support’, 6 Partners, (01/04/2016 – 31/03/2019); 
- CarbonNext: ‘The Next Generation of Carbon for the Process Industry’, 3 Partners, (0 1/09/2016 - 
31/08/2018); 
- E4WATER: ‘Economically and Ecologically Efficient Water Management in the European Chemical 
Industry’, 20 Partners, (01/05/2012 - 30/04/2016). 
 
DEC is/was also a participant in the following relevant H2020 projects: 
- ENERGY-X: ‘Transformative chemistry for a sustainable energy future’, 13 Partners, (01/03/2019 – 
29/02/2020); 
- VOLATILE: ‘Biowaste derived volatile fatty acid platform for biopolymers, bioactive compounds and 
chemical building blocks’, 21 Partners, (01/12/2016 - 30/11/2020); 
- INSPIREWater: ‘Innovative Solutions in the Process Industry for next generation Resource Efficient 
Water management’, 11 Partners, 01/10/2016 - 31/03/2020); 
- AceForm4.0: ‘Activating Value Chains for EU leadership in FORMulation Manufactur ing 4.0’, 7 
Partners, (01/10/2016 - 30/09/2018); 
- BioLinX: ‘Creating links to speed -up innovation in the bio economy’, 9 Partners, (01/07/2015 - 
30/06/2018); 
 
DEC is an Associate Member of the Bio-based Industries Consortium (BIC) which represents the private sector in 
the Bio-based Industries Joint Undertaking (BBI JU), the Public -Private Partnership (PPP) with the European 
Commission. DEC also represents Germany at the European Federation of Chemical Engineering, which promotes 
scientific collaboration supporting the work of engineers and scientists in 30 European countries. In addition, DEC 
is a member of the European Federation of Biotechnology  (EFB) which p romotes the safe, sustainable and 
beneficial use of the life sciences, as well as research and innovation at the cutting edge of biotechnology. EFB 
provides a forum for interdisciplinary and international cooperation, in order to facilitate an informed dia logue 
between scientists, the biotechnology industries and the public. 
 
DEC is a founding member of SusChem, the European Technology Platform (ETP) for Sustainable Chemistry. 
SusChem’s mission is to initiate and inspire European chemical and biochemical innovation to respond effectively 
to societal’s challenges by providing sustainable solutions. SusChem has close ties with two PPPs: the ‘Sustainable 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 75 
 
Process Industry through Resource and Energy Efficiency’ ( SPIRE) PPP and the Biobased Industries Joint 
Initiative (BBI JU) . 
Role in the project 
DEC will lead WP8 'Project Coordination' acting as the project coordinator, assuming responsibility for the 
Coordination and Management of the project, including the planning, monitoring, assessment, reporting, 
evaluation and continuous assessment of all Work Packages (WPs), their associated task s, and the overall 
execution of the implementation plan. DEC will also coordinate the External Advisory Board (EAB) steering the 
commercial and scientific direction of the project.  
 
From the technical point of view, DEC will participate in  WP1 ‘ Intensification of Upstream Purificatio n’ 
contributing in the analysis of treated hemicellulose streams. In particular, DEC will undertake the liaison with the 
involved industrial providers of feedstocks: UPM, FhG, Clariant.  
 
Under WP2 ‘Intensification of Catalytic Conversion’ DEC will be involved to ensure optimal knowledge transfer 
towards the dissemination & exploitation WP (WP7) and integrate the findings of WP2 into the Training, 
Education & Capacity-Building Programme (TECBP). Similarly, DEC will be involved in WP3 ‘Intensification 
of Downstream Purification’ and WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation 
Intensification’.   
 
Within WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration ’ DEC will lead the task dedicated to  the 
transferability case study with Clariant Sunliquid® stream . DEC will monitor the development of a case study 
report on processing the Clariant streams with the recommendations on the integration of the most efficient process 
operation variants. DEC will collect the data from previous technical WP (1 –4) activities, in order to prepare a 
summary characteristic comparison  of all the  key characteristics for consequent upstream/reaction/downstream 
processing (hemicellulose, decomposed oligo -/monomer sugars, furans, biomass -derived organic acids, lignin, 
inorganics (ashes), density, viscosity, mixture surface tension, etc.).  
 
In WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’ DEC will be in charge of the system analysis and 
description aiming to provide the goal and scope of the integrated sustainability assessment as well as all initial 
definitions, settings and system description, including technological parameters. DEC will also participate in the 
Integrated life cycle sustainability assessment  so as to ensure that all the results from previous analyses  are 
integrated to identify and depict the most sustainable pathways among the BioSPRINT value chains compared to 
all reference systems. 
 
As a hub of an interdisciplinary network of topic -oriented committees, organizing events and professional 
development courses for specialized subject area s, DEC will also lead WP7 ‘ Dissemination and Exploitation’ 
aiming to develop the project’s multidimensional dissemination & communication (D&C) plan and deliver D&C 
activities; undertake stakeholder base building and stakeholder engagement activities via BBI-JU and also  
contribute to existing and emerging standards. As part of WP7, DEC will work with all partners across to identify, 
develop and publish agreed dissemination materials to the identified target audiences in a timely manner.  In 
particular, DEC will develop, implement, monitor and update the Plan for Exploitati on and Dissemination of 
Results (PEDR) a document setting the strategic directions of the dissemination activities in order to reach the 
project goals by supervising a series of strategic and targeted communication activities, promot ing BioSPRINT 
and its results to multiple audiences, using all appropriate channels, to reach stakeholders, raise their awareness, 
and encourage engagement with the project. In addition, DEC will promote the interests of BBI-JU to address the 
needs for a strong and efficient bio economy. With regards to standardisation, DEC will be in cha rge of the 
activities seeking to make an impactful contribution to industry Standards related to P rocess Intensification (PI) 
equipment and processes, building on the RoadMap for PI standardisation developed as part of the IbD project, as 
well as product standards related to resins, polyols and polymers . DEC will be mainly responsible for the 
establishment of a CENELEC Workshop Agreement (CWA) on ‘PI for Biorefining processes’. 
 
DEC will lead the following tasks: 
− T5.4 Transferability case study with Clariant Sunliquid® stream  
− T6.1 Definitions, settings and system description  
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T7.4 Contribution to existing and emerging standards 
− T8.1 Project coordination and reporting 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 76 
 
 
DEC will participate in the tasks listed below: 
− T1.1 Analysis of treated hemicellulose streams 
− T2.3 Development of extractive reaction intensification 
− T3.3 Intensification of Downstream Purification Processes  
− T4.4 Identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via PSE tools 
− T6.6 Integrated life cycle sustainability assessment  
− T7.2 Training, Education and Capacity Building programme (TECBP) 
− T7.3 Identification of early adopters, post-project opportunities and business plan  
− T8.3 Quality assurance & Risk management. 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Jochen Michels (Male)  is a Researcher and Scientific Project Coordinator at Dechema Gesellschaft Fuer 
Chemische Technik Und Biotechnologie E.V. (DEC) and he is responsible for renewable resources. He received 
his PhD in 1994 at the University of Göttingen and has more than 20 years of experience of scientific, as well as 
research and innovation management. Since 1997, he is employed at DECHEMA and has initially coordinated 
large research projects on soil bioremediation and natural attenuation. From 2008 to 2013 he was the coordinator 
of the large German Lignocellulose Feedstock Biorefinery Project. Within the FP7 project BIOCHEM he was 
amongst others responsible for the partnering platform and the underlying database, which was a Europe -wide 
partnership co-funded by the European Commission to support companies entering the rapidly emerging market 
of bio-based products. He has been involved in the development of the technological roadmap of the BIO -TIC 
project, the industrial biotech research and innovation platforms centre – towards technological innovation and 
solid foundations for a growing industrial biotech sector in Europe. Within BBI JU project RoadToBio he was part 
of the coordination team. In 2015, he contributed to the study on the bioeconomy in the Federal State of Hesse. In 
2009 he also took a lectureship in renewable resources at Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences.  Dr. Jochen 
will be the Leader of WP8 ‘Project Coordination’ and will also serve as the Project Coordinator (PC).  
Sarah Fuchs (Female)  joined DEC as a Project Manager in 2017  and now she  works for the Biotechnology 
Research and Project Coordination department. Sarah is the project Coordinator of the KETBIO Project and 
manages amongst others the KETBIO Hub , which is a highly  interactive platform that offers an online meeting 
place for key enabling biotechnology research. She has been actively involved in the KETBIOs communications 
and dissemination tasks such as support of the website, promoting and campaigning of interaction on the KETBIO 
Hub as well as direct communication with the commission.  Sarah studied chemistry at the Technical University 
Dortmund. Previously, she worked as scientific assistant for the chair of Technical Chemistry at the TU Dortmund. 
Her research was focused on the design and development of sustainable and industrial synthesis of bifunctional 
molecules. Sarah will be the Leader of WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation ’ and will also serv e as the 
Dissemination and Communications (D&C) Manager.  
 
Ulrich Westhaus (Male) is the Group Leader of Thermophysical Property Data & Software in DEC responsible 
for the software related products. He holds a Masters and PhD degree in Chemical Engineering. He will serve as 
the Data Protection Officer of DEC. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Michels, J. , Wagemann, K.  (2010). The German Lignocellulose Feedstock Biorefinery Project. Biofuels, 
Bioproducts and Biorefining, 4, 263-267. 
2. DECHEMA / IEA / ICCA (2013). Technology Roadmap Energy and GHG Reductions in the Chemical 
Industry via Catalytical Processes; available at www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Techn
ologyRoadmapEnergyandGHGReductionsintheChemicalIndustryviaCatalyticProcesses.pdf.    
3. Michels, J. (2017) Die Nutzung von Biomasse zur Herstellung von Treibstoff und Chemikalien. In: Pietzsch, 
J., Bioökonomie für Einsteiger, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, p. 77-104. 
4. Michels, J. The use of biomass for the production of fuel and chemicals. In: Pietzsch, J., Bioeconomy for 
beginners, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, in press.  
5. The E 3 Platform: Improvement of energy efficiency in industrial water circuits using tools for online self -
assessment, benchmarking and economic decision support. www.e3-waterwatt.net/ 
Relevant Projects 
1. BIOTIC [EU]: ‘The Industrial Biotech Research and Innovation Platforms Centre - towards Technological 
Innovation and solid foundations for a growing industrial biotech sector in Europe’. BIO -TIC was dedicated 
to developing a roadmap with recommendations how to ov ercome hurdles for industrial biotechnology in 
Europe. (01/08/2012 - 31/07/2015). www.industrialbiotech-europe.eu/. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 77 
 
2. BioLinX [EU]: ‘Creating links to speed -up innovation in the bio economy’. BioLinX br idges research and 
innovation efforts in the bioeconomy by building three large clusters in Europe and initiating within them a 
range of powerful linking and innovation acceleration processes.  (01/07/2015 - 30/06/2018). www.biolinx-
project.eu/.  
3. RoadToBio [EU]: ‘Roadmap for the Chemical Industry in Europe towards a Bioeconomy’. RoadToBio 
delivered a roadmap that will specify the benefits for the chemical industry along the path towards a 
bioeconomy to meet the societal needs in 2030. (01/05/2017 - 0/04/2019). www.roadtobio.eu/.  
4. VOLATILE [EU]: ‘Biowaste derived volatile fatty acid platform for biopolymers, bioactive compounds and 
chemical building blocks’. VOLATILE aims in the development of an innovative Volatile Fa tty Acids 
Platform for the bioconversion of municipal solid bio -waste fraction and sludgy biowaste from other 
industries. The platform will be integrated in anaerobic digestion. (01/12/2016 - 30/11/2020). www.volatile-
h2020.eu/. 
5. WaterWatt [EU]: ‘Improvement of energy efficiency in industrial water circuits using gamification for online 
self-assessment, benchmarking and economic decision support’. The main tool developed in the project was 
the Energy Efficiency Evaluation (E3) Platform where industrial water circuits can be modeled and the effect 
of different energy efficiency improvement measures can be simulated online (01/04/2016 – 31/03/2019). 
www.waterwatt.eu/. 
 
4.1.2 AEP POLYMERS SRL 
Short Name AEP 
 
Country Italy 
Type Small or medium-size enterprise 
Website www.aeppolymers.com 
Short Profile 
AEP Polymers SRL (AEP) is an innovation -based company, focused on applied R&D in the field of biobased 
building blocks, polymers and formulations for industrial applications. AEP Polymers was founded in 2013 and 
has 4 highly trained employees with long -standing expertise in fib re-reinforced composites, epoxy resins, 
polyurethanes (rigid and flexible PU foams, compact PU), elastomers, adhesives and a wide variety of 
functionalized building blocks. 
 
Sustainability is AEP’s way of working to generate added value to companies though  the creation of new 
substances and materials starting from renewable resources, from plant -derived fatty acid oils to bio -aromatics, 
like Cashew Nut Shell Liquid (CNSL) and lignin. Naturally -occurring peculiar chemical structures are a perfect 
starting point to pursue innovative chemical routes and formulation approaches, delivering performing materials 
for demanding industrial applications. The starting materials are selected or extracted from by-products of the food 
and forestry industry and chemically m odified to obtain the desired properties. The functionalized materials are 
then formulated in high bio -content resin systems ready for benchmarking against commercial petro -based 
products. 
 
The novelty of the approach is coupling material selection and syn thetic approach in a way that ensures that the 
materials will be industrially scalable and performing on par with commercially available products. The product 
development approach often combines phenols, carbohydrates and fatty acids in order to obtain materials that are 
technically and economically viable. 
 
AEP’s business model exploits the newly generated IP on biobased polymers through licensing, with a number of 
bio-based products and formulations already being produced and commercialized by industrial partners. AEP has 
extensive synthetic expertise, having developed biobased polyols, amines and other functionalized materials from 
a wide variety of biobased oils both within funded R&D projects and industrial cooperations. 
 
AEP will focus on the conversio n of the monomers previously obtained from hemicellulose (furfural, 5 -HMF,) 
into novolac and resole -type resins for application in wood boards, as well as into Mannich -base, novolac-type, 
polyester and polyether-polyester polyols for rigid polyurethane foams. 
The optimization of the synthetic protocols and their successive upscaling will be carried out based on the 
feedbacks from application-oriented formulation and testing work. AEP will investigate the performance benefits 
provided by the newly developed bio-based polyols, also benchmarking them against commercially available 
petro-based polyols for targeted industrial applications.  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 78 
 
AEP is a Full Member of the Bio -based Industries Consortium (BIC) which represents the private sector in the 
Bio-based Indus tries Joint Undertaking (BBI JU), the Public -Private Partnership (PPP) with the European 
Commission. 
Role in the project 
AEP’s role will be focused on the formulation of new and innovative biorenewable resins from5-HMF and furfural, 
as well standards applicable to products and the identification of exploitation pathways. 
 
In WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream Purification’, AEP will participate in the preparatory processing actions 
for downstream so as to ensure efficient liaison with the polymerisation activities at WP4. 
 
Leveraging expertise in the synthesis of biobased polyols, developed in industrial partnerships and strengthened 
within BBI JU projects (e.g. ReInvent, where AEP has been develo ping bio-polyols from fatty acids-based oils) 
AEP will lead WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation Intensification’  monitoring the 
activities to convert a) the monomers obtained in WP3 (furfural, 5 -HMF) into novel novolac and resole -type 
polymers (500 g scale) for application in wood boards and b) 5-HMF into novel Mannich-base, polyester polyols 
and polyether-polyester polyols respectively (500 g scale) for rigid polyurethane foams and Polyesters for coatings. 
In addition, AEP will lead the development of testing of bio -based polyols . In particular, AEP will use the 
monomers previously obtained from hemicellulose (furfural, 5-HMF) to develop and study: a) novolac and resole-
type resins for application in wood boards and b) Mannich-base, novolac-type, polyester and polyether-polyester 
polyols for rigid polyurethane foams. Under WP4, AEP will also take care of the formulation and testing of rigid 
polyurethane foams based on the new bio-polyols. 
 
As part of WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’ , AEP will support the integration of the 
developed concepts and technologies for the UPM stream and the Organosolv stream. In addition, AEP will lead 
and monitor the scale-up of optimal product formulations, selecting the most promising polyols, pre-polymers and 
resins and their developed syntheses replicated through the multiple repeatable batches in small –medium bench 
scale. This will support the modelling, simulation and scale -up of polymerization reactor units, for pilot plant 
engineering and optimization enduing.  
 
In WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’, AEP will contribute in the process and product safety 
assessment, assessing specifically the safety of new bio-based products, taking into account also their production 
processes. The use of less hazardous reagents and/or solvents (e.g. less volatile, more environmentally friendly, 
having lighter labelling) will be considered and, for each optimized production process, a safety protocol will be 
prepared, providing the operators with a list of instructions and personal protective equipment (PPE). 
 
As part of WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’ , AEP will contribute in the Training, Education & Capacity 
Building programme (TECBP)  development and implementatio n by organizing one of the 4 BioSPRINT 
workshops for knowledge transfer, capacity -building, training and education. Also, AEP will be involved in the 
effort to make an impactful contribution to industry standards related product standards. In addition, as part of 
WP7, AEP will support the Coordinator in the Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder 
engagement activities in order to develop the project’s multidimensional dissemination & communication (D&C) 
plan and undertake stakeholder base building and stakeholder engagement activities via BBI-JU. 
 
In WP8 ‘Project Coordination’, AEP will support the Project Coordinator DEC, in the o verall coordination, 
management and reporting as the leader of WP4. 
 
AEP will lead the following tasks: 
− T4.2 Development and testing of bio-based polyols and their applications in rigid PU foams 
− T4.3 Process intensification of bio-based polymer production 
− T5.5 Scale-up of optimal product formulations 
 
AEP will, in addition, participate in the tasks listed below: 
− T3.1 Preparatory processing actions for downstream  
− T4.4 Identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via PSE tools 
− T5.2 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream 
− T5.3 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for Organosolv stream (FhG) 
− T6.5 Process and product safety assessment 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 79 
 
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T7.2 Training, Education and Capacity Building programme (TECBP) 
− T7.4 Contribution to existing and emerging standards 
− T8.1 Project coordination and reporting 
Key Personnel 
Mr. Andrea Minigher (Male) is in charge of Business Development at AEP Polymers  SRL (AEP) since 2013. 
Andrea graduated in Chemical Engineering from the University of Trieste. He started his professional career in 
2003 as a researcher in the field of material science industrial polymers. Andrea has gained a considerable 
experience in the design and optimization of polymeric systems, focusing on bio -based formulations, functional 
coatings and more recently on polyurethane systems for industrial composites, adhesives ad foams. He has been 
responsible of the technical and financial manage ment of European projects.  Andrea will coordinate AEP’s 
activities and be directly involved in polyurethane foams formulation and testing.  Andrea will be the  Leader of 
WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation Intensification’. Andrea will serve as the Data 
Protection Officer of AEP. 
 
Dr. Pietro Campaner (Male)  joined AEP in 2014 working in product development as R&D chemist . Pietro 
graduated in Chemistry in 2002 and got his PhD in Organic Chemistry at the University of Trieste in 2007.  In 
2008 he started his professional career as a research scientist in the field of bio-based polymeric materials. He has 
a strong background in the extraction, characterization, functionalization of naturally occurring renewable 
resources and their use as  building blocks for high -performance polymeric matrices in composite materials and 
polyurethanes. Author of numerous articles published in international scientific journals and inventor of 5 patents.  
Dr Pietro will be  mainly focusing on synthesis of nove l bio-based resins and polyols and in the formulation of 
polyurethane foams systems. 
 
Dr. Francesca Dinon (Female) is VP at AEP, working also as R&D chemist. Francesca graduated in Chemistry 
and earned her PhD in Organic Chemistry at the University of Trie ste. She is co -author of numerous papers in 
international scientific journals and co -inventor of 3 patents. Francesca has expertise in the synthesis of polyols 
and amines from bio-based oils and in the chemical modification, functionalization and analytical characterization 
of bio -based derivatives to obtain a wide variety of building blocks.  Francesca will work in dealing with the 
synthesis and chemical characterization of bio-based resins and polyols. 
 
Elena Benedetti (Female) is a Director at AEP and works in R&D related to product application. She graduated 
from the University of Trieste with a three-year degree as Biotechnological Laboratory Technician. She moved to 
the materials science sector as researcher in 2004. Elena has a long-standing experience in the design and testing 
of thermosetting resin systems, particularly formulations for fibre-reinforced composites. She also developed skills 
in the area of nanostructured materials, synthesizing nanoparticles and additives for coatings. Elena will take care 
of testing of polyurethane foams and benchmarking against commercial products. 
Relevant publications 
1. Development of three catalogue of new polyols and diols for rigid and flexible polyurethane foams and PU 
adhesives from bio-based alkylphenols (CNSL, Cashew NutShell Liquid), 2014-2019;  
2. A. Natesh, P. Campaner. Paper, (2016) “Novel cardanol based polyols a nd their use in rigid polyurethane 
foams” in Polyurethanes Technical Conference, 26-28 September 2016, Baltimore, MD, USA;  
3. Yun Mi Kim, Guo Ming, Mengjiu Chen, Pietro Campaner ., (2014) “Cashew Nutshell Liquid polyols for 
various applications”, UTECH North America, 4-5 June; 
4. Development of a catalogue of new amine hardeners and bio-based formulated epoxy resins for application in 
composites, derived from CNSL, 2014-2018;  
5. Campaner, P.; D’Amico, D.; Longo, L.; Stifani, C.; Tarzia, A.; Tiburzio, S., (2011) “Study of a Cardanol -
Based Benzoxazine as Reactive Diluent and Toughening Agent of Conventional Benzoxazines”, in Handbook 
of Benzoxazine Resins, Chapter 19, pp.,365-375. 
Relevant Projects 
1. ReInvent [EU]: ‘Novel Products for Construction and Automotive Industries Based on Bio Materials and 
Natural Fibres’. ReInvent is developing and combining bio -based materials and fibres for replacing the 
petroleum based polyurethane (PUR) insulation products used in buildings and soft foams for vehicles interior 
products. Polyols, natural cellulose fibres and nanocrystals, and biomass derived nanoparticles (NPs)  will be 
derived by advanced technologies from sustainable wood -based and agro -based sources. (01/06/2018 – 
31/05/2022) www.bbi-europe.eu/projects/reinvent.  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 80 
 
2. SmartLi [EU]: ‘Smart Technologies for t he Conversion of Industrial Lignins into Sustainable Materials ’. 
Aims at developing technologies for using technical lignins as raw materials for biomaterials and 
demonstrating their industrial feasibility. The technical lignins included in the study are k raft lignins, 
lignosulphonates and bleaching effluents, representing all types of abundant lignin sources.  (01/07/2015 – 
30/06/2018) www.clicinnovation.fi/projects/smartli/.  
3. VIPRISCAR [EU]: ‘Validation of an industrial process to manufacture isosorbide bis(methyl carbonate) at 
pilot level ’. VIPRISCAR main objectives are: 1) To validate at pilot scale in an industrially relevant 
environment a sustainable ‘isosorbide bis(methyl carbonate’) IBMC production process from isosorbide (IS); 
2) To show a proof of principle for the added value IBMC brings to the market by demonstrating the usefulness 
of polymers derived thereof in three high-volume market sectors: industrial coatings, hot-melt adhesives, and 
biomedicine (antithrombotic-antimicrobial catheters). (01/06/2018 – 31/05/2021). www.vipriscar.eu/.  
4. VAMOS [EU]: ‘Value added materials from organic waste sugars’. Aims to showcase, at demonstration scale, 
the f easibility of producing and valorising second generation sugars derived from municipal solid waste 
(MSW). This MSW is composed of either mixed domestic residual waste or waste rejected from sorting and 
recycling processes (MRF rejects) and contains signifi cant quantities of paper/card (lignocellulosic) based 
materials. (01/09/2019 – 31/08/2022). Grant agreement signed. 
Relevant Infrastructure 
The company’s laboratory is located in the AREA Science Park of Trieste (Italy), one of the most important multi-
sectorial technological parks in Europe, that offers services aimed at strengthening the integrated regional research 
infrastructure, creating new networks and increasing researchers’ mobility and companies’ internationalization. 
AEP’s laboratory covers 210 sq. meters and has the equipment to cover the following activities: 
• Chemical reactors (design and synthesis of new molecules, scale-up and optimization up to 5L volume) 
• HPLC-GPC (chemical characterization) 
• Automatic titrator + Karl Fisher (characterization and QC analyses) 
• Ovens (controlled curing of thermosetting polymers) 
• Viscometer (viscosity, polymer/formulation stability) 
• DSC (glass transition temperature, enthalpy of reaction, fusion)  
• Universal Testing Machine (tensile, flexural, compression, adhesion tests) 
• Small scale fire reaction tests (UL-94 and similar) 
• Polymer formulation and reactivity evaluation (string time, pot life, gel time, tack free time, etc.) 
• Production of small-scale prototypes (foams, composites, coatings) 
• Chemical resistance tests, thermal ageing tests 
 
Other tests are available via continuous collaboration with local research institutions: 
• High temperature mechanical characterization 
• Rheological characterization of non-Newtonian fluids 
• UV weathering 
• Optical microscopy, TEM, SEM 
• NMR analysis 
 
In BioSPRINT as an in-kind contribution, AEP will install a new chemical laboratory and purchase equipment 
(new chemical reactor, ancillary and testing instruments) with capacity to convert biobased fractions into chemical 
building blocks, polymers and reactive formulations, for a total value of €140,000. The new lab will serve as an 
addition to the company’s lab infrastructure. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 81 
 
4.1.3 DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL 
Short Name ADSC  
Country Spain 
Type Small or medium-size enterprise 
Website www.analisis-dsc.com 
Short Profile 
DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS 
SL (ADSC) is a mechanical engineering and 
service consultancy company specializing in 
process engineering and applications related to 
fluid mechanics, heat transfer, bulk materials 
using Computer Aided Engineering (CAE) 
tools such as Computational Fluid Dynamics 
(CFD), FEA, and Discrete Elements 
Modelization (DEM).  
 
The company was founded in 2002 in Madrid, 
Spain. ADSC has expertise in the analysis of 
complex industrial processes involving fluids in 
tasks of  Basic Engineeri ng, Failure 
Engineering; Analysis, Optimization and Scale-
up of Industrial Processes. 
 
ADSC is the exclusive distributor for CAE 
(Computer Aided Engineering) software in 
Spain and Portugal. The computer aided engineering or CAE, is a group of informatic programs, which is able to 
analyze and simulate the engineering designs incorporating them in a computer, in order to evaluate their 
characteristics, properties, feasibility and profitability. The goal is to optimize the design, the production costs and 
also reduce the number of the necessary tests so as to obtain the desired product. 
 
As an engineering and consultancy company ADSC is involved in the development of a wide range of projects: 
- Industrial processes optimization, from the structural, thermal or fluid dynamic point of view; 
- Industrial products design optimization from the structural, thermal or fluid dynamic point of view; 
- Structural static or dynamic analysis, fatigue, etc.; 
- Tunnel and stations ventilation and risk analysis study using S. E. S. and CFD tools; 
- Contingency analysis (contaminants/radioactive particles dispersion analysis); 
- A technological partner in R&D projects. 
 
For the development and implementation of its projects ADSC uses several tools such as CAD (Computer Aided 
Design), Computational meshers, CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) or fluid mechanics, Structural or thermal 
mechanics (Mecánica) using finite elements method, SES (Subway Environment Simulator) and Discrete 
Particles.  
 
In the project, ADSC’s strong knowledge and experience of CFD will be leveraged in order to perform tasks of 
basic engineering, analysis, optimization and scale-up of process engineering.  
 
CFD is a software tool, used to simulate the behavior of the fluid-flows, heat transfer, chemical reaction and other 
related physical phenomena. The CFD has the ability to solve the equations of the fluid flow in the region or 
domain of interest, with specified conditions in the boundaries of the domain.  CFD is widely used by engineers 
and scient ists for a wide range of applications in the following domains: Process industry (mixers, chemical 
reactors, heat exchangers, pumps, valves, scrubbers, fermenters), Energy (combustion, nuclear plant 
thermohydraulic analysis), Renewable energy (solar therma l, eolic energy, tidal energy), Hydraulics 
(turbomachinery and pipes, erosion, working limit analysis) and Chemistry (agitators, fermenters, bubble columns, 
reactors, carbonators).  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 82 
 
ADSC usually works for customers in the Iberian Peninsula or as subcontractor to other international customers 
in need of specialized engineering services when facing operational or design problems. ADSC is a horizontal 
engineering company with references in most of the main economic sectors such as energy, civil engineering, 
hydraulics, chemistry, etc. 
 
The following table provides a short list of studies undertaken by ADSC for biorefineries. 
 
Study 
Abengoa Bioenergía (ABNT01_112013): Basic engineering of agitation systems. Analysis and optimization of 
the main mixing systems, in an urban solid waste plant to obtain biofuels including liquefactors, fermentator, 
beerwell, and saccharificator using CFD tools (01/01/2013 - 01/07/2015) 
Abengoa Bioenergía (ABNT01_092014): Basic engineering of agitation systems. Analysis and optimization of 
the main mixing systems in a biofuel plant, whose raw material is sugar cane. to obtain biofuels including 
liquefactors, fermentator, beerwell, and saccharificator using CFD tools (01/01/2015 - 01/07/2015) 
 
Role in the project 
ADSC will mostly perform tasks of process systems engineering (PSE), and analysis, optimization and scale -up 
of process engineering using advanced modelling tools such as CAE (CFD, FEA, DEM, etc). Different CAE 
scenarios will be performed so that other partners in the consortium will evaluate the CFD vs Experiment 
comparison.  
 
In WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’, ADSC will participate in the identification of upstream scale-
up challenges via process systems engineering (PSE) tools , providing CFD tools and simulations. Under WP2 
‘Intensification of Catalytic Conversion’, ADSC will lead the i dentification of reaction scale -up challenges via 
process systems engineering tools for the catalytic conversion phase of BioSPRINT. In particular, the reaction and 
extraction processes to be intensified in WP2 will be analysed using CFD tools at lab-scale in order to provide a 
set of recommendations on how to scale-up an intensified reaction and extraction reactor. These recommendations 
will include the thermo-fluid behaviour of the reactor using CFD tools, the control anal ysis and PAT techniques 
on the later-on pilot plant equipment. 
 
Similarly, in WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream Purification’ , and WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable 
Resins and Polymerisation Intensification’ , ADSC will participate in the task relating to the i dentification of 
downstream scale-up challenges, and polymerisation scale-up challenges respectively. 
 
In WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’, ADSC will contribute in the integration of the developed 
concepts and technologies for the Organosolv stream (FhG) with an emphasis on the validation of reaction and 
downstream purification technologies. 
 
As part of WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’, ADSC will support the Coordinator in the Multidimensional 
dissemination, communicat ion and stakeholder engagement activities  in order to develop the project’s 
multidimensional dissemination & communication (D&C) plan and undertake stakeholder base building and 
stakeholder engagement activities via BBI-JU. 
 
ADSC will lead T2.4 ‘Identification of reaction scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools’, and 
participate in the following tasks: 
− T1.4 Identification of upstream scale-up challenges via process systems engineering (PSE) tools 
− T3.4 Identification of downstream scale-up challenges 
− T4.5 Identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools 
− T5.3 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for Organosolv stream (FhG) 
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Jerónimo Domingo (Male)  is a Scientific Manager at Dynamic & Security Computations SL (ADSC). He 
holds a Phd in Naval Engineering from the Helsinki University of Technology in Finland.  His Research area is 
Energy and Environment. As a researcher he contributed to the development of the plans of the gases exhaustion 
system of a power plant also supervising its installation. Dr. Jeronimo has expertise in analysis, and optimization 
ofbiomass reactors, heat recovery boilers, particle deposition and fires using CFD programs. His research area also 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 83 
 
includes the analysis of the obtained chemical results, System Optimization Engineering. He held several positions 
before joining ADSC. He worked as a Programmer at the Helsinki University of Technology developing a torsional 
vibration software in FORTRAN for ship powerplants and as an Assistant Professor at the Helsinki University of 
Technology. 
 
Laura Torres Gordo (Female) is a Business Development and Marketing Manager at ADSC. She studied for an 
MBA at Instituto de Empresa, Madrid and a Msc in Business Administration from University of Carlos III, Madrid. 
She has worked for over 12 years in the areas of business development and strategy to provide technical solutions 
that can answer end-user needs. 
 
Dr. Rubén BARBERO (Male) is a Technical Manager at ADSC. He holds a PhD in Renewable Energies (2018) 
(Thermosolar energy; UNED, Spain). He is an Industrial Engineer (2003) specialized in energy techniques from 
ETSII-Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. Ruben is an experienced project manager in the area of energy, basic 
& detailed engineering and construction of a microfiltration module for a biodiesel plant. 
 
Juan Enriquez Paraled (Male) founded ADSC in 2002 after completing his MBA at the Instituto de Empresa. 
Previously, he had been working at VTT -Energia carrying proce ss engineering using CFD tools in the 
pharmaceutical sector. He studied a BSc and MSc in Aeropace Engineering at SUNY Buffalo and University of 
Cincinnati, in 1995 and 1998 respectively. Juan will serve as the Data Protection Officer of ADSC. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Barbero, Rubén & Cuadra, Daniel & Domingo, Jeronimo & Iranzo, Alfredo & Gallego, Eduardo. (2014). 
Investigation of the near-range dispersion of particles unexpectedly released from a nuclear power plant using 
CFD. Environmental Fluid Mechanics. Vol.15, No. 10, DOI: 1007/s10652-014-9359-y. 
2. F. Martín -Fuertes, R. Barbero, J.M. Martín -Valdepeñas, M.A. Jiménez, (2007), Analysis of source term 
aspects in the experiment Phebus FPT1 with the MELCOR and CFX codes, Nuclear Engineering and Design, 
Vol. 237, Issue 5, pp.,509-523, doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2006.07.006. 
3. Ludwig, Wolfgang; Lehtinen, Kari; Pyykönen, Jouni; Brown, David; Enriquez Paraled, Juan; Jokiniemi, 
Jorma. (2001). ‘CFD simulation on aerosol impaction and deposition’, Vol. 33, No.11, Proceedings from the 
8th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering, Nice, France. 
4. Ari Auvinen, Kari E.J. Lehtinen, Juan Enriquez, Jorma K. Jokiniemi, Riitta Zilliacus, (2000), Vaporisation 
Rates Of Csoh And Csi In Conditions Simulating A Severe N uclear Accident, Journal of Aerosol Science, 
Vol. 31, Issue 9, pp. 1029-1043, doi.org/10.1016/S0021-8502(00)00027-6. 
Relevant Projects 
1. IbD [EU]: ‘Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handling’. The project 
focused on the intensification of processes involving solids handling. One of the case studies of the project 
was intensification of mineral processi ng, especially the grinding circuit and beneficiation. Raman 
spectroscopy was used in the IbD project to measure mineral concentrations and abundances during the 
grinding and flotation processes. (01/09/2015 – 31/08/2018). ibd-project.eu.  
2. Modelization for the Biotechnology production of Carothenoids and Cephalosporins, (IDI-20100445). 
Internal R&D project financed by CDTI (Center Development and Technology and Industry. The analysis of 
biomass growth from lab scale to industrial scale using CFD tools). www.cdti.es  
3. Modelization of Processes for Biotechnology Production (FIT-010000-2007-74). Internal R&D project 
financed by the Spanish Ministry of Industry, 2007-2008, for the analysis, scale-up of pharmaceutical 
biomass using CFD tools. 
Relevant Infrastructure 
ADSC has a wide variety of cluster of computers to use with the proper CAE tool depending of the application. 
ADSC has over 15 years of engineering experience in the usage of computational tools to provide the best solutions 
to our customers. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 84 
 
4.1.4 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD 
Short Name EBOS 
 
Country Cyprus 
Type Small or medium-size enterprise 
Website www.ebos.com.cy 
Short Profile 
EBOS Technologies Ltd (EBOS) is an innovative and client-focused Information Technology (IT) SME software 
house with head offices in Cyprus and branch offices in Ireland and in the UK. EBOS is dedicated in providing 
comprehensive and cost-effective technologically-advanced e-business software solutions to enterprise customers 
worldwide. 
 
EBOS product portfolio provides a wide range of Windows and web -based customisable business solutions 
targeted for the enterprise market. EBOS core product offering, WiseBOS Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), 
is a state -of-the-art comprehensive software Suite, that offers complete, innovative, and proven solutions for 
enterprises of all sizes who want to thrive in the new digital era. WiseBOS ERP Suite is designed to adapt in 
flexible ways to the ever -changing business nee ds of companies, unleashing the real potential of having fully 
integrated solutions that are fully-aligned with their business directives.  
 
EBOS is heavily investing in beyond the state -of-the-art technologies, thereby accelerating future digital 
innovation. EBOS Research & Development (R&D) division is focused on future -oriented research in a broad 
area of activities and domains, such as ICT, wireless communication networks including 5G, Next Generation 
Internet Technologies, Big Data analytics, A rtificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Cybersecurity, Augmented 
& Virtual Reality as well as Energy efficiency. EBOS long-term expertise and experience of 16+ years have been 
boosted though the company’s successful engagement in cutting -edge research projects funded primarily by the 
European Commission. In collaboration with large international research teams, EBOS has managed to become a 
highly respected and reliable partner and has made significant achievements at the frontier of ICT development, 
to drive industry development and business model success via technological breakthroughs.  
EBOS is a member of 5G -PPP and a member of the NESSI (Networked European Software and Services 
Initiative), NEM (New European Media), NetWorld 2020 European Technology P latforms and NGI (Next 
Generation Internet) initiative. In such platforms, EBOS is an active member of the SME Working Groups, where 
it provides input to the EU Institutions on research actions and technology matters of particular importance to the 
software and interactive technologies domain, specifically in relation to their relevance for SMEs. 
EBOS is also a member of Vision 2020 - Crowdhelix, a pan-European Open Innovation platform connecting an 
international network of universities, research organisations & companies, with 377 member organisations to date.. 
In January 2019, the Ministry of the Finance of Cyprus has distinguished eBOS Technologies with the ‘Innovative 
SME’ certificate in recognition of its efforts in research, development and innovation activities. The certification 
is the result of an independent evaluation that confirmed eBOS engages an important share of the company’s 
financial and human assets in continuous research and innovation efforts. Nation-wide, eBOS Technologies is the 
13th SME recipient of the award, highlighting the rigor and ambition of the criteria to be achieved. 
 
In BioSPRINT, EBOS will involve two of departments, the Research and Development department  (R&D) 
coordinating the involvement of EBOS in research projects imple mented in collaboration with international 
partners, and the Creativity department providing a range of professional services including Website design. The 
R&D department will provide expertise mainly in the areas of Interactive dashboards, Data Visualisation & Data 
analytics, Quality Assurance and Risk Assessment, as well as Open -standards APIs development, application 
integration and interoperability. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 85 
 
Role in the project 
EBOS will provide ICT development related to the application of Machine Learning to optimal catalyst 
development and the use of advanced data analytics and visualisation techniques for effective and efficient 
monitoring of complex systems.  
 
In WP2 ‘Intensification of Catalytic Conversion’, EBOS will participate in the catalyst development using HTP 
Methods in order to deliver robust catalyst formulations for integrated conversion of C5 and C6 sugars into a single 
reactor, coupled with extraction of reactive furan intermediated. In particular, EBOS will leverage assets from 
CHARIOT so as to develop machine learning algorithms including variable selection, evolutionary optimisation, 
intelligent model identification and model validation. Together with IRIS, EBOS will contribute to the monitoring 
approach of the catalytic conversio n process by developing advanced data visualisation  and data analytics 
techniques, including data fusion strategies for maximising the information quality obtained from the different 
instrumentation and monitoring devices. Together with UOULU, EBOS will al so investigate Machine learning 
(ML) techniques for establishing a decision support system based on rule induction and case -based reasoning 
strategies for predictive maintenance and optimization in terms of energy - and material efficiency. In addition, 
Analytics Prediction models will be created by EBOS and presented through an interactive dashboard, highlighting 
out-of-bounds behaviors; identifying risk areas and alerting users in view of taking proactive maintenance actions. 
The advanced intelligence dash board will be used for both understanding processes and for post data analytical 
purposes to assist in the refinement and improvements of their performance. 
 
As part of WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration ’, EBOS will be involved in the s imulation and 
analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes which is focused on assessing and improving the 
overall performance of the BioSPRINT Process Intensification enhanced biorefinery concept. EBOS will work at 
the validation of the tools developed as part of WP2. 
 
Under WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’, EBOS will contribute in the Techno-economic 
assessment with modelling techniques and tools, leveraging advanced data analytics and data visualisation 
techniques which can support decision-making, for example related to investment. 
 
Moreover, EBOS will actively participate in the dissemination and communication activities of the project under 
WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’. EBOS' Creativity department will undertake the project’s identity and 
website design as part of Task 7.1 ‘Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement 
activities’. EBOS will also design and create the project’s communication materials. In addition, as part of WP7, 
EBOS will contribute to the development and implementation in the Training, Education & Capacity Building 
programme (TECBP) , in particular EBOS will support the development of the online TECBP modules with 
appropriate and highly efficient ICT tools. 
 
Leveraging more than 15 years of experience in successfully developing and commercialising innovative 
solutions, as well as participating in EU-funded research projects, EBOS will undertake the role of Quality & Risk 
Management. As a leader of Task 8.3 Quality Assurance & Risk Management  under WP8 ‘Project 
Coordination’, EBOS will have the responsibility of organising and supervising quality review/peer reviews for 
all deliverables including the implementation of the qualit y management plan. EBOS will be also in charge of 
performing project quality evaluation criteria, risk assessment, continuous monitoring, triggering quality assurance 
project reviews, risk assessment procedures, evaluation measurements and producing risk a nd quality review 
reports. 
 
As part of WP8, EBOS will also support MAT in identifying and managing innovation from the project. In 
particular EBOS will be responsible for preparing and monitoring the implementation of the Data Management 
Plan (DMP), determ ining how innovation and research data are handled during and after the project, the 
application of the data privacy and pseudo -anonymisation techniques, privacy preserving data mining, security 
and consent management which will be applied to data collected in the project.  
 
EBOS will lead: 
− T8.3 Quality Assurance & Risk Management 
 
EBOS will participate in the following tasks: 
− T2.1 Catalyst Development using HTP Methods 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 86 
 
− T5.1 Simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes  
− T6.3 Techno-economic assessment  
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T7.2 Training, Education and Capacity Building programme (TECBP) 
− T8.4 Innovation, IPR & Data Management 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Stelios Christofi (Male) is the founder and Director of the company. He holds a BSc degree with first class 
honours and an MPhil degree in Computer Science from the UMIST University (UK), and a PhD from City 
University (UK), where he has also published numerous research papers. H e is a specialist in web applications 
development, cybersecurity, cloud computing and private corporate security systems and technologies including 
dynamic systems integration. He has developed an innovative state -of-the-art software suite including the 
conception, design, development and continuous evolution of the company’s innovative WiseBOS platform, 
which is used for rapid application development. He is also responsible for enriching and embedding in EBOS 
inhouse developed applications and solutions ‘s ecurity and privacy by design’ approaches making the products 
fully compliant with EU and national policy directives. He has more than 18 years of experience in these fields 
and he leads the company’s strategic and technological direction, business evolution and financial department.  He 
is also responsible for management decisions and for implementing the company's long and short -term strategic 
vision plans.  
 
Dr. Loizos Christofi (Male) is the R&D Director of the company, leading the way for the company’s innovation.  
He holds a BEng degree with first class honours, as well as MPhil and PhD degrees in Electrical Engineering and 
Electronics with specialisation in Digital Communications from UMIST University (UK). From 2001 -2017, he 
worked as a full-time senior telecommunications engineer at Cyta, the incumbent telecom operator of Cyprus. He 
is a specialist in the design, planning, development and evolution of Cyta’s fixed telecommunications networks, 
with a particular focus on softswitch, IP Multimedia Subsystem, Software Defined Networking/Network Functions 
Virtualisation and cybersecurity technologies. He has been involved in numerous research projects and 
publications. He has an extensive experience and expertise in the fields of technical specification el aboration, 
tender evaluation, equipment procurement, strategic studies elaboration, quality assurance, risk management, 
project coordination and management, successfully leading Cyta’s fixed -mobile convergence and Class5 
replacement projects. During 2004 -2009 he has been, in parallel, a visiting lecturer in the computer science 
department at Frederick University Cyprus. He is a member of the Technical Chamber of Cyprus in the fields of 
Electronics and Computer Engineering. He has more than 20 years of exper ience in research and innovation 
projects.  
 
Gotelenne Piaton (Female)  is the R&D Programme and Communications Manager of the company. She is a 
business development and project management expert with a wide range of experience attained from working in 
demanding international environments in Paris, Brussels and Nicosia in the areas of public diplomacy, 
international development, marketing and IT. From 2012 to 2017, she held the position of Business Development 
and Quality Manager at Axiom Consulting, a loyalty marketing and IT solutions provider. From 2009 to 2011, she 
worked at the Permanent Representation of France to the EU where she was in charge of relations with EU think 
tanks and research centres. In 2008, she served as Internal Communications Executive for the industrial Group 
Thales in Paris. During her studies, she interned for the United Nations Development Programme and the European 
Commission in Cyprus. Gotelenne holds an MA in International Relations (2007) from the Institute of Political 
Studies of Lille, France, an MA in International Communication Strategies (2008) from the University of Dijon, 
France and is a certified Project Management Professional (PMP) from the Project Management Institute, United 
States, since 2016. She will serve as the Quality Assurance & Risk Manager. 
 
Philippos Philippou (Male) is a Senior Project Manager in the Research and Development (R&D) department of 
the company. He holds a BEng degree in Civil Engineering from the UMIST University (UK) and a Master degree 
in Business Administration from the University of Bradford (UK). He has more than 25 years of experience in the 
fields of Operations Management and Supply Chain Management in a wide spectrum of business environments 
both in Cyprus and the Gulf region. He is also experienced in quality management systems, GDPR, risk analysis, 
business process analysis and re-engineering. Philippos will serve as the Data Protection Officer of EBOS. 
 
Frini Lazarou (Female) is the Project Support Manager of the company. She holds a BSc degree with First Class 
Honors in Political Science and a minor degree in Gender Studies from the Universit y of Cyprus since 2011. In 
2012, she was awarded a Master’s degree in Globalisation and Development from the University of Sheffield (UK) 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 87 
 
with Distinction. Frini is supporting project management and the quality assurance of the company’s R&D 
projects, ensuring the timely delivery of qualitative project deliverables.  
 
Niovi Lambrou (Female) is the Communications Designer of EBOS. She holds a BA degree in Communication 
Design and a minor degree on Applied Multimedia from the University of Nicosia.  Niovi has more than 3 years 
of experience in Website & Social Media design and development, using WiseBOS CMS, a custom website editor 
that revolutionises website and social media design. Niovi has great expertise in Adobe design programs like 
Photoshop, Illustrator, inDesign. Her range of work spans across Search Engine Optimisation (SEO) optimisation, 
business branding, content management and typography layout. She is highly intuitive and has an excellent eye 
for innovative designs as she is constantly trying to achieve the highest quality in her area.  
Software Products and Services 
WiseBOS Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) is a state -of-the-art comprehensive software Suite, that offers 
complete, innovative, and proven solutions for enterprises of all sizes who want to thrive in the new digital era. 
WiseBOS ERP Suite is designed to a dapt in flexible ways to the ever -changing business needs of companies, 
unleashing the real potential of having fully integrated solutions that are fully-aligned with their business needs. 
Relevant Projects 
1. CHARIOT [EU] : ‘Cognitive Heterogeneous Architecture for Industrial IoT’. CHARIOT will provide a 
design method and cognitive computing platform supporting a unified approach towards Privacy, Security and 
Safety (PSS) of IoT Systems (01/01/2018 - 31/12/2020) www.chariotproject.eu/.  
2. 5G-SOLUTIONS [EU]: ‘5G Solutions for European Citizens’ is a 5G -PPP project supporting the EC’s 5G 
policy by implementing the last phase of the 5G cPPP roadmap. It aims to prove and validate that 5G provides 
prominent industry verticals with ubiquitous access to a wide range of forward -looking services with orders 
of magnitude of improvement over 4G, thus bringing the 5G vision closer to realisation. This will be achieved 
through conducting advance d field -trials of innovative use cases, directly involving end -users across five 
significant industry vertical domains: Factories of the Future, Smart Energy, Smart Cities, Smart Ports, Media 
& Entertainment. (01/06/2019-31/05/2022). www.5gsolutionsproject.eu/.   
3. INSPECTr [EU]: ‘Intelligence Network & Secure Platform for Evidence Correlation and Transfer’.   The 
principal objective of INSPECTr will be to develop a shared intelligent platform and a novel process for 
gathering, analysing, prioritising and presenting key data to help in the prediction, detection and management 
of crime in support of multiple agencies at local, national and international level. This data will originate from 
the outputs of free and commercial digital forensic tools complemented by online resource gat hering. 
(01/09/2019 – 31/08/2022). cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/223657/factsheet/en.  
4. ICONET [EU] : ‘New ICT infrastructure and reference architecture to support Operations in future P I 
Logistics NETworks’. ICONET will significantly extend state of the art research and development around the 
PI concept in pursuit of a new networked architecture for interconnected logistics hubs that combine with IoT 
capabilities and aiming towards comme rcial exploitation of results. (01/09/2018 – 28/02/2021). 
www.iconetproject.eu/  
5. CIVILnEXt [EU]: Next generation of information systems to support EU external policies. The CIVILnEXt 
project supports the develop ment of a solution addressing existing “fragmentation” and closing “gaps”, to 
provide civilian CSDP missions with the next generation of secure and cost -effective information systems. 
CIVILnEXT contributes to the development of beyond the state -of-the art communication tools to support 
external policy objectives (e.g. cooperative working, augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) environments, 
sensor-integration and interoperability with EU member states agencies). (01/05/2018 – 30/04/2021). 
www.civilnext.eu/.  
Significant IT Infrastructure 
 
A leading Platform for Web & Windows Applications 
 
The WiseBOS Platform  enables the EBOS software development team to easily create robust, bug -free and 
reliable software applications in the least possible timeframe. Thus, EBOS gains customer satisfaction and 
confidence in EBOS products with respect to the competition which uses standard methods of manually developing 
software coding, that requires inevita bly longer development times and rigorous testing before it can be 
commercially deployed. So, EBOS customers enjoy higher quality services with increased reliability, better 
support and with lower costs of ownership and lower operational costs. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 88 
 
WiseBOS Platform leverages the latest Microsoft .NET software programming language, which provides us with 
the most advanced application development tools for continuously incorporating innovation, scalability, 
robustness and security to all of EBOS’ solutions. Havi ng that in mind, all WiseBOS applications blend easily 
with the customer’s existing infrastructure, allowing them at the same time to work with tools that are already 
known to them, thus minimising the implementation and infrastructure costs and also minim ising their learning 
curve. 
 
WiseBOS platform empowers all company’s flexible customer -centric solutions and offers inherent integration 
with all software components and modules in EBOS product portfolio. WiseBOS Platform is designed to provide 
the ability to package different applications based on each enterprise specific business needs. EBOS customers 
can extend the functionality of each product they select, easily and seamlessly with the modules that are offered 
through the WiseBOS Platform and unleash the real potential of having an integrated solution that is fully aligned 
with their business requirements. 
 
 
WiseBOS Content Management System (CMS) is EBOS proprietary and powerful web editor. WiseBOS CMS 
is an important part of any website because it gives the flexibility to create, customise and manage the content. It 
gives the user a plethora of user-friendly tools to work with. Users can choose their own design for their website 
from a wide selection of template layouts, edit images, upload documents and manage the SEO metadata. All these 
are manageable without any technical skills of HTML or CSS through the user -friendly interface of WiseBOS 
CMS. The solution supports multiple file formats, languages and dynamic menus, is social media friendly, includes 
inquiry forms and is integrated with a mail database for newsletters. Its SEO and e-shop features make it the perfect 
system for efficiently managing all aspects of an organisation’s digital marketing strategy. 
 
 
4.1.5 FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V. 
Short Name FhG 
 
Country Germany 
Type Non-governmental organisation 
Website www.fraunhofer.de/ 
Short Profile 
The FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V.  
(FhG) is the leading organi sation for applied research in Europe. Its research activities are conducted by 72 
institutes and research units at locations throughout Germany. FhG employs more than 25,000 of people who work 
with an annual research budget  of 2.3 bn euros  in total . Of th is sum, almost 2 bn euros are generated through 
contract research. Around 70% of the FhG’s contract research revenue is derived from contracts with industry and 
from publicly financed research projects. International collaborations with excellent research partners and 
innovative companies around the world ensure direct access to regions of the greatest importance to present and 
future scientific progress and economic development. 
The Fraunhofer Institute for Interfacial Engineering and Biotechnology (IGB) develops and optimizes processes, 
products and technologies in the business fields of health, chemistry and process industry, as well as environment 
and energy. IGB combines the highest scientific standards with professional know -how in competence areas – 
always with a view to economic efficiency and sustainability. Their competences comprise Interfacial Engineering 
and Materials Science, Molecular Biotechnology, Physical Process Technology, Environmental Biotechnology 
and Bioprocess Engineering, as well as Cell and Tissue Engineering. They offer solutions from market analysis 
through research & development till the finished product. 
In view of the finite nature of fossil resources, the growing demand for resources and climate change, the use of 
renewable raw materials has acquired great significance. The Fraunhofer Center for Chemical-Biotechnological 
Processes (CBP) in Leuna focuses on the combination of biotechnological processes with chemical processes, and 
with its pilot scale technical equipment it closes the gap between the laboratory and industrial implementation. By 
providing the infrastructure and technical facilities as well as a staff of highly qualified experts, it enables partners 
from research and industry to develop and scale up processes for th e utilization of renewable and petrochemical 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 89 
 
raw materials to production-relevant dimensions, and also to accelerate process developments. Focus is laid on the 
use of vegetable oils, the disintegration of lignocelluloses and the production of technical enzymes. 
Role in the project 
FhG role in the project focuses on three dimensions: 
1. Production and provision of sample quantities (100 Liter Scale) of hemicellulose from the Organosolv process, 
directly from the pilot plants of Fraunhofer Center for Chemical-Biotechnological Processes (CBP).  
2. Implementation and scaling of chemical (via HTP, oxidation etc.) and biotechnological (e.g. by enzymatic 
conversion) conversion of hemicellulose -containing material streams (C5 and C6 sugars and its oligomers)  to 
furan derivatives;  
3. Purification of hemicellulose streams to isolate C5 and C6 sugars; separation and purification of furan 
derivatives, phenols from reaction mixtures, process development and scale up, process simulation 
 
In WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’, FhG will be involved in the analysis of treated hemicellulose 
streams supplying an Organosolv stream from a pulping of beech wood pilot plant in order to perform the analysis 
of feedstocks. FhG will also be involved in the precipitation and solids handling by using dilution and distillation 
precipitation processes  so as to b enchmark tests . With support from UOULU,  FhG will focus on membrane 
purification as an intrinsically intensified separation technology. FhG will also support the optimisation of water 
and solvent recovery and reuse processes, which will be investigated using membrane distillation processes. 
 
Under WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream Purification’ , FhG will lead the task relating to the p reparatory 
processing actions for downstream . In particular FhG will be in charge of the p rocess design simulation of 
distillation developing distillation simulation models and will also implement the 1st set of downstream separation 
experiments, separating primarily furans/5 -HMF from the extractive -reaction solvent.  In addition, FhG will 
participate in the Intensification of downstream purification processes , focusing on h eat transfer intensification 
with integration.  
 
As part of WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’, FhG will take part in the simulation and analysis 
of the existing and improved biorefinery processes for the FhG Organosolv biorefining process and the information 
necessary to model the biorefinery process as close as possible to the  FhG facilities under study, and enable the 
KPI measurements and performance analysis. Thus, FhG will lead the integration of the developed concepts and 
technologies for the Organosolv stream with an emphasis on the validation of reaction and downstream purification 
technologies. Upon completion, a technology -transfer report will be produced indicating the prospect of 
integrating the realised intensified process into FhG biorefining operations. 
 
In WP7 ‘Dissemination  and Exploitation’ , FhG will support the Coordinator in the Multidimensional 
dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities in order to develop the project’s 
multidimensional dissemination & communication (D&C) plan. 
 
FhG will lead the following tasks: 
− T3.1 Preparatory processing actions for downstream  
− T5.3 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for Organosolv stream (FhG) 
 
FhG will take part in the tasks listed below: 
− T1.1 Analysis of treated hemicellulose streams 
− T1.2 Precipitation and solids handling 
− T1.3 Hybrid membrane purification and concentration of hemicellulose sugars 
− T1.5 Solvent and water recovery 
− T3.2 Development of distillation (with/w/o extraction)  
− T3.3 Intensification of Downstream Purification Processes  
− T5.1 Simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes  
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
Key Personnel 
Daniela Pufky-Heinrich (Female) is a Chemist leading the group of Chemical Processes at the Fraunhofer Center 
for Chemical-Biotechnological Processes (CBP). Daniela is responsible for the pilot plants separation, purification 
technology and chemical processes at the Fraunhofer CBP.  She has been working at F hG since 2008 both as a 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 90 
 
scientist and project leader. Her expertise is in the field of chemical transformation, catalysis and related up - and 
downstream processing.  
 
Christian Bartsch (Male) is a Process Engineer in the group of Chemical Processes at the Fraunhofer CBP. He 
has been working at Fraunhofer since 2017 as a scientist and project manager. His special expertise lies in the field 
of downstream processing especially in the membrane technology, distillation and computer-based simulation. 
 
Ireen Gebauer (Female) is a chemist and has been working as a scientist and project manager in the Biomass 
Fractionation group at Fraunhofer CBP since 2019. Her expertise lies in the field of wood, pulping and bleaching 
chemistry. 
 
Ralf Harter (Male) is the Data Protection Officer of Fraunhofer Gesellschaft Zur Foerderung Der Angewandten 
Forschung E.V (FhG). Ralf will serve as the Data Protection Officer of FhG. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Trebar M, Witzel T, Hauffe A, Junghans U, Bulc A, Pufky -Heinrich D  (2018). Feasibilty Study on the 
etherification of fermentative -produced isobutylene to fully renewable ethyl tert-buytl ether (ETBE), 
Catalysts, 8, 514. 
2. Lettner M,Solt P, Rößiger B, Pufky-Heinrich D, Jääskeläinen A-S, Schwarzbauer P, Hesser F, From Wood to 
Resin—Identifying Sustainability Levers through Hotspotting Lignin Valorisation Pathways, Sustainability, 
2018, 10(8), 2745; DOI:10.3390/su10082745. 
3. Rößiger B, Röver R, Unkelbach G, Pufky -Heinrich D. (2017) Production of Bio -Phenols for Industrial 
Application: Scale-Up of the Base-Catalyzed Depolymerization of Lignin, Green Sustainable Chem., 2017, 7, 
193-202, DOI: 10.4236/gsc.2017.73015. 
4. Schule P, Seidel -Morgenstern A, Lorenz H, Leschinsky M. Unkelbach G. (2016) ‘ Advanced process for 
precipitation of lignin from ethanol organosolvspent liquors’, Biores. Technolo, Vol., 199, pp., 128-134. 
5. Rossberg C, Janzon R, Saake B, Leschinsky M. (2019) ‘Effect of Process Parameters in Pilot Scale Operation 
on Properties of Organosolv Lignin’, Vol., 14, pp., 4543-4559. 
Relevant Projects 
1. SteamBio [EU]: ‘Flexible Superheated Steam Torrefaction and Grinding of Indigenous Biomass from Remote 
Rural Sources to Produce Stable Densified Feedstocks for Chemical and Energy Applications’, The objective 
of SteamBio is to demonstrate a mobile processing concept that will enable efficient pre -treatment of agro-
forestry res idues for use as flexible feedstocks in chemical and process industries. These ligno -cellulosic 
materials originated from rural locations will be upgraded and densified into uniform sizes at source, allowing 
cost-effective transportation to existing industrial sites. (01/02/2015 – 31/07/2018), www.steambio.eu/. 
2. KomBiChemPRO [Other]: ‘Fine and platform chemicals from wood through combined chemical -
biotechnological processes’. As part of the joint project KombiChemPro, the results of various development 
work on the material use of renewable raw materials are to be brought together and combined with new 
approaches from research. These are to be demonstrated in an integrated concept, the process of which is both 
robust and efficient compared to conservatively produced platform chemicals.  The aim is to produce 
demanded, marketable products, which convince by a broad applicability and competitiveness against 
petrochemical manufactured platform chemicals. (01/10/2015 – 30/06/2019), funded by the Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research (BMBF). www.kombichempro.de/ 
3. Lignoplast [EU]: ‘Aromatic synthetic building blocks from lignin’. In the project both academic and industrial 
partners are working on processes to develop lignin as a source of raw materials for aromatic synthesis 
components. The required aromatic compounds are obtained by means of hydrolytic degradation of the 
macromolecular lignins and then functional ized chemically and enzymatically to make adhesives, paints, 
polyurethanes and epoxides. The lignin -based products are used in trial materials and subsequently 
characterized in terms of their application technology and compared with conventional systems. (01/03/2013 
–29/01/2016).www.igb.fraunhofer.de/en/research/competences/biocat/specialty-fine-
chemicals/lignoplast.html. 
4. ALIGN [Other]: ‘Aromatics from LIGNin’. ALIGN focuses on upscaling three extraction processes that lead 
to both a high-value lignin fraction and a pure cellulose/sugar fraction: The LX process (LXP), a Organosolv 
process combined with base-catalysed depolymerisation (BCD) and the lignin-first process (LFP). The lignin 
fractions derived from the three processes differ in their composition in regard to the degree of 
depolymerisation and functionalisation. Starting with this broad range of different lignin derivatives combined 
with tailor-made downstream processing (DSP) strategies, a wide variety of bio-based aromatics with unique 
properties can be produced. It aims at applying these bio-based aromatics as phenolic resins for the production 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 91 
 
of high-pressure-laminates as well as natural vanillin for food and beverages. Funded by the Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research (BMBF). www.bigc-initiative.eu/align.php.  
Relevant Infrastructure 
FhG CBP is equipped with Lab scale, technical scale and pilot scale equipment for biomass pulping and raw 
material processing, conversion and isolation of value streams; TLR 3-6;  
Particularly relevant for the project:  
• Lignocellulose bio refinery namely pre -treatment and fractionation of lignocellulose biomass, proc ess 
engineering within chemical wood technology and analysis of lignocellulose composition and resulting  
process streams; 
• Development of chemical processes for the transformation of raw materials to basic and fine chemicals 
for reactions in gas and liquid phase or with solids, catalytic reactions under continuous and discontinuous 
conditions, reactions under high pressures (up to 350 bar) and temperatures  
(up to 500°C), simulation and modeling of processes and reaction units for process scaling, integrated 
process development and optimization (energy and resource efficiency), in-process analytics; 
• Development of processes for separation and purification of product mixtures; evaluation and 
development of methods for separation and purification, development of suitable methods and scale -up 
within different pilot plants, simulation and modelling of processes and integration of separation and 
purification steps in the overall process and evaluation of the whole value chain; 
• Feasibility studies for process development and evaluation, scale-up and optimization, concept and plant 
design as well as delivery of sample amounts (kg to t scale). 
 
4.1.6 IFEU - INSTITUT FUR ENERGIE UND UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH 
Short Name IFEU 
 
Country Germany 
Type Small or medium-size enterprise 
Website www.ifeu.de  
Short Profile 
Founded in 1978, the INSTITUT FÜR ENERGIE- UND UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH  - 
Institute for Energy and Environmental Research Heidelberg - (IFEU) conducts research and provides a worldwide 
consultancy service in relation to all major environmental and sustainability issues. With more than 40 years of 
experience, IFEU is one of the most important ecological research institutes in Germany. Currently, IFEU employs 
67 researchers consisting of specialists from all major fields of environmental sciences. In 2017, its annual turnover 
was €5.25 million. As an independent body for environmental research and consulting, IFEU has an extensi ve 
track record in areas such as waste management and packaging materials, transport & mobility, renewable energies 
and energy efficiency as well as food and bio-based systems.  
 
IFEU is especially renowned for its expertise (>25 years) in the field of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). Recently, IFEU developed the integrated life cycle sustainability 
assessment (ILCSA) methodology (see figure 1 below), and applied it successfully in dozens of projects in the last 
10 year s. IFEU executed more than 250 LCAs and sustainability assessments on existing and innovative 
technologies in the field of renewable energies and materials (notably bioenergy and bio -based 
materials/chemicals) starting more than 25 years ago.  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 92 
 
 
Figure 1: Integrated Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment (ILCSA) 
IFEU has been working on the environmental impacts of biorefineries for the past years and evaluated dozens of 
biorefinery concepts for biodiesel, bioethanol and bio gas but also bio-based products. In recent years, a specific 
focus was put on lignocellulose biorefineries and algae biorefineries. In addition, IFEU has been working on the 
sustainability assessment of lignocellulosic biorefineries since the late 1990s, b efore the concept of second 
generation biofuels even existed, assessing the development of lignocellulosic biorefineries from the experimental 
stages to large -scale plants. IFEU’s expertise helps to optimise the process development from a sustainability 
perspective, and shows both the disadvantages and risks along with the advantages and opportunities associated 
with the different concepts. 
 
At European level, IFEU has been involved in a number of projects on lignocellulosic biomass such as BIOLYFE 
(GA No. 239204), BIOCORE (GA No. 241566), SUPRABIO (GA No. 241640) and OPTIMA (GA No. 289642). 
In all these projects, the IFEU department of ‘Food and bio-based systems’ has led the work package on integrated 
lifecycle sustainability assessment (ILCSA).  
 
The clients and sponsors of IFEU include governments, federal and federal -state ministries and associated 
authorities (e.g. the German Federal Environment Agency), the European Commission, national and international 
foundations, UN organizations (e.g. FAO, UNEP and UNFCCC), private enterprises, associations and 
environmental organizations. 
Role in the project 
IFEU will lead WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’ (organized as indicated in Figure 2 below) 
to assess the sustainability impacts of the BioSPRINT processes and products, including environmental and 
techno-economic benefits and risks. Thi s will be done based on process data obtained fro m the previous work 
packages, but also includes theoretical assumptions.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 93 
 
 
 
Figure 2: BioSPRINT Integrated Sustainability Assessment 
 
In the d efinitions, settings and system description IFEU will contribute to the goal and scope definitions and 
settings for the sustainability assessment, which will be used by all subsequent Tasks (6.2 to 6.6) to guarantee a 
coherent analysis throughout the whole WP. First, the key questions to  be answered by the sustainability 
assessment will be defined.  
 
In addition, IFEU will be in charge of the Environmental Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)  so as to evaluate the 
environmental impacts associated with the targeted BioSPRINT products in comparison to all selected reference 
products. The Environmental Life cycle assessment (E-LCA) will address the environmental aspects and potential 
environmental impacts (e.g. use of resources, environmental consequences of emissions) of a product. A wide 
range of impact categories will be covered (e.g. climate change, ozone depletion, acidification, eutrophication and 
resource depletion), providing a comprehensive picture of the product’s environmental implications. The 
assessment includes the product’s entire life cycle from raw material acquisition through production, use, end-of 
life treatment, recycling and final disposal. 
 
IFEU will also be involved in the Socio-economic assessment in order to assess the s ocio-economic impact by 
measuring the contribution of the project to both economic and social well -being. IFEU will support MAT to 
explore whether there are any direct risks to society e.g. health, safety, economic and environmental security, 
posed by the implementation and uptake of BioSPRINT project and target products. 
 
IFEU with its great expertise in Integrated life cycle sustainability assessment will have the responsibility to check 
the results from the previous analyses (Tasks 6.2 to 6.5) are integrated to identify and depict the most sustainable 
pathways among the BioSPRINT value chains compared to all reference systems. IFEU will use a multi -criteria 
evaluation software tool following the innovative methodology of Integrated Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment 
(ILCSA) covering all sustainability indicators chosen. 
 
In WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’ , IFEU will take part in the m ultidimensional dissemination, 
communication and stakeholder engagement activities supporting DEC to develop the project’s multidimensional 
dissemination & communication (D&C) plan; deliver D&C activities.  
 
In WP8 ‘Project coordination’ IFEU will support the Project Coordinator DEC, in the overall coordination, 
management and reporting as WP6 leader. 
 
IFEU will lead the following tasks: 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 94 
 
− T6.2 Environnemental Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)  
− T6.6 Integrated life cycle sustainability assessment 
 
In addition, IFEU will participate in the tasks listed below: 
− T6.1 Definitions, settings and system description  
− T6.4 Socio-economic assessment  
− T6.5 Process and product safety assessment 
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T8.1 Project coordination and reporting 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Guido Reinhardt (Male) is the Scientific Director  of Institute for Energy and Environmental Research 
Heidelberg (IFEU), a member of the scientific board and scientific director of the department of ‘Sustainability of 
renewable energies and biobased system s’. Since he joined IFEU in 1991, he has been working in the fields of 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), transport and environment, environmental assessments of food, bioenergy, 
industrial crops, bio-based materials and algae. He has a broad experience in the a cquisition and coordination of 
large-scale projects and is a consultant for national and international institutions and a member of several advisory 
panels.  
 
Nils Rettenmaier (Male) is a Senior Scientist and Senior Project leader at IFEU. His main working fields are: life 
cycle inventories (LCI), biomass resource assessments and sustainability criteria. Nils is involved in several 
projects both at a  national and EU level and has led the work packages on sustainability assessment e.g. in 
BIOCORE, SUPRABIO and OPTIMA. He is member of several panels, e.g. the VDI (Association of German 
Engineers) guideline committee 6310 'Classification and quality criteria of biorefineries' and the CEN/TC 411/WG 
4 ‘Sustainability criteria, life cycle analysis and related issues’ and chairs the German Institute for Standardization 
(DIN) committee NA 17200-11 AA 'Bio-based products' (which mirrors CEN/TC 411) since January 2016.  Nils 
will be the Leader of WP6 ‘ Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’ and serve as the Sustainability, 
Safety and Security Manager.  
 
Sven O. Gärtner, Dipl.-Phys. Ing., (Male) is a senior scientist and project leader at IFEU. Working at IFEU for 
more than 15 years, Sven Gärtner has  a wide experience in life cycle assessment (LCA), especially concerning 
biomass and food. Projects he has been involved in dealt with 1st and 2nd generation biofuels, biogas in its 
different usage forms, heat and power from woody and herbaceous biomass including perennial grasses as well as 
the material use of biomass for biochemicals in biorefinery approaches. In his department, he supervises the LCA 
calculations and the data management for life cycle inventories.  
 
Dr. Heiko Keller (Male) is a Senior Scientist and Project leader at IFEU. His main working fields are Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA) and Integrated Sustainability Assessment (ILCSA), which covers environmental, social, 
economic and technological aspects of sustainability. Heiko is a scientific advisory member of the working group 
on sustainable wood energy of the German bioenergy association Bundesverband Bio-Energie e.V. (BBE). He is 
a visiting lecturer for Life Cycle Assessment at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT). 
 
Dominik Jessing (Male) is a Project Manager at IFEU. Dominik studied biology and public law at the University 
of Heidelberg. He is c urrently undergoing in-service training, Master studies in evaluation at the Centrum for 
Evaluation (CEval) at the University of the Saarland. He is a Member of the Society for Evaluation (DeGEval – 
Gesellschaft für Evaluation e.V.), and speaker of the Work Group ‘Environment’. He has been teaching for several 
at the Geography Institute of the University of Heidelbe rg. Dominik will serve as the Data Protection Officer of 
IFEU. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Keller, H., Rettenmaier, N., Reinhardt, G. A. (2015): Integrated life cycle sustainability assessment – A 
practical approach applied to biorefineries. Applied Energy, Vol. 154, 1072 –1081. 
www.dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.01.095;    
2. Rettenmaier, N., Gärtner, S., Keller, H., Müller-Lindenlauf, M., Reinhardt, G., Schmidt, T., Schorb, A. (2015): 
Life cycle assessment of bioenergy and bio-based products from perennial grasses cultivated on marginal land. 
In: OPTIMA project reports, supported by the EU’s FP7 under GA No. 289642, Institute for Energy and 
Environmental Research (IFEU), Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
https://www.ifeu.de/wpcontent/uploads/IFEU_2015_LCA-bioproducts-marginal-land.pdf; 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 95 
 
3. Rettenmaier, N., Harter, R., Himmler, H., Keller, H., Kretschmer, W., Müller-Lindenlauf, M., Reinhardt, G., 
Scheurlen, K., Schröter, C. (2014): Integrated sustainability assessment of the BIOCORE biorefinery concept. 
In: BIOCORE project reports, supported by the EU’s FP7 under GA No. 241566, Institute for Energy and 
Environmental Research (IFEU), Heidelberg, Germany. 
www.biocoreeurope.org/file/BIOCORE_D7_6_Integrated assessment_2014-03-31.pdf; 
4. Müller-Lindenlauf, M., Cornelius, C., Gärtner, S., Reinhardt, G., Schorb, A., Rettenmaier, N., Bhattacharya, 
A., Komodromos, C. (2014): Integrated sustainability assessment of SUPRABIO biorefineries. In: 
SUPRABIO project reports, supported by the EU’s FP7 under GA No. 241640, Institute for Energy and 
Environmental Research (IFEU), Heidelberg, Germany. 
www.ifeu.de/wpcontent/uploads/IFEU__Brunel_2014_Integrated-sustainability-assessment-ofSUPRABIO-
biorefineries_2014-10-31.pdf.  
5. Kretschmer, W., Keller, Reinhardt, G. et al. (2013): Integrated sustainability assessment of BIOLYFE second 
generation bioethanol. In: BIOLYFE project reports, supported by the EU’s FP7 under GA No. 239204, 
Institut für Umweltstudien (IUS), Heidelberg, Germany. 
www.biolyfe.eu/images/stories/downloads/BIOLYFE-Integrated sustainability assessment.pdf.  
Relevant projects 
1. UNRAVEL [EU]: ‘UNique Refinery Approach to Valorise European Lignocellulosics’. UNRAVEL aims to 
develop advanced pre-treatment, separation and conversion technologies for complex lignocellulosic biomass 
to produce usable lignin fragments, and monomeric sugars fro m the cellulose and hemicellulose fraction 
suitable for biochemical conversions. BBI project (BBI -792004, 2018 -2022). IFEU is leading the WP on 
sustainability assessment. TNO’s FABIOLA™ low temperature, energy-efficient acetone based fractionation 
process will be assessed. (01/06/2018 – 31/05/2022). www.unravel-bbi.eu/.  
2. BIOLYFE [EU]: Second generation BIOethanol process: demonstration scale for the step of Lignocellulosic 
hYdrolysis and FErmentation. The focus of this project was on lignocellulose pre -treatment via steam 
explosion and simultaneous saccharification and co -fermentation (SScF) of cellulose and hemicellulose into 
ethanol (FP7 -239204, 2010 -2013). IFEU was a subcontractor to IUS and led  the WP on Sustainability 
assessment. In particular, IFEU was involved in the Integrated sustainabi lity assessment. The study 
demonstrated how established assessment methodologies such as environmental LCA and cost benefit analysis 
from a business perspective can be supplemented by innovative approaches to cover and integrate all 
sustainability related aspects of future BIOLYFE biorefineries. IFEU contributed in  the integrated 
sustainability evaluation which was also performed as part of this project. It aimed to analyse whether future, 
large-scale dissemination of the PROESA™ technology provides benefits from environmental, economic and 
social perspectives compared to the use of existing biofuels or fossil fuels. This comprehensive analysis 
investigated scenarios on future implementation of this technology, from the provision of raw materials to the 
energy utilisation of the bioethanol, and a variety of optimisation options.  (01/01/2010 – 31/12/2013). 
www.biolyfe.eu/.  
3. SUPRABIO [EU]: ‘Sustainable products from economic processing of biomass in highly integrated 
biorefineries’. The biochemical routes investigated in this project were also based on lignocellulose pre -
treatment via steam explosion and simultaneous saccharification and co-fermentation (SScF) of cellulose and 
hemicellulose into ethanol (FP7-241640, 2010-2014). IFEU led the WP on sustainability assessment. Danish 
company BioGasol’s biomass fractionation technology was analysed. (01/02/2010 – 31/07/2014). 
www.suprabio.eu/.  
4. BIOCORE [EU]: ‘BIOCOmmodity Refinery’. BIOCORE  creates and demonstrates a lignocellulosic 
biorefinery for sustainable processing of agricultural residues (wheat and rice straws), SRC wood (poplar) and 
hardwood forestry residues, into 2G biofuels, bulk chemicals, polymers, speciality molecules, heat and power 
(FP7-241566, 2010-2014). IFEU led the WP on sustainability assessment. Biorefining of straws and wood 
into specialty polymers, fuels, and materials was the main focus of this project which was based on an 
Organosolv pretreatment by French company CIMV. (01/03/2010 – 28/02/2014). www.biocore-europe.org/.  
5. OPTIMA: Optimization of Perennial Grasses for Biomass Production, (FP7 -289642, 2011-2015). IFEU led 
the WP on sustainability assessment. The integrated  sustainability assessment covered the conversion of 
lignocellulosic biomass from marginal land into ethanol. (01/10/2011 – 30/09/2015) 
cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/101188/factsheet/en 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 96 
 
4.1.7 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA 
Short Name IRIS 
 
Country Spain 
Type Small or medium-size enterprise 
Website www.iristechnologygroup.com/ 
Short Profile 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA (IRIS) is an advanced engineering company 
established in Barcelona in 2007 with a mission of bringing process optimisation solutions to manufacturing. IRIS 
focuses on Key Enabling Technologies for Digital Transformation: making Industry smarter, more sustainable and 
efficient in Industry 4.0. Currently the company employs 60+ staff with a turnover of €5m. It is equipped with 
three engineering workshops, food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, two optics labs, and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. 
  
IRIS specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) -based real -time 
quality monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly 
targeted at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, IRIS product line comprises proprietary 
state-of-the-art infrared analyzers for at-line and in-line process monitoring.  
 
On the one hand IRIS solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics -in the fields of Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman Spectroscopy. On the other hand, IRIS leverages ICTs, whereby 
they apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, 
as well as for decision support systems. In addition to photonics-based analyzers, IRIS’s staff also works with IoT 
sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the 
Industry4.0 paradigm. IRIS solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
The company’s Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior 
Management, and an Innovation Unit for managing and executing the company’s innovation roadmap, has three 
core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 
− Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorization; 
− New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimization; 
− ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms). 
 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying various joint private projects with industry 
partners, the Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both 
as coordinators and partners), and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. Thanks to the expertise 
obtained in R&D projects, IRIS designed and developed its own devices based on Infrared Spectroscopy, with the 
mission of integrating novel inline monitoring systems for quality improvement and process standardisation in the 
food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries, among others. As such, in 2016, the VISUM brand was born. The 
Value Proposition for the in dustry of VISUM is to bring affordable and reliable laboratory analytical capability 
into manufacturing lines (Lab2Line) and right along the value chain (Lab2Chain) for real-time process monitoring 
and quality inspection purposes.     
 
IRIS is ISO 9001:200 8 certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D. 
IRIS is also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio 
Certification).  
 
IRIS is a member of the following sectorial  networks: SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial 
collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ 
of industry). In addition, IRIS is a member of A.SPIRE, the European Association which is committed to manage 
and implement the SPIRE Public-Private Partnership. 
Role in the project 
IRIS role in the project will be focused on: 
1) Development of monitoring and control strategies for bio-based processes by applying IRIS background 
on PAT solutions;  
2) Support to IT developments in particular related to Machine Learning. 
3) Application of ultrasounds technology as possible pre-treatment stage.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 97 
 
In WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’, IRIS will lead the activities on the identification of upstream 
scale-up challenges via process systems engineering (PSE) tools  in order to generate experimental data for the 
validation of the process system engineering tools. Similarly, in WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and 
Polymerisation Intensification’, IRIS will lead the activities on the i dentification of polymerisation scale -up 
challenges via process systems engineering tools. The polymerisation processes intensified in this WP is analysed 
using CFD tools at lab-scale. IRIS effort aims to provide a certain set of recommendations on how to scale-up an 
intensified polymerisation reactor. These recommendations will include the thermo-fluid behaviour of the reactor 
using CFD tools, the control analysis and PAT techniques on the later-on pilot plant equipment. 
 
In WP2 ‘Intensification of Catalytic Conversion’, IRIS will support ADSC in the identification of reaction scale-
up challenges via process systems engineering tools , whereas as part of WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream 
Purification’, IRIS will support UOULU in the i dentification of downstream scale -up challenges in the 
downstream purification processes, which have been analysed using the CFD tools at lab scale opera tion. IRIS 
background on PAT solutions and techniques will provide the results that will be used to identify scale-up. 
 
In WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’, IRIS will support UPM on the integration of upstream, 
reaction and downstream pro cesses. In addition, IRIS will participate in the s cale-up of optimal product 
formulations. 
 
Under WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’, IRIS will support the Project Coordinator to develop the project’s 
multidimensional dissemination & communication (D&C) plan , deliver D&C activities . Moreover, IRIS will 
primarily assist MAT to survey the broader market with a view to assessing sectoral needs, considering how other 
actors are responding.  
 
IRIS will lead the following tasks: 
− T1.4 Identification of upstream scale-up challenges via process systems engineering (PSE) tools 
− T4.5 Identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools 
 
IRIS will take part in the tasks listed below: 
− T2.4 Identification of reaction scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools 
− T3.4 Identification of downstream scale-up challenges 
− T5.2 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream 
− T5.5 Scale-up of optimal product formulations 
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T7.3 Identification of early adopters, post-project opportunities and business plan 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Ing. Elodie Bugnicourt  (Female) is the Leader of the Eco -Materials business unit in Iris Technology 
Solutions, Sociedad Limitada (IRIS) since 2009. She holds Masters in Material Science & Engineering (2002), 
PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applied Science (INSA), Lyon, 
France. She has successfully coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio-based packaging materials 
development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Her previous industry experience included positions in the 
areas of R&D in chemical industry especially related to reactive polymer formulations (Arkema), and in the field 
of polyester powder coating (Wacker Chemie). She also focused on bio -sourced resins, flame retardant resins, 
SMC resins, PU and epoxy structural adhesives. Moreover, she has successfully led and participated in many R&D 
projects aimed at developing new formulations, understanding mechanisms and structure-properties relationships, 
developing new analytical methods and modelling (for improved quality management); as well as collaborations 
with academic labs and other players in the supply and value chain. Dr. Elodie is the author of several papers in 
peer-reviewed and technical journals, and has presented her work in numerous international conferences. 
 
Albert Torres (Male)  is a PMO Manager at IRIS. He holds a Masters in Industrial Engineering (2009) and a 
masters in Project Management (2013)  from the University of Catalonia and the Univercity of Barcelona 
respectively. He spent almost 5 years as being member of the International Project Office of LEITAT Research 
Centre, where he acquired the knowledge and experience of managing and coordinate  Public Funded Research 
Projects under the different financial International, National and Regional schemes: H2020, ERA -Nets, JTIs, 
CIEN, RIS3CAT, sharing experiences with the top R&D performing entities around Europe. At IRIS, he is leading 
the PMO Office with a team of five Project Managers, leading them with passion and optimistic attitude, believing 
that great results are achievable in well-functioning teams. Moreover, Albert contributes on the business strategy 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 98 
 
development and commercial decision -making, sharing his experience in risk management and portfolio 
management. 
 
Ignacio Montero Castro (Male) is a Project and Innovation Manager at IRIS since 2018. He is Chemical Engineer 
graduate from the University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, and holds a Master in Process Engineering from 
Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain. Ignacio comes from a background in process control and industrial 
safety, developing applied research in self-optimizing control strategies for industrial facilities and environmental 
risk analysis for the Catalan department of Industry. He spent almost three years on the Circular Economy unit of 
LEITAT Technological Centre working as R&D engineer and Technical Project Manager. During this period, he 
was responsible for manageme nt, execution and proposal writing of Public Funded Research Projects under the 
different financial International, National and Regional schemes: H2020, CIEN, LIFE. Since joining IRIS, he has 
been providing business management services to support the award , coordination and implementation of EU 
funded projects on Applied Photonics, ICT & Digitalisation and Circular & Bio-economy sectors.  
 
Dr. Laura Rodríguez Turienzo (Female) is currently working as postdoctoral researcher (awarded with a Torres 
Quevedo Grant since 2014) holding the positions of Coordinator of the Science Area, Lab Responsible and WP 
leader or technical responsible in public and private R&D projects. She holds a BSc in Food Science & Technology 
(2008), a Masters in Innovation in Safety & Food Technologies (2010) and PhD in Biological Sciences (2011), all 
from University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain. She has participated in a number of R&D regionally 
nationally and internationally funded projects aimed at developing and validating n ew bio-based active edible 
packaging, physico-chemical characterization of novel foods and valorisation of food industry wastes and food 
decontamination with emerging technologies. She is author of several papers in peer -reviewed journals and has 
participated in different national and international conferences.  
 
Alejandro Rosales (Male)  is the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 engineers and 
researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing novel high -end solutions for industry. In addition, he 
is the Head of the Innovation Unit in IRIS. He received his MSc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana 
(1986). His background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: 
optics, lase rs, high vacuum, colorimetry, UV -VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of 
measurement instruments. He has extensive practical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical 
CAD design as well as R&D methodology and management. His profes sional career included positions as 
researcher applications engineer, design engineer, business developer and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in 
the FTIR spectroscopy field applied to quality control in the agro-food (wine) industry, whereby he developed two 
new measurement instruments for wine analysis. His career as industrial physicist has been focused in applying 
his wide expertise to provide solutions for industrial problems.   
 
Ivan Paquico Rodriguez (Male) is working as a Scrum Master in IRIS. He is leading a number of software scrum 
teams working in internal, commercial and collaborative R&D projects in the development of the software for 
advanced monitoring systems, sensor integration, wireless sensor networks, among others. He holds a 
Telecommunications Degree from University Polytechnic of Catalonia and a Joint Degree in Multimedia 
Development from LUAS (Finland). His is a Professional Scrum Master certified by Scrum.org, and an official 
iOS and Android Developer, since 2010. Since then he has cre ated numerous social network Apps for Mobile 
Platforms with experience programming with iOS SDK from Apple, Couchbase database technology, and using 
different programming languages such as C, C++, Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time systems. He 
has expertise in multimedia methodologies ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D 
modelling software such as OpenGL, Quest3D, Autodesk Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe Photoshop.  
 
Dr. David Nettleton (Male)  is Data Scientist at IRI S. He has over 25 years of experience in IT system 
development, specializing in databases and data analysis. He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer 
Science, a Masters degree in Computer Software and Systems Design, and a Ph.D. in Artificial Inte lligence. He 
has worked for IBM as a Business Intelligence Consultant, among other companies. In 1995, he founded his own 
consultancy dedicated to commercial data analysis projects, working in the Banking, Insurance, Media, Industry 
and Health Sectors. He has published over 40 articles and papers in journals, national and international congresses 
and magazines, and has given many presentations in conferences and workshops. Before joining IRIS, he has held 
positions was a contract researcher at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain and at the IIIA-CSIC, Spain, 
specializing in data mining applied to online social networks and data privacy.  
Ana Pacual (Female) is the Head of Finance and HR at IRIS.  Anna will serve as the Data Protection Officer of 
IRIS.  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 99 
 
Relevant Publications  
1. Maxi-use of wastes from agro -food processing to obtain truly sustainable bioplastics, E. Bugnicourt, O. Mc  
Nerney, A. Lazzeri, Bioplastics magazine, Vol 6, 32-34, April 2011. 
2. E. Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe , M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Recent Prospects in the Inline 
Monitoring of Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings by Optical Technologies, Nanomaterials 2016, Review, 
6(8), 150; doi:10.3390/nano6080150; 
3. Whey protein layer applied on biodegradable packaging film to improve barrier properties while maintaining 
biodegradability, Patrizia Cinelli, Markus Schmid, Elodie Bugnicourt, Jessica Wildner, Agostino Bazzichi, 
Irene Anuillesi, Andrea Lazzeri,  Polymer Degradati on and Stability. 07/2014; DOI: 
10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.07.007; 
4. Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): Review of synthesis, characteristics, processing and potential applications in 
packaging, Elodie Bugnicourt, Patrizia Cinelli, Vera Alvarez, Andrea Lazzeri, eXPRESS Polymer Letters 
06/2014; 8(11):791-808; 
5. Towards Automatic Calibration of In -Line Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial 
Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F.Nettleton, E.Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, 
London, UK, July 28-29, 2016. 
Relevant Projects 
1. AgriMax [EU]: ‘Agri and food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks biorefinery 
processing technologies for new high added value applications’. To extract the significant amounts of valuable 
compounds contained in these wastes, AgriMax will combine affordable and flexible processing technologies 
(ultrasound assisted and solvent extraction, filtration, thermal and enzymatic treatments) for the valo rization 
of side streams from the horticultural culture and food processing industry to be used in a cooperative approach 
by local stakeholders. (01/10/2016 – 30/09/2020). www.agrimax-project.eu/.  
2. IbD [EU]: “ Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handling" IbD® 
Project has created a holistic platform for facilitating process intensification design and optimisation in 
processes in which solids are an intrinsic part across t he ceramic processing, pharmaceutical, chemical, 
mineral and ore processing sectors.” (01/09/2015-31/08/2018). www.ibd-project.eu/  
3. BIOnTOP [EU]: ‘Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end of life and performance based on bio-
based copolymers and coatings ’. The BIOnTOP project will deliver recyclable -by-design cost competitive 
packaging solutions that can be mechanically recycled, industrially/home composted or even suitable for 
anaerobic digestion. (01/06/2019 – 31/05/2023). Website under construction.  
4. URBIOFIN [EU] Demonstration of an integrated innovative biorefinery for the transformation of Municipal 
Solid Waste (MSW) into new BioBased products. The aim of URBIOFIN project is to demonstrate the techno-
economic and environmental viability of the conversion at semi-industrial scale (10 T/d) of the organic fraction 
of MSW (OFMSW) into: Chemical building blocks (bioethanol, volatile fatty acids, biogas), biopolymers 
(polyhydroyalkanoate and biocomposites) or additives (microalgae hydrolisated for biofertilisers). By u sing 
the biorefinery concept applied to MSW (urban biorefinery), URBIOFIN will exploit the OFMSW as 
feedstock to produce different valuable marketable products for different markets: agriculture, cosmetics.  
(01/06/2017 – 31/12/2021). www.urbiofin.eu/ This project is under VISUM Ltd, the Irish branch under IRIS 
Technology Group. 
5. PERCAL [EU] Chemical building blocks from versatile MSW biorefinery. PERCAL will exploit Municipal 
Solid Waste (MSW) as feedstock to develop i ntermediate chemical products at high yield and low impurity 
level with huge industrial interest. These will be complementary to the bioethanol (current PERSEO 
technology), to achieve a cascade valorisation of the MSW components . (01/07/2017 – 30/06/2020). 
www.percal-project.eu/. This project is under VISUM Ltd, the Irish branch under IRIS Technology Group. 
Relevant Infrastructure 
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), an Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as 
well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim -Xenics). The associated staff are properly trained and skilled in 
chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -
commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up -to-date hardware and t ools: 
signal generators, wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for 
programming microcontrollers, CNC -milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD 
software [SolidWorks], among others.   
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 100 
 
IRIS optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the 
designs by means of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light 
sources and related “opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, 
microbiological equipments, microspcope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for 
colour and opacity measurement), Ford cup vi scometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic 
chambers, manual and automatic coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, 
etc. 
 
4.1.8 KEMIJSKI INSTITUT 
Short Name NIC 
 
Country Slovenia 
Type Research Organisation 
Website www.ki.si/en/ 
Short Profile 
The National Institute of Chemistry, Ljubljana, Slovenia (NIC), is a leading Slovenian research institution in the 
field of chemistry and related scientific disciplines. Basic and applied research are oriented towards fields which 
are of long -term importance to both Slovenia and the world: materials research, life sciences, biotechnology, 
chemical engineering, structural and theoretical chemistry, analytical chemistry and environmental protection; 
through which the institute is in line with the needs of the  domestic and foreign pharmaceutical, chemical, 
automotive and nanobiotechnological industries. 
 
The work of the Institute is also in line with the priority thematic areas of the EU Research and Innovation 
programme Horizon 2020, which places an emphasis on nanotechnology, genomics and biotechnology for health, 
climate change, energy, sustainable development and global change and quality and safety of food. 
 
The National Institute of Chemistry has 331 employees (31.3.2019), of which around 292 carry out research work 
in 9 departments and two infrastructure centers; 149 of these have doctorates of science degrees. 
 
NIC’s fields of activity are listed below: 
- Research, particularly related to Process Intensification, Catalysis, Biochemistry, Chemical Reaction 
Engineering, Energy management and efficiency, etc. 
- Education: Currently 74 graduate students are being trained at the Institute within the national Young 
Researchers Program for the acquisition of their PhD degrees. The young researchers represent about 25% 
of the Institute's staff members, making National Institute of Chemistry one of the leading Slovenian 
organizations for graduate-level education and training. 
- Cooperation with industry : Research is oriented towards the development of new techno logies and 
products, which will help to ensure the long-term development of Slovenia and which are internationally 
relevant. Industry is an important partner to the Institute in these endeavors. There are a number of 
Slovenian companies with whom the Insti tute has entered into close long -term cooperation, as well as a 
number of well -regarded foreign companies. From a financial point of view, this kind of cooperation 
represents 20% of the income of the Institute. 
 
The Institute offers high-level research equipment, allowing researchers to engage in even the most cutting edge 
research challenges at the world level. 
 
NIC will involve the Department of Catalysis and Chemical Reaction Engineering which is primarily invested in 
chemical (process) engineering, reactor and unit operation design and construction, as well as multi-scale process 
modelling. The Department topics foremost include carbon dioxide and natural gas conversion, hydrogen and fuel 
cell technologies, biomass valorisation to bio-based compounds, and (bio)pharmaceutical processes. 
 
The National Institute of Chemistry is 1 of the 3 original founding partners of the Slovenian Strategic Resear ch 
and Innovation Partnership (SRIP) Networks for the Transition into Circular Economy , which is a cluster -like 
national stakeholder in the field of circular economy implementation.  Moreover, NIC is a member of SusChem, 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 101 
 
the European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry. SusChem National Technology Platform Slovenia 
(NTP Slovenia) is lead by NIC. NTP Slovenia is one of the 17 National Technology Platforms of Su sChem’s 
network of national platforms which are considered k ey to the involvement of national stakeholders including 
small and medium -sized enterprises (SMEs), large companies and academic groups, in European initiatives  
relating to, among others, biotechn ology, advanced materials, new & improved processes and clean sustainable 
technologies. 
Via its membership in the ‘Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Stajerska’, Slovenia , NIC  is a n associate 
member of the BIC consortium, the European Association which represents the private sector in the Bio-based 
Industries Joint Undertaking (BBI JU). 
Role in the project 
NIC’s role in BioSPRINT is focused on: 
1) Process intensification, in particular of catalytic conversion, downstream purification and polymerisation 
reactions, in view of achieving intensified and integrated final processes, as well as the intensification of 
these unit operations. This is directly related to extensive background knowledge in chemical reactor 
engineering, as well as specific (bio-economy) patent applications. NIC will intensify, optimize and scale-
up the production of bio-based furans, as well as hydroxyl-methyl-furfural, (targeted) intermediate. 
2) The strategic planning, delivery and evaluation of an impact Training, Education and Capacity -Building 
Programme (TECBP) aiming at maximising the potential for BioSPRINT’s results to be leveraged by 
actors beyond the consortium. 
 
In WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’ , NIC will undertake the analysis of treated hemicellulose 
streams which will be supplied by FhG, UPM and Clariant and serve as a foundation for further technical work in 
the project . NIC will thus provide r eports on feedstock variability analysis collecting immediate upstream 
implications.  
 
As part of WP2 ‘Intensification of Catalytic Conversion’, NIC will take part in the c atalyst Development using 
HTP Methods to deliver robust catalyst formulations for integrated conversion of C5 and C6 sugars into a single 
reactor, coupled with extraction of reactive furan intermediated. Additionally, NIC will monitor the reactions for 
realistic stream mixtures. In particular, NIC will be in charge of the chemical kinetics determination, modelling & 
simulations which will be evaluated for synthetic, as well as for realistic feedstock mixtures ; the integration of 
synthetic sugar mixtures which will be applied before proceeding to realistic feedstock compositions in order to 
individually establish the interactions between the former, at first excluding the influences of impurities from, e.g. 
lignin. Moreover, NIC will contribute in the development of extractive reaction intensification being responsible 
for the application/extensio n of the modelling from the purely reactive mechanisms to intensified reaction –
extraction operation. 
 
NIC will be the Leader of WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream Purification’. In particular, NIC’s involvement 
will be focused on the following: in the p reparatory processing actions for downstream NIC will be in charge of 
the reaction composition analysis for downstream especially for the exact composition determination. Moreover, 
NIC will monitor the development of distillation focusing on the modelling validation, simulation and optimisation 
to be executed in order to expand the range of conditions, compositions and purities to be predicted by simulations. 
As a result, NIC will provide the modelling of distillation to support the scale-up of pilot unit operation. The scale-
up to the TRL 4–5 operation will be the responsibility of FhG, as factors, such as fluidics, monitoring and control 
will be considered. NIC will start the pilot scale validation based on multi-scale modelling simulations which will 
be implemented and finalised by FhG. NIC will be in addition involved in the i ntensification of downstream 
purification will be focused in the reduction in foot print and hazardous inventory for the liquid-liquid decanter 
unit that separates the aqueous and organic phases originating from the extractive-reaction unit.  
 
In WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation Intensification’ , NIC will support AEP on 
the development and testing of novolac-type resins and bio-based polyols in order to intensify the processes for 
the production of resins and polyols and support the task related to the intensification of polymerisation processes. 
 
Under WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’, NIC will contribute to the integration of  the 
developed concepts and technologies for the UPM stream and the FhG Organosolv streams  and also assist DEC 
to perform a transferability and replicability case study using the stream of associated partner Clariant.  
 
In WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’ , NIC will participate in the dissemination and communication 
activities. In addition, NIC will lead the Training, Education & Capacity Building programme (TECBP) with 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 102 
 
the participation of academic,  research and industrial partners . Materials will be developed in line with best 
practises in this area, and will also take into account learning from the SusChem Educate to Innovate initiative. 
NIC, together with the  rest Work packages  leaders and EBOS, w ill develop, implement and deliver 4 online 
training modules, introduced via live webinars, to a large academic, research and industrial audience. NIC during 
the third year of the project, with partners support, will organise 1 TECBP workshop in Slovenia, while NIC will 
support DEC in the organisation of the BioSPRINT Summer School. 
 
As part of WP8 ‘Project coordination’, NIC will assist the project Coordinator (DEC) in the overall project 
coordination, reporting and management, as leader of WP3. Also, NIC will participate in the technical management 
supporting UNEW.  
 
NIC will lead the tasks listed below: 
− T1.1 Analysis of treated hemicellulose streams 
− T2.2 Reactions for realistic stream mixtures  
− T3.2 Development of distillation (with/w/o extraction)  
− T7.2 Training, Education and Capacity Building programme (TECBP) 
 
NIC will participate in the following tasks: 
− T2.1 Catalyst Development using HTP Methods 
− T2.3 Development of extractive reaction intensification 
− T3.1 Preparatory processing actions for downstream  
− T3.3 Intensification of Downstream Purification Processes  
− T4.1 Development and testing of novolac-and resole-type resins and their applications in wood laminates 
− T4.2 Development and testing of bio-based polyols and their applications in rigid PU foams 
− T4.4 Identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via PSE tools 
− T5.2 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream 
− T5.3 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for Organosolv stream (FhG) 
− T5.4 Transferability case study with Clariant Sunliquid® stream  
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T8.1 Project coordination and reporting 
− T8.2 Technical management 
Key Personnel 
Prof. Dr. Blaž Likozar (Male) is the Head of the Department of Catalysis and Chemical Reaction Engineering at 
the National Institute of Chemistry  (NIC). Dr. Blaž earned his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 2008 from the 
University of Ljubljana. He has been working at NIC for 7 years as the Head of department, as well as Senior 
research fellow and Assistant Professor in the field of chemical engineering . He is responsible for (leading) the 
programme “Chemical Reaction Engineering” as well as several research projects. His expertise lies  in 
heterogeneous catalyst materials, modelling, simulation and optimization of process fluid mechanics, transport 
phenomena and chemical kinetics. Between 2014–2015 he worked at the University of Delaware (Catalysis Center 
for Energy Innovation, Newark, Delaware, USA), as a Fulbright Visiting Scholar Program researcher in the field 
of chemical engineering. Prof. Likozar has published over 120 original peer-reviewed scientific research papers 
and has the h-index of 19 (presently, 1477 citations). He has expertise in, in terms of scientific category keywords, 
chemical engineering, reaction engineering, reactor engineering, heterogeneous catalysis, process optimisation, 
process int ensification, valorisation, multi -scale modelling, density functional theory, kinetic Monte Carlo, 
computational fluid dynamics, thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, micro -kinetics, transport phenomena, heat 
transfer, mass transfer, fluid mechanics, unit ope rations, and separations. He is a co -author of numerous patent 
applications, e.g. Process and related system for removing ashes from biomasses, 2016. In 2018, he received the 
Prometheus of Science for Excellence in Communication. Since, 2017, he is a membe r of the Working Party on 
Chemical Reaction Engineering and also the Program board vice president of Strategic Research and Innovation 
Partnership (SRIP) Networks for the transition into circular economy . Since, 2016, he is the NIC’s EERA 
Bioenergy representative. He is the WP leader in 5 H2020 projects in MefCO2,  ADREM, FReSMe, BiZeolCat 
and ReaxPro. Since 2016, he is also the project leader in the programme CEL.CYCLE. Dr. Blaz is also the 
President of SusChem Slovenia. Blaz will serve as the Capacity Building Manager. 
 
Dr. Miha Grilc (Male) is a Postdoctoral researcher at NIC. He earned his MSc in chemical engineering in 2011 
and PhD in 2015 at the University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology. He was awarded 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 103 
 
“Jožef Stefan” golden emblem prize, presented by the Jožef Stefan institute, for most promising and notable PhD 
theses in science and maths, technology and medicine and biotechnology for the last three years. He was also 
awarded “Prešeren” award presented by the University of Ljubljana, for significant accomplishments in the master 
thesis in the field of chemistry and related sciences. He started his academic career in 2011 as a young researcher 
under the mentorship of Prof. Dr. Janez Levec. His main expertise lies in modelling of the reaction kinetics, 
transport phenomena and fluid dynamics in multiphase  catalytic contactors (reactors). He investigated catalytic 
systems related to biomass valorisation and NOx conversion. In 2017 he has worked for 12 months at the Leipzig 
University (Institut für Technische Chemie), as a specialist for DeNOx system modelli ng for car industry. Dr. 
Grilc published 35 scientific articles, which were cited 488 times in total (h index of 11). Dr. Grilc is a co-author 
of a patent application; Process and related system for removing ashes from biomasses, 2016. He was a project 
leader of several project with industry, i.e. Distillation and Cracking of marine bilge oils, 2017 (client Ecoporto, 
Koper, Slovenia), Liquefaction of ash-rich biomass in alcohols, 2017 (client Inser, S.p.A., Torino, Italy), Detailed 
analysis of products obta ined by liquefied wood and pyrolysis oil upgrading, 2014 (client Inser, S.p.A., Torino, 
Italy). Involvement in the proposal: Dr. Miha Grilc will be responsible for multi-scale reaction, reactor & process 
modelling. He will be the leader of WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream Purification’. 
 
Brigita Hočevar (Female) is a Researcher at NIC. She earned her B.Sc in 2012 and MSc in 2015, both in chemical 
engineering at the University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology. She was awarded 
“Prešeren” award presented by the University of Ljubljana, for significant accomplishments in the master thesis 
in the field of chemistry and related sciences. She started her academic career in 2015 as a young researcher under 
the mentorship of Do c. Dr. Blaž Likozar. She investigated catalytic hydrodeoxygenation of compounds, 
representative in the cellulose part of lignocellulosic biomass. She published 3 scientific articles (as a first author) 
which were cited 11 times. 
 
Tomaž Bizjak (Male) is the Head of the Technology Transfer Office head and DPO of NIC. He has obtained a 
BSc degree at the Faculty of Electrical Engineering in the field of communications engineering, University of 
Ljubljana and a Master's degree at the Department of Chemical Engin eering and Biotechnology in the field of 
bioscience and enterprise, University of Cambridge. His career started at the Centre of excellence for Biosensors, 
Instrumentation and Process Control where he acted as a developer of a technology transfer field. Simultaneously, 
he was a Chief Operative Officer for the CEE region investment conference COINVEST where he acted as a 
liaison with start-ups and other stakeholders. He was also an entrepreneur, developing a bilateral initiative between 
Slovenia and the UK, which consequently led him to a position of a Regional Lead for the consulting group New 
Medicine Partners, UK. In addition to his formal education, he obtained knowledge through various programmes 
such as 'Training for trainers of Start -ups' and 'Managerial-Entrepreneurial Skills Development for Researchers'. 
During the time at the University of Cambridge he achieved finalists' rounds of competitions 'Young Entrepreneur 
of the Year' and the international summit 'GapSummit Leaders of Tomorrow'. In 2019 he w as providing support 
to a researcher from the National Institute of Chemistry and the project received the Rector's Award for the best 
Innovation of the University of Ljubljana 2019. Information-related skills he is currently acting as an IP portfolio 
manager, providing support in the processes of innovation disclosure, patenting and protecting. Tomaž will serve 
as the Data Protection Officer of NIC.  
Relevant Publications 
1. Hočevar, B., Grilc, M., Likozar, B. (2019), “Aqueous dehydration, hydrogenation, and hydrodeoxygenation 
reactions of bio -based mucic acid over Ni, NiMo, Pt, Rh, and Ru on neutral or acidic catalyst supports”, 
Catalysts, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 286-1-286-20. 
2. Bjelić, A., Grilc, M., Huš, M., Likozar, B. (2019), “Hydrogenation and hydrodeoxygenation of aromatic lignin 
monomers over Cu/C, Ni/C, Pd/C, Pt/C, Rh/C and Ru/C catalysts: mechanisms, reaction micro -kinetic 
modelling and quantitative structure-activity relationships”, Chemical Engineering Journal, Vol. 359, pp. 305-
320. 
3. Hočevar, B., Grilc, M., Huš, M., Likozar, B. (2019), “Mechanism, ab initio calculations and microkinetics of 
straight-chain alcohol, ether, ester, aldehyde and carboxylic acid hydrodeoxygenation over Ni –Mo catalyst”, 
Chemical Engineering Journal, Vol. 359, pp. 1339-1351. 
4. Bjelić, A., Grilc, M., Likozar, B. (2018), “Catalytic hydrogenation and hydrodeoxygenation of lignin-derived 
model compound eugenol over Ru/C: intrinsic microkinetics and transport phenomena ”, Chemical 
Engineering Journal, Vol. 333, pp. 240-259. 
5. Grilc, M., Likozar, B. (2017), “Levulinic acid hydrodeoxygenation, decarboxylation and oligmerization over 
NiMo/Al2O3 catalyst to bio-based value-added chemicals: modelling of mass transfer, thermodynamics and 
micro-kinetics”, Chemical Engineering Journal, Vol. 330, pp. 383-397. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 104 
 
Relevant Projects 
1. nextBioPharmDSP [EU]: ‘Next-generation biopharmaceutical downstream process’. The scope of the project 
is the optimization of downstream process (DSP) for the production of Biopharmaceuticals. (01/03/2015 – 
28/02/2019). www.nextbiopharmdsp.eu/.  
2. REWOFUEL [EU; subcontractor]: ‘REsidual soft WOod conversion to high characteristics drop -in 
bioFUELs’. REWOFUEL goal is to demonstrate the performances, reliability, environmental and socio -
economic sustainability of the entire value chain, for the transformation of residual soft-wood into hydrolysate 
(RWH), conversion of RWH into bio-Isobutene (bio-IBN) by fermentation and further conversion to biofuels. 
(01/06/2018 – 31/05/2021). www.rewofuel.eu/  
3. CONVERGE [EU]: ‘CarbON Valorisation in Energy -efficient Green fuels’. The CONVERGE project will 
validate an innovative value chain for the production of green biodiesel. (01/11/2018 – 30/04/2022). 
www.converge-h2020.eu/.  
4. ReaxPro [EU]: ‘Software Platform for Multiscale Modelling of Reactive Materials and Processes’. Reactive 
process design has largely been based on trial -and-error experimentation and similarly, reactor design has 
utilised empirical kinetics (data-based models). (01/01/2019 – 28/02/2023). 
www.cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/219982/factsheet/en.  
5. BIOEASTsUP [EU; linked third party]: ‘Advancing Sustainable Circular Bioeconomy in Central and Eastern 
European countries’. The overall objective of BIOEASTsUP project is to support the BIOEAST initiative in 
the implementation of its Vision for 2030 and Action Plan for transition of 11 Central and Eastern European 
(CEE) to bioeconomy. (TBA/2019 – TBA/2022). Website TBA. 
Relevant Infrastructure 
Continuous reactor system with thermo -gravimetry, flow -through nuclear magnetic resonance analyser, 
continuous reactor with mass spectrometry, porosity and adsorption isotherm analyser, high-temperature high-
pressure equilibrium analysis system, fuel cell stack testing system, gas chromatograph with mass spectrometry, 
parallel continuous reactor system (5 units), parallel batch reactor system (6 units), and high -resolution 
transmission electron microscopy equipment. 
 
In BioSPRINT as an in-kind contribution, NIC will purchase equipment and materials for HPLC, UPLC, IR, UV 
and Vis spectroscopy. In addition, NIC will cover any patent filing costs as additional investments for a total value 
of €103,700. 
 
4.1.9 MATURUS OPTIMI BV 
Short Name MAT 
 
Country Netherlands 
Type Small to Medium sized Enterprise 
Website www.maturusoptimi.com 
Short Profile 
Maturus Optimi bv  (MAT) is a n  engineering and strategic consultancy focusing on process design, energy 
efficiency, sustainability and techno-economic feasibility of new and existing industrial processes serving a variety 
of research, technology, engineering and manufacturing organisations across different industrial sector s, such as 
Chemicals, Oil & Gas, Mining, Renewables, Biotech, Biobased, Pharmaceuticals, and Life Science. 
 
MAT applies extensive expert knowledge along with industry standards and inhouse developed tools to support 
process development and scale up activit ies and to deliver cost -effective plant designs. MAT solutions entail: 
detailed and first principle unit operation modelling, dynamic and steady state process simulation, process energy 
analysis, heat and process integration, process equipment design, capital cost estimation, financial assessment and 
risk analysis (Monte Carlo based simulation). MAT areas of expertise include: 
− Process Engineering: dealing with any process engineering challenge in Front End Design (new processes 
and technologies) as well as in Running Plants. With respect to Front End Design, MAT specializes in 
converting new technologies and new process ideas into fully developed process concepts. This 
specifically includes: deriving model -based mass and energy balances, drafting process alternatives, 
optimization, preliminary designs, etc. Furthermore, they identify steps and resources that are necessary 
to complete such tasks. Th is expertise is of great importance to organizations that need to evaluate 
innovative ideas and develop new businesses or products. For Running Plants, MAT offers solutions that 
support plant operation and manufacturing in improving their daily activities.  Most commonly these 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 105 
 
solutions are focused on providing plant staff with model-based advice on process operation and control. 
These so-called decision-making tools are exceptionally effective for improving plant efficiency up to 5% 
or more.   
− Cost Estimating and Process Economics: providing customers with complete business cases, containing 
the economic data related to the project, from capital costs until operational costs. Evaluations are carried 
out for all scenarios whether new or existing plants, full or partial processes. MAT solutions include 
complete economic evaluation with recommendations and risks. In this way, MAT provides guidance to 
R&D and speed up towards a successful project. 
− Socio Economic Assessment:  MAT assesses the economic and social impact which projects have on the 
community and businesses on a larger scale and in the longer run. The impacts are measured by the 
economic and social well -being parameters such as job and value creation, quality of life, health and 
security. MAT helps harness the information to develop a business case for action and make strategic 
recommendations to maximise impact.  
− Energy Efficiency: combining sophisticated modelling tools, various energy analysis methodologies and 
rich industrial experience, MAT provides solutions that meet clients’ energy challenges. For existing plant 
facilities MAT focuses on: evaluating the current status of process energy efficiency, identifying energy 
savings opportunities and recommending energy effective designs and solutions. Depending on different 
factors such as the age, design and adaptability of a plant, MAT’s solutions bring from 3% to over 20% 
in energy efficiency increase. This ultimately results in: reducing the production costs, reducing carbon 
emissions and increasing the product value. Regarding new processes, MAT helps its customers to focus 
on technology selection and design that is led by energy efficient solutions. 
 
MAT has participated in many industrial projects related to process development, design and techno-economic 
optimization studies supporting R&D of many large organizations from various industrial sectors through the 
process of selection and development of new and unproven technologies. Furthermore, MAT has conducted a 
number of research studi es related to improving manufacturing performance through retrofit of the existing and 
the implementation of new technologies.  
 
MAT has extensive experience with the application of the industry standard, state of the art software AspenTech 
to perform techno-economic modelling and simulation of industrial processes.  
 
MAT network of partners includes : DSM, DuPont, Invista, LanzaTech, CPI UK, Ioniqa, Lanxess, Maire 
Tecnimont, Farabi Petrochemical Company, Energie Beheer Nederland (EBN), ECN Netherlands. 
Role in the project 
MAT will be responsible for leading techno -economic and socio -economic assessment studies in Bio SPRINT 
project. The goal is to analyze and evaluate, early on, technological feasibility and economic viability of the 
BioSPRINT solutions for the existing and new biorefineries. MAT identifies limitations, risks and opportunities 
related to the implementation of the new technology, allowing the project to better focus the research and optimize 
the process design at the early phase of the project. 
 
In WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’, MAT will lead the task on the s imulation and analysis 
of the existing and improved biorefinery processes . In particular, MAT will be responsible to define  biorefinery 
process boundaries & collect data . MAT will describe standard biorefinery process  in terms of technology, 
products, wastes stream, process conditions and energy consumption. Process boundaries will be setup to include 
key technological steps relevant for BioSPRINT. Physical properties data will be collected for nonconventional 
compounds. MAT will source data from literature and its own database, as well as relevant information provided 
by industrial partners UPM and FhG . MAT will use  these data and information in order to build a simulation 
model of the baseline biorefinery and validate this using state-of-the-art industry standard software tool AspenPlus. 
As part of WP5, MAT will also support UPM, FhG and DEC to integrate the developed concepts and technologies 
for the UPM stream and the FhG Organosolv streams;  and perform a transferability and replicability case study 
using the stream of associated partner Clariant.  
 
Under WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’ , MAT will contribute in the definitions, settings 
and system description. MAT will be responsible for the techno-economic and socio-economic assessment. MAT 
will develop e conomic models of the improved biorefinery, with P rocess Intensification (PI)  technologies 
implemented, in the state-of-the-art software tool Aspen Process Economic Analyzer. MAT will assess the socio-
economic impact by measuring the contribution of the project to both economic and social well-being and whether 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 106 
 
there are any direct risks to society e.g. health, safety, economic and environmental security, posed by the 
implementation and uptake of BioSPRINT project and target products. 
 
In WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’, MAT will take part in the dissemination and communication activities. 
In addition, MAT will be responsible for the identification of early adopters and post-project opportunities as well 
as the development of a business plan. In particular, MAT will survey the broader market with a view to assessing 
sectoral needs, considering how other actors are responding to the problem in this space.  
 
As part of WP8 ‘Project coordination’, MAT will support the project Coordinator in the overall coordination , 
reporting and management of the project. Moreover, MAT will undertake the role of Innovation, IPR & Data 
Management. MAT, supported by EBOS, will identify and manage innovation from the project, advising the 
Project Manager and partners on the scope and potential of the innovations arising and paying attention to 
discerning IPR at regular checkpoints. Work includes the monitoring of the progress of development of innovative 
tools/services throughout the project. In order t o ensure sustainability, exploitation and marketability of the 
project’s results, MAT will design the IPR protection strategy, and establish IPR management procedures and 
associated activities. All IP produced is monitored and the potential IPR attached to them (e.g. copyright, patent, 
etc.) are verified and cleared for the project's good execution. MAT will also ensure that confidentiality agreements 
and all the partners’ defined IPRs (foreground and background) in the Co nsortium Agreement (CA) are fully 
respected. MAT will additionally assist with IPR protection activities, in view of strategically protecting the most 
compelling innovation from BioSPRINT, when the IP owners request MAT to do so.  
 
MAT will lead the following tasks: 
− T5.1 Simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes  
− T6.3 Techno-economic assessment  
− T6.4 Socio-economic assessment  
− T7.3 Identification of early adopters, post-project opportunities and business plan  
− T8.4 Innovation, IPR & Data Management 
 
MAT will take part in the tasks listed below: 
− T5.2 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream 
− T5.3 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for Organosolv stream (FhG) 
− T5.4 Transferability case study with Clariant Sunliquid® stream  
− T6.1 Definitions, settings and system description  
− T6.5 Process and product safety assessment 
− T6.6 Integrated life cycle sustainability assessment  
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
Key Personnel 
Mladen Crnomarkovic (Male) is the director of Maturus Optimi B.V. (MAT). He holds a MSc degree (University 
of Belgrade, Serbia) in Chemical Engineering and Professional Doctorate of Engineering PDEng (University of 
Twente, The Netherlands). Mladen has extensive experience (14 years) in sustainable chemicals and bioenergy 
gained through years of working for international companies across chemicals, petrochemicals, energy and life 
sciences. He has a deep understanding of innovation, technology implementation, policies, markets and value 
chains of the chemical and bio-based industries. Mladen has led numerous techno-economic assessments and has 
provided business advisory services to private and public organisations, helping them overcome challenges related 
to technology deployment and commercialisation. He has been successful deliv ering international and cross -
functional projects through positive engagement of stakeholders and beneficiaries. Mladen also has hands -on 
experience with design, development and construction of large industrial facilities as well as development of 
energy efficiency programs and low -carbon solutions for industry. From 2004 to 2011 he worked as a Senior 
Researcher in the R&D centres of Unilever and DSM in The Netherlands. This included four months spent in 
Guatemala with the local UN World Food Programme office working on strategic projects related to food security 
and eradication of chronic malnutrition. Since 2011 he has been working as a director of Maturus Optimi 
consultancy, primarily focusing on improving economic viability and market uptake of new and e merging 
technologies. In 2017 he joined, as an external associate and strategy advisor, to E4tech, a London based 
consultancy which focuses on bio-energy and sustainability.  On behalf of E4tech Mladen has led and successfully 
delivered several projects in the area sustainable chemicals and bioenergy including BBIJU’s funded “RoadToBio” 
which created a 2030 roadmap for European bio-based industry. Mladen is fluent in English, Spanish and Serbo-
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 107 
 
Croatian, and has intermediate Dutch. Mladen will serve as the Innovation and Transferability Manager and 
also as Data Protection Officer of MAT. 
 
Marcel Eijkenboom  (Male) is a managing consultant at M AT. Marcel holds a bachelor degree in chemical 
engineering (Hogeschool Heerlen, Netherlands), bachelor degree in econom ics and a masters degree in business 
administration (Economische hogeschool Diepenbeek, Belgium).  Marcel has over 25 years of industry experience 
across sectors (chemicals, pharma, biotech, oil&gas, resins, etc) and disciplines (maintenance, engineering a nd 
R&D). His principle areas of expertise are cost estimating and economic evaluation of industrial facilities, global 
project relocation analysis, Monte Carlo based risk assessment and process development. He has extensive 
experience in design and economi cs of industrial systems and deep knowledge about the impacts of global 
economic factors on the overall project feasibility. Marcel has participated in and manged numerous techno -
economic studies covering a board range of technologies and industries, inclu ding bioenergy and bio -based 
processes. Prior to joining Maturus Optimi in 2011, Marcel worked as senior process engineer in the engineering 
department of DSM and later as a senior researcher in DSM’s R&D centre in Geleen, The Netherlands.  
Relevant Projects 
1. For Dutch DSM and Italy based GF Biochemicals MAT conducted a detailed process design and evaluation 
study of new technology for production of Levulinic acid by thermochemical conversion of 
lignocellulose. In order to  support their development, work a comprehensive process design study of the 
Levulinic acid production process is conducted. A number of process options for lignocellulose pre-treatment, 
reaction and product/by-product separation are considered and evaluated. Detailed mass end energy balances, 
technology design and comparison, energy  efficiency studies, economic evaluation, CAPEX, OPEX and 
financial analysis have been conducted to support the project development and business decisions. 
2. For UK based consortium Invista (UK)/ Lanza Tech (UK)/CPI (UK) which is developing new fermentation 
technology for production of butadiene and other value intermediates from waste gases  Maturus Optimi 
conducted process design and economic evaluation study. In order to evaluate technological and economic 
viability of the project, a complete design of the gas fermentation and product separation process has to be 
developed and valuated. To achieve this, the following task have to be completed: development of process 
concept for the complete waste to chemicals plant, detailed mass and energy balance of the plant, technology 
selection and preliminary equipment design, energy study and optimization, full scale economic evaluation of 
the project (CAPEX, OPEX and Financial Analysis). In addition to the main plant, a similar study has been 
performed for the OBL parts of the plant which include connections to the waste gas source, waste gas 
compression and storage.            
3. Dutch startup IONIQA which developed a proprietary technology for chemical recycle of PET (Polyethylene 
terephthalate) is looking to attract investors and therefore needs to demonstrate that the technology is sound 
and economically viable at the commercial scale. For this purpose , Maturus Optimi performed a scale up 
study, design and economic evaluation of commercial scale plant for chemical recycling of PET  
(Polyethylene terephthalate).  Our scope of work included:  Process concept development, design and techno-
economic evaluation of chemical recycle PET plant; Project investment appraisal; Detailed simulation model 
development for technology analysis, drafting process alternatives and process equipment preliminary design; 
Model based planning and support of scale up activities from lab to pilot (100 lit.) to demo (10 k ta) scale; 
Development of Basis of Design (BOD) document for contractors and conceptual design phase.  
4. For a US based developer of gasification technology Anellotech, Maturus Optimi has performed an integral 
process design and economic evaluation study of lignin gasification process into olefins and aromatics. 
Our scope of work included: development of process concept, design of biomass gasifier, catalyst recovery 
unit and downstream processing i.e. separation of light olefins, B,T,N and X; Process modellin g and 
simulation, development and tuning of process mass and energy balance, process analysis for different 
scenarios of lignin conversion and product selectivity ; Process optimization studies, including energy 
efficiency and heat and process integration study (Pinch analysis) of the Gasification and Downstream 
processing units; Creating of BOD document, full scale economic feasibility study: CAPEX, OPEX and 
investment appraisals for several process alternatives.  
5. For companies Roquette and DSM, Maturus Op timi has conducted a full -scale evaluation of yeast-based 
fermentation technology for production of succinic acid from plant derived starch/sugar feedstock  including 
comparison with other fermentation based technologies. Scope of work included: development  of process 
concept, technology selection and design of biobased succinic acid production based low pH yeast 
fermentation, including feedstock pre -treatment, product separation and purification, waste water treatment 
and other auxiliary production facilities. Project scope building and valuation study including AACE level 4 
cost estimate, economic and financial analysis, comparison with bacteria -based fermentation technology for 
production of Succinic acid.         
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 108 
 
Relevant Infrastructure 
MAT will be doing desktop studies which include plant design, modelling and simulation, economic assessments, 
etc. MAT has the adequate knowledge and software tools to conduct these studies. Working for many years across 
various industry sectors including chemicals and biotechnology, MAT has built a significant knowledge base about 
process equipment, plant design and operation but also an extensive data base on equipment and labour cost  which 
allow us to perform accurate cost estimates of large and small scale plants built in various locations in Europe and 
worldwide.  
In BioSPRINT as an in-kind contribution, MAT will purchase license for the AspenONE software which will be 
used for simulation and economic evaluation of existing and new biorefinery processes for a total cost of €72,000. 
 
4.1.10 OULUN YLIOPISTO 
Short Name UOULU 
 
Country Finland 
Type Academic 
Website www.UOULU.fi 
Short Profile 
OULUN YLIOPISTO (UOULU) is a multidisciplinary university with 16,000 students and over 3,000 employees 
located in the north of Finland. The university has eight faculties which range from humanities and medicine to 
business, science and technology. The structure of the Univers ity and its wide collaboration network allows it to 
build multidisciplinary projects, conduct high level research and contribute to solving global challenges in the 
following five focus areas:  
1) Creating sustainability through materials and systems;  
2) Molecular and environmental basis for lifelong health;  
3) Digital solutions in sensing and interactions;  
4) Earth and near-space system and environmental change and  
5) Understanding humans in change. 
 
UOULU collaborates in many ways with various partners to meet the changing demands of information and work 
life, and to promote well -being and competitiveness of the society. UOULU has a proven track record of 
participating in the EU Framework programmes throug hout their evolution since FP4. Currently, UOULU 
coordinates 15 European projects. In the Horizon 2020 programme only, the University has more than 75 approved 
projects.  
 
UOULU is well equipped to manage large -scale projects with multiple international pa rtners. To support the 
talented researchers and high -quality infrastructures, the University provides  a range of support services to 
facilitate successful management and implementation of its  multiple projects. Research Support Services, Legal 
Services and Innovation Services help  the researchers in contract, project management, commercialisation and 
IPR-issues. 
 
The participating unit is the Environmental and Chemical Engineering Research Unit (ECE) from the Faculty of 
Technology. The research unit comprises several teams bringing expertise from various fields of engineering, such 
as separation technology, catalyst and  reactor design, sustainability assessment, process modeling, control and 
optimization and  intelligent methods in process automation.  UOULU has versatile expertise in separation 
processes, including membrane technologies (micro -, ultra - and nanofiltration, reverse osmosis and 
pervaporation), distillation, absorption, adsorption and ion-exchange, photocatalysis and ScCO2 extraction based 
on former projects in several application areas.  
 
In addition, UOULU has expertise in photocatalytic membrane separation. The knowhow on heterogeneous 
catalysis is long-lasting both in environmental and process catalysis, which helps to understand the needs set to 
the up-stream purification and separation processes and supports also our modeling group in their studies. UOULU 
has strong experience on utilization of design of experiments and machine learning algorithms, such as automatic 
variable selection methods, artificial neural networks (ANN) and genetic algorithms (GA) with a wide application 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 109 
 
field. The earliest work stem from 1990s. Further, UOULU holds expertise in process modeling, control and soft 
sensing and recently UOULU has been involved in developing process control tools for intensified processes in 
H2020SPIRE –project. Sustainability assessment, criteria development and process safety are as well mastered by 
the process engineers in the group with the methodological expertise provided by the Industrial Engineering and 
Management Research Unit. 
 
UOULU is an Associate Member of the Bio-based Industries Consortium (BIC) which represents the private sector 
in the Bio-based Industries Joint Undertaking (BBI JU), the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) with the European 
Commission. 
Role in the project 
UOULU will lead WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’ aiming to perform the analysis of feedstocks 
establishing technical composition specifications, and analytical comparisons; obtain a stream free of solids 
suitable to be fed to membranes systems; establish a hybrid membrane purification system for the removal of 
inorganic and organic impurities and concentration of hemicelluloses; develop robust systems for handling of 
viscous and solid streams in the process; enhance water and solvent reuse strategies; generate experimental data 
for the validation of the process system engineering tools. In particular, in the analysis of treated hemicellulose 
streams UOULU will specifically leverage its existing expertise in PAT, providing time-on-stream information to 
the operators of bio -refineries. In addition, UOULU will focus on membran e purification as an intrinsically 
intensified separation technology by testing different membrane materials so as to select the best membranes. In 
addition to membranes, UOULU will combine hybrid processes where membrane purification with conventional 
purification processes may be needed in order to explore how the streams may be fractioned by combining micro-
, ultra- and nanofiltration in series. Within WP1, UOULU will also be in charge of the water recovery to improve 
the water efficiency of biorefineries by recovering and reusing the water streams originated from different stages 
of the purification process. 
 
In WP2 ‘Intensification of Catalytic Conversion’, UOULU will lead the task dedicated to catalyst Development 
using HTP Methods aiming to deliver robust catalyst formulations for integrated conversion of C5 and C6 sugars 
into a single reactor, coupled with extraction of reactive furan intermediated. Based on assets from FUNBARK, 
UOULU will develop machine learning algorithms including variable selecti on, evolutionary optimisation, 
intelligent model identification and model validation . The resulted models will be employed to create predictive 
ability between experimental data and accelerate catalyst development and optimisation.  
 
Under WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream Purification’ , UOULU will be in charge of the i dentification of 
downstream scale-up challenges. Process system engineering (PSE) tools can prevent some typical shortcomings 
of the scale-up of the units from the laboratory to final commercial scale. Data from experimental laboratory results 
will be collected/ analysed to define PSE target. Then, the analysis of distillation (and extraction), using CFD 
tools, as well as the validation with experiments will be performed, also considering the control/PAT development 
for units. UOULU will provide a set of the recommendations for the successful scale -up process of downstream 
purification processes/separation PSE. 
 
In WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation Intensi fication’, UOULU will be involved 
in the identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools.  
 
Within WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’ , UOULU will participate in the s imulation and 
analysis of the e xisting and improved biorefinery processes  supporting the development and testing of the 
simulation models, and assist in linking the results from the plant -wide biorefinery simulations and work 
conducted in WP1-4 and WP6-7. UOULU will also assist DEC to perform a transferability and replicability case 
study using the stream of associated partner Clariant taking the lead on the t ransferability tests for intensified 
technologies. 
 
In WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’ , UOULU will lead the Process and product safety 
assessment, addressing both regulatory and technical barriers. The analysis will utilize quantitative and qualitative 
risk assessment techniques such as fault tree analysis, machinery safety criteria and Hazop (hazard and operability 
study) to identify potential process safety risks and occupational accident and health hazards. As a result, UOULU 
will produce a list of identified safety hazards and an analysis focusing on their risk assessment.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 110 
 
As part of WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’ , UOULU will take part in the dissemination and 
communication activities, the development and delivery of a scalable training and capacity-building programme, 
in particular with the organisation of a Finland-based capacity-building workshop (1 day).  
 
In WP8 ‘Project coordination’, UOULU will support the project Coordinator in the overall project coordination, 
management and reporting as leader of WP1.  
 
UOULU will lead the following tasks: 
− T1.3 Hybrid membrane purification and concentration of hemicellulose sugars 
− T1.5 Solvent and water recovery 
− T2.1 Catalyst Development using HTP Methods 
− T3.4 Identification of downstream scale-up challenges 
− T6.5 Process and product safety assessment 
 
UOULU will participate in the tasks below: 
− T1.1 Analysis of treated hemicellulose streams 
− T1.4 Identification of upstream scale-up challenges via process systems engineering (PSE) tools 
− T2.4 Identification of reaction scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools 
− T4.5 Identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via process systems engineering tools 
− T5.1 Simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes  
− T5.4 Transferability case study with Clariant Sunliquid® stream  
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T7.2 Training, Education and Capacity Building programme (TECBP) 
− T8.1 Project coordination and reporting 
 
In BioSPRINT as an in-kind contribution, UOULU will recruit a PhD student fully funded by the Professorship in 
Biorefinery Measurements in UOULU (Faculty of Technology and Kajaani University Consortium) to support the 
process systems engineering (PSE) tasks for a total value of €37,500.  
Key Personnel 
Riitta L. Keiski (Female) is a Professor in Mass and Heat Transfer and the Dean of the Faculty of Technology at 
OULUN YLIOPISTO (UOULU). She has long experience (~30 years) in research in process and environmental 
catalysis, sustainability assessment, nanomaterials,  separation processes (especially membranes, adsorption 
materials, ion-exchange, ScCO2 extraction), and reactor design. Prof. Keiski is Adj. Professor in Chemical process 
engineering, especially in Heterogeneous Catalysis and Environmental Engineering; and Dr. honoris causa at three 
universities in Finland and abroad. Prof. Keiski has supervised 27 doctoral theses, is the principal supervisor for 
20 doctoral students, has totally over 230 publications in peer -reviewed journals, more than 400 other scientifi c 
contributions and one patent. She has coordinated tens of research and infrastructure projects financed by the 
Academy of Finland (AF), Finnish Funding Agency for Innovations (Business Finland), EU, foundations and 
industry. She is a member of the Board of the Academy of Finland, has had several other national and international 
academic responsibilities, and is an active evaluator of national and international research proposals, projects etc.   
 
Mika Ruusunen (Male) is a Professor, at the Environmental and Chemical Engineering Research Unit (EGE) of 
the Faculty of Technology at UOULU. He is responsible for a professorship in Biorefinery measurements. His 
research interests include advanced data-analysis, modelling and predictive optimization of production processes. 
He has more than 20 years on practical experience on energy conversation and bio -based processes utilizing 
biomass and organic residues as a feedstock. There, development of measurements, monitoring, and automatic 
control methods  to gain energy and material efficiency have been in research focus. His research interests 
additionally include optimization methods in demand response and peak load cutting at city wide level. The 
research additionally includes design of experimental set -ups including instrumentation, data acquisition, and 
statistical measurement analyses. He has planned and acquired successful funding for these research projects, 
totally over 3 Meur. 
 
Arto Reiman (Male) is an Adjunct professor, D.Sc. (Tech.) working as a  research team leader at the University 
of Oulu under the Industrial Engineering and Management discipline. Reiman has a versatile experience in the 
fields of occupational health and safety, human factors and risk management. In addition to working in the 
academia, Reiman has practical experience from private consulting sector where he led or participated in several 
projects concerned with human health impact assessments and process safety development. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 111 
 
 
Markku Ohenoja (Male) is a Postdoctoral Researcher at UOULU and he has been working in the area of process 
engineering in UOULU for over ten years. He was a post-graduate student in International Doctoral Programme 
in Bioproducts Technology (PaPSaT) and received his doctorate from UOULU in 2016. His work has focused on 
process modeling and simulation, control design, and process optimization in number of research project with 
application areas consisting of chemical processes, water treatment, fuel cells, papermaking, and mineral 
beneficiation. He has contributed to more than 25 technical and scientific publications. Markku will be the Leader 
of WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’. Markku will serve as the Data Protection Officer of UOULU. 
 
Hanna Valkama (Female) is working as a doctoral student at UOULU. Her research topics include separation 
processes at the biorefineries as well as water purification. She has worked in different projects related to ionic 
liquids and deep eutectic solvents purification and dehyd ration by membrane technologies as well as water 
purification by membrane technologies and adsorption. 
 
Maria Lindholm (Female) is a doctoral student at the University of Oulu, Finland, at the Department of Industrial 
Engineering and Management. Her main research interests are occupational safety and well-being at work and she 
has experience on variety of risk analysis methods used e.g. in process hazard analysis . She completed her MSc 
in Industrial Engineering and Management in 2016 and has performed a research exchange period in Karolinska 
Institutet and KTH (Sweden) during 2019. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Ohenoja, M., Boodhoo, K., Reay, D., Paavola, M. & Leiviskä K. (2018) Process control in intensiﬁed 
continuous solids handling. Chemical Engineering & Processing: Process Intensiﬁcation, 131, pp. 59–69. 
2. Pirilä M., Lenkkeri R., Goldmann W.M., Kordas K., Huuhtanen M. & Keiski   R.L. (2013) Photocatalytic 
degradation of butanol in aqueous solutions by TiO2 nanofibres. Topics in Catalysis 56, pp. 630–636. 
3. Niemistö J., Saavalainen P., Pongracz E., & Keiski R.L. (2013) Biobutanol as a potential sustainable biofuel 
- Assessment of lignocellulosic and waste-based feedstocks. Journal of Sustainable Development of Energy, 
Water and Environmental Systems 1(2), pp. 58–77.  
4. García V. Valkama H., Sliz R., King A.W.T., Myllylä R., Kilpeläinen I. & Keiski R.L. (2013) Pervaporation 
recovery of [AMIM]Cl during wood dissolution; effect of [AMIM]Cl properties on the membrane 
performance. Journal of Membrane Science 444, pp. 9–15. 
5. Ohenoja M. & Leiviskä, K. (2010) Validation of genetic algorithm results in a fuel cell model. International 
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, Vol. 35 (22), pp. 12618–12625. 
Relevant Projects 
1. SelDES [ERDF]: ‘New bioproducts and –chemicals from cellulose side streams using a DES -based refining 
concept’: UOULU’s task is purification and dehydration of deep eutectic solvents used in processing of 
different cellulosic side products. The target is to desi gn a feasible solvent recycling process. (2018 –2020) 
www.UOULU.fi/pyokui/seldes  
2. IbD [EU]: “Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handling" IbD® 
Project has created a holistic platform for facilitating process intensification design and optimisation in 
processes in which solids are an intrinsic part across the ceramic processing, pharmaceutical, chemical, 
mineral and ore processing sectors.” UOULU provided the control analysis toolbox for the holistic platform 
facilitating process intensification design and optimization. UOULU also contributed to case studies with 
advanced process control and real -time model adaptation with evolutionary optimization. (01/09/2015-
31/08/2018). www.ibd-project.eu/  
3. FUNBARK [Academy of Finland]: ‘Fundamentals of Barkhausen noise and magnetic field modelling 
Multidisciplinary approach to implement sweep measurements for industrial quality control’: UOULU 
developed the signal processing and data -driven modeling tools needed for  reliable quantitative surface 
characterization. (2015–2019). www.researchgate.net/project/Fundamentals-of-Barkhausen-noise-and-
magnetic-field-modelling-Multidisciplinary-approach-to-implement-sweep-measurements-for-industrial-
quality-control.  
4. FuBio [TEKES]: ‘Future Biorefineries’: The research program aimed finding new products for forest biomass 
in the future bioeconomy. UOULU performed dehydration of ionic liquids used in dissolution of cellulose. 
(2011–2014). www.oulu.fi/energy/node/15154  
5. BIOMECON [TEKES]: ‘Measurement and control technologies for renewing paper industry and 
biorefinery’: The target was to develop measuring and control solutions, which will increase the profitability 
of existing processes and also enable the realization of new economically profitable and environmentally 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 112 
 
friendly chemical wood production processes. (2009–2012) www.researchgate.net/project/Measurement-and-
control-technologies-for-renewing-paper-industry-and-biorefinery-BIOMECON.  
Relevant Infrastructure 
UOULU has several membrane separation units, both laboratory and pilot scale, pilot -scale supercritical CO 2 
extraction unit and fraction and micro distillation units. In addition, UOULU has a hybrid photocatalytic membrane 
unit. 
 
4.1.11 PREFERE RESINS GERMANY GMBH 
Short Name PFR 
 
Country Germany 
Type Industrial 
Website www.prefere.com  
Short Profile 
PREFERE RESINS GERMANY GMBH  (PFR) is part of the Prefere Resins Group , the leading European 
manufacturer of high quality phenolic, specialty urea and melamine resins. In the Erkner site, mainly resoles and 
novolacs are produced.  
 
Product development is a key focus area for PFR, generating new innovative products and applications as well as 
customised existing products to meet customer’s needs. High emphasis is placed on sustainability, emission 
reduction and alternative products. With a number of product development facilities in Germany, Finland, Austria, 
and the U.S. PFR develop resins, additives, and solutions to enable and support customers with their products and 
innovation processes. experienced specialists make sure that these products are at the forefront of technology and 
constantly adapted to the changing needs of the industries. PFR’s target of development is to provide products 
fulfilling high demands on performance, legal and environmental requirements. Utilization of renewables as raw 
material is a main topic among others in PFR’s development work over last decades. 
 
As one of the global market leaders , PFR supplies its customers with a wide range of tailor -made resins for a 
number of different applications in construction, insulation and in technical applications.  
 
PHENOLICS MELAMINES PARAFORM 
Use/Field Applications Type Applications Methanol derivatives 
Construction 
wood materials, 
paper 
impregnation. 
Coating resins  
 
Automotive OEM, 
Industrial and Food 
Packaging fields; Formaldehyde 
Paraformaldehyde 
Hexamethylenetetramine 
Dimethoxymethane 
Potassium Cyanate 
Sodium Cyanate 
Triallylcyanurat 
Industrial 
phenolic foams, 
foundry, 
abrasives, 
automotive 
filters, friction 
materials etc. 
Specialties 
resins 
Rubber, Specialty and 
Decorative Papers, and 
Textiles 
Insulation 
 
mineral wool, 
glass fibre 
tissue. 
Technical 
resins 
Laminates and Technical 
Surfaces. 
 
PFR maintains a long tradition of minimising the environmental impact of its processes and products focusing 
work on openness and continuous improvement. PFR’s production sites, using modern technology and cleaner 
production processes, as well as producing more environmentally sound products, represent a competitive 
advantage in the markets they serve. All the sites of Prefere Resins Group in Europe are certified to the ISO 14001 
environmental standard. PFR’s production site in Germany has already gone one step further by establishing an 
environmental management system according to the European Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS).  
Role in the project 
In BioSPRINT, PFR will be mainly involved in WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation 
Intensification’. In particular, PFR will be in charge of the d evelopment and testing of novolac -and resol-type 
resins and applications. Moreover, thy will support AEP on the development and testing of bio-based polyols, and 
applications. PFR will also support UNEW in the process intensification of bio-based polymer production. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 113 
 
As part of WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’, PFR will be involved in the scale-up of optimal 
product formulations. The most promising polyols, pre -polymers and resins produced by AEP and PFR will be 
selected, characteristics benchmarked, and their developed syntheses replicated through the multiple repeatable 
batches in small –medium bench scale (1 –3 kg) in order to analyse optimal process conditions, assess average 
standard QC properties, and define preliminary tentative specification, thus setting the premises for the scale -up 
to a near-industrial pilot level. 
 
Under WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’, PFR will take part in the process and product safety 
assessment supporting AEP to assess the safety of new bio -based products, taking into account also their 
production processes. 
 
In WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation ’, PFR will support the Coordinator in the Multidimensional 
dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities in order to develop the project’s 
multidimensional dissemination & communication  (D&C) plan and undertake stakeholder base building and 
stakeholder engagement activities via BBI-JU. 
 
PFR will lead: 
− T4.1 Development and testing of novolac-and resole-type resins and their applications in wood laminates 
 
In addition, they will participate in the following tasks: 
− T4.2 Development and testing of bio-based polyols and their applications in rigid PU foams 
− T4.3 Process intensification of bio-based polymer production 
− T5.5 Optimization and first upscaling of the best synthetic products 
− T6.5 Process and product safety assessment, addressing both regulatory and technical barriers 
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Elke Fliedner (Female)  is Technology Manager for Industrial applications  at PREFERE RESINS 
GERMANY GMBH (PFR). She is leading the R&D department at the Erkner site since 2014. She started working 
for PFR in 1998 as development chemist. Between 1994-1998 she worked as project le ader at one of the 
Fraunhofer Institutes near Berlin. She holds a PhD degree in chemistry, with specialization in polymer chemistry. 
In her career she was always busy with thermosetting resins, their synthesis and processing in different 
applications. She was leading in some development and research projects dealing with renewables - e.g. proteins 
or lignin. 
Relevant Publications 
1. Fliedner, Heep, van Herwijnen: Verwendung nachwachsender Rohstoffe in Bindemitteln für Holzwerkstoffe“, 
Chemie Ingenieur Technik 2010, 82, No. 8, 1161. 
2. Fliedner: “Möglichkeiten der industriellen Nutzung von Organosolvlignin zur Herstellung von Phenolharzen”; 
Chemie Ingenieur Technik 2014, 86, No. 9, 1516. 
Relevant Projects 
Lignocellulose Biorefinery project [Germany]: Investigation, how lignin derived from new organosolv process 
could be substantially used for synthesis and application of phenolic resins. 
Relevant Infrastructure 
PFR has a well working development laboratory for synthesis and analytics, options for several application tests 
and relevant analytical methods to describe resin properties (viscosity, solids, solvent content, remaining free 
monomers, pH), advanced methods l ike molecular weight distribution (HPLC, GPC), thermal analysis (DCS, 
STA) and different tests related to special applications (mechanical testing, surface tension, flame retardancy, etc.) 
 
 
4.1.12 UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE 
Short Name UNEW  
Country United Kingdom 
Type Academic 
Website www.ncl.ac.uk 
Short Profile 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 114 
 
UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE (UNEW) is a Higher Education Institution in the United 
Kingdom. It is part of the Russell Group, which represents 24 leading UK universities which are committed to 
maintaining the very best research and outstanding teaching and learning experience. There are currently 24,696 
undergraduate and post-graduate students registered on full-time and part-time courses at the University. UNEW 
employs a total of 5,786 staff.  
 
UNEW will involve its Process Intensification Group. The Process Intensification Group is part of the School 
Engineering in the Faculty of Science, Agriculture and Engineering (SAgE). The PI group is part of the discipline 
area of Chemical En gineering and currently has 1 5 members of research active academic staff, 9 research 
associates and 42 PhD students, being currently the largest group working on process intensification in the world. 
In particular, the PI Group counts the membership of:  
 
− Prof Adam Harvey, Professor of Process Intensification; 
− Prof David Reay, Senior Research Associate; 
 
The concept of Process intensification (PI) centres on orders of magnitude reductions in the size of process 
equipment, leading to substantial capital and running costs savings, and enabling new processes to break through 
competitive markets. The PI group at Newcastle has been developing novel approaches to equipment design and 
process synthesis with the aim of miniaturising process plants and making these environmentally friendly. The   
group’s research activities involve spinning disc reactors  (SDRs), 
rotating packed beds, oscillatory baffled reactors, micro -reactors, 
plasma reactors, intensified bioreactors, and compact heat 
exchangers among other technologies. UNEW has also developed 
experience in design, synthesis and industrial applications of 
heterogeneous catalysts, and in green chemistry and biorenewable 
processes. The Group has experience in designing intensified 
technologies to address separation processes such as liquid -liquid 
extractions and absorption/desorption in CO 2 sequestration 
applications in high gravity systems which are of direct relevance. 
UNEW is also developing technology for sustainable processing 
applications, including research on CO 2 capture and valorisation 
using heterogeneous catalysts and photo/bio/electrical catalysts. The 
Group have experience in planning and conducting prototype, pilot 
and full scale plant test work for validation of lab scale technologies 
and scale up of equipment. 
 
With regards to Brexit, UNEW remains committed to participation in H2020 and hope that the UK reaches an 
agreement allowing continued participation in H2020 and successor programmes. In case this proves impossible, 
the UK government has made public assurances that “where UK organisations bid directly to the EC (…) for EU 
funding projects while [the UK is] still a member of the EU, the Treasury will underwrite the payments, even when 
specific projects continue beyond the UK’s departure from the EU . In addition, it announced the gu arantee is 
extended to the end of 2020, even in a no deal scenario.  
Role in the project 
UNEW will also play a major role in development of continuous and intensified methods of upstream purification, 
catalytic conversion, downstream purification and polymerization. UNEW will contribute with inputs to process 
simulation, LCA, economical assessment, dissemination and exploitation activities. Most importantly, UNEW will 
undertake Technical Management for the project, ensuring technical work is appropriately coordinated across all 
WPs and directly contributes to the realisation of the project’s impact. 
 
In WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’ , UNEW will design the precipitation and solids handling 
processes. In particular, UNEW will be in charge of the intensification of precipitation using Spinning Disc 
Reactors and the o ptimisation of partic le formation for enhanced solids recovery . UNEW will also support 
UOULU in the hybrid membrane purification and concentration of hemicelluloses sugars activities. 
 
UNEW will lead WP2 ‘Intensification of Catalytic Conversion’, aiming to: develop robust predictive models for 
catalyst composition and catalysts for simultaneous C5 and C6 sugars dehydration; develop kinetic models to 
describe the conversion and aqueous-organic partition of multiple C5/C6 sugars; intensify the dehydration reaction 
Figure 3: New pilot scale facility to test 
amines for CO2 capture 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 115 
 
by integration of the conversion of multiple C5 and C6 sugars to furans in a single unit ; investigate the effect of 
upstream purification efficiency in catalyst lifetime and production yields. In more detail, UNEW will participate 
in the catalyst development using HTP Methods and the experiments to test and evaluate different reactions for 
realistic stream mixtures. UNEW will also be in charge of the d evelopment of extractive reaction intensification 
process. 
 
As part of WP3 ‘Intensification of Downstream Puri fication’, UNEW will participate in the p reparatory 
processing actions for downstream and lead the intensification of downstream purification processes focusing in 
the reduction in foot print and hazardous inventory for the liquid -liquid decanter unit that separates the aqueous 
and the organic phases with an emphasis on the intensification and integration of heat transfer in distillation units.  
 
In WP4 ‘Development of Biorenewable Resins and Polymerisation Intensification’, UNEW will support AEP in 
the development of rigid foams from bio-based polyols under which new resins and polyols developed as part of 
WP4 will be used in industrial reference formulations for thermosetting adhesives and fibre-reinforced composites 
and for rigid polyurethane foams. In addition, UNEW will lead the process intensification of bio-based polymer 
production. Based on the formulations developed for the bio-based novolac-type resins and Mannich-type polyols, 
which will be studied in conventional batch stirred tank reactor technologies, protocols will be developed to 
transfer the optimised formulations to a continuously operated polymerisation process with a view to upscaling 
the production of selected polymers from grams to kg scale. 
 
In WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’ UNEW will be involved in the simulation and analysis 
of the existing and improved biorefinery processes  supporting the development and testing  of the simulations 
models, and assist in linking the results from the plant-wide biorefinery simulations and work conducted in WP1-
4 and WP6-7. UNEW will also assist UPM and FhG to integrate the developed concepts and technologies for the 
UPM stream and the FhG Organosolv streams respectively.  
 
As part of WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’, UNEW will be actively involved in the development of the 
project’s multidimensional dissemination & communication (D&C) plan an d the delivery of the D&C activities. 
In addition, UNEW will support NIC in order to develop and deliver a scalable training and capacity -building 
programme, in particular UNEW will organise one capacity -building workshop at its premises in Year 2 of the 
project. UNEW will also contribute to existing and emerging standards by supporting DEC with the establishment 
of a CENELEC Workshop Agreement on ‘PI for biorefining processes’.  
 
In WP8 ‘Project coordination’, will support the project Coordinator in the overall coordination, reporting and 
management, as leader of WP2. Moreover, UNEW will undertake the role of Technical Management, leveraging 
Process Intensification expertise . UNEW will  monitor the technical progress of the project according to the 
contractual schedule; the preparation of technical deliverables . UNEW will p rovide technical expertise in the 
coordination and steering of efforts in the technical WPs, while assisting in the technical soundness and feasibility 
assessment of all the project’s tasks.  
 
UNEW will lead the following tasks: 
− T1.2 Precipitation and solids handling 
− T2.3 Development of extractive reaction intensification 
− T3.3 Intensification of Downstream Purification Processes  
− T4.4 Identification of polymerisation scale-up challenges via PSE tools 
− T8.2 Technical management 
 
UNEW will participate in the tasks below: 
− T1.3 Hybrid membrane purification and concentration of hemicellulose sugars 
− T2.1 Catalyst Development using HTP Methods 
− T2.2 Reactions for realistic stream mixtures  
− T3.1 Preparatory processing actions for downstream  
− T4.3 Process intensification of bio-based polymer production 
− T5.1 Simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes  
− T5.2 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream 
− T5.3 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for Organosolv stream (FhG) 
− T5.5 Scale-up of optimal product formulations 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 116 
 
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T7.2 Training, Education and Capacity Building programme (TECBP) 
− T7.4 Contribution to existing and emerging standards 
− T8.1 Project coordination and reporting 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Fernando J Russo Abegão (male) is a Teaching Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced 
Materials. Fernando holds a Licenciatura degree in Chemical Engineering, University of Coimbra, Portugal and a 
PhD degree from the University of Cambridge, UK. Fernando’s research focus is on catalysis and reaction 
engineering with a particular interest in process intensification and  biorenewable applications. Current work 
applications include process intensification of biodiesel and glycerol conversion processes, CO2 conversion into 
chemicals and fuels, photocatalysis, catalytic upgrade of biomass, and intensified synthesis of hetero geneous 
catalysts. Fernando is a CoI in a Marie Skłodowska -Curie Innovative Training Networks – CHARMING – 
Chemical Engineering Immersive Learning, 500k EUR (H2020-MSCA-ITN-2018, proposal number 812716). He 
has also been awarded 5 research early career res earch grants over the last 3 academic years on a total of £90k. 
Fernando has an extensive background in industrial catalysis. He worked for Johnson Matthey as a Senior Research 
Scientist and as a Process Development Engineer investigating catalyst manufact uring processes and developing 
a new generation of manufacturing methods. He has coordinated multiple industrial trials involving partners across 
Europe and he led the technical design of a multi -million pounds state -of-the-art facility for manufacture of 
heterogeneous catalyst. Additionally, he managed the upgrade and commissioning of two manufacturing lines. 
Fernando also worked on development and design of Platinum Group Metal catalysts for several chemical, 
petrochemical and biorenewable applications, h aving taken part in the development of the formulation of 4 
commercial heterogeneous catalysts.  Dr. Fernando will be the Leader of WP2 ‘Intensification of Catalytic 
Conversion’. 
 
Dr. Kamelia Boodhoo (female) is a Reader in Sustainable Process Technology within the Chemical Engineering 
stream in the School Engineering at Newcastle University, UK. Her expertise is on the development of continuous 
flow reactors with particular emphasis on centrifugal field reactors such the Spinning Disc Reactor (SDR) and 
their application to a range of processes involving polymerisation, crystallisation, polymerisation and organic 
catalytic reactions. Since 2001, she has secured over £1M of research income as PI and Co -I. The most recent 
award in 2015 was €640k of funding as PI for the “Intensified by Design (IbD)” project supported by Horizon2020 
SPIRE-8 Programme as part of a large consortium of 22 EU academic and industrial partners (Total project funding 
€8.5M). In the last 15 years, she has attracted over £200k of industri al funding from multinational organisations 
such as Total Oil, Roquette Freres and Eastman Chemicals. Between 2004 and 2018, she has successfully 
supervised 10 full-time PhD students and 6 postdoctoral researchers in the area of process intensification, spinning 
disc reactor, polymerisation, crystallisation and fermentation processes. She is currently supervising a further 3 
PhD students. She has published over 35 peer-reviewed articles in leading scientific journals, 7 book chapters and 
more than 30 confer ence papers. She is the lead editor of “Process Intensification for Green Chemistry: 
Engineering Solutions for Sustainable Processing” (Wiley -Blackwell, 2013).  Dr. Kamelia will serve as the 
Technical Manager. 
 
Maureen Wilkinson (Female) is a Chief Informat ion Security Officer at UNEW. She is an experienced 
Data/Information Governance Manager with a demonstrated history of working in the Health Sector, Higher 
Education and utilities industry. She is skilled in Data Protection, Incident Management, Informatio n Risk 
Management, Strategy, Information Security Governance and IT Service Processes. Maureen will serve as the 
Data Protection Officer of UNEW. 
Relevant Publications 
1. S. Sana, K. Boodhoo, V. Zivkovic, Production of starch nanoparticles through solvent-antisolvent 
precipitation in a spinning disc reactor, Green Processing and Synthesis, 8, 510–518 (2019) 
2. Wang H., Mustaffar A., Phan A., Zivkovic V., Reay D., Law R., Boodhoo K. (2017) “A review of process 
intensification applied to solids handling”, Chemical Engineering and Processing, 118, 78–107.  
3. Mohammadi S., Harvey A., Boodhoo K.V.K. Synthesis of TiO2 nanoparticles in a spinning disc reactor. 
Chem.  Eng. J. 258, 171–184 (2014). 
4. Boodhoo K.V.K., Al-Hengari S., Micromixing characteristics in a small -scale spinning disk reactor, Chem. 
Eng. Technol., 35(7), 1229-1237 (2012) 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 117 
 
5. Boodhoo, K.V.K., Cartwright, C.D., Vicevic, M., Prieto, M.A., Tortejada, M. “Development of a Higee 
Bioreactor (HBR) for production of PHA: hydrodynamics, gas-liquid mass transfer and fermentation studies”, 
Chemical Engineering & Processing: Process Intensification, 49 (7), 748-758 (2010).   
Relevant Projects 
1. IbD [EU]: “Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handling" IbD® 
Project has created a holistic platform for facilitating process intensification design and optimisation in 
processes in which solids are an intrinsic part a cross the ceramic processing, pharmaceutical, chemical, 
mineral and ore processing sectors.” (01/09/2015-31/08/2018). www.ibd-project.eu/  
2. ‘Evaluation of Process Intensification on Early Development or Retrofittin g Existing Processes for 
Green & Sustainability Benefits ’ [Other]: Funded by the Economic Development Board (Singapore) and 
GSK (Singapore). (10/2013-09/2017).  
3. Process Intensification of Biodiesel Production from Microalgae  [Other]: Proof of concept proje ct to 
deploy intensification of microalgae harvesting, oil extraction and conversion steps, including cell wall 
cellulose photocatalytic degradation for enhanced oil recovery (2016 -2017). funded by the SuperGen 
Bioenergy Hub, EPSRC, UK 
4. BIOPRODUCTION [EU]: “Sustainable Microbial and Biocatalytic Production of Advanced Functional 
Materials” (01/09/2006 - 31/12/2010). 
5. “Kinetics and Mechanisms of Rapid Radical Polymerizations in Spinning Disc Reactors”, [Other]: funded by 
EPSRC (01/10/2001-30/4/2005). 
Relevant Infrastructure 
Pilot scale Rotary Packed Beds, Spining Disc Reactors, Oscillatory Baffled 
Reactors and cold plasma technologies for biorefining, pyrolysis, 
gasification are readily available in UNEW’s labs as are various other lab -
scale PI equipment such as Agitated Cell Reactor (ACR), Taylor-Couette 
reactor (TCR), a Heat-Pipe Screw Dryer, Plasma Reactor, Micro-Fluidised 
Beds, Gas Bubbling Column Photoreactor (125 W Medium pressure 
Mercury Lamp) etc. UNEW’s 3D printing lab is equipped with facilities to 
make microstructured components for use in our reactors and se parators. 
The PI lab is also equipped with a range of analytical equipment including 
UV/Vis Spectrophotometers (off -line/in-situ, transmittance and 
reflectance), FTIR Spectrometers (off-line/in-situ monitoring), HPLC, GC 
& GCMS, Calorimeters, Coulometric T itration, dissolved oxygen, 
conductivity and turbidity probes, Bohlin Viscometer.  UNEW also has access to a number of shared analytical 
facilities in the School’s Analysis Suite and the University’s Advanced Chemical & Materials Analysis unit which 
include a Malvern Zetasizer for particle size and zeta potential measurements, Gas adsorption (N2/BET and CO2 
chemisorption), ICP (Inductively Coupled Plasma Emission Spectroscopy), DSC (Differential Scanning 
Calorimetry), Thermal Gravimetric Analysis (TGA), SEM/ESEM-EDX, XRD, TEM and Raman Microscopy. 
 
 
4.1.13 UPM GMBH 
Short Name UPM 
 
Country Germany 
Type Industrial 
Website www.upmbiochemicals.com  
Short Profile 
UPM GMBH (UPM) is a global leader of the bio-based forest industry with a history dating back over 100 years. 
Through the renewing of the bio and forest industries, UPM is building a sustainable future across six business 
areas: UPM Biorefining, UPM Energy, UPM Raflatac , UPM Specialty Papers, UPM Paper ENA and UPM 
Plywood. UPM’s products are made of renewable raw materials and are recyclable. Today, UPM is serving 
thousands of customers worldwide employing around 19,300 people with annual sales exceeding EUR 10 billion. 
UPM shares are listed on NASDAQ OMX Helsinki. 
 
Figure 4: Rotating Packed Bed 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 118 
 
UPM’s extensive knowledge and know-how of sustainably sourced renewable wood biomass is the starting point 
of their business. UPM sees versatile wood-based biochemicals as the next natural step in the evolutio n of wood 
usage. Wood-based renewable biochemicals offer sustainable and competitive high-quality solutions for replacing 
fossil-based raw materials. UPM’s responsibly sourced renewable lignin is already in use across various industries 
and applications.  
 
UPM provides Glycols and Lignin products. UPM has developed an advanced concept for the production of 
renewable glycols targeting sustainable performance. Furthermore, Lignin is a versatile biomaterial that helps to 
reduce dependency on fossil -based raw materials as we’re moving from disposable to sustainable. That’s why 
lignin has already found its way into a rapidly growing number of industrial applications such as resins, adhesives, 
bio-plastics, and polyurethanes.  
 
Following five years of extensive technology development and piloting, UPM is currently evaluating the potential 
of a new-to-the-world biorefinery that would convert hardwood from sustainably managed forests into renewable 
glycols and lignin.  The planned industrial scale biorefinery would convert wood into bio -monoethylene glycol 
(bMEG), bio-monopropylene glycol (bMPG) and lignin up to 150,000 metric tons per year. Production would be 
based on hardwood from sustainably managed forests in Central Europe.  
 
Role in the project 
UPM is interested to support the development within the project by providing knowhow in the field of 
lignocellulosic based sugar production and techno -economic evaluation of biorefinery processes. Furthermore, 
UPM will provide samples obtained from UPMs operations as industrial relevant feedstock available. 
Theerfore, UPM’role is four-fold: 
1) Provision of hemicellulose streams for purification and further processing 
2) Provision of expertise and specifications for the WP on upstream purification 
3) Leading the validation activities 
4) Contribution to the Techno-economic analysis of the project’s results (process performance, market viability, 
value chain compatibility) 
5) Contribution to dissemination and exploitation of projects’ results. 
 
As an industrial feedstock provider, in WP1 ‘Intensification of Upstream Purification’, UPM will contribute in 
the analysis of treated hemicellulose streams by supplying a hardwood hemicellulose stream from biorefinery pilot 
operations. UPM will take part in the precipitation and solids handling processes. Moreover, UPM will be involved 
in the h ybrid membrane purification and concentration of hemicelluloses sugars . UPM will provide its  
hemicellulose stream which stems from solid-liquid separation after the pre-treatment step without any additional 
purification so it contains larger amounts of soluble lignin, furans, organic acids, soluble ash, and pre -treatment 
chemicals. 
 
UPM will lead WP5 ‘Validation, Process Simulation & Integration’ , which aims to analyse and simulate the 
existing and BioSPRINT biorefinery process; integrate the developed concepts and technologies for the UPM 
stream and the FhG Organosolv streams; perform a transferability and replicability case study using the stream of 
associated partner Clariant; and also proceed with optimisation and first upscaling of the best synthetic products. 
In particular, UPM will participate in the simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery 
processes and be in charge of the i ntegration of the developed concepts and technologies for its stream with an 
emphasis into the validation of the upstream purification technologies for removal of lignin and potential catalyst 
inhibitors. Upon completion, a technology-transfer report will be produced indicating the prospect of integrating 
the realised intensified process into UPM biorefining operations.  
 
In WP6 ‘Integrated Lifecycle Sustainability Assessment’ , UPM will be involved in the t echno-economic 
assessment supporting MAT in developing economic models of the improved biorefinery, with PI technologies 
implemented.  
 
Under WP7 ‘Dissemination and Exploitation’ , UPM will, with rest of the partners, actively participate in the 
dissemination and communication activities in order to develop the project’s multidimensional dissemination & 
communication (D&C) plan also supporting MAT to identify early adopters and post-project opportunities. UPM 
will also contribute to existing and emerging standards by taking part in the meetings of technical committees for 
standardisation whose scope is relevant to BioSPRINT. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 119 
 
In WP8 ‘Project coordination’, UPM will support the project Coordinator in the overall project management and 
coordination as a leader of WP5.  
 
UPM will lead ‘ T5.2 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream ’, and also 
participate in the following tasks: 
− T1.1 Analysis of treated hemicellulose streams 
− T1.2 Precipitation and solids handling 
− T1.3 Hybrid membrane purification and concentration of hemicellulose sugars 
− T1.4 Identification of upstream scale-up challenges via process systems engineering (PSE) tools 
− T5.1 Simulation and analysis of the existing and improved biorefinery processes  
− T5.2 Integration of the developed concepts and technologies for UPM stream 
− T6.3 Techno-economic assessment  
− T7.1 Multidimensional dissemination, communication and stakeholder engagement activities 
− T7.3 Identification of early adopters, post-project opportunities and business plan  
− T7.4 Contribution to existing and emerging standards 
− T8.1 Project coordination and reporting 
Key Personnel 
Dr. Nina Rimmel (Female) is the Head of UPM’s development unit in Frankfurt Höchst, focused on R&D in the 
field of hardwood based biorefinery processes.  She holds a B.Sc.  in Molecular Biotechnology, as well as M.Sc. 
in Renewable Resources and PhD degree in Biotechnology with specialization in biotransformation of renewable 
substrates to polymer precursors from the Technical University of Munich (TUM). From 2015-2017, she worked 
as a part of the UPM Biochemicals strategic marketing  team and got deeply insights in technology monitoring, 
market evaluation and development of UPM’s biorefinery initiative. Nina will be the Leader of WP5 ‘Validation, 
Process Simulation & Integration’ and will also serve as the Data Protection Officer of UPM.  
 
Dr. Michael Duetsch (Male) joined UPM in 2011 as Director Biochemicals. He holds a PhD degree in Chemistry 
from the University of Göttingen, Germany. In 1994 he started his career in research and development of specialty 
surfactants at a company belonging meanwhile to Evonik followed by management positions in corporate strategy 
and controlling. In later years he led R&D as well as new business development areas in the construction chemicals 
segment of Evonik and then BASF. He has also served as general manager of an IP holding company. Nowadays 
he is responsible for R&D, sales & marketing and business processes of the emerging UPM Biochemicals 
Business.  
Relevant Projects 
1. ValChem [EU]: Demonstration of the technical and economic viability of an innovative and sustainable value 
chain, which utilises wood as raw material to produce the bio -alternative of the platform chemical MPG as 
well as lignin -based performance chemicals. The pr oject involves 4 partners from 4 different countries 
(Finland, Sweden, France, Germany). UPM was the consortium leader and coordinator of ValChem. 
(01/07/2015 – 30/06/2018). www.valchem.eu. 
2. PRODIAS [EU]: Providing new cost- and energy efficient downstream-processes to facilitate a competitive 
use of renewable feedstocks in the process industry, processing of dilute complex aqueous mixtures. Under 
the consortial leadership of BASF, nine partners including U PM, from UK, Germany, Finland, Belgium and 
the Netherlands collaborated. (01/01/2015 – 31/12/2018) www.spire2030.eu/prodias.
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) 
4.2.1 DECHEMA GESELLSCHAFT FUER CHEMISCHE TECHNIK UND BIOTECHNOLOGIE E.V. 
Do you plan to subcontract certain tasks please note that core tasks of the action should not be 
sub-contracted) 
Yes 
After careful consideration of the resources that would be necessary to implement the action, DEC deems necessary 
to activate subcontracts for secretarial services for the establishment of the CENELEC Workshop Agreement 
(CWA) as part of WP7 Dissemination and Exploitation. 
Subcontracting will amount to a maximum of €38,000 in total which represents about 6% of DEC’s total 
requested EC contribution as part of BioSPRINT. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 120 
 
DEC will launch an open competitive tendering procedure in order to select the best value for money regarding 
the secretarial services for the CWA.  
 
When subcontracting the above listed services, DEC will award the subcontract ensuring the best value for money 
or, if appropriate, the lowest price. As the best value for money principle does not in all cases require competitive 
selection procedures, when appropriate, DEC will demonstrate how best value for money was ensured, defining 
quality criteria in ways clear and coherent with the purposes of the action task that is subcontracted. 
 
In doing so, DEC will avoid any conflict of interests. DEC will ensure that the majority of the work done by the 
subcontractor(s) is located in EU Member States or associated countries. DEC will also make special arrangements 
regarding results produced by the subcontractors (in order to be able to fully comply with their obligations under 
the Grant Agreement). 
 
Do you envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties3  No 
Do you envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the 
General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is perfomed by International Partners4 (Article 
14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
No 
 
4.2.2 AEP POLYMERS SRL 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.3 DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.4 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LTD 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.5 FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V. 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.6 IFEU - INSTITUT FUR ENERGIE UND UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.7 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.8 KEMIJSKI INSTITUT (National Institute of Chemistry) 
No third parties involved. 
 
4.2.9 MATURUS OPTIMI BV 
No third parties involved. 
 
 
3  A third party that is an affiliated entity or has a legal link to a participant implying a collabor ation not limited to the action 
(Article 14 of the Model Grant Agreement). 
4 ‘International Partner’ is any legal entity established in a non -associated third country which is not eligible for funding under 
Article 10 of the Rules for Participation Regulation No 1290/2013. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 121 
 
4.2.10 OULUN YLIOPISTO 
Do you plan to subcontract certain tasks please note that core tasks of the action should 
not be sub-contracted) 
Yes 
After careful consideration of the resources that would be necessary to implement the action, UOULU deems 
necessary to activate subcontracts for biochemical analyses to be implemented as part of WP1 Intensification of 
Upstream Purification. 
Subcontracting will amount to a maximum of € 7,600 in total which represents about 2% of UOULU’s total 
requested EC contribution as part of BioSPRINT. 
 
When subcontracting the above listed chemical analyses, UOULU will award the subcontract ensuring the best 
value for money or, if appropriate, the lowest price. As the best value for money principle does not in all cases 
require competitive selection procedures, when appropriate, UOULU will demonstrate how best value for money 
was ensured, defining quality criteria in ways clear and coherent with the purposes of the action task that is 
subcontracted. 
 
In doing so, UOULU will avoid any conflict of interests. UOULU will ensure that the majority of the work done 
by the subcontractor(s) is located in EU Member States or associat ed countries. UOULU will also make special 
arrangements regarding results produced by the subcontractors (in order to be able to fully comply with their 
obligations under the Grant Agreement). 
Do you envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties No 
Do you envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 
of the General Model Grant Agreement) 
No 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is perfomed by International Partners 
(Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
No 
 
4.2.11 PREFERE RESINS GERMANY GMBH  
No third parties involved. 
4.2.12 UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE 
No third parties involved. 
4.2.13 UPM GMBH 
No third parties involved.
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 122 
 
 
Section 5: Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
 
The research carried out in the project, even though primarily focused on chemical and biochemical processes, will 
involve human participants who will be  volunteers and who will give informed consent to participation in the 
research. All participants will be provided with a sheet informing them about the handling of their data before the 
start of the study  (Annex 3), which will then be signed and returned, constituting informed co nsent. There are no 
exclusion or inclusion criteria besides recruitment criteria related to a useful adequate sample covering the topics of 
the study.  
 
During the preparation of this proposal, in keeping with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an Et hics Self-
assessment was performed with the completion of the Ethical Issues Table, and this project does not involve specific 
Ethics issues.  
Although the self -assessment identified no ethics issues arising from the actual workplan itself, it is worthy of  
comment the measures that we are taking during the project work plan to address and mitigate any concerns that 
could indeed appear in the future:  
• Regulatory activities have been incorporated in the project with the intention of gathering data to fuel into a 
further safe and compliant development phase. See T6.5 ‘Process and product safety assessment’, addressing 
both regulatory and technical barriers on page 59 in section 3.   
• The appropriate health and safety procedures conforming to relevant local/national guidelines/legislation will 
be followed by staff involved in this project. In this sense, partners follow recognised hygiene and safety 
rules, including sectorial rules. For example, end-users in the Chemicals sector abide to chemical regulations 
such as REACH.  See page 23 in section 1.   
• The use of LCSA, which identifies environmental as well as social, health and safety impacts, can help 
identify where the maximum impact could occur providing the opportunity for process or material 
modifications to minimise these impacts. See page 37 in section 2.   
• Finally measures related to responsible innovation, spread as relevant along the work plan, are overseen in 
WP8 (T8.4 Innovation, IPR & Data Management).  
 
BioSPRINT aims at utilising and valorising hemicelluloses, pursuing intensified processing steps and technologies 
towards ‘zero -waste’ bio -based operations and applying an integrated biorefinery concept that embodies the 
cascading principle to create new hemicellulose-derived products, so as to maximise conversion of the lignocellulosic 
biomass feedstock and its by -products, side streams and residual streams into higher added -value products. The 
BioSPRINT philosophy is based on valorising the previously -discarded or costly side streams (thus ‘closing the 
loop’).  The purpose of the BioSPRINT project is to develop, test and validate process intensification methods (up to 
TRL 4-5) for purification and conversion of sugars from the hemicellulose fraction of lignocellulosic biomass to 
obtain biorenewable furan-based resins for novel polymeric applications. 
To do so, BioSPRINT works directly with researchers and professionals in Process Intensification technologies and 
Biotechnology as well professi onals from the Bioeconomy, standardisation and regulatory bodies, ICT SMEs, 
feedstock providers, etc.  
 
The project will thus work directly with employees of organisations listed above, and will conform to established 
ethical principles when doing research and development with human subjects as well as development of innovative 
systems and methods. The BioSPRINT Platform will also use behavioural and educational data from and about 
participants.  
 
Should the BioSPRINT activities raise social and ethical issues due to the sensitive nature of this data as well as the 
nature of the technologies involved, for example related to the following: 
• Personal data handling, which will be done in accordance to the General Data Protection Regulation 
(Regulation 2016/679) (GDPR);  
• Developing systems and advancing the state of the art responsibly (i.e. not pursue research and innovation 
that could in any way be detrimental to persons, society or environment).  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 123 
 
The Project Coordinator and the consortium will take all appropri ate measures to address them efficiently. As a 
testimony of this commitment, a subtask of the project ST8. 4.3 ‘Ethics, Gender and cross -cutting priority 
monitoring’ (WP8) is dedicated to monitor ethics and cross-cutting-priorities .  
 
At proposal stage, th e consortium members have agreed that the work that will be performed are driven by the 
following key ethical frameworks:  
• The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention 108 for the Protection of Individuals with 
Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data; 
• the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000/C 364/01); 
• the European Convention on Human Rights; 
• The European Code of Conduct for Research Integrity; 
• Horizon 2020 Rules for Participation; 
• Principles and guidelines of “Ethics for Researchers” to Facilitate Research Excellence, prepared by the EC 
Governance and Ethics Unit in 2007. 
• The association of Internet Researchers guidelines and as well as guidelines from ethical review boards (those 
present at academic institutions of the project).  
 
As part of the project, we will aim to identify, analyse and integrate considerations of any legal, ethical or social 
issues raised by the project, and identify and implement elements that will foster trust, usability and social acceptance. 
 
The consideration of ethical issues, and the embedding of ethics -by-design, is a key way in which BioSPRINT 
represents progress beyond the state of the art. Our ethics-by-design approach applies to the assessment of research 
and innovation plans and practices. It aims at encouraging all partners involved in the course of research and 
innovation as part of the project to: 
  
• Anticipate and consider the potential consequences of the research and innovation project for society, 
including any plausible future uses and applications of the results of project, and take appropriate remedial 
action to address any (potentially) negative societal and environmental impacts if such action seems justified; 
• Consider whether and how the research or innovation activity could positively or negatively contribute to the 
interests, rights and well-being of individuals and groups 
• Consider whether the research or innovation promotes or is compatible with sustainable development, and 
how it might promote greater environmental sustainability; 
• Avoid misuse of research materials and results. Consider whether the materials, methods, technologies, and 
knowledge involved in or generated during the research or innovation could serve, or be modified or 
enhanced to serve, individuals, animals, society and/or the environment 
• Communicate important research results and (potential) societal consequences to relevant stakeholders and 
to the general public to ensure their proper interpretation, while explaining the degree of uncertainty 
involved. 
 
Given this, the consortium of BioSPRINT is committed to handling potential ethical issues responsibly. All partners 
will adhere to and respect national regulations and laws and will continue to reflect and refine our own innovation 
conduct, data processing, ethical principles and practices.  
 
Regarding the collection of personal data. The question: “ 4 - Collection of Personal Data - Does your research 
involve personal data collection and/or processing? ” has been answered with ‘Yes’, since several considerations 
related to on-site activities and capacity-building activities shall be taken into consideration.  
 
The BioSPRINT partners are familiar with the ethical requirements associated with research with humans, given their 
training and previous experience in research and innovation methodology, and are familiar with the sorts of processes 
needed to meet and exceed these requirements. 
 
For example, in relation to informed consent, the consortium will adhere to the following principles: 
• All the test subjects, and their legal guardians where applicable, will be informed and given the opportunity to 
provide their consent to any monitoring and data acquisition process that all the subjects will be strictly volunteers 
and all test volunteers receive detailed oral information. 
• All stakeholder engagement activities ( testing, trials, workshops, etc.) will be conducte d with participants that 
will be in a position to understand their role in the project, what data is collected, how it is processed, stored and 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 124 
 
anonymised and peer reviewed before being used in the project used e.g. through publication or as part of system 
innovation. No covert data collection will take place. 
• No data will be collected without the explicit informed consent of the individuals under observation and their 
legal guardian where applicable. This involves being open with participants about what th ey are involving 
themselves in and ensuring that they have agreed fully to the procedures/research being undertaken by giving 
their explicit consent. 
• Participants will be given information on who will benefit from their participation in the research and what risk 
or burden they are undertaking by participating.  
• The consortium will also provide information about the potential for commercial exploitation of the innovation. 
Participation in these aspects of the BioSPRINT project will be fully voluntary and all participants will be given 
the opportunity to ask questions and receive understandable answers before making decisions about their 
participation.  
• Participants will also have the right to withdraw and terminate their participation in the research at any 
time and will be reminded about their rights before participation. Participants will be given this information via 
an information sheet and be asked to sign a consent form to document and verify the information they have been 
given. During the research, in formed consent forms will be used for pilot testing and workshops with experts. 
The BioSPRINT Draft Information sheet and informed consent form are provided in the Optional Annex 3: 
Ethics supporting document(s). These sheets will be continually reviewed b y the consortium, and respective 
ethics committees that will need to approve any pilots, trials, workshops etc. 
• No personal or sensitive data will be centrally stored. In addition, data will be scrambled where possible and 
abstracted in a way that will not affect the final project outcome. 
• No data collected will be sold or used for any purposes other than the current project. 
• A data minimisation policy will be adopted at all levels of the project and will be supervised by the Project 
Coordinator and the Data Protection Officers appointed by each partner. This will ensure that no data which is 
not strictly necessary to the completion of the current study will be collected. 
• Specific measures will be in place in order to protect the pupils from a breach of privacy/confidentiality and any 
potential discrimination; In particular their names will not be made public and their participation will not be 
communicated to. Any incidental findings will be kept strictly confidential and erased from files under request 
from the enrolled subject.  
 
5.1.1 Meeting national requirements  
With specific relation to national ethical requirements, BioSPRINT will undertake specific reviews of the innovation 
to be brought forward. First, BioSPRINT will be guided by the ethical codes of partners such as those of DEC, 
UOULU, UNEW, NIC, etc. In addition, BioSPRINT will fully comply to specific (and in certain cases more strict) 
national legislation of the countries involved in the project.  
 
Our starting point is a peer-reviewed approach to ethics, in which policies, protocols, innovation and data handling 
is reviewed by peers with different skillsets, perspectives, which is informed by all other ethical frameworks to make 
informed decisions about any ethical concerns. As part of this process, if necessary, we will conduct a Data Protection 
Impact Assessment (DPIA) on the project to help identify and minimise the data protection risks of a project.  
 
Should the EC request national assessments in addition to these mechanisms, the Project Coordinator will liaise with 
the Project Officer to identify potential review mechanisms. All reviews will include a consideration of the objectives, 
methodology and potential impact of the activities undertaken in the BIOSPRINT project. This robust review cycle 
will ensure that the project complies with national and European legislati on (including privacy and data protection 
legislation) and with the ethical principles associated with research with humans and Responsible Research and 
Innovation principles. Subtasks ST8.1.3 External Advisory Board management and ST8.3.4 ‘Ethics, Gender and 
cross-cutting priority monitoring’, will ensure that project’s research activities are ethically sound and that data from 
research participants is stored according to EU and national regulations to ensure their privacy.  
 
Where required, this task will also seek approval from relevant national authorities. Throughout the project, the 
implementation of the Ethics protocol will be monitored and reported on in the project’s interim and final reviews 
(M18 and M36). All ethical issues pertaining to these reviews will be forwarded to the Project Steering Team for 
discussion and action.  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 125 
 
5.1.2 Data collection  
The BioSPRINT project will touch on privacy and data protection issues by collecting data from project participants 
from EU countries via the project workshops and events, collecting data about persons as part of the te st data used 
by the project and collecting data about during the Training, Education & Capacity-Building Programme (TECBP). 
Both qualitative and quantitative data can be collected through these activities. During their implementation we are 
likely to obtain questionnaire and interview data.  
 
Questionnaires and interviews will take place in data collection sessions, in which each participant is always aware 
of that they are being recorded. All digitally recorded activities will be done with participant’s ex plicit consent. In 
addition, we will identify what data will be necessary for the project, and only record and study that relevant for the 
project. 
 
Personal data will be processed anonymously and in an aggregated form where possible. Personal data collected from 
the BioSPRINT project will be treated as highly confidential, respecting privacy  in GDPR compliant manners. In 
these cases, the personnel involved will receive an informed consent, expressed in a formal agreement. BioSPRINT 
will collect and process data that are strictly necessary for the research. All of the individuals participating in the 
project’s activities will be volunteers and will have the project data collection, storage and processing plans explained 
to them before the activity begins. Should they wish to exclude themselves from the activity, or should they wish 
their data to be anonymised after the activity, the consortium will oblige and write to them to confirm (a) that their 
wishes have been carried out and (b) precisely how their wishes have been carried out. 
 
BioSPRINT does not involve the processing of genetic information. 
 
Data storage will be secured and access by unwanted third parties will be prevented. Appropriate procedures will be 
applied for data coll ection (and their usage) and the methodology that will be employed for collecting, using and 
storing various data and information. These procedures include encryption and anonymisation/pseudonymisation/ 
aggregation of sensitive data according to GDPR. Concerning risk management and legal compliance, all participants 
are aware of their obligations as potential data processers and controllers as well as issues beyond data and 
information protection and privacy described above. Actions should be taken to ensur e that those handling subjects 
identifiable or sensitive information are made fully aware of their responsibilities and obligations to respect 
confidentiality in compliance with market standards (e.g.: ISO/IEC 27001:2005), best practices and legal 
requirements under the GDPR. 
 
Data protection legislation, standards and best practices will be applied on the data collection, storage, protection, 
retention and destruction. The related GDPR-compliant procedures for data collection, storage, protection, retention, 
destruction or re -use as well as data safety procedures will be developed as part of Subtask ST8.4.2 ‘Data 
Management plan and monitoring’. In addition,  Subtask ST 8.4.3 ‘Ethics, Gender & cross -cutting priority 
monitoring’ will ensure that BIOSPRINT activities and pilots testing are ethically sound and that data from research 
participants is stored according to EU and national regulations to ensure their privacy. In addition, every partner has 
appointed, or will appoint from project’s start, a Data Protection Officer (DPO). 
 
This does not imply that every partner will indeed engage in data processing activities, but rather ensure that data 
protection obligations resulting from GDPR, if any, will be duly identified and complied with by each partner. 
 
The Parties agree that any Background, Results, Confidential Information and/or any data and/or information that is 
provided, disclosed or otherwise made available between the Parties during the implementation of the Action and/or 
for any Exploitation activities (“Shared Information”), shall not include personal data as defined by Article 4, General 
Data Protection Regulation (679/2016) (hereinafter referred to as “Personal Data”). Accordingly, each Party agrees 
that it will take all necessary steps to ensu re that all Personal Data is removed from the Shared Information, made 
illegible, or otherwise made inaccessible (i.e. de -identify) to the other Parties prior to providing the Shared 
Information to such other Parties.  
 
Most of the documentation associated  with these ethical and legal reviews are not yet available, nor would it be 
appropriate to approach the relevant experts before the project is funded. However, the consortium is happy to provide 
the draft information sheets consent forms to be used by the  project in the Optional Annex 3 – Ethics supporting 
documents. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 126 
 
Remark: BioSPRINT will opt in to the Open Data pilot. The Data Management Plan DMP (D8. 7) will detail what 
data the project will generate, whether and how it will be exploited or made accessible for verification and re -use, 
and how it will be curated & preserved. A first version of the DMP will be submitted by M 6 to be continuously 
updated until the end of the project.
5.2 Security  
 BIOSPRINT will not involve:  
• Activities or results raising security issues;  
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results.  
 
This initial assessment does not preclude a different assessment following the security scrutiny. Should the members 
of the JTI Programme Committee consider that BioSPRINT involves security-related activities or produces outputs 
that need to be classified, special provisions for classified information (as defined in the Commission Ru les of 
Procedure (Decision 2015/444/EC,ECSC,Euratom, and further explained in the Guidelines for the classification of 
research results) will be taken in the grant agreement, as necessary and appropriate.
5.3 Declarations from participants regarding Ethics and Security   
5.3.1 DECHEMA GESELLSCHAFT FUER CHEMISCHE TECHNIK UND BIOTECHNOLOGIE E.V. 
As part of BioSPRINT, work conducted by DEC, exclusively destined to civil applications, will not involve: 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research staff; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals or plants. 
 
DEC will collect and process necessary personal data for the following purposes: 
− From project partners for project coordination activities; 
− From external web page users who are using the contact form or subscribe to the newsletter  
− However, DEC does not store and manage any personal data other than that which is required to manage the 
activities of the project described above (like name, email, etc.) in the project and will further avoid any 
unnecessary collection and use of personal data 
 
DEC abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with the European law and legislation. It is available online 
through the following URL: www.dechema.de/en/privacy.  
 
 
5.3.2 AEP POLYMERS SRL 
As part of BioSPRINT, work conducted by AEP, exclusively destined to civil applications, will not involve: 
− personal data collection and processing; 
 
AEP uses chemical substances on the laboratory scale for the synthesis of new building blocks and their use in 
formulated systems. All of them have an associated chemical hazard. All researchers at AEP use personal protective 
equipment (PPE) and collective protective equipment (CPE), chosen or designed according to the Safety Data Sheets 
of the substances in use, so neutralizing the risk for health. All researchers are properly trained and subject to 
periodical health surveillance. The level of chemical risk is periodically updated. 
Some chemicals used as reactants are hazardous for the environment. Researchers at AEP  neutralize the  
environmental hazard through proper equipment (e.g. several filters are installed on each laboratory fumehood and 
are periodically replaced to ensure optimal efficiency ) and correct disposal of every liquid or solid waste produced 
in the laboratory by certified companies. 
 
 
5.3.3 DYNAMIC & SECURITY COMPUTATIONS SL 
As part of BioSPRINT, work conducted by ADSC, exclusively destined to civil applications, will not involve: 
− personal data collection and processing.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research staff.; 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 127 
 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals or plants. 
 
ADSC abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with the European law and legislation. It is available 
online through the following URL: www.analisis-dsc.com.  
 
5.3.4 EBOS TECHNOLOGIES LIMITED (EBOS) 
As part of BioSPRINT, work conducted by EBOS, exclusively destined to civil applications, will not involve: 
− personal data collection and processing.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research staff.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals or plants. 
EBOS abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with the European law and legislation. It is available online 
through the following URL: www.ebos.com.cy/privacy-policy.  
 
5.3.5 FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V. 
No ethical or security issues raised. 
 
5.3.6 IFEU - INSTITUT FUR ENERGIE UND UMWELTFORSCHUNG HEIDELBERG GMBH 
As part of BioSPRINT, work conducted by IFEU, exclusively destined to civil applications, will not involve: 
− personal data collection and processing.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research staff.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals or plants. 
 
IFEU abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with the European law and legislation.  
 
5.3.7 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA 
As contact point of IRIS Technology Solutions for proposal, I conform that our organisation is aware of the hazards 
related to environmental protection and safety that bio -based processes and engineering activity may cause over 
workers, people involved in the project and the environment. To minimise the risks associated to this activ ity, the 
following preventive measures are implemented in standard IRIS procedures: 
 
• Identification and risk assessment. Implementation of preventive measures. 
• Working procedures and safety instructions. 
• Training and information on chemical and biological risk to workers. 
• Specific medical examinations (Health Surveillance) 
• Vaccinations 
 
IRIS abides by its Privacy Policy which is in accordance with the European law and legislation. It is available online 
through the following URL: www.iristechnologygroup.com/privacy-policy/ 
 
5.3.8 KEMIJSKI INSTITUT (National Institute of Chemistry) 
The research of NIC within  BioSPRINT does not involve personal data collection and/or processing, it does not 
involve the use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research staff, it does not involve the use of 
elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals or plan ts, it does not raise concerns regarding the 
exclusive focus on civil applications, there any no ethics issues that should be taken into consideration, and our 
organisation has an ethical, privacy or data protection code, the name of this document being the Code of Ethics (the 
document is not confidential, while it can be provided as a copy for records through the link: 
https://www.ki.si/en/about-the-institute/code-of-ethics/). 
 
5.3.9 MATURUS OPTIMI BV 
As part of BioSPRINT, work conducted by MAT, exclusively destined to civil applications, will not involve: 
− personal data collection and processing.; 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 128 
 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research staff.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals or plants. 
 
 
5.3.10 OULUN YLIOPISTO 
The research data gathered involves equipment and material information, analyses results and measurements. 
Therefore, no personal data are treated. The research  should not raise concerns regarding civil applications. The 
materials to be used are mostly or fully non -toxic and only treated by a skilled laboratory staff being aware of the 
material properties, storage and disposal. 
 
5.3.11 PREFERE RESINS GERMANY GMBH  
As part of BioSPRINT, work conducted by PFR, exclusively destined to civil applications, will not involve: 
− personal data collection and processing.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to humans, including research staff.; 
− The use of elements that may cause harm to the environment, to animals or plants. 
  
5.3.12 UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE 
No ethical or security issues raised. 
 
5.3.13 UPM GMBH 
No ethical or security issues raised. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 129 
 
Annex 1: External Advisory Board  
The following table provides information about the members of the External Advisory Board (EAB). 
 
# Name & Position Profile 
1 Dr. Markus Rarbach (Male), Head of 
Business Line Biofuels & Derivatives, 
Clariant, Germany.  
Dr. Markus is the Head of Clariant’s Business Line Biofuels & 
Derivatives focusing on the commercialization of bio -ethanol, 
licenses and enzymes.  Leading the bioethanol operations, Dr. 
Rarbach is, among other tasks, responsible for the development and 
commercialization of Clariant’s sunliquid® technology  for the 
conversion of cellulosic feedstock into 2nd generation bioethanol 
and other biobase d chemicals. Dr. Markus studied Biotechnology 
at the Technical University of Berlin. 
2 Dr. Ed Marshall (Male), General 
Manager Biorefinery R&D, Sappi 
Biotech Ltd, United Kingdom. 
Dr. Ed is the General Manager Biorefinery R&D in Sappi Biotech, 
part of the multinational Sappi Group with responsibility for 
developing new chemical and biotechnology processes to generate 
revenues from sugar - and lignin- rich effluent streams at Sappi’s 
mills in South Africa, the US and Europe. In addition, Dr. Ed directs 
R&D projects in areas such as the purification of high value rare 
sugars from waste streams, the production of high value chemicals, 
e.g. xylitol, furfural from waste sugars, and the development of new 
applications for lignin including adhesives, resins and polyols. Dr. 
Ed has a strong commercial aptitude and manage s Sappi’s 
relationships with several third-party technology providers in areas 
as diverse as the purification of sugars and new technologies for 
utilising lignin.  
3 Marios Mavrogiannos (Male), 
Standards Officer, Cyprus Organisation 
for Standardisation (CYS), Cyprus. 
Mr. Mavrogiannos is a Standards Officer at CYS. Currently, he is 
involved in the promotion of International & European standards to 
the Cyprus industry/businesses. Marios is r esponsible for 
Chemicals & Environment  and he is an a ctive member of the 
European Technical Committee for Standardization CEN/ TC 165 
“Waste water engineering”, CEN/ TC 264 “Air Quality” and the 
Strategic Advisory Body on Environment (SABE). Representing 
CYS as an Observer at ISO/TC 193 Natural Gas.  He is a Certified 
ISO 9001/ ISO 14001/EMAS and ISO 50001 Auditor by Cyprus 
Certification Company (C CC) and certified Auditor by CERTIF 
(Portugal) for product certification in plastic pipes manufacturing 
product standards (EN 1401, EN 1329, ISO 1452, EN 12201, 
EN/IEC 61386-21). He also holds professional qualifications for 
the Management systems OHSAS 18001 Occupational Health and 
Safety and ISO/IEC 17025 General requirements for the 
competence of testing and calibration laboratories.  
4 Dr. Darren Gobby Dr. Darren is a Principal Process Engineer in Johnson Matthey 
working in the process development and design areas. He leads a 
team of other engineers and process chemists to develop 
commercially and technically viable technologies for both new and 
existing end products. His main areas of focus are developing bio-
based technologies based on second generati on bio -feeds and 
carbon capture/utilisation technologies. In addition, he also leads 
process development projects to complement existing 
petrochemical technologies. Dr. Darren holds a PhD in Chemical 
Engineering.  
5 Dr. Tom Granström (Male), Head of 
St1 Research, ST1 OY, Finland 
Dr. Tom Granström (Male) is the Head of ST1 Research team. He 
has over 20 years of experience in bioprocess engineering of 
producing organic acids, solvents, rare sugars etc. in abroad and 
Finland acquired both in academia and  industry. He has been 
studying and developing production technologies for advanced 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 130 
 
biofuels, organic acids and chemicals from lignocellulose, biowaste 
and starch-based feed stocks. His focus areas include lignocellulose 
biomass pre -treatment, enzyme techn ology, fermentation, 
downstream processing, biogas production. Tom is the a uthor of 
over 50 peer reviewed scientific articles, several book chapters, 
patents/patent applications, posters and public speeches.  In 
addition, Dr. Tom is St1’s contact person in LigniOx (BBI-JU) 
project and also in many different nationally funded joint projects 
with academia and industry.  
6 The 6th seat of the EAB is reserved for a member of the Board of the BIC consortium. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 131 
 
Annex 2: Letters of Support from the EAB Members 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 132 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 133 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 134 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 135 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 136 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 137 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 138 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 140 
 
Annex 3: Ethics Supporting Documents 
Annex 3 has been uploaded in the EC portal as ‘Optional annex 3: Ethics – Supporting Document’.  
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      
BioSPRINT                                                                                                                                              Page 139 
Optional Annex 3: Ethics Supporting Documents  
 Information sheet template and Informed consent template 
 
Information Sheet Template         [Date] 
 
 
BioSPRINT  
Biorefining of sugars  
via Process Intensification 
 
BioSPRINT is a 48-month EU-funded project with the purpose of __________________.  
You are invited to join the BioSPRINT research project to take part in the BioSPRINT definitions/ case studies   
integrated life cycle assessment / dissemination & communication activitie/1. Please take whatever time you need to 
read and understand the following text. The decision to join, or not to join, is up to you. If you agree with the content, 
please sign the consent form hereafter.  
 
I freely and voluntarily consent to participate in the BioSPRINT project.  
The aim of this activity is to _________________________. It will be conducted at _____________. 
I understand that my participation is voluntary and free-of-charge.  
I understand that the project may stop the activity or take me out of the trial at any time they judge it is in my best 
interest. They may also remove me from the trial for various other reasons. They can do this without my consent.  
I am free to stop participating at any time without any negative consequence.  
I understand that the activity will take me approximately _________ minutes/hours.  
I understand that BioSPRINT will process my personal information for the purposes of the project. Only information 
that is necessary to address the central purpose of the research will be recorded, and the data will be anonymised at 
the point of collection. My name or any information that could identify me or relate to my identity will not be linked 
with the research materials. The information will be securely stored and retained for the lifetime of the project and 
safely deleted afterwards.  
I understand that such information will be treated as strictly confidential and handled in accordance with the 
provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU (2000/c 364/01), Convention No. 108 of the Council of 
Europe for the Protection of Individuals and Regulation (EU) 2016/679.  
I have been informed that , if I have any questions about the trial or the project itself, any problems, unexpected 
physical or psychological discomforts, any injuries, or think that something unusual or unexpected is happening I am 
free to contact Mr./Ms. [First Name, Last Name] at mail@example.com.  
 
Signature of Subject or Representative  
Date ____________                                         _____________________________________ 
        
 
 
  
 
1 Select the option which applies. 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
                                                                                                                                                                      
BioSPRINT                                                                                                                                              Page 140 
 
BioSPRINT  
Biorefining of sugars  
via Process Intensification 
 
Informed consent template 
 
I ……………………………………… agree to voluntarily participate to the BioSPRINT project.  
 
I understand that if I decide at any time that I no longer wish to take part in this activity, I can notify the researchers 
involved and withdraw immediately, without any negative consequence.  
I have read the Information Sheet and understand what the trial involves.  
I understand that confidentiality and anonymity will be maintained regarding my personal information and it will not 
be possible to identify me at any research stage in the project.  
I have had the opportunity to have all my questions answered  to my satisfaction. I have also been informed of the 
data governance of the BioSPRINT project.  
A copy of the Information Sheet and this signed consent form will be provided to the signee.  
 
Signature of Subject or Representative  
 
Date __________                                                 ___________________________________ 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Jochen Michels on 04/09/2019 16:25:03 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)