2.1 Expected impacts 
In a world of finite resources, the transition to a knowledge-based post-petroleum economy is imperative. To support 
this evolution towards a low-carbon Europe, reducing its heavy dependency on fossil resources, the EC presented in 
2012 a roadmap targeting the establishment of sustainable and competitive bio-based industries and value chains104. 
The Bioeconomy Strategy and its Action Plan  pave the way to a more innovative, resource -efficient and 
competitive EU society, being reviewed in 2017105 & subsequently updated in 2018106, to accelerate the deployment 
of a sustainable EU bioeconomy so as to maximise its contribution towards the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), as well as the Paris Agreement, and the new EU policy priorities, in particular the 
renewed Industrial Policy Strategy, the Circular Economy Action Plan and the  Communication on 
Accelerating Clean Energy Innovation.  
That reconciles food security with the sustainable use of renewable resources for industrial purposes, while generating 
new incomes and ensuring job creation, within a Circular Bioeconomy Society. In  this context, the BBI’s SIRA 107 
aims to accelerate, among other things, the development of bio-based packaging and plastic sector , decoupling 
economic growth from resource depletion and environmental impact, and contributing to Vision ‘The circular bio -
society in 2050’. Perfectly in line with this overall goal, BioSupPack addresses the need to bridge technology gaps, 
generating the ne cessary enabling knowledge and technologies to build and boost the new value circle from bio -
monomers to end markets.  In this framework, the bio-based industries play a strategic role in complementing and 
replacing product streams from fossil oil and providing innovative bioplastic solutions for different applications. In 
the strategic area related to bio-based materials, according to SIRA 2030-draft2 (pag 18): ‘The BIC SIRA 2017 set 
25% in 2030 as a target for the share of bio-based or renewable feedstock of the total volume of organic chemicals 
raw materials/feedstock used by the chemical industry’. 
Nowadays, plastics are used in various sectors with a demand of 51.2 MT per year. Packaging makes up for 39.9% 
of this use, of which food packaging accounts for around 90%. In this sector, the EoL treatment of plastics is 
underperforming, especially when compared to more homogenous materials such as metals or glass, traditionally 
used in food packaging. According to Plastics Europe109, in 2018, 32.5% of plastic waste was recycled in Europe; 
nevertheless, there are many opportunities to increase recycling ratios. The recently adopted EC’s plastics strategy 
aims at decoupling plastics production from virgin materials, reducing their leakage into the environment, improving 
 
104 COM(2012) 60 final. The Commission Communication of 13 February 2012 entitled "Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A  Bioeconomy for 
Europe".  
105 https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/c2f36c72-2e59-11e8-b5fe-01aa75ed71a1/language-en/ 
106 https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/publication/updated-bioeconomy-strategy-2018_en. COM/2018/673 final.The Commission Communication 
of 11 October 2018 entitled “A sustainable Bioeconomy for Europe: Strengthening the connection between economy, society and the environment”. 
107 SIRA-Strategic Innovation & Research Agenda – 2030, for a Circular bio-based EU. Draft 2, March 2020 
108 Adoption of 11 March 2020, of the entitled ‘New Circular Economy Action Plan’, one of the main buidling blocks of the European Green Deal-
COM(2019) 640 final. https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/new_circular_economy_action_plan.pdf 
109 https://www.plasticseurope.org/application/files/1115/7236/4388/FINAL_web_version_Plastics_the_facts2019_14102019.pdf 
BioSupPack contributes to 3 of 9 identified product groups with high potential for bio-based applications, i.e. 
plastics/polymers, cosmetics, and coatings to be used in the packaging of several food and non -food products. 
Moreover, the bio-based raw used in BioSupPack are locally, renewable and sustainably sourced chemicals, 
cellulosic materials and bioplastics lea ding to close to 100% renewably sourced packaging. In addition, 
increased consumer awareness and acceptance of bio-based products, concerted policy and labelling will make an 
important contribution to improve market penetration. As such, BioSupPack packaging constitutes an enormous 
business opportunity helping to  nurture the realisation of the new EU CE 108 that also requires  the optimal 
management of bioplastic waste. 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 27 of 112 
the economics and uptake of recycling to support the transition from a linear to a circular economy model.  
BioSupPack is a high impact project for the improvement of the Circular Bioeconomy in EU. Thus, it is hinged on 
delivering cost competitive packaging solutions that can be enzymatically recycled. Moreover, industrial scraps 
can be mechanically recycled. In this way, the sustainability from cradle to cradle of several new bio-based high-
volume applications will be maximised. This impact will be achieved by performing innovation and demo work 
with the objective of making this concept commercially viable in practice, analysing the potentially successful 
exploitation pathways, and assessing and managing any related risks.  
- Creation of at least 1 new cross-sectorial interconnection in circular bio-based economy cluster (KPI 1) 
With BioSupPack we will establish one new bio-cluster circular connection as represent the follow scheme: 
 
and further intensify 4 connections, among the sectors of agri-food, bioplastics´ raw materials, pulp & paper and 
primary/secondary packaging from different industries (i.e. food & beverage, cosmetics, homecare): 
• BioSupPack will reinforce the strong bond that the bioplastics sector has with the packaging sector (which 
is by far the largest consumer of biodegradable and bio-based plastics) by providing new demonstrators in food, 
beverage, homecare and personal care applications. This new link is for example illustrated at the level of some 
of our compounding and large packaging converters, SABIO, GPI, ILAB, which so far have had good 
commercial biopolymers for other applications, but who wish to overcome the gap with the market to widen the 
new improved bio-based packaging in their product portfolio. The participation in BioSupPack will ensure them 
to drive the development towards actual market needs. 
• Relying on the transition from linear to circular value chains, i.e. value circles , we close the loop connecting 
biomass generators, with bioplastics producers and th e new enzymatic recycling alternative , which will 
provide the new secondary carbon source for bioplastics production . This way a new up -stream links with 
producers of non -valorised food by -products (BSG) will be created, opening up new business opportuniti es, 
especially for primary sector, becoming a crucial actor in this bio-based value circle and giving them a win-win 
solution. The BioSupPack aims to deliver >85% of bio -based formulations using highly sustainable biomass 
feedstock. As such, the current waste challenge turns into an enabler for innovation allowing a significant 
decrease in the environmental impact of the agri -food sectors and of the value chains of the BioSupPack 
solutions. We will have the agri-food processing industry playing a strategic polyvalent role: packer (end user) 
and supply raw material (BSG). Incontrovertibly, this magnifies the strength of the new links and the resonance 
of our solutions in the new bio-based value circle, which as an overall picture, it covers 7 stages: i) degradation 
of BSG to generate free fermentable sugars (with PLT plasma treatment and ASA as an enzyme supplier), ii) 
production of  PHB from BSG sugars and 3HB produced in the enzymatic recycling of PHA  based packaging 
waste, iii) Modif ication of PHB polymer by melt compounding by SABIO to produce bottles (ILAB) and  
commercial PHA by CTB to produce carboard bowls, trays and cups (GPI) in standard processing equipment, 
iv) to improve surface and barrier properties, produced packages will be treated with plasma by PLT partner and 
grafting of PHA coatings by ASU partner, v) food, beverage, homecare and cosmetic packers ( ULK, NFG and 
MICA with the support of stakeholder Calidad Pascual) will validate the packages in their current products, GPI 
will validate their coated cardboard packages (with the potential involvement of customers like Starbucks o KFC)  
vi) IRIS and SAV are in charge of the logistic related collection and sorting to have a homogeneous source of 
recycled plastics for further treatments, vii) the post -consumer PHA based packages will be recycled by SAV 
using enzymes provided by ASA, the substances from the enzymatic recycling will be used to produce new PHA 
based polymers for similar applications, in order, to close the circle. 
• Besides with PHA based coatings in the pulp-based packaging, the link between the bioplastic packaging and 
the pulp/paper sector will be reinforced for some primary packaging. Indeed, while conventional plastic-based 
coatings are now used, with BioSupPack, new bio-based nano-scale grafting and PHA coating for the 2 sides of 
fibre-based materials (solvent free, only water born) will allow improved barrier properties. The use of enzymatic 
recycling will allow the removal of the plastic coating from the cardboard -based packages and reuse the clean 
pulp to other non-food packages. 
• Cross-sectorial interdependencies will be created through the synergies among the needs of the sectors of the 
8 packaging solutions-demonstrators (e.g. similar materials serve the needs for food & beverage including service 
packaging, homecare and personal care, and the chosen 2 ndary packaging). We will build o n such synergies to 
reach out to sectors beyond the consortium, like pharma packaging or other non -food packaging. Further links 
with other applications in packaging sector can also be established though the discussion of the post project 
potential of the new materials with enhanced barrier, hydrophobic, microwavable or squeezable properties. All 
these links, considered when building our AB, can contribute to the outmost exploitation of our results. 

  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 28 of 112 
BioSupPack will create an unprecedented systematic, cross-border and cross-sectorial, connection among all 
industrial actors from ‘cradle’ to ‘cradle’ for the considered bioplastics -based end use applications.  Indeed, our 
consortium covers in the cradle-side, i.e. biosourcing, represented by the bio-based feedstock (MICA), bioplastic 
producers (NFG and SABIO)  and packaging producers (ILAB, GPI). But BioSupPack consortium, once  going 
through the end-user (MICA, ULK, NFG and GPI customers), also covers the new route ‘from former grave to 
new cradle-side, closing the loop, within a circular bioeconomy’, i.e. from waste management (SAV) and waste 
sorting (IRIS), going through the enzymatic recycling (SAV) to obtain the raw material to new polymers 
production. Complementary technologies will be proposed such as surface grafting of PHA coatings ( ASU) and 
cold plasma (PLT) to treat the BSG, packages and  waste materials prior enzymatic recycling and specific enzymes 
for the hydrolysis of the BSG and waste packages at the EoL (ASA). Their presence favours the generation of positive 
spill over effects among their affiliates leading to push-pull effects for the new BioSupPack technologies.  
While the current recycling of biodegradable bioplastics is almost i nexistent industrially, this new connection will 
allow launching concerted advocating for an improved framework for circular bio -based plastics. Potentially 
including incentive schemes both at EU and national levels and providing valuable input for on-going standardisation 
efforts at EU level, the project will aim to reduce the use of conventional petrol -derived plastics by promoting the 
use of bio-based plastics, which are required to be biodegradable and compostable110.  
- Creation of at least 1 new bio-based value chain based on the innovative products developed (KPI 2) 
BioSupPack aims to produce of a suite of novel bioplastic packaging solutions that respond to unmet demands in 
terms of functionality and novel EoL and that requires connecting a critical mass of actors able to generate value in 
a synergistic collaboration. We aim to create 3 new stable and effective value chains not only by new players 
interconnections at the upstream of the chain (to obtain the new bio-based raw materials and process polymers) 
but also remodeling existing value chains , becoming them value circles (from compounders, plastics converters 
onwards) that will substitute their petrol -derived products with our bioplastics solutions. As illustrated in Fig ure 9, 
upstream players crossover the 3 targeted packaging sub-sectors. 
 
Figure 9. BioSupPack new effective value chains  
The BioSupPack actors will work towards the same goals and a proper proportion of large end users, who will test 
and validate the new bio -based solutions in the selected target demonstrator applications, are included as early 
adopters at the end of the value chain to stimulate the demand. This will particularly benefit SMEs (PLT, SABIO, 
NFG, MICA, IRIS, ASA) as it will provide them with new up - and down -stream partners. Cooperation among 
BioSupPack members will be particularly important in the post -project phase, as results of the project are pre -
competitive and further additional investment will be required before BioSupPack is ready for commer cialisation. 
As addressed through specific tasks in WP8, setting the basis for a robust value circle will be key to generate real 
value on the market. We are confident that our developments fulfil market demands and they can convert into a 
sustainable supply & value chain of bio -based material with functionalities that outperform existing plastic 
materials at a competitive market price. 
-Demonstrate at least two new bio-based materials for packaging (KPI 5) 
BioSupPack will deliver at least 2 biobased PHA materials to produce high-performing rigid packaging: 
1. PHA based compounds to produce bottles by EBM and the secondary packaging by IM. 
2. PHA based coatings to be used in the protection of grafted fibre-based packages such as bowls, trays, and cups.  
 
110 For example, a new law in Germany encourages the use of materials from renewable resources or recycled materials for the production of packaging, 
supports the use of certi fied bio-based and compostable plastic bags for the mandatory separate collection of biowaste. Likewise, in 2016, France 
adopted its ‘Green Growth and Energy Transition law’ and stipulated that bio -based, home -compostable packaging was mandatory for many 
applications. A Decree specified percentages of bio-based content to be reached by defined dates: 30% bio-based content by 2017, 40% by 2018, 50% 
in 2020, and 60% in 2025 and such initiative is now extended to Europe under the SUP legislation under definition. 

  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 29 of 112 
PHB will be produced from fermentable sugars of BSG and from the carbon substances produced during the 
enzymatic degradation of the PHA based waste (mainly 3-hydroxybutyric acid-3HB) in a synergic combination. PHB 
fermentation is divided into two stages, i.e. bacterial growth and PHB accumulation. Using BSG hydrolysate 
containing carbon sources, nitrogen sources and minerals will facilitate bacterial growth with minimal commercial 
nutrient supplements. Using 3HB during PHB accumulation, a higher carbon source to PHB conversion yield will be 
achieved as the microorganism does not grow any longer and only accumulates PHB. 3HB can also be used for 
growth, so it can also be used together with BSG hydrolysate if higher carbon source concentration is needed at the 
beginning of fermentation. Both raw materials have a great advantage in comparison with other sources of 2G sugars 
for fermentation process as we detail in the following text.  Based on the different EU food industries statistics, the 
beer industry is among the most important ones in terms of production capacity as Table 8 shows.  Regarding 2G 
sugar availability derived from the food industry by -products produced by the different  food industries95, as figure 
10 details BSG constitutes a considerable source of 2G sugars with only sugar beet pulp and wheat milling by -
products being able to provide 2G sugars (wheat milling by-products contains also a considerable amount of starch) 
at higher quantities than BSG. Oilseed meals could also provide comparable quantities of 2G sugars with BSG, but 
these are used as predominant animal feed in EU. BioSupPack is focusing on one of the major sources of 2G sugars 
in food industry by-products available in almost all EU countries and around 20% are landfilled. 
 
Figure 10. Geographical distribution in EU -28 in 2016 of potential fermentable sugar availability derived from BSG (left) and Sugar Beet 
Pulp (right) 
BSG has lower availability compared to other lignocellulosic feedstocks (agricultural and forest residues), which 
however, are more recalcitrant to pre -treatment/hydrolysis and the associated logistics/collection/transportation is 
complex. However, 2G sugars isolation from BSG is more efficient since the complex structure of lignocellulose is 
damaged during malting and mashing and, therefore, the material is much more prone to enzymatic hydrolysis. BSG 
indeed contains a moisture content of 70-75%6, if the transportation from the breweries to the bioprocessing plant is 
carried out in a relatively short time after production (few days) and it will befree of contaminants, and thus, transport 
be done without any need for temperature or moisture control. This is a significant advantage contrary to other food 
industry by-products (e.g. cheese whey is easily contaminated, sugar beet pulp must be dried for transportation). 
BSG contains other value-added products such as a polyphenols, lipids, lignin and proteins to be used in the plastic 
industry or other industrial sectors 96. This will permit to reduce the final treatment costs and to achieve a zero -
waste refinery. Depending on the final quality of the obtained lignin in BSG plasma treatment, they can be sale to 
companies that produce vanillin or lignosulfonate-based additives, being a huge market for these complex molecules. 
BSG proteins can be used not only in animal feeding but also in food supplements- there is high demand for proteins 
in modern diet and for non-synthetic additives, whereas BSG phenolics can be evaluated as antioxidants in PHA/PHB 
formulations for the plastics industry. Lipids and proteins can be used also in the fermentation of PHB, the lipids can 
be used as additional carbon source and it is possible to hydrolyse the proteins and use them as additional nitro gen 
source in PHB production . In our experience , introduction of protein hydrolysates boosts up significantly PHB 
production. In conclusion, to use a synergic blend of carbon sources (BGS hydrolysates with proteins and 3HB) 
can easier achieve economies of scale of PHB production from BSG.  
As reported in Section 1, a ccording to EUB the global production capacity of PHA is expected to increase in more 
than the 500% from 2019 to 2924. Indeed, PHA will contribute the most to the growth of biopolymers in that period. 
BioSupPack paves the way to widen bioplastic market, providing innovative PHA bio-based products.  
Current production of PHA111 is mainly in the US (CJ Bio CheilJedang (5kton), Danimer Scientific (5kton)) followed 
by Asia (Kaneka, Japan; 5kton), TianAn Biological Materials Co. Ltd. (China; 2kton), Tianjin GreenBio Materials 
9kton). In despite the excellent properties of this mater ials and the huge market growth, the production capacity in 
Europe is very limited.  The most important criterion for large-scale production of PHA is sustainability in terms of 
 
111https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2019/10/09/1927137/0/en/The-global-polyhydroxyalkanoate-PHA-market-size-is-estimated-to-
grow-from-USD-57-million-in-2019-to-USD-98-by-2024-at-a-CAGR-of-11-2.html 

  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 30 of 112 
supply and cost. The sustainable production of PHAs could be achieved by utili zation of renewable, inexpensive 
carbon substrates and adopting efficient extraction processes. The operational cost of PHAs production process can 
be significantly minimized by using high yielding strains and optimization strategies of production and 
downstream112. The use of two complementary carbon sources with limited contaminants, as BioSupPack suggests, 
can increase the yield and decrease the downstream needs, in consequence, it reduces significantly the investment 
required to produce large amounts to have a competitive cost by economy of scale. According to the studies of Choi 
et al.113, the industrial production (>1,000 t/year) of R3HB though P3HB depolymerization via chemical methods is 
twice expensive than the use of enzymatic routes. Additionally, if purification process of R3HB is not required due to 
the new P3HB will be also produced via biological methods and the selected fermentation bacteria are specific to 
work with 3HB, the cos t of production of P3HB will be expected lower than current technologies  that uses only  
sugars and lipids as a feedstock. 
- Creation of at least two new demonstrated ‘consumer’ products based on bio-based chemicals and materials that 
meet market requirements (KPI 6) 
BioSupPack will deliver 2 main new demonstrated ‘consumer’ packaging products based: 
1) High-performing rigid mono -material packaging , wh ich will show excellent performance in terms of 
barrier properties  (oxygen, moisture, liquids and fats), squeezability and/or compatibility with hot filling, 
equivalent to fossil and better than another bio. 
2) Coated and grafted fibre -based packages: wet coa ted and grafted paper structures, with unique 
functionalities (i.e. microwaving), still compatible with optimal EoL of derived coated materials.  
Those improvements can enhance the consumer’s experience, facilitating the product release from the packaging, 
reducing waste and maximising products organoleptic characteristics. BioSupPack materials will replace the current 
plastic packaging products made up of conventional PP & PE (for sauces, cosmetic and homecare applications), and 
the service packaging composed of board base, with PE coating. The consumer is given an important position in our 
bio-packaging value circles, as direct user of all BioSupPack products.  
Based on the current price of PHA, the cost of the proposed monolayer packages versus fossil based or other 
non-biodegradable bioplastics will be about 4-5 folds more expensive compared to fossil alternatives. Current, 
monolayer packages made with PP and PE are fully mechanical recyclable but with downgrading, but the recycled 
post-consumer packages cannot be used to produce new food packages, they only can be used for non-food packages 
or for low-cost applications like pipes, waste bags or pots, whereby the price of the material lost 70% of their value 
after their reprocessing. In BioSupPack, the enzymatic recycling and the obtained product (mainly 3HB) will be used 
to produce a new polymer for the same application as in 1st life cycle. Loss of value is therefore significantly lower 
as 3HB is mainly used to PHB accumulate in the bacteria. 
Current prices of PHA vary between 7 -15 €/kg. Because there are recent announcements by several companies to 
increase PHA production, and there are several start -up companies and R&D efforts to make production more 
efficient, it is estimated that a price of 5-8€/kg will be achieved in near future. Specifically, for the coated PHA 
materials, the patent -pending coating pastes are water -based dispersions in which also relatively high amounts of 
inexpensive food-contact-approved plasticisers are used. This way, r aw chemicals used for the coating pastes are 
estimated to be 2 – 4 €/kg, including pricing, marketing, formulation and sales this will lead up to 4.5 – 8 €/kg for a 
coating paste with about 40% solid content. According to different market studies, PHA barrier coatings will be about 
2-3 folds more expensive compared to fossil alternatives, depending on the desired properties. It will therefore be 
important to highlight the additional benefits PHA coatings will offer, such as recyclability and biodegradability.114 
 
112 Geeta Gahlawat et al. Polyhydroxyalkanoates Biopolymers: Production Strategies. 2019. Springer Nature, 70 páginas, ISBN 3030338975. 
113 Choi, et al (2004). Process analysis and economic evaluation for the production of enantiomerically pure (R) -3-hydroxybutyrate by 
degradation of bacterial poly (3-hydroxybutyrate). Korean Chemical Engineering Research, 42(3), 345-354. 
114 http://www.tianan.com/en/ 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 31 of 112 
PHA-based packages have attracted interest for 
food packaging application due to its renewability, 
biodegradability, and water vapor barrier 
properties. PHB acts as a better light barrier in the 
visible and ultraviolet light regions than PLA. 
Despite the comparable properties of PHB with 
synthetic thermoplastics 115, its widespread usage 
has been limited by drawbacks of cost, limited 
commercial availability and narrow er melt 
processing window due to brittleness and low 
thermal stability in the molten  state116. PHAs have 
properties close to traditional plastics such as low -
density polyethylene (LDPE), PP which makes 
them suitable for industrial uses especially in 
packaging11 (see Figure 11). 
PHBV offers the suitable gas barrier properties for use in coated paper and films. Non -biodegradable PE coating is 
currently used for this purpose preventing either biodegradation of the paper or recycling of the cellulose fibres. 
PHBV coated paper has been shown to be completely biodegradable in all main environments and easier to recycle 
compared to conventionally coated paper. 
PHB has also better barrier properties than other bioplastics such PLA, OTR and WVTR of PLA is 30-300 cm3/ (m2 
day bar) and 35-200 g/ (m2 day bar) respectively whereas OTR and WVTR of PHB is 8-100 cm3/ (m2 day bar) and 
3-30 g/ (m2 day bar) , for the selected applications polymers with good barrier properties is encouraged, and for this 
reason we select PHA for coatings an PHB for rigid packages. This would also help to optimize thickness of the final 
packaging (thickness reduction) or avoid the use of multilayer structures to fulfil requirements.  
ENVIROMENTAL IMPACT: Minimise landfill or incineration of the packaging material after use. 
Our objective is to reduce significantly the amount of packages that are not properly managed at the EoL, by the 
implementation of technologies of enzymatic recycling that allow to transform PHA/PHB in 3HB that will be useful 
as a carbon source in the production by fermentative/enzymatic routes of new PHA/PHB, that can to be used in same 
application. 
In the case of monolayer bottles made with polyolefins are collected and mechanical recycled, but due to the final 
quality and food packaging regulations, the do not reach the security level requested in the manufacture of new food 
packages and their final use is in the production of low added value products with very low industrial profit. The 
increase of use of post -consumer recycled polyolefins in profitable applications is limited, and alternatives, as 
BioSupPack proposes, are needed, aligned with EU Directive 2019/904. 
Pulp-based packaging that combines carboard and plastic, the percentage of their mechanical recycling is very low 
due to the insufficient capacities of specialised recycling mills which mainly focus on recovering beverage cartons 
and technical difficulties to separate plastic and pulp making it impossible to process by standard paper mills and the 
low value of post -consumer recycled materials coming from the treatment of pulp-based packaging. BioSupPack 
aims to improve the recyclability of pulp -based packaging by the use PHA coatings instead of the use of 
polyolefins and to implement the enzymatic recycling, where a better-quality paper can be obtained (cellulose 
fibers and PHA will be transformed in new PHA by fermentative routes at the enzymatic recycling facilities). 
ENVIROMENTAL IMPACT: Reduce greenhouse gas (including CO2) emissions (expressed in CO2 equivalents) 
in the overall value chain compared with the state of the art;  
The main benefits of using bioplastics vs. conventional plastics are generally in terms of saving non -renewable 
resources and low toxicity . According to the BBI JU’s SIRA, bioplastic has been identified as a major sector that 
determine the economy decarbonisation. In terms of resources, bio-based plastics have the unique potential over 
conventional plastics for reducing GHG emissions or even being carbon neutral (1 metric ton of bioplastic generates 
between 0.8 and 3.2 fewer metric tonnes of CO2 than 1 metric ton of petroleum-based plastics)117,118.  
Figure 11 left shows two ellipses, separated from each other, that represent the clusters of GHG results. The ellipse 
on the upper right, which contains data based on using fossil resources of more than 70 MJ/kg of plastics and 
greenhouse gas emissions of partly cl early more than 3 kg CO 2 equivalent/kg of plastics, correlates with 
petrochemical plastics. The other ellipse illustrate the results of the bio -based plastics PLA and PHA/PHB, the 
data of which for the use of fossil resources are lower than 70 MJ/kg of pla stics. At the same time the GHG of 
 
115 Thellenet al. J A J Polym Environ 16 (2008) doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10924-008-0079-6 
116 Erceg et al., Polym Compos 31 (2010) 272 
117 Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Bioplastics and Bioelastomers 
118 www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-of-plastics 
Figure 11. Polymer barrier properties (oxygen & water vapour) 
 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 32 of 112 
bio-based plastics amount to clearly less than 3 kg CO2 equivalents/kg.  
Figure 12 right shows that 
the production of bio -based 
polymers in comparison 
with the production of 
petrochemical plastics in 
most cases also leads to 
greenhouse gas emission 
savings. For PHA, the 
average savings potential in 
this case amounts to 5.8 ± 
2.7 kg CO2 eq/kg of plastic.  Figure 12. Comparison of environmental impacts of bio-based and petrochemical 
polymers119 
In comparison with PP and HDPE, considerable savings potentials ranging between 2.2 and 3.2 kg CO2 equivalents 
are found. Table 7 shows the differences in the greenhouses emissions between a rigid package produced using a 
polyolefin and PHB. The expected greenhouses gases reduction is estimated in the range of 3.2 to 5.5 CO2equi/Kg of 
package depends on the compared EoL system. 
Table 7:  GHG Emissions of packages made with HDPE and PHB 
Greenhouse gas emissions (CO2 equivalents)120 HDPE PHB 
Production of the polymer and the package (CO 2equi/Kg of package) 5.7 2.5 
Collection, transport, and sorting (CO2equi/Kg) 0.2 0.2 
Mechanical recycling of the package (CO2equi/Kg) 0.35 0.35 
Enzymatic recycling of the package (CO2equi/Kg)121 -------- 0.45 
Energy recovery of the package (CO2equi/Kg) as Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 2.8 ------- 
Total CO2equi/Kg per package emissions based on mechanical recycling (other EoL)  6.25 (8.7) 3.05 (3.15) 
But not only the use of bioplastics but also the recovery and valorisation of the 20% amount of landfilled BSG will 
promote environmental benefits in terms of GHG emissions. As every tonne of BSG in landfill releases 513 kg CO2 
equivalent of GHG14 and considered the amount of BSG available for recovery in the EU, nearly 350 Ton CO2 
equivalent of GHG release could be avoided. 
ENVIROMENTAL IMPACT: Contribute to the EU’s 2050 long -term strategy for a climate -neutral Europe by 
replacing fossil-based material with bio-based, renewable material. 
Contributions to the Green Deal Goals. BioSupPack will contribute the follow key policies and measures: 
-Mobilising industry for a clean and circular economy (section 2.1.3). Energy-intensive industries, such as steel, 
chemicals and cement, are indispensab le to Europe’s economy, as they supply several key value chains. The 
decarbonisation and modernisation of this sector is essential.  
While the circular economy action plan will guide the transition of all sectors, action will focus on resource-intensive 
sectors such as textiles, construction, electronics, and plastics. The Commission will develop requirements to ensure 
that all packaging in the EU market is reusable or recyclable in an economically viable manner by 2030, will develop 
a regulatory framework for biodegradable and bio-based plastics, and will implement measures on single use plastics. 
BioSupPack aims to produce PHA bioplastics for different package applications including service packaging that 
are single use. Furthermore, PHA will be enzymatically recycled to be used in the same application and reduce the 
loss of value at EoL. 
-A sustainable product policy also has the potential to reduce waste significantly.  Where waste cannot be 
avoided, its economic value must be recovered and its impact on the environment and on climate change avoided or 
minimised. This requires new legislation, including targets and measures for tackling over -packaging and waste 
generation. In parallel, EU companies should benefit from a robust and integrated single market f or secondary raw 
materials and by -products. This requires deeper cooperation across value chains, as in the case of the Circular 
Plastics Alliance. The Commission will consider legal requirements to boost the market of secondary raw materials 
with mandatory recycled content (for instance for packaging, vehicles, construction materials and batteries). To 
simplify waste management for citizens and ensure cleaner secondary materials for businesses, the Commission will 
 
119Essel (2012): “Meta-analysis of 30 LCAs”; Bioplastics Magazine (Vol. 7/2012-02),  
120 In despite that the density of PHB is higher than HDPE, due to the better strength properties of bio-polyester, we can reduce the package thickness 
maintain the same mechanical and thermal properties as the Layman report of ECOBIONET project details www.ows.be/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/LAYMAN_ecobionet-report_vfinal.pdf  
121 Enzymatic recycling is done by selected enzymes that work at moderate temperatures, require low investment and OPEX than chemical process, in 
consequence the CO2 emissions will be significant lower than chemical process or simple biodegradation in a industrial compost plant. 

  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 33 of 112 
also propose an EU model for separate wast e collection. BioSupPack aims to optimize new routes of recycling to 
maximize their economic value and to contribute to improve the knowledge in waste separation technologies. 
-A zero -pollution ambition for a toxic -free environment (section 2.1.8).  ‘Creating a toxic -free environment 
requires more action to prevent pollution from being generated as well as measures to clean and remedy it’. All 
processes in BioSupPack are toxic free and thanks to the optimization of enzymes, reactors and their processing 
conditions, we expect a significant reduction of direct and indirect emissions of GHG in the different process 
involved, as we detailed before (under the previous environmental impact). 
Presently, there are bio-based alternatives for many industrial applications, including packaging. In the case of PHAs, 
currently there are applications in bio -refinery, medical, agriculture, construction and packaging (though still in 
niches). The comparative cost analysis of PHA from by -products and enzymatic recycli ng with commercially 
available ones and potential to attain circular economy is one of the main advantages to be demonstrated in 
BioSupPack, considering that our PHA will come from 2nd & 3rd generation raw materials, instead of raw sugars. 
The reasons for this shift are connected to the non -renewability of fossil -based resources, the deteriorating 
environmental impacts, and the lack of biodegradability of the petroleum -produced materials but also to the 
avoidance of food competition as in case of current PHAs. 
Using our novel BioSupPack compounds and coatings will ensure that the impact of plastics on the environment 
is minimised by offering alternative & more sustainable recycling solutions to the fossil fuel materials. The selected 
EoL, by industrial enzymatic recycling, will be the environmentally sustainable EoL, for PHA upcycling, as an 
alternative the current recycling of the counterparts materials, coming from the fossil fuels, thus contributing to the 
EU’s 2050 long-term strategy for a climate-neutral Europe.  
Although mechanical recycling normally emerges as the superior waste processing option by life cycle analysis, all 
plastic materials have a limited mechanical recycling lifetime (while some materials are simply non-recyclable) and 
therefore materials need to also be chemically or biologically recyclable if a “recycling loop” is truly to be 
implemented122 especially when targeting food contact applications . Moreover, there will always be a certain 
level of leakage of materials t o the environment, regardless of the improvement in our collection systems. 
Biodegradable plastics in mild conditions as PHAs would help to alleviate the impact of this leakage.  In a holistic 
approach to mitigate current EoL challenges for PHA, besides delivering new materials, BioSupPack will also 
adapt specific sorting lines that will ensure the right material sorting towards enzymatic recycling streams to 
maximize the final value of the polymer.  
Enzymatic recycling is the most sustainable EoL, when the post-consumer waste still contains rests of food or other 
products. Keeping with the waste management hierarchy, we will also show that the recycling of BioSupPack 
packaging, post-industrial waste and rigid fractions is viable contributing to increase the recycling rates of plastic in 
the future CE (target <10% landfill in municipal solid wastes by 2030) and reducing landfill or incineration.  The 
need to explore the establishment of industrial recycling facilities which are dedicated to non “d rop-in” bio-based 
plastics, currently very limited, due to their current use is very limited in comparison with petrol-based polymers. On 
the other hand, enzymatic recycling is a technology that require a limited CAPEX123 due to selected natural enzymes 
works at mild conditions, has high efficiency, and require low enzymes concentration (less downstream needs). 
Finally, in terms of use,  the barrier packaging (functionalized PHA coated paper and plasma treated EBM 
packaging) ensuring a longer shelf life will have a hugely positive impact on the food chain. Likewise, whereas 
packed food typically binds much more resources than the packaging itself, the reduction of products waste due to 
squeezability provided will have a large effect on the LCA results expected in the project. All in all, in BioSupPack, 
the carbon footprint of the considered bio-based products will be decreased along the new value chains as will be 
shown by LCA during the project in WP4. 
ECONOMIC IMPACT: Lay the basis for market-acceptable production costs of the targeted bio-based products. 
In different OECD countries, packaging waste represents a significant, yet increasing, share of total household waste. 
This represents a significant economic burden too. The applicable EoL options and  related fees vary per type of 
packaging material and mainly depends on how easy it is to separate it in the waste management stage. Gate fees for 
EoL management for similar treatment options can vary substantially at national level but also at regional and local 
level. Due to the specificities of plastic packaging, the costs linked to plastics EoL treatment tend to be significantly 
higher than the costs related to the treatment of other materials. Despite the recycling rate is increasing following a 
shift towards a CE, currently only 32.5% of plastic is recycled and more than 42,6% incinerated (energy recovery) 
and 24.9% landfilled124. These last two EoL options lead to significant resource depletion. Indeed, even the energy 
recovery achieved by incineration plants only has an average efficiency of 35% . Therefore, gate fees at material 
recovery facilities are substantially lower than those for incineration and landfilling. Usually, factors influencing gate 
 
122 Biodegradable Plastic in Solving Plastic Solid Waste Accumulation www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128131404000194 
123 Tournier et al. An engineered PET depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic bottles. Nature 580, 216–19 (2020). 
124 https://www.plasticseurope.org/es/resources/publications/1804-plastics-facts-2019 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 34 of 112 
fees are mainly related to the landfill tax (which enables competing treatments to raise their gate fees as the tax 
increases); the quality and quantity of material being presented; energy costs, etc.  
According to the E UBP, more than 90% of materials currently disposed -off in incinerators and landfills could be 
reused, recycled and composted. According to EPA, a well-run curb side recycling program can cost anywhere from 
€40 to more than €122 per ton whereas trash collection and disposal programs, cost from €57 to more than €160 per 
ton. Recyclers pay variable amount for post consumers and post -industrial plastic wastes depending on their 
cleanliness and purity (e.g. from 0 to 700 € per t on) less than three times lower than virgin ones. Then they have to 
separate, clean, grind and reprocess the compounds and subsequent materials vs. operative costs involved, a positive 
balance can be obtained only if such materials can be sold above 600€/t . To find customers paying this plastic cost 
to produce low added value products is in most case complex. 
Table 8: Summary of differences of cost of monolayer 
rigid packages produces using HDPE and PHB. 
 
Cost  HDPE 
Bottle 
PHB 
bottle 
Production of the polymer (€/Kg). 1.50 5.00 
Production of the package (€/Kg). 0.40 0.45 
Plasma treatment (€/kg) 0.00 0.02 
Collection, transport, sorting (€/Kg). 0.10 0.10 
Mechanical recycling (€/Kg). 0.20 ------ 
Enzymatic recycling (€/Kg). -------- 0.1 
Value of the plastic at the EoL   
Sales of recycled polymer or 3HB (€/Kg). 0.40 1.00 
Difference of cost  -1.80 -4.75 
BioSupPack aims to produce two main types of packages: 
monolayer bottles for food and non -food products and 
pulp-based packaging both produced using PHA/PHB as 
the main plastic material. Current PHA/PHB cost are 
several times higher than petrol based . However as 
demonstrated in a preliminary economic study (d etailed 
in Annex-B.P.), the packages produced using the 
materials and the technology optimized in BioSupPack 
will be cost competitive compared with the current petrol-
based material, if the full process is considered. One of 
the key points to be cost compe titive is to reduce the 
cost of PHB to values below 5.0 €/kg. To fulfil this, we plan 
to scale up the production of PHB using BSG hydrolysates 
BSG proteins as a source of nitrogen and 3HB as a synergic 
source of carbon that it is accumulated directly by the 
bacteria in form of PHB. 
Furthermore, BSG is a low -cost lignocellulosic biomass, but it is less recalcitrant than other such as straw (i.e., its 
lignocellulosic structure is damaged during malting and mashing and, therefore, BSG is much mo re prone to 
enzymatic hydrolysis).  
This expected cost will represent a significant reduction in comparison with the current state of the art, where we 
reduce from actual 4 -5 folds in comparison with petrol -based materials to near 2.5  folds, as showed the 
calculations in the following point.  
ECONOMIC IMPACT: Increase business opportunities for new, innovative, and sustainable packaging solutions 
that have no negative impact on the environment. 
BioSupPack valorises residual streams from primary sector, 
BSG. Estimations on the 2 main bio -based materials & 
products (according to KPI5&6) are detailed in Annex-
Business Plan (B.P.), showing the viable commercial costs 
for the 2 project lines.  Herein economic breakdown for the 
new business line based on PH A compounds + High -
performing rigid mono -material packaging is included, as it 
represents the highest im pact (ca. 95%) in terms of PHAs 
amount introduced in the market. All calculations are based on 
the foreseen scheme for the Business plan of the Industrial 
plants (see descriptions in annex B.P.) and data and 
assumptions provided by the industrial partners. Table 9 shows 
the details of the Industrial Plant 1 - bottles whole process 
production, and the source of the data to calculate the 
comparisons between an average bottle weight as data provided 
by ULK, as a reference HDPE, 30g weight ( supposedly now 
made up of BioSupPack PHB). Table 10 shows the details of 
Industrial Plant 3 -Collection, Sor ting & Enzymatic 
recycling -to close the value chain. The cost that SAV will pay 
for having the PHAs waste sorted results in about 0.1 €/kg, and the same amount (i.e. 0.104 €/kg) is the cost that 
SAV will assume to perform the enzymatic recycling. 3HB will be the new raw material to be supplied NGF.  
Other social and environmental impact (including contribution against climate change)  
BioSupPack will also contribute to other impacts especially in terms of pollution and consumer health.  
Table 9: Industrial Plant 1-bottles whole process 
production 
Table 10: Industrial Plant 3-Collection, sorting & 
enzymatic recycling 

  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 35 of 112 
Microplastics Sea pollution : A study based on measures taken during 24 expeditions, estimate s the presence of a 
minimum of 5.25 trillion plastic particles in the oceans, corresponding to a mass of 270 ktons.125 Recent concern 
about plastic pollution has focused on microplastic particles. Microplastics are likely the most numerically abundant 
items of plastic debris in the ocean today, and quantities will inevitably increase, in part because large, single plastic 
items ultimately degrade into millions of micr oplastic pieces. Microplastics are of environmental concern because 
their size (5 millimetres) renders them accessible to a wide range of organisms at least as small as zooplankton, with 
potential for physical and toxicological harm. Moreover, plastic wast e can also damage coral reefs and marine 
invertebrates and contribute to the spreading of invasive species as they drift in the oceans, possibly causing 
ecosystems’ destruction.  
PHB polymers are fully biodegradable in soil and sea water conditions, and th e bioplastics products incorporating 
the PHB coming from BSG valorisation developed in BioSupPack project can consistently contribute to the 
environmental risk related to microplastic formation in case they are not well managed at the end of their life. 
Additionally, a lot of studies detail the use of PHB or PHBV as ingredient in fish feed formulations due to their 
“prebiotic effect”126. Replacing a small amount of the diet with PHB improved weight gain, speciﬁc growth rate 
(SGR) and survival in the fish ﬁngerlings127-128.  
Unquestionably, our quality of life is linked to the quality of our environment and measures are needed for lowering 
the environmental burden of our activities and consumption patterns. According to a report of the Ellen MacArthur 
foundation129, only a very low amount of plastic materials is recycled (14%) while high amounts end up in landfills 
(40%). It is important to highlight the most critical point is  the amount of plastic wastes leaking from our waste 
management streams shows as much as 32% of plastic ending up in our environment.  
Long term plastic persistence in the environment is aggravated by a cumulative effect, due to both accidental and 
intentional littering. The slow decomposition of plastic into small pieces leads to damages to the fauna via ingestion 
and entanglement 130,131. Recognized as one of the major international environmental challenges by the European 
Environment Agency (EEA)132, plastics account for 89-95% of marine litter (roughly 8 million tons every year), 
in particular packaging (bottles, lids, etc.) leading to irreversible consequences for marine ecosystems. Besides, 25 
Mt of plastic waste is accumulated annually in soil worldwide, being detrimental to the environment (irreversible 
soil contamination, degradation of soil quality, pollution of rivers and groundwater) and human health (heavy metals, 
dioxins and furans released during plastic burning are associated with endocrine disruption, heart disease, cognitive 
and motor disabilities, and human carcinogen)133. At the EU level, the recent BOHEMIA study134 recognises ocean 
and marine pollution as key priorities to be tackled by the EU post-H2020 R&I framework programme (HORIZON 
EUROPE). Concerted actions are required to sustainably solve the huge plastic waste accumulation issue.  
Promoting the use of recycled plastics in value added application, BioSupPack solutions will influence the increase 
of the quantity of plastic waste enzymatically recycled to produce polymer for food and non -food ap plications 
Furthermore, BioSupPack PHA/PHB biodegradability in mild conditions is a step towards the existence of plastic 
packaging that can biodegrade also when accidentally littered in the environment, mainly on sea waters, where 
the PHA is has biodegradable, has prebiotic effect in fish fauna and do not produces microplastics.  
BioSupPack will use harmless/innocuous substances which derive from food (by -products from BSG that contains 
proteins, holocellulose fermentable and antioxidants) and paper. Also, barrier packaging will provide consumers with 
healthy food along longer shel f life. Furthermore, in terms of coated pulp -based packages, our new PHA coatings 
will impart durable hydrophobicity enabling industry to replace polyolefins which are currently used in 
hydrophobic coatings, but they are difficult to manage at the end of life as previously detailed. 
BioSupPack packaging demand is expected to be driven by green- and health- conscious consumers concerned about 
the environment and especially unsustainable persistent littering and resulting microplastics135. Furthermore, societal 
benefits will be assessed by the active involvement of partners such as ASU and ULK, that are working on consumers’ 
needs and perceptions. BioSupPack will ensure a strong coverage at EU level, on consumers attitudes on the 
issue and their requirements which will contribute to encourage the knowledge of the positive benefits of bio-
 
125 Sailing seas of plastic, cf. //app.dumpark.com/seas-of-plastic-2/#expeditions/60  
126 Prebiotics are substances promoting beneficial gut microflora hence improving digestion and nutrient absorption processes. 
127 Duanet al.  Effects of dietary poly -β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) on microbiota composition and the mTOR signaling pathway in the intesti nes of 
litopenaeus vannamei. J Microbiol. 55, 946–954 (2017). 
128 Franke et al. Poly-β-hydroxybutyrate administration during early life: effects on performance, immunity and microbial community of European sea 
bass yolk-sac larvae. Sci Rep 7, 15022 (2017). 
129 https://www.newplasticseconomy.org/about/publications/global-commitment-spring-report 
130  http://www.kimointernational.org/MarineLitter.aspx 
131 http://www.onegreenplanet.org/environment/ways-plastic-pollution-impacts-animals-on-land/ 
132 State of Europe's seas, EEA Report No 2/2015, ISSN 1977-8449 
133 D. Briassoulis et al. (2013) Review, mapping and analysis of the agricultural plastic waste generatio n and consolidation in Europe, Waste 
Management & Research31 (12), 1262 – 1278  
134 Beyond the Horizon: foresight in support of future EU Research and Innovation Policy- Doi: 10.2777/906131 
135 About 80% of European consumers want to buy products with a minimal impact on the environment (Eurobarometer survey, EC, 2013). 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 36 of 112 
based packaging as well as raising awareness about future economic, societal and environmental challenges. 
Contribution to improving the innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge 
While the generation of new knowledge is positive, it is in its industrial use that innovation capacity is increased, and 
impact is realised. As such, to allow generating truly market replicable innovation, the BioSupPack consortium unites 
the industry value chain necessary for market success. The project has integrated several transversal activities such 
as environmental, regulatory, safety and economic assessments, and finally business planning activities to maximise 
the post-project exploitation of the r esults. The project gives trans-sectorial industry and transdisciplinary research 
and technology players an opportunity to collaborate and share all required technical knowledge and market expertise. 
Effective knowledge transfer from the RTDs (AIMPLAS, ASU, AUA, BUT & CTB) to the participating enterprises, 
especially SMEs (PLT, SABIO, NFG, MICA, IRIS and ASA) often lacking own R&D capacities, laying down the 
basis for supporting the industry partners to carry forward the results post -project, is fundamental to increasing the 
likelihood of market uptake. Moreover, the engagement of large companies, for the pilot plants and as end-users, is 
crucial (GPI, ILAB, SAV, ULK).  
As discussed in the innovation section, unique and potentially patentable bio -packaging solutions relying on PHA 
for coating formulations and PHB compounds from BSG + broth of enzymatic recycling  will be developed to  
achieve optimal functionalities and allow enzymatic recycling in mild conditions. Another key novelty is the use of 
enzymes for PHB recycling and BSG pre-treatment in combination with plasma. 
This knowledge will not only provide new insight for the scient ific community who lacks systematic studies on 
enzymatic recycling of specific polymers, as well as also help in the shaping of new related standards but will also 
be used with two industrial targets: i) support the eco-design of the products meeting target EoL scenario and 
ii) support organic recyclers, to ensure they sort suitably the new post-consumer waste for enzymatic recycling. 
To increase the industry innovation capacity, our approach is to  capitalise on a valuable opportunity for the EU 
bioplastic, packaging, and the end -user industries to substitute current synthetic counterparts with bio -based 
compounds and coatings. BioSupPack represents a very timely development of new cost-efficient, recyclable and 
high-performance bio-based materials, into growing ‘green’ and ‘bio-based’ industries.  
This will result in great business opportunities reinforced by current bioplastics market trends, the growth in 
our target end use sectors, increased visibility, and policy awareness and support for such solutions. Indeed, we tap 
into the massive EU plastic business (€350 billion turnover per annum). Packaging Plastics demand in EU is ca. 
20 Mt , of which 9% is for olefin rigid  packaging136 and coatings . BioSupPack is estimated to reach a market 
penetration of 0.5% of these plastic segments (totalling a potential of 9,000 kt per year) by 2030 in EU, generating 
close to €45 million turnover and ~180 new jobs (based on 1 job/250 k€ of turnover) at the biopolymer production 
upstream level. Such figures would be reinforced at the downstream (end users) level  who benefit from new 
unique products. Besides direct partners’ exploitation, these figures, equivalent fo r current limited European PHA 
production to increase by a factor of seven by 2024 according to European Bioplastics, correspond to an overall 
deployment through further licensing, business alliances with additional producers and converters. Estimates abou t 
how partners respectively expect to grow their business and create jobs with our solutions are given in section 2.2.  
Impact on consumers and consumer choice:  With the growing consumer awareness towards greener and wiser 
choices from the environmental point of view, more attention is paid to products with a lower environmental impact. 
While this concerns the product as a whole, it is also increasingly the case for packaging material, which is especially 
critical in the case of food, drink and personal care products. These products are sold in massive quantities for short-
term use and the packaging must be light, resistant and impermeable to gases and liquids, maintain the organoleptic 
properties of its contents while keeping compatibility with existing rec ycling options. In terms of impact on 
consumers and their preferred choices, BioSupPack  addresses the following aspects: i)favour the selection of 
products that are packed in selected biobased materials, which per se (or on the monomeric state) do not pose a safety 
risk to human health due to migration effects; ii) Moreover, the BioSupPack  packaging solutions accommodate the 
growing demands of green - and health- conscious consumers concerned about the environment 135; iii) consumers 
will benefit from high -quality products due to the improved preservation properties of the new packaging 
formulations; iv) favour the use of natural materials to counteract consumers’ concerns about synthetic additives and 
substances migrating to food; v) consumer expectations regarding recycling/upcycling, reduction of packaging waste 
and environmental side effects of mishandled packaging will be fulfilled137.  
Barriers/obstacles/framework conditions. 
BioSupPack has carried out an analysis using the PESTLE approach. Table 11 presents the political (P), economic 
(E), social (S), technological (T), legal (L) and environmental (E) factors that can have an impact on the market. The 
success of the project and the exploitation of the results depend on many external factors. The primary risks/barriers 
 
136 https://www.packagingstrategies.com/articles/90098-whats-next-for-the-rigid-plastic-packaging-market 
137 For about 95% of European consumers, it is important that the design of products/pa ckaging facilitates plastic recycling (Special Eurobarometer 
501 Survey, 2019)   
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 37 of 112 
related to project implementation are covered in section 3.2. The longer-term barriers and obstacles towards achieving 
impact relate to scaling the project results from TRL6-7, into widespread market replication, as following: 
Table 11: Barriers and mitigation measures in BioSupPack 
 
138 McKinsey & Company ‘The packaging industry and the coronavirus pandemic’ (April 2020) 
BARRIER DESCRIPTION  MITIGATION MEASURES  
Economic Barriers  
Worldwide pandemic situations 
such as Covid-19 has led to material 
disruptions and changes in the 
operations (installations, 
manufacturing and supply chain). 
Based on a recent study published by McKinsey 138 on how the COVID -19 crisis will likely impact the 
packaging industry, solutions like BioSupPack relevance is expected to increase: i) More focus on hygiene 
aspects, less on re-usable packaging: this implies that more items will only be used once, thus increasing the 
need for recycling and upcycling; ii) D isrupted supply chains, need to avoid the reliance on importing 
fundamental goods: we use bio-based polymers for which the feedstock is sourced locally and will strengthen 
the EU production capacity. In contrast, the oil prices decrease makes the competiti on harder for bio-based 
materials and is a disadvantage for us, but it is not expected to continue till the market entry of our solutions. 
Food, hygienic and drink consumption will increase in home that use small packages in comparison with 
HORECA sector. Providing then waste feedstock to industries keeps up ongoing.  
Market: High cost of early 
demonstration projects and lack of 
testing facilities is a challenge which 
requires greater government 
support.  
BioSupPack will have their own testing places to validate the new materials and technologies developed. 5 
different places (for the 3 pilot plants) will be available for validation of demonstrator’s circular chain at 
pilot plant conditions: Czech Republic, Italy, Portugal, Belgium & Spain. Additionally, as Table 4, section 
1 indicates, most of the partners take part in research & innovation projects, which valuable expertise 
accumulated.  Wherever possible industrially available technologies will be used in the packaging 
conversion steps to avoid carrying the burden of large investments for PHA adopters. 
Continued cost reduction:  Bio-
based materials need investments in 
research and innovation to 
accelerate cost reduction, 
particularly in technologies very 
close to commercialisation.   
BioSupPack will contribute to reduction of equipment costs (through integration of technologies), logistic 
costs (i.e. the online platform will reduce cost of logistics as well as will let better exploit the waste feedstock 
resources), and energy consumption by, mainly, u se mild conditions in the different fermentative and 
enzymatic steps, and improve yield production; compared to existing bio -based production of high -level 
materials. All those factors would both decrease the CAPEX and OPEX and increase production efficiency, 
further reducing the final cost of the new PHB/PHA products. 
Private financing of follow -up 
steps: Increasing amounts of private 
investment will enter the Bio -based 
packaging sector as the technology 
matures. Ultimately, the decision 
whether or not to  support the full 
commercialisation rests with private 
investors. 
Key component of WP8 will be to prepare the case for post project financing from commercial or public 
funding sources to ensure we can complete the journey over the Innovation Gap and then, swiftly on through 
the Valley of Death. This will be supported by Life Cycle Costing (LCC) activities undertaken in WP6. 
ENCO is experienced in securing commercial investment from long term sources of finance for innovative 
technologies. This experience has contributed to the structure of the proposed plan of work. It has identified 
the required demonstration scales required for the various pathways, the setting of cost targets that must 
ultimately be based against commodity traded fossil fuel market prices  and, of the continual requirement to 
monitor and mitigate risks as they arise (both technical and economic), undertaken in WP9.  All processing 
partners has a strong investment capacity but, in view of its high diversification in terms of processing 
techniques, ILAB and GPI would opt first for new PHN bottles and PHA coating to be processable with 
existing equipment before reaching a volume warrantying dedicating an own production line.  
Sociological Barriers  
Public acceptance  & their support 
is vital to ensure that viable 
deployment sites can be secured. As 
is the case for regulators, public 
acceptance will grow over time as 
the number of successful 
deployments increases. 
Public concern on use of durable plastics and their lea kage into the environment have rose and led to the 
currently more stringent packaging regulations that generally can support biodegradable plastics, paper & 
board packaging and recycling. On previous EU projects in which partners have participated, a progr essive 
involvement of citizenship has been checked (SAV projects in Table 4). Furthermore, the tendency of people 
is changing, and every time they are more aware of the climate change issues.  Preparation of communication 
and education concepts. Involvement of science centre in EU in education. 
Technological Barriers  
Technology development: new 
technologies and materials are 
needed to reduce costs.  
Improvement of the yield of PHB production from BSG, barrier properties and EoL needed. Technical risks 
and mitigation strategies associated with the project delivery are covered in section 3.2. Any scale -up and 
industrialization of a technological process  involves a certain level of risk. However, in addition there are 
risks that competing actions could result in protected IP that could limit the proposed innovation strategies. 
Freedom to Operate is fundamental for future exploitation. Initial IP searches undertaken in the preparation 
of this proposal (see section 1.4) have shown that there is no existing IP conflict and that the consortium in 
fact has a rich IP portfolio to build upon in the project. However, throughout the project, as part of WP8, the 
consortium will employ due diligence to ensure that any future identified IP risks do not become barriers.  
Political, Legal and Regulatory Barriers  
Standards and certification:   
introducing bespoke solutions and 
new standards  
A number of regulations are underway and expected to affect the market, such as:  
• Single use plastics directive (SUPD): Ban of certain single use plastic products by 2021 –shifting additional 
volume to fibre alternatives but also influencing the choice of suitable polymer barrier coatings.  
• Packaging and packaging waste directive (PPWD): could boost fibre packaging which are more recycled 
already to reach the overall targets. 
•Landfill bans of recyclable materials by 2025 (proposal) –with potential positive impact on recycling. 
Policy development: European 
Commission last initiatives, 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 38 of 112 
Additional investments 
In terms of further contributions to maximizing the impact of this BBI action, significant in-kind contributions are planned 
to reflect the industrial context of the action and will definitely contribute to increasing the impact and reaching the proj ect 
objectives. The consortium covers 38.2% (2.43M€) of the overall project budget. This co-funding, comprising the 65% budget 
of the large companies and SMEs as well as a 10% for RTOs partners, is justified by the genuine  conviction of the partners that 
they will on the short-medium term obtain a return on their investment when the BIOSU PPACK solutions reach the market. Our 
success securing in the consortium world leaders in the bioplastics, packaging, food and personal  & homecare fields who will 
fully cover their own costs by themselves , and members of the AB who will make also significant in -kind contribution (in 
providing samples, assessment, advice, providing actual society/ consumers data, etc.) shows that we have a winning concept.  In 
addition, some partners also provide additional investments towards the BBI-JU’s objectives (Table 12). 
Table 12: Summary and cost of the additional investments (note: no financial transfers between partners are made) 
Entity Activity Contribution to the BBI JU 
objectives 
Estimated 
private 
investment 
(M€) 
Estimated 
value public 
investment 
(M€) 
Other EU 
funding 
received 
1.AIMPLAS Improve control of recycling steps, adaptation 
of facilities for bioplastics. Synthesis of 
biopolymers (2021-2023) 
KPI1 (polymer processing), KPI2 
(polymer processing), KPI6 (RTD 
for food packaging processing) 
0.55M€ Investments are supported by 
regional authorities via own 
resources and European 
regional funds (50%). 
3.CTB Extension of lab facilities and pilot lines to 
help the reconversion towards a circular bio-
based economy (2021-2022) 
KPI1 (polymer processing), KPI2 
(polymer processing),
1.5 M € 1.0M€ Belgian 
Province W-
Flanders invests 
in the building 
& infrastructure 
Investments 
supported via 
EU regional 
funds (50%) 
4.ASU 
Innovation Campus – Model Factory and 
Laboratory for sustainable food production 
and food packaging 
KPI1 (polymer processing), KPI2 
(polymer processing), KPI6 (RTD 
for food packaging processing) 
2,0 M€ 
No other investment or funding 
expected to be received 
8.SABIO Upgrade of the production plant and 
recycling plant. 
KPI1 (polymer processing), KPI2 
(polymer processing), KPI6 (RTD 
for food packaging processing) 
0.05 M€ No other investment or funding 
expected to be received 
9.NFG Building a 1kT capacity industrial plant to 
increase the capacities of PHB production 
(2020-2021) 
This investment will contribute to 
the successful meeting of the 
project objectives. Specifically, 
KPI1 and KPI8 related to BSG 
hydrolysis and PHB production 
will be fulfilled together with 
KPI12 (business and growth). 
0,33 No other investment or funding 
expected to be received 
10.ULK ULK as a high distributor of Fast-Moving 
Consumer Goods is determined to play a key 
role to push all parts of the supply chain to 
close the circle of plastic, push forward the 
use of biopolymers and significantly reduce 
the rate of plastic disposal in the environment 
R&D activities associated with 
plastic recycling, introduction of 
bioplastics and sustainable 
packaging that contribute to BBI-
JU objectives (KPI2 and 6) 
0.4M€ No other investment or funding 
expected to be received 
Directives, etc.  BioSupPack will contribute to put into practice EU & national initiatives, Directives aligned with 
bioeconomy & circular economy. Project partners and stakeholders will foster public bodies and 
administration involvement, thanks to their current relationships and networks. E.g. the Circular Economy 
Package (CEP), Directive (EU) 2018/852 amends Directive 94/62/EC and EN 13427:2005, on Packaging & 
Packaging Waste; REACH regulation (EC No  1907/2006), Food Contact Materials – Plastics. Regulation 
(EU) No 10/2011 (last amendment by Regulation (EU) No 2017/752. In 2019, ECHA (European Chemicals 
Agency) published a new version of the restriction report. The report mentions a list of substances  banned 
for use as a substitute for microplastics in cosmetics and fertilizers and opens up an opportunity for PHB, 
since PHB is named as an example of a reference for biodegradability. 
Environmental Barriers  
Carbon footprint: The carbon 
emissions reduction of the whole 
bio-based product life cycle is 
complex 
As seen in terms of GHG, the CO 2 eq emission of bioplastics is much less than that of fossil plastics 
packaging. For the specific case of the coated packaging, the carbon footprint is generally more positive for 
fibre-based packaging than for other materials (driven by renewable sourcing and recyclability) so they can 
help reducing the GHG emission of the food packaging sector. In the case of monolayer bottles, we expect 
a reduction of greenhouses gases reduction between 3-5 CO2equi/Kg of package depends on selected EoL. 
The intelligent logistics platform together with efficient driving systems through the use of sensors put in 
practice in WP1 by SAV will allow a reduction of greenhouse effect emissions close to 20% , based on 
previous knowledge on PlastiCircle project, and IoT optimization technologies.  
Life cycle impacts:  Mooring and 
anchoring seabed disturbance 
impacts on marine life and species. 
Plastics (and its conversion to microplastics while in the sea) will be avoided in a significant way by the 
self-production of bioplastics, being easier to degrade and being these ones the “possible” plastics to end in 
the sea. For example, when by accident plastic bottle, try or cup will allow the sea water, BioSupPac k’s 
packaging proposed will be marine degradable and therefore have a limited impact on marine species.  
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 39 of 112 
14.IRIS Participation in projects where IRIS provides 
a significant cofunding (BBI:  PolyBioSkin, 
Refucoat, Pulpacktion, Agrimax, CE: 
Ecobulk, SPIRE: Multicycle)  
 Research and innovation related 
with bioplastics, plastic recycling 
and packaging that contribute to 
BBI-JU objectives (KPI2 and 8) 
and are in fact synergistic with 
BIOSUPPACK  
0.87M€  
(2019-2022)