1.1 Objectives  
The increasing use of bioplastics in the packaging sector is driven by the continuous demand for sustainable products 
by consumers and brands alike, due to a growing awareness of the environmental impact and the need to reduce the 
fossil resources dependency. The bioplastics industry´s continuous innovations make the number of manufacturers, 
converters and end -users increas ing steadily. New and innovative biopolymers such as polyhydroxyalkanoates  
(PHAs) show a very high relative growth rate. With a global production capacity of 25.300 Ton in 2019, it is expected 
an increase up to 160.000 Ton in the next 5 years1 (from 1.2% to 6.6% of bioplastics´ global production capacity). In 
this context, new ways of producing PHAs are going to take a great importance in a short future , being one of the 
challenges open to source it from 2nd-3rd generation raw materials instead of raw sugars2. 
PHAs are an important polymer family, they are 100 percent bio-based, with versatile biodegradability properties in 
most environments exceeding those of any other bioplastic 3,  recyclable and featuring a wide array of physical and 
mechanical properties depending on their chemical composition , from very flexible poly(3 -hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV) to rigid polyhydroxybutyrate  (PHB), showing similar properties to some fossil -based 
materials like  polypropylene (PP) and polyethylene (PE) 4 and be ing a good biodegradable and compostable 
alternative in packaging applications5. However, further improvements are needed to provide cost effective solutions 
with suitable performances for demanding packaging applications, and alternative environmentally sustainable end 
of life (EoL) that maximises the retention of the added value of these biopolymers in a new circular plastic economy. 
On the other hand, spent organic materials have yet to reach 
an industrial level of market potential related to a value 
hierarchy (Figure 1 ). It is the case of brew spent grains 
(BSG), the most abundant by -product from the brewery 
industry6, available at low or no cost and produced in large 
quantities7. Being high value d, its use as a feedstock is 
limited at present 8, primarily as animal feed (70%), 
bioethanol (10%) and landfilled (20%). Main challenges are 
a high moisture and low fermentable sugar content (mainly 
C6 sugars), making microbial growth and spoilage possible 
in only 7–10 days , thus being an environmental problem . 
Despite of them, BSG by -product is one of the most 
promising candidates as a PHA feedstock, because: i) high amounts are produced in Europe every year and in almost 
all European countries, ii) it is not seasonal, iii) it is highly stable in comparison with other food by-products, iv) 2G 
sugars isolation from BSG is more efficient since the complex structure of lignocellulose is damaged during malting 
and mashing and, therefore, the material is much more prone to enzymatic hydrolysis ( less recalcitrant)9, v) BSG’s 
proteins act as a nitrogen source avoiding the use of expensive nitrogen supplements in the fermentation process, vi) 
BSG’s lipids can be also carbon source for PHA production.  Although the brewing industry tends to be more 
environmentally friendly than other industries10, the increasing demand for sustainability in all operations  could be 
satisfied by reducing the amount of BSG still landfilled or used in low added value applications. BioSupPack strategy 
and innovations, shown in Figure 2, have been well defined to overcome the described limitations and deliver novel 
packaging that will respond to end users’ needs and European sustainability policies. 
In terms of packaging performance 
PHA has been selected for the production of novel BioSupPack packaging due to its good mechanical performance 
in rigid packaging, its ability for being applied as wet coating on paper/cardboard substrates, and its better gas, fat 
and liquid barrier properties compared to other bioplastics like polylactic acid (PLA) and even some fossil -based 
materials11. Other requirements like squeezable properties and suitability for hot filling  and microwavable 
applications are also addressed. The following approaches will led to high -performing bio-based packaging: For 
primary packaging : i) production of tailored PHA compounds  for rigid packaging for food, cosmetic and 
homecare products; ii) use of already developed plasma technology to improve barrier performance of food and 
 
1 https://docs.european-bioplastics.org/publications/market_data/Report_Bioplastics_Market_Data_2019.pdf 
2 Bugnicourt e al (2014) PHA: Review of synthesis, characteristics, processing and potential applications in packaging. Express Polym Lett 8, 7 91-808. 
3 Debbarma et al (2017) Comparative in situ biodegradation studies of polyhydroxybutyrate film composites. 3 Biotech 7(3), 178.  
4 Jedra F. (2014) Polyhydroxyalkanoates: various properties, various applications. Arnhem: KCPK.   
5 Daraniet al (2015) Application of PHA in food packaging: Improvements by nanotechnology. Chem Biochem Eng Q . 2, 275-285. 
6 Buffington, J. (2014) The Economic Potential of Brewer’s Spent Grain (BSG) as a Biomass Feedstock. Adv Chem Eng Sci 4, 308 -318.  
7 Fărcae al (2014) Brewers ’ spent grain -A new potential ingredient for functional foods. J Agroaliment Process Technol 20, 13 7–141. 
8 Gupta et al (2010) Barley for Brewing: Characteristic Changes during Malting, Brewing & Applications of Its By-Product. Compr. Rev. Food Sci Food Saf 9, 318-28.  
9 Robertson et al (2010) Profiling Brewers’ Spent Grain for Composition & Microbial Ecology at Site of Production. LWT Food Sci  & Tech 43, 890-96.  
10 Ishiwaki et al (2000). Development of high value uses of spent grain by fractionation technology.  MBAA Tech Q.37, 261–5. 
11 G. Keskin et al (2017) Potential of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) polymers family as substitutes of petroleum based polymers for packaging applications and solutions 
brought by their composites to form barrier materials. Pure Appl Chem 89(12), 1841–1848. 
Figure 1: Biomass cascade (Source: Peter Westermann, 
Copenhagen Institute Technology) 
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 7 of 112 
cosmetic packaging, mainly in terms of oxygen barrier, avoiding the use of multi-layered packaging structures and 
facilitating their posterior EoL; iii) optimization of recently developed patent -pending PHA based wet coatings 
to protect rigid service packaging based on paper pulp/cardboard from moisture , liquids and fats; iv) grafting of 
fibre-based PHA coated substrates to protect food packaging from gases, fat and liquid; iv) production of PHA 
based compounds suitable for squeezable packaging for food and cosmetics products. For beverage secondary 
packaging, specifically beer glass bottles multipack, a PHA based compound will be produced for rigid clips that 
will replace current packages (rustic wood packaging or plastic rings to carry six-bottle packs). 
In terms of biobased packaging materials from biomass feedstock 
BSG will be valorised to produce  PHAs, specifically PHB. The whole process contemplates innovations in 
upstream BSG pre -treatment, fermentation and downstream PHB separation and purification stages 
focusing on the development of a n economically feasible, highly efficient  and sustainable bioprocess : i) 
enhancement of BSG to sugar conversion yield using the already developed plasma technology  towards 
lignocellulose pre-treatment at low temperature combined with sequential enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose and 
hemicellulose. Lipid and protein hydrolysis will be also assessed  to supply carbon and nitrogen sources to the 
fermentation stage; ii) PHB production via fermentation with conventional mesophiles and novel extremophilic 
bacteria for reduced risk of contamination in non -aseptic cultures; iii) combined use of sugars and 3 -
hydroxybutyric acid (3HB) monomer derived via enzymatic recycling of used PHA packages as carbon sources 
in fermentation; iv) extraction of PHB from bacterial biomass by ‘green’ solvent and recyclable switchable anionic 
surfactants to facilitate PHB extraction of high purity and yield, avoiding any PHB degradation leading to retention 
of the molecular weight (Mw) produced during fermentation. The PHB obtained will be used for the development 
of tailored compounds (physical modifications by blending with necessary additives , and commercial PHAs if 
required) for rigid packaging for food, cosmetics, homecare and beverage. Physical modifications of selected 
commercial PHA grades aimed at  wet coatings for food pulp based rigid packaging (service packaging), will 
address the need for alternatives to PE coated paper that cannot be neither recycled nor degraded in nature. 
In terms of packaging EoL sustainability 
The inherent properties of PHA will be exploited not only in the design and production of packaging prototypes, 
but also in the selected EoL by enzymatic recycling. Enzymatic degradation of PHB is easier and faster compared 
to other biopolyesters like PLA or polybutylene succinate (PBS)12. This EoL will provide profitable precursors 
to be reintroduced in the value chain, maximizing the retention of the biopolymer added value in a new circular 
plastic economy. Specifically, derived 3HB will be an additional carbon in fermentation for PHB production, 
besides BSG´s sugars and lipids, allowing producing the original biopolymer with the same properties. Whereas 
compostability can be suited for applications whose mechanical recycling is extremely difficult or impossible, e.g. 
packaging waste containing remains of the product packed or PE coated paper as PE cannot be separated from the 
paper fraction being the packaging not recyclable, enzymatic recycling using selective enzymes prone to hydrolyse 
PHAs (vs. product remains, paper) is a very suitable EoL. While considering recycling as a favourable option for 
PHA upcycling, it may require adaptation of the sorting lines. As such, photonic based solutions will be delivered 
to assess the correct sorting towards industrial recycling streams. The proposed EoL will contemplate: i) use of 
plasma as pre-treatment of the packaging waste, reducing the polymer Mw and modifying its surface properties 
to facilitate subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis ; ii) exploit known microorganisms producing PHB depolymerase 
releasing monomer 3H B during PHB hydrolysis; iii) select organisms from currently available metagenomic 
databases created from extreme environments that produce PHB depolymerase with higher 3H B production rate 
than existing ones; iv) implement enzyme engineering to improve PHB depolymerisation efficiency to 3H B; v) 
employ cloning and heterologous enzyme expression to overproduce the targeted PHB depolymerase; iv) optimise 
enzyme cocktails to maximise PHB depolymerisation efficiency. BioSupPack also considers the mechanical 
recycling of industrial PHA scraps to be reintroduced in the conversion processes loop , increasing circularity 
and making the whole process more cost-efficient and environmentally sustainable. For PHA based coated paper, 
BioSupPack will address the need for enzymes and bacteria during the repulping of such packaging materials, so 
that they can be recycled with the simple addition of specific microorganisms or enzymes to the recycling process. 
 
12 Tokiwa, Y.; Calabia, B.; Ugu, C.; Aiba, S. (2009) Biodegradability of Plastics. Int J Mol Sci 10(9): 3722–3742.  
  
BioSupPack                                                 BBI 2020.SO3. D4                                                       
Page 8 of 112 
 
Figure 2. BioSupPack strategy and main innovations 
The project contemplates the production of different rigid packaging prototypes representing large volumes on the 
packaging market, and where current performance of biobased biodegradable materials, waste management and EoL 
contexts must be improved (Figure 3). It is addressed to applications where the novel packaging can influence the 
consumers´ perception about the use of plastic packaging. The innovative materials, which will replace conventional 
polyolefins like PE and PP,  will 
cover the food, beverage, 
cosmetic and homecare 
packaging of early adopters 
present in the consortium , but 
their relevance goes far beyond 
this, with potential impact in the 
brewery and the biotechnology 
industries, covered by our 
advisory board (AB). 
The main goal of BioSupPack is to deliver novel, cost-competitive and versatile bio-based packaging solutions 
based on PHA, that demonstrate high -performance for the packaging of food, cosmetics, homecare and 
beverage products as well as no environmental damage during and after their use, by means of: 
1. Optimization of PHA based formulations based on significantly use of >85% w/w of renewable resources. 
2. Upscale the different conversion processes as well as post -consumers waste sorting and recycling  
following advanced industry 4.0 approaches. 
3. Broad the range of rigid packaging applications  by tailoring biobased materials and packaging properties 
through the optimization of the formulations in combination with plasma technology or grafted coatings.