2.2 Making data openly accessible (related to the Open Science community) 
Selected data and results will be shared with the scientific community and other stakeholders through publications in scientific 
journals and presentations at conferences, as well as through open access data repositories.  Identify existing e-Infrastructure 
and resources: including advice on copyright law, best practices on intellectual property right and exploitation (using persistent 
identifier such as a DOI or following OpenAIRE+ and ZENODO e-infrastructures to establish the right protocol, or GitHub (e.g. 
EUDAT, for software ). T he Bio-Uptake project datasets are f irst stored and organized in a database by the data owners 
(institutional secure server) and on the project database. All data are made available for verification and re-use, unless the task 
leader can justify why data cannot be made openly accessible. All data deposited on EOSC or ZENODO are accessible without 
restriction for public. Embargo periods of certain publications (green open access) will be solved by sharing pre-prints version. 
For other data, potential users must contact the IPR team or the data owner in order to gain access (e.g. via Researchgate). If 
necessary, appropriate IPR procedure (such as non- disclosure agreement) will be used. 
2.3. Making data interoperable 
AIM with the support of IRI and SIM will be in charge of making data interoperable: machine -to-machine interoperability of the 
metadata generated in the project. Making files opened, readable and understandable by different software will ease the 
reproducibility of the new files for replication purposes. All datasets will use the same standards for data and metadata 
capture/creation. Information on data & metadata vocabularies, standards or methodology to follow facilitate interoperability and 
whether the project uses standard vocabulary for all data types present to allow interdisciplinary interoperability. 
2.4. Increase data re-use  
Creative Common Licensing w ill be used to protect the ownership of the datasets. Both Share -Alike and NonCommercial -
ShareAlike licenses will be considered, for which the decision of making that part public has been made by the Consortium.
2.5 Curation and Storage 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    18 
An internal peer review is performed for the main project deliverables (among WP leaders and through coordinator) to guarantee 
the deliverable is developed with a high level of quality. The project data will remain re-usable for at least 5 years. 
The European Open Science Cloud will enable researchers across disciplines and countries to store, curate and share data . 
Also, public partners such as public European universities & libraries (e.g. LIM) will provide this service too. 
2. IMPACT 
2.1. Project’s pathways towards impact 
▪ Contribution to the outcomes and the wider impacts 
 
Fig. 9: Definition of Project Outcomes and KERs identification (temporal line according to the achievement of project milestones)  
Bio-Uptake contribution to the Outcomes specified in this topic: 
Demonstrate relevant scale production of innovative bio -based products to substitute traditional materials with high 
environmental footprint 
The manufacturing sector and more in particular the plastics manufacturing sector is on the centrality of a variety of value 
chains. The potential scale production of Bio-Uptake concept and the developed manufacturing processes (KER4) goes far 
beyond the selected value chains. It is based on modularity: production of intermediate formats (KER2), which are used as 
components of the final or finished products (industry-to-industry trade – KER3). This is a European dominated market with 
a share2020 of 37.75%. The potential to grow is huge, as an example, the Global Organosheet and Semi-Finished Thermoplastic 
UD-Tape Laminate Market Anticipated to Reach $1,671.2 Million by 2030 at a CAGR 2020-2030 of 10.03% 34, which can be 
considered the SAM (Served Addressable Market) of Bio-Uptake developed intermediates. Owing to increasing environmental 
concerns, this concept is gaining momentum and Bio-Uptake aims to be the first of its kind  introducing and promoting 
biobased composites (biobased plastics and fibres/reinforcement) with such a model. Up to know, the commercial materials 
that dominate these types of intermediates are mainly Glass and Carbon Fabrics, epoxy thermosets, high-tech thermoplastics 
such as PEEK, PPS and PA, and Polyolefins - PP. In this sense, Bio-Uptake aims at demonstrating that at least for the selected 
value chains, biobased epoxy and flax fabrics, PLA and bioPA products can be as competitive as petroleum-based counterparts 
following this modularity approach and with a proper eco-design. The selected demo cases for each value chain (construction, 
medical and packaging), opens the door for biobased materials to develop and adapt a complete manufacturing process that 
could be afterwards exploited in these sectors or others. In any case, it permits to car ry out the experimental and digital 
modifications, obtaining physical products to trade-show and opening three direct penetration markets (Bio-Uptake Serviceable 
Obtainable Market – SOM). The scale production within the selected sectors is  therefore: 1) Prefabricated Bathroom Pods 
market is valued at USD 1.41 billion in 2020 and is expected to reach USD 2.95 billion by the end of 2027, growing at a 
CAGR2021-2027 of 10.53%35; 2) foot orthotic insoles market size was 2.98 billion in 2020 and is projected to grow at a CAGR2020-
2027 of 6.1% reaching 4.50 billion in 202736; and 3) the global waste management market will reach 2.3 trillion U.S. dollars in 
2027, based on a CAGR2020-2027 of 5.5% from 202037. 
 
 
34 Business Wire. Research & Markets 2021. Global Organosheet and Semi-Finished Thermoplastic UD-Tape Laminate Market Report 2020-2030 
35 CISION – Valuates Reports (2021): Prefabricated Bathroom Pods Market Size 
36 FORTUNE BUSINESS INSIGTHS – Medical Device / Foot Orthotic Market. Forecast 2021-2027 
37 STATISTA (2021): Market size of waste management worldwide in 2019 and a forecast for 2027  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    19 
Develop products with similar or better mechanical, physical and chemical properties, while having a substantially lower 
environmental footprint and being sustainable, non-toxic and recyclable when compared to non-biobased materials 
The conception of the intermediate formats was originally developed in the aerospace and defence industry, which dominated 
the market until 2019 (quite a new trend). In this way, lightweight products with outstanding strength and design flexibility were 
conceived. Each intermediate format is designed to provide a particular feature/function and once these individual components 
are joined, the resultant product presents a synergistic technical behaviour that meets target requirements for an application. 
This concept is applied in Bio-Uptake to overcome the well-known technical barriers of biopolymers1. 
Introduction & comparison in properties of Bio-Uptake products and non-biobased counterparts:  
The garbage containers are designed for society (for councils in urban areas, industries and home-residential areas) adapting 
them to ease trash deposition in the most hygienic way.  These are made of PE (oil-based polyethylene) + EPDM (oil based 
elastomeric material) conceived to present good mechanical properties and not to be affected by environmental harshness’s 
or vandalism actions. Up to now, there has been some approaches to make this product more sustainable, but none based on 
Bio-Uptake concept: CONTENUR is manufacturing containers with 100% recycled PE (CIRCLE ®) and PLASTIC OMNIUM 
(EU World Leader) 100% sugarcane-based polyethylene. Bio-Uptake aims at migrating this material for a combination of self-
reinforced PLA organosheet (which presents mechanical properties 38 compared and even higher than current PA, while 
reducing the product overall cost and whose industrial production its being strate gically foster in EU 39) overinjected with 
European bioPA (to provide UV, water, chemical and mechanical resistance specially toughness at impacts 40,41). This bioPA 
will be reinforced with different derivates of lignin microfibers (European feedstocks): from bioCF to r-wood. Lignin will provide 
natural UV- blocker protection42, noise reduction (it is used in bio-asphalt43 for this purpose), aesthetical properties (e.g. for the 
organic container) and antimicrobial 44 effect. A clear reinforcing effect in the case of the selected bioCF coming from LIBRE 
and VIBES developments is expected: > 2 GPa tensile strength and > 200GPa modulus45). 
The modular bathroom pods are simple to lift, place and connect (e.g. hotels, caravans, offices…). These flat panels can be 
also used as walls and floors of the whole bathroom pod solution (modular plug). Currently, these panels as produced via resin 
vacuum infusion of conventional epoxy resin46 and glass fibre and within Bio-Uptake it will be substituted by a thermoforming 
process of flax-epoxy layers and a wood basal core. For this product it is of outmost importance avoiding water uptake (accurate 
control of the curing stage of the bioepoxy), be light while mechanically resistant and absorb noise too. 
Foot pain affects more than 30% of the general population. Feet orthotic insoles are shoe inserts designed: a) to cure the 
foot deformities (e.g. medical for plantar fasciitis, bursitis and arthritis…), b) stabilize the biomechanical misalignment of the 
foot (e.g. sports & athletics) and c) provide personal comfort in daily life . Bio-Uptake aims at demonstrat ing a solution to 
“adaptable hard” insoles to substitute Thermoformable Composite Insole rigid insoles 2.5 mm thick and made to be used as a 
rolling insole for diabetic pati ents & of Dynamic Walk AFO designed to allow people with dorsiflexor paresis or paralysis to 
confidently regain their stride. These two models are now made of Carbon Fibre and medical PEEK grades. In this case self-
reinforced PLA and PCL/PLA microfibrillar bicomponent organosheets will confer mechanical properties comparable to current 
hard insoles (rigidity for the plantar arc, impact absorption). 
Sustainability and environmental comparison , contributing to emissions reduction : In terms of environmental footprint, LCA 
studies have demonstrated the benefits of introducing these biobased materials to achieve decarbonisation and Green Deal 
GHG goals. Three categories are foreseen:  
• Regarding the thermoplastics used for Bio-Uptake products: PA is made of adipic acid (AA) building block. Conventional 
AA account for about 5% of anthropogenic N 2O emissions which is a powerful greenhouse  gas (265 time the CO 2 
reference) and have a global warming 7.84 kg CO2eq. Biobased AA (coming from softwood - celluloses either via levulinic 
acid or enzymatic route) contains biogenic carbon (carbon positive) and the total global warming is of 4.28 kg CO2eq, this 
is about 45% less GHG emissions 47. Moreover, if a circular solution is encouraged such as in Bio-Uptake, reusability 
and/or recyclability is contemplated and in a second loop this biobased recycled material greenhouse emission is cut down 
by 50% (about 2.3 kg CO2 eq)48. 
• Reinforcements such as the high added value Carbon Fibre (PAN - oil-based polyacrylonitrile) has a global consumption 
or 170,000Tn and its production generates 38,9 kg CO2eq/kg CF49. According to LIBRE project LCA results, lignin-based 
 
38 L. Van der Schueren et al. BIO4SELF: High stiffness PLA yarns for biobased self-reinforced composites – Journal Chemical Fibres International, April 2018 
39 European Biotechnology 2021. Progress for PLA plant in EU (Total Corbion & NextChem, new PLA operational plant in France 2024) 
40 NaturePlast bioPA grades (TDS). 100% biobased. Comparable mechanical and chemical properties to oil-PA. Non-toxic, even Food Safe. 
41 J. Reolid, et al (2019). Functionalization of Partially Bio -Based Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) by Blending with Fully Bio -Based Poly(Amide) 10,10 and a 
Glycidyl Methacrylate-Based Compatibilizer. Polymers. 11. 1331. 
42 H. Sadeghifar, et al (2020). Lignin as a UV Light Blocker—A Review. Polymers. 12. 1134. 
43 Gosselink R.J.A., Landa P., Lignin-based bio-asphalt, WO2019/092278 (PATENT) 
44 Lobo, F.C.M.; et al (2021). An Overview of the Antimicrobial Properties of Lignocellulosic Materials. Molecules, 26, 1749. 
45 A.Beaucamp (2019).Carbon Fibre From Renewable Resources:The Role of Lignin Molecular Structure on its Blendability with Biobased PET.Green Chem21 
46 A. La Rosa, et al (2016). Recycling treatment of carbon fibre/epoxy composites: Materials recovery and characterization and environmental impacts through 
life cycle assessment. Composites Part B: Engineering 104. 
47 Achille-B, et al (2017). A Prospective Cradle-to-gate LCA of a Bio-based Adipic Acid. Maastritch University & Chemlot InSciTe. FNRS LCA Contact group 
48 B. Cushman-Roisin et al (2021). Data, Statistics, and Useful Numbers for Environmental Sustainability. Bringing the Numbers to Life. Chapter 1 - Materials. 
Elsevier Books. ISBN 0128230118, 9780128230114 
49 Carbon Fibre LCA data in EcoCalculator, An essential extension. Composites Europe - 2018. EUCIA – European Composites Industry Association 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    20 
CF can cut in half the CO 2 footprint of CF production. The impact of Glass Fibre production is 1.5 kg eq. CO 2 per Kg of 
virgin GF produced 50. The production of E -glass (technical fibre) also emits SO x and NO x from batch material 
decomposition. In Bio-Uptake Glass Fibre will be substituted for flax fabrics in the construction applications. The CO 2 
impact of using flax for thermoset applications  varies depending on the origin of the biomass (e.g. European versus 
Chinese fibre due to more sustainable agricultural practices). Bio-Uptake will promote and use exclusively flax coming 
from EU (promoting EU local resources Be-Fr-Nl). In a comparison stu dy carried out by Elin Jacobson 51 (2018), results 
showed best values for global warming potential of -1.4 kg CO2 /kg fibre considering carbon dioxide sequestration  
(biogenic). These data have been also corroborated by Nova-Institut report52.  
• The use of toxic and environmentally hazards chemicals in conventional epoxy thermoset (Bisphenol-A & Epichlorohydrin 
are highly toxic and are categorized as carcinogenic, mutagenic, and reprotoxic) has triggered efforts among researchers 
on developing epoxies from various bio-sources such as vegetable oil (as in Bio-Uptake with formulations developed under 
ECOXY project and own SP research).  Studies comparing oil-based epoxy with vegetable derived epoxy have shown 
about a 38% reduction in Global Warming Potential (GWP)53. 
 
Demonstrate disruptive innovation of biobased materials production in at least three different manufacturing value chains 
Bio-Uptake disruptive innovation has been brought by combining material and process development new concepts together 
with their digital twin (digital thread and digital manufacturing creating a virtual process that enables to accurately simulate, 
monitor and optimise the final product). The disruptive innovations which are specific for the peculiarities of each Manufacturing 
Process (KER4) and are highlighted below:  
• In the manufacturing process for thermoset composites, (construction) pre-fabricated panels for modular bathroom 
pods will be developed  thanks to: 1) developing biobased endured organosheets based on bioepoxy +3R -CANs + flax 
fabrics, which are reshapeable; can be stored at room temperature without refrigeration; if certain curation appears it does 
not mean that is has to be discarded permitting its reuse (this will terminate with the unintentional generation of scrap); 2) 
set up a semi -automated process to work with these endured -pre-pregs by monitoring the curing level of the resin will 
allow to introduce and faster and less energy consumption ; 3) migrate the current infusion of pod panels (slow process) 
for a quicker thermoset process; 4) new TSIM simulation module to enable designing products under this concept. 
• In the manufacturing process for highly customised thermoplastics, (medical) orthotic insoles are developed thanks 
to 1) biobased monocomponent and bicomponent reinforced fibres and the creation of microfibrillar structures monitored 
by machine vision (AI analysis) and spectroscopic techniques to ensure the quality , 2) free forming of thermoplastic 
organosheets layers allows a selective reinforcing for customised configuration. 
• In the manufacturing process for one-shot large volume thermoplastic production , (packaging) a lighter garbage 
container lid  will be developed thanks to: 1) introducing a self-reinforced core structure (organosheet intermediate 
monitored via spectral temperature camera) and making an overinjection to provide selective reinforcing and a protective 
layer for environmental harsh ; 2) spraying a bonding-debonding adhesive on the organosheet surface prior injection to 
create an interphase which will favour materials separation and recycling under controllable stimuli (de-manufacturing); 3) 
a new CADMOULD simulation module to enable designing products under this biobased pre-fabricated concept. 
 
Develop sustainable business models for materials sourcing and recycling 
A circular business model is a means of implementing one or more circular goals in an economically feasible way. Indeed, 
shifting to a circular way of producing and consuming requires fundamental changes in the way products and services are 
conceived; new types of relationships between producers, retailers, consumers and service providers; alternative notions of 
material and product value and associated revenue models. Bio-Uptake will develop one circular sustainable business model 
for the European manufacturing sector. This model is built on three basic pillars:  
1. Agility by means of manufacturing with intermediate formats. This is based on the concept of pre-fabricated parts (coming 
from the construction sector). 
2. Decentralized Manufacturing (boosting start-ups and SMEs with expertise in a specific process) to produce with flexibility 
and faster,  using local resources and labour workforce and costs from location area (closer to final customers  and 
permitting more interaction and co-creation).  
3. Manufacturing-as-a-Service (MaaS)54 manufacturing thanks to the implementation of the process digital twin. 
4. Boosting new Value Capture revenues due to product circularity opportunities to ensure that the value remains in the 
value chain: the product comes back to industry for being de-manufactured, reused, recycled... as regenerated material 
(permitting the creation of jobs & growth by launching new industries and/or opening business lines for manufacturers) 
 
50 Life cycle assessment of CFGF. By PwC – Sustainable Performance and Strategy (Report for GlassFibreEurope) 2016 
51 Master´s Thesis – Mid Sweden University. Environmental Impact Analysis of Flax Fibre Cultivation for Composite Reinforcement. Elin Jacobson, 2018 
52 N. de Beus et al (2019). carbon footprint and sustainability of different natural fibres for biocomposites and insulation material - study providing data for the 
automotive and insulation industry. comprehensively revised 2nd edition. 
53 A.D. La Rosa, et al (2014). Bio-based versus traditional polymer composites. A LCA perspective, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 74, 135-144 
54 Pezzotta, G., et al (2017). Collaborative product-service systems engineering: Towards an active role of customers and stakeholders in valu e co-creation. 
International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE/ITMC). 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    21 
Business models are defined as a combination of value proposition  (VP), value creation (VCr) and value capture strategies 
(VCp)2: The VP of Bio-Uptake is KER4 (the Bio-Uptake manufacturing processes). This means, that the model  can only be 
implemented if KER4 reaches exploitation (which needs to be complemented by the other KERs, specially KER1 and KER2, 
as explained in Fig. 10). The VCr is demonstrated within Bio-Uptake is double: first by developing products as intermediates 
(KER2) and second end-products (KER3)  in three different sectors : construction  (pre-fabricated biobased panels for 
modular bathroom pods ), medical (feet insoles - AFO oriented) and packaging (garbage container lids with biobased and 
recyclable materials). Moreover, the particularisation of this model to the three manufacturing value chains will imply new VCp 
(a current gap that still exists due to the current linear model). The implication of citizens and policy makers will be key to 
enable new access-based modes, that will suppose new opportunities to create further value capture strategies via:  
a) material (source) cost reduction either due to the use of CANs (endured thermosets and adhesives) which will avoiding 
factory scrap, permitting material rework, or due to the substitution of costly materials such as PEEK or Carbon Fibre;  
b) revenues will come from selling the product itself and,  
c) new opportunities may arise by working in the access-based model of each sector and end-user product. Specific circular 
access-based proposals for Bio-Uptake KER3 products are:  i) after an in -house renovation , reforms´ SMEs and waste 
managers will ensure that pre-fabricated composite panels come back to the re-manufacturing site; ii) providing incentives to 
end-users when getting rid of the insoles  which can be handled through the orthopaedic shops (physical or virtual) were are 
redirected to a waste/de -manufacturer manager ; and iii) making some rental of the containers to institutions (councils, 
hospitals, residence-communities, shopping malls…) so the return of the product is guaranteed to the de-manufacturer. 
For the three products, whenever reusing and remanufacturing (including industrial symbiosis) is not feasible/possible due too 
critical damage, recycling alterna tives will be sought with new network stakeholders (creation of network value). These 
recycling alternatives will be cooperative actions with current EU projects (task 5.4) based in chemical and enzymatic recycling. 
In this sense, both the monomer building-blocks of the polymer used and the reinforcing fibres, will be recovered so as to be 
re-introduced by chemical companies into the manufacturing value chains as biobased-recycled material sources. 
 
A successful shift to a circular economy could help meet the Sustainable Development Goals, the Paris Climate Agreement 
targets, the ambitions of the European Green Deal and reach carbon neutrality in Europe by 2050. 
Bio-Uptake contribution to wider impacts  specified in the destination:  Global leadership in clean and climate -neutral 
industrial value chains, circular economy and climate -neutral digital systems and infrastructures (networks, data 
centres), through innovative production and manufacturing processes and their digitisation, new business models, sustainable-
by-design advanced materials and technologies enabling the switch to decarbonisation in all major emitting industrial sectors, 
including green digital technologies.  In addition to the explanations previously given to the speci fic project outcomes, and 
according to Destination 4 wider impacts, it should be highlighted: 
Bio-Uptake human dimension: Bio-Uptake has conceived a training plan (Task 1.4) with defined impact indicators to train young 
researchers (including at RIA stage also engineers) and industrial workforce with the skills required to set up the new processes 
and models, in which digitalisation and low -carbon circular economy principles are embraced (technological change + master 
digital components). Moreover, the training model applied in the project is based on the “learning-by-doing” method, with the aim 
of providing sufficient levels of flexibility and learning autonomy, preparing for a more resilient labour jobs (preparing future workers 
for a short-term and a long-term learning (proactive attitudes, flexibility, teamwork and communication skills). Gamification will be 
also applied so as to create workers/scientist engagement, behaviour changes an d create culture (in favour of new attitudes at 
work). This approach aims at making more attractive and safer the future jobs for humans. 
Bio-Uptake business dimension: Bio-Uptake project will act as an example to introduce circular practices and new approaches 
and technical models which will be needed in European future factories. These have been designed following the Made in Europe 
Partnership SIRA 3 Key technologies and enablers , in order to motivate a change from a mass production model to a mass 
customisation model. Bio-Uptake processes and sustainable models have been designed to set up the future decentralised, 
cleaner and greener , more flexible and smaller factories  of the future.  Thanks to the modularity concept of the disruptive 
technologies, Bio-Uptake processes will be easily to robotise (advanced robotics). Bio-Uptake project has been designed so 
provide a global solution that answers the 4 R&I specific objectives of the manufacturing strategic agenda: 1) Excellence, 
Responsive & Smart Factories & supply chains  (WP1,WP5); 2) Circular Products & Climate Neutral Manufacturing  
(WP2,WP3,WP4), 3) New integrated business, product -service and production approaches; new use models  (WP6), and 4) 
Human-centered & human-driven manufacturing innovation  (WP1). In addition, this  project structure is linked to the following  
Sustainable Development Goals: SDG4-Quality Education, SDG8-Decent work and economic growth, SDG9-Industry, Innovation 
and Infrastructure, SDG12-Responsible Production and Consumption, SDG13-Climate action. 
Bio-Uptake serving as cradle for the New European Bauhaus 55: Bio-Uptake defined conformal processes allows the 
manufacturing not only of final products for construction applications but also for other products such as tertiary packaging or 
even urban furniture, in a greener and more customised way (mimetising the particular needs of a designed urban environment, 
opening the designs to be more artistically -oriented and ultimately “shaping more beautiful, sustainable and inclusive forms of 
living together”). In the particular demo case of the garbage lid, a message to society is sent: “your waste is a valuable resource”, 
 
55 https://europa.eu/new-european-bauhaus/index_en 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    22 
where impact on society behaviour is sought by manufacturing the garbage container lids with biobased and recyclable materials 
(VCr), making this product, greener, lighter, ergonomic, aesthetically to integrate itself in the urban environment. 
Bio-Uptake considerations on the “Do Not Significant Harm Principles”:  According to the latest report of the technical 
working group of the Platform  on Sustainable Finance (PSF) 56, manufacturing, waste management and construction  (sectors 
covered within Bio-Uptake project), appears on the operational list of economic activities to steer green investments that will make 
a substantial contribution to a/some of the 6 environmental objectives. Bio-Uptake project is considered taxonomy-aligned to: 
Table 6: Bio-Uptake contribution to DNSH Objectives 
DNSH Objectives Bio-Uptake contribution 
OB4: the 
transition to a 
circular 
economy 
One of the major threats to our ecosystem is the large increase in the accumulation of plastic waste. Thanks 
to the CANs innovation and the de-centralised manufacturing concept based on intermediate formats, Bio-
Uptake will allow the remanufacture and recy clability of thermoset materials (which nowadays ends at 
landfill or burnt) and boosts the circularity and recyclability of biobased thermoplastics. Bio-Uptake will lead 
to new and regenerated products that will boost the emergence of a disruptive value ch ain that can be 
perfectly integrated as part of local systemic solutions to augment the circular economy and also the 
industrial symbiosis across different sectors: e.g reuse and recycle PLA, recover caprolactone monomers 
from PCL and bioPA, reshape and remanufacture bioepoxy thermosets etc. Bio-Uptake will cooperate with 
other projects providing solutions at different stages of the value chain with regard to the circular economy 
(e.g. BIZENTE, VIBES, DECOAT, MULTICYCLE…). It will also deploy the usage of high-value applications for 
sustainable materials such as lignin which has currently no application - with 2% burned as low value fuel 
OB3: the 
sustainable use 
and protection of 
water and 
marine 
resources 
It is not expected either to generate significant inefficiencies or pollution to air, water or soil and the project 
directly or indirectly. LCA and safety validation assessment (WP1) to evaluate the impact will be performed 
and in case of any inefficiency  or pollutant is found, propose alternatives to minimise its impact.  Overall, 
we expect to lower emissions, pollution and energy consumption utilising advanced low energy 
manufacturing techniques developed in previous EU projects (e.g. LIBRE).  If any unexpected polluta nt 
particle appears in the project results, corrective measures will be proposed. The re-manufacturability and 
reshapeability of plastic composites will open an important second economy activity for a multitude of 
products whilst providing extra value to t he materials. This will avoid negative practices such as sunk & 
abandoned vessels or goods, reducing also the amount of  plastics and fibres  in the oceans, waterways 
and soil. The project will in fact avoid the incineration or landfill of valuable bioplastics (zero pollution, zero 
landfill). 
OB5: pollution 
prevention and 
control 
Bio-Uptake makes a substantial contribution to those objectives while there is not foreseen any intentional significant harm to any 
of other objectives. Environmental and safety activities gathered in WP1 will monitor the developed activities and in case of any 
significant harm appears as potentially affecting any of the objectives a mitigation measure and potential contingency activities  
will be defined. 
▪ Requirements, potential barriers and mitigating measures 
The dynamics necessary to transform current business mod els into circular ones, involv es certain requirements such as 
innovation of business models, technology or social practice, as well as enabling factors such as policy measures and education. 
Apart from identified technical barriers (which are specific for the manufacturing processes selected), there exists other non -
technical systemic pre-conditions and barriers that need to be addressed in favour of a large-scale implementation of new circular 
business models. The main identified ones are: 
Technical barriers: Bio-Uptake project needs to overcome multi-faceted technological barriers, which are basically related to 
the manufacturing of biobased materials ( those which are not commercial with higher risk) and with the Digital twinning and 
fabrication. These are related to the speed, stability and robustness of the new green and smart conformal manufacturing 
processes (between different series or batches) that are adopting CAN innovative materials (basically 2 in the thermoset 
process & 1 in the packaging process). The concept of decentralised factory based on intermediate products (prefabricated) 
will help to overcome this barrier, as process can be divided and improved easier without affecting others (localised). 
Social & Cultural barriers - Resistance to change and lack of awareness and sense of urgency: Powerful stakeholders have 
vested interests in keeping production processes linear, such as waste incineration businesses. Circular Economy requires a 
systemic perspective and high cooperation among actors at all levels of the manufacturing and de-manufacturing supply 
chain and a systemic change needs to be gradual  to allow such businesses to recoup their investments. For consumers, 
buying recycled or bio -based products can be seen as assuming  unnecessary risks than buying fossil-based products. For 
businesses, limited knowledge about the circular economy leads to inertia and aversion to taking risks that disrupt current 
processes. And while nearly all European regions governments have matured urban waste systems based on generic 
collection systems, it can be challenging to focus more on quite selective fractions  and specific selective. WP1 (training) 
and WP6 (dissemination and communication) are a combined approach to provide skills to the stak eholders to better 
understand and work in Circular Economy and to allow motivated communities to reach a higher audience. In case of industrial 
 
56 Platform on Sustainable Finance: Technical Working Group. Taxonomy pack for feedback - August 2021 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    23 
symbiosis, where waste generated by an industrial ecosystem can be used as source of materials and energy for other, there 
is also the need for cooperation among different supply chains and avoid uncertainties about the data generated by providing 
data security. Establishing trustful conditions among all supply chain actors  is indeed one of the major barriers. WP1 
(LCA, LCC assessments) and WP4 (digital twin, building a virtual factory) will develop m ultilateral information systems to 
manage the whole product life-cycle from supplier to end-user, while adding value and maximizing the resource utilization. 
Legislation barriers constitutes an additional barrier to the implementation of Circular Economy businesses. Policies, rules 
and regulations were likewise designed with linear processes in mind and may restrict innovation in circularity.  This issue 
affects to many of the current regulations, directives and standards; and activities related to de -manufacturing and 
remanufacturing are still legally undefined in most countries, even though ongoing initiatives are addressing end -of-waste 
regulation (at EU level Bio-Uptake will benefit from the Circular Economy Package : new circular economy action plan , 
Directives 850/2018 and 851/2018…). In WP1, UNE will surveillance current standards, helping the project in contributing to 
new ones. In addition, WP6 targets Policy Makers too, and ensures actions to update and provide feedback with them. 
High Economic costs: Transitioning to a Circular economy incurs costs to businesses in terms of management, planning, 
research and development, physical and digital infrastructure. While government can provide incentives or subsidies, these 
costs nonetheless bring uncertainty and risk. New manufacturing plants will be initially supported by dedicated policies, but 
they must be gradually turned into self-sustaining sites by adopting appropriate business models.  Sustainable business 
models have been foreseen and will be further elaborated within WP5/6 in Bio-Uptake. 
▪ Scale and Significance of Bio-Uptake´s contributions → KPIs 
Table 7: Scale and Significance of Bio-Uptake´s contribution 
Contribution Scale & Significance Justification 
OUT1: 
Relevant 
Production 
Scale: market share 3 4% (SOM - 
construction); 28% (SOM - medical), 38% 
(SOM – packaging); Significance: 
thermoset thermoforming: 30% faster, 17% 
cheaper; free-forming thermoplastics: 34% 
more efficient, 12% lower cost, 50% shorter 
process; over-injection: 22% cheaper.  
As justified in excellence section and OUT1: Due to the new 
prefabricated – modular concept using the flexible 
intermediates and conformal technologies, a reduction in 
CAPEX will be achieved. Also, in OPEX due to savi ng in 
materials, zero waste achievements, reusing & recyclable rates. 
Digitalisation permits a more accurate control of the overall 
process and of the product quality. 
OUT2:Similar 
properties, 
lower Env. 
Foot.  
Scale: biobased content of end -products: 
sandwich panel (8 7%); feet insoles (7 5%); 
garbage lid (9 9%); Significance: average 
CO2 reduction [12%-33%] 
As justified in excellence and OUT2: Due to the type of materials 
used (and feedstocks – EU local), the efficiency of the 
manufacturing processes, the reduction in chemicals (including 
end-of-life due to re-manufacturability). 
OUT3: 
Disruptive 
innovation in 
3MVC 
Scale: Increment the uptake of biobased 
products by 39%. (Average of SOM x 
%biobased x MF) . Significance: Increase 
portfolio of biobased products in at least 3 
new products per targeted sector and at 
least 1 new product in 3 other new sectors. 
Thanks to the incorporation of these technologies (KER4) to the 
market a multiplier factor57 (MF≈1.3) is rapidly achieved as not 
further CAPEX are required  (none leverage factor = need of 
new investments) , what permits a quick adaptability for new 
products and markets. Thanks to the intermediate formats, re-
design & MaaS production will be straightforward. 
OUT4: 
Sustainable 
Business 
Models 
Scale: 1 new sustainable business model; 
Significance: 3 direct business cases 
As explained in OUT4, this model is based on pre -fabricated 
intermediate products & de-centralised manufacturing, permits 
flexible processes adapted to territorial industry & society 
needs. It is more competitive than rigid solutions, being easier 
to adapt & replicate with minimum expenses. 
WIDER 
IMPACTS 
Scale: 24 new direct jobs derived from the 
implementation of the project (partners) and 
about 1000 indirect jobs  (short term) & 1M 
jobs at long term. 
Significance: stable and versatile jobs 
(adaptable) 
This manufacturing model based on flexible processes, digital 
jobs, allows to keep the talent within EU. De -localized 
manufacturing permits also delocalised workers, more home -
office, and more versatile jobs, tha t can be realised by 
disadvantaged and vulnerable social groups  in rural and 
territorial areas and that pe rmits a fully gender equality.  Long-
term job creation is estimated to reach 3% of the total EU 
manufacturing industry (30M jobs)58. 
 
  
 
57 Schanz, H, et al. (2019). Markets as leverage points for transformations of economic systems: The example of the German bioec onomy. Environmental 
Innovation and Societal Transitions. 
58 Destination 4 – Climate Neutral, Circular and Digitised Production. European Commission (2021) 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    24 
2.2. Measures to maximise impact – Dissemination, exploitation and communication 
▪ Plan for the dissemination and exploitation including communication activities 
The Plan of exploitation and dissemination of results (PEDR), will be designed in order to fully achieve the expected impact 
of the Bio-Uptake project and to prepare the transit ion towards industrial and commercial uptake. The PEDR will describe the 
strategy and the activities to be undertaken (how and by whom) in order to ensure the exploitation beyond the project itself. The 
exploitation strategy will reflect and will be built -up as a result of sound analysis of the market trends, potential users, and 
financial sustainability. In order to optimize dissemination and exploitation of the results, one specific WP have been described: 
WP6 - Exploitation, dissemination and communication, including activities aimed at engaging stakeholders, business strategy 
and results deployment, showing to our envisaged target audience (Table 8) the benefits of the project and therefore facilitate the 
transfer of experience and knowledge needed to replicate the Bio-Uptake approach. This strategy is also completed with WP1 - 
Manufacturing plan, sustainability assessment and good practices distillation, in particular with Task 1.3 – Standardization 
and Task 1.4 – Training (which have to be taken under consideration for exploitation and dissemination purposes too). The 
communication, dissemination and exploitation strategy will be elaborated at the very beginning of the project (M6) in D6.1 and 
updated periodically during the project. 
This PEDR plan will rely on three pillars: exploitation, dissemination and communication therefore it will be orchestrated by  the 
Exploitation leader (AIT) and the Dissemination leader (LIM) in cooperation with the Communication leader (POL) with the 
collaboration of all partners. It will be defined under T6.1 and as a “lived” 
plan, will be updated as project results arises (Fig. 9) and the best strategy 
to maximise its impact is decided and executed as define in the following 
tables (Table 9 - Communication &Table 10 - Dissemination).  
The business model of Bio-Uptake is conceived on the exploitation of the 
newly developed manufacturing processes  (KER 4), these industrial 
processes permit the transformation of  new materials (KER 1) and 
production of pre-fabricated intermediate products (KER 2) which can also 
be exploited individually outside the manufacturing process. Other related 
services such as software development (KER 5) and training & 
consultancy services (KER 6) cannot be exploited individually but are servi ces that provided added value  to the exploitation of 
KER 4  (additional packages) . Finally, the combination of these KERs as a commercial offer will mean the possibility of 
manufacturing new final biobased industrial products (KER 3). 
Table 8: Bio-Uptake target audience and alignment to potential KERs of interest 
Target Audience Examples of Stakeholders KER 
(1) Policy makers 
(EU, National, local 
level) 
European decision -makers, Governmental, Environmental EU agencies, The European 
Bioeconomy Panel, Directorate -General Enterprise and Industries (DG ENTR), Environment 
Directorate-General (DG ENV), Regional and Local organizations for implementing bioeconomy, 
Regional and Local organizations for implementing circular economy…Public authorities at local, 
regional, national and EU levels (from partners countries and regions to EU replication level) 
4,6 
(2) Working Groups 
of influence, 
platforms, 
partnerships & 
Standardisation 
bodies 
Sectorial groups and sectorial associations – Made in Europe, Circular Bio-based Europe (CBE 
– previous BBI), Vanguard Initiative, Processes4Planet (SPIRE), CleandSky, Shift -to-Rail, 
EGVI, European -Biotechnology Network, European T echnology Platforms e.g. SusChem, 
EuropaBio,… European Innovation Partnerships - EIPs: EIP Raw Materials & EIP Agri, EITs 
(Manufacturing and Digital KIC, Raw Materials and Climate), Digital Europe Programme – DEP, 
Network of National Contact Points (NCPs) for the Climate & Environment Programme; REACH, 
AMFEP, CEN, ISO, SETAC, AETOX, TÜV, ISC. 
6 
(3) Industrial 
Stakeholders) 
 
Industries (Large industries, SMEs, start -ups and industrial clusters ) along the entire Value 
Chain related to: (a) Biobased Materials producers; (b) Technology Uptakers; (c) Plastic Product 
developers (for same: medical, construction & packaging; or others for replication: automotive, 
electronics, sports, naval, railway, leisure, furniture, etc >; (d) Recyclers & Waste Managers 
1,2,
3,4,
5,6 
(4) Research & 
Scientific 
communities 
Universities, Research Institutes, PhD candidates, Technological centres…at EU level. 
Scientific forum organizing conferences of interest for the project such as: FMF (Applied 
polymer research), European Bioplastics, European Biomass Industry association, Different 
chemical societies from Europe (RSC, GDCh…) and outside (ACS…) 
6 
(5) Investors and 
financial actors 
Horizon Results Platform (HRP), European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD), the European Circular Bioeconomy Fund (ECBF), European Investment Bank (EIB) 
4 
(6) Wider audience 
(public at large) 
NGOs, Consumer’s Associations… European citizens, customers, civil organisations 4 
 
 
 
Fig. 10: Bio-Uptake KERs relation & prioritization for 
exploitation 
KER1 KER2
KER4
KER3
KER5 KER6
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    25 
Table 9: Communication measures. These have been designed to inform and reach specific target groups/audience at different levels and show the activities performed, project outputs and the 
benefits these will have for the European society. The communication activities pave the way for future exploitation activities by engaging interested target groups.  
Tool/Channel Audience Objective & Message Related KPI Target 
Website / 
Website 
General 
Public.  
(1 - 6) 
Generate awareness on project and serve as central contact point for external queries and information request 
Update information about: the project (general overview); news about developments; publishable activities and results; 
list of relevant events, meetings and conferences; meet consortium partners & provide contacts. 
Nº website users 3,500 
≈ session duration 00:01:00 
Countries reached 35 
Social Media / 
Twitter & 
Youtube 
 
(6) (1) 
(1)  
Building a community that shares the same interests in bioeconomy, circular economy, manufacturing 
technologies…Increasing visibility to stakeholders active in social media, raising awareness and redirecting to website , 
articles published, related news or debate forum. Multiplier effect & motivate citizens to take action. Inform about the 
labour of R&D EU cooperative research. Videos of the project (also short pills), topics relevant and related to the project 
in terms of novelties in legislation, standards regarding circular and plastics bioeconomy, twinning/connections with other 
project, news about live-ongoing events, spots of intermediates and products, links to project results and publications… 
Nº of followers 2,000 
LinkedIn (2) (3) (5) Nº of posts 450 
ResearchGate (4) Nº of reactions 1,000 
Press Kit 
released: TV, 
Radio, 
Newspapers & 
Magazines* 
To general 
public, 
particular 
emphasis 
to (6) (3)* 
Bio-Uptake benefits known to potential end-users and consumers of biobased products. Catch -up attention on circular 
bioeconomy, influence on society habits and show how close are biomaterials in their daily routines. Press releases will 
be covered at EU in English and at national and local level in consortium partner´s local language. 
Few Examples: TV: futuris-euronews, Horizon Results Platform (HRP)-TV, TVE,..), AragónTV, ETB, Radio: France Bleu, 
DR, Radio Sysvast…  Newspapers: Cordis, Heraldo de Aragón, L´Echo…; Industry Magazines: Chemical & Engineering 
news, European Plastics News, Composite World Magazine, JEC Magazine, Eco de l’Ain, Empresas XXI …… 
Nº of journalism 
impacts 80 
Nº of press kit 
distributed 30 
Participation in 
TV/Radio 10 
Newsletters / 
emailing  
(2) (3) (4) Updates on project developments, promotion of reached milestones and give visibility to the participation in relevant 
events. Communication in and understandable manner to the project’s subscribers. Catch attention of industry, platforms, 
clusters to have a direct mu ltiplier effect to other sectors and boost replication (potential adopters). Inform scientific 
community about research lines carried out in project institutions (to promote collaboration and career positions). 
Nº of subscribers  200 
Nº Newsletters  8 
Promotional 
materials for 
social media 
(e.g Youtube); 
exhibitions, 
open-days, 
congresses 
summits, 
infodays, 
Brokerage 
events, Fairs, 
webinars… 
General 
Public.  
(1 - 6) 
Communication of the project’s activities and Unique Selling Proposition in a captivating and engaging manner. 
Illustrate the work. 2 general videos (M4-framing the problem, solution and presenting the consortium & M40 showing 
the results – project wrap-up); other intermediate videos-pills explaining specific technical actions e.g. digitalization for 
interoperability, benefits of CANs, eco-design with biotextiles? Raise citizens’ about cooperative R&D projects. 
Nº of videos 5 
Nº of views 700 
(2) (3) (4) Catch up Public attention and interest in events, inviting public to come across the stands and ask partner representant: 
1 infographic (poster/roll up) explaining the Bio-Uptake concept & solutions. 2 project leaflets: presenting the project’s 
main elements (beginning) and another summarising project achievement at the mid-end 
Nº of events (in a 
one way comm.) 30 
Nº people asking for 
information 500 
Adapted to 
(1-7) 
audience 
Project general and specific presentations (PPT/Prezi). To spread the word in Bioeconomy, Bio-Uptake products and 
Circular Economy practices. Impact in end -user consumption habits to boost biomaterials´ demand. Create a debate. 
Bring bioeconomy closer to daily routines (close examples).  Examples of events: Th e European Biopolymer Summit, 
ECOMONDO, K -Trade-Fair, Fakuma Show, Annual JEC World Fair, ACHEMA 2021, Composites for Europe, 
Expoquimia, The Greener Manufacturing Show, TECMA,  
Participation in webinars and events organised by CSA, clusters and PPP: pitching, matchmaking, networking. Starting 
point to collaborate with other EU initiatives. Receive feedback and engage in a dialogue. Open a door to share results 
and avoid duplicate mistakes. Multiplier effect to reach other sectors for replication purposes.  Examples: Infoday CBE, 
BIOECONOMY VENTURES, VIBES, POLYNSPIRE, MANDALA, … 
Nº of events 
presented (in a two-
way comm) 
20 
Nº of initiatives 
liaised with 15 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    26 
Dissemination activities  within the project are conceived to have an impact in (4) audience group. However other target 
audiences such as (2), (1) and (3) with multidisciplinary teams, are also considered. 
Table 10: Dissemination activities 
Tool & Examples of identified Channels Objective  KPI Target 
Scientific publications in:  
• Identified Journals: Polym. Sci., J. Reinf. Plast. Compos., J. Mater. 
Process. Technol., J. Adv. Manuf. Syst., J. Manuf. Mater., Int. J. 
Precis. Eng.Manuf., J. Intell.Manuf., Digit. Disc. (RSC), 
Adv.Model.Simul.Eng. Sci 
• Identified scientific congress/conference: Composites Recycling 
Conference–JEC; BIOPO L International Conference on 
Biodegradable Polymers & Sustainable Composites, 
COMPOSIFORUM Composite forum for industry and researchers, 
Composites Europe, MECHCOMP International Conference on 
Mechanics of Composites, … 
Scientific peer validation of 
project’s approach and 
findings. Sharing of 
knowledge at European & 
International level. Put into 
practice Open Science & 
teach Young Researchers 
(oriented to STEM and 
environmental 
multidisciplinary researchers) 
Nº papers 
published 8 
Organization 
of congress 1 
Oral 
Contribution 20 
Poster 
Contribution 8 
Scientific internal transfer of knowledge: 
• Research and innovation programmes: Tutoring PDR & PhD by 
senior IPs & researchers to start project’s innovation lines.  
• Training transfer:  Demo Workshops on pilot lines, classrooms 
and short conceptual lessons. Promote Learning-by-doing. 
Inhouse & Open training sessions on manufacturing technologies: 
experimental and digital uses. 
Creating talent, integrating 
multidisciplinary profiles 
Training researchers and 
workforce in circular 
bioeconomy & digitalisation 
Nº research 
lines initiated 5 
Nº young 
researchers 20 
Nºworkshop 3 
Nº trained 
workers 40 
Standardization Activities: Channel: UNE. UNE will introduce the 
project to the appropriate standardisation groups, organising working 
sessions… To start during project implementation and to continue 
after the end of the project (Influencing biobased mater ials & 
processing technologies market) 
Contribute to & complement 
current standards as 
technical specifications-TS 
or CEN Workshop 
Agreements-CWA 
sessions 
with 
standariz. 
groups 
3 
Nº TS/CWA 3 
Scientific influence on Policy Makers – Preparation of Public final 
Layman Report. To start during the project implementation and  to 
continue after the end of the project  (contribute to Pathways to 
sustainable industries 59 and the 4th Industrial Revolution - 
digitalization & human dimension60) 
Become an Important Project 
of Common European 
Interest (IPCEI) & provide 
feedback to Projects for 
Policy P4P initiative  
Nº 
distributed 
Layman 
Reports 
200 
* In favour of boosting Open Science practices , from envisaged scientific journals, books… Bio -Uptake will promote scientific 
publications in open access journals were open peer reviews and pre -pints modes are in use: Elsevier, MDPI, F1000Research, 
Sci-Post, PeerJ, etc. Some, such as Elsevier and MDPI journals also permits the inclusion of almetrics. Examples taken in Table 
10, belongs mainly to these platforms. 
 
Strategy for the management of intellectual property 
Bio-Uptake will continuously contribute to generate new knowledge that will be instrumental for shaping the expected project 
outputs, several of which may qualify for Intellectual Property (IP) protection. The consortium will comply with the obligation to 
disseminate results as well as open access rules and obligations, whilst safeguarding at the same time the rights of the consortium 
partners to protect their IP thus enhancing the chances of an effective commercial exploitation of the project results. 
Based on the background of the consortium and once beneficiaries have agreed about the access rights on a royalty-free basis, 
(which will be identified and agreed in the Consortium Agreement), Bio-Uptake will define a policy for the protection of the project’s 
results whenever are expected to be come commercially exploitable. An internal IP protection plan will be elaborated within 
WP6 (T6.1 & T6.2). Partners will continuously evaluate the potential contribution to new IP generation, whenever project outputs 
are suspected to be commercially exploitable and protecting them is possible, reasonable and justified . IP protection measures 
(such as patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade-secrets confidentiality, and other forms of protection) shall follow the Grant and 
Consortium Agreements. Any issue that might arise from the IP protection initiative during the project will be dealt with by the 
General Assembly and coordinated by the exploitation leader (AIT). For protectable IP, the following steps will be taken  as 
provisional IP protection strategy: 
1. The concerned partner notifies the Exploitation leader about the technical  content of any protectable IP . The ownership 
rights will be defined : i) Bio-Uptake results are owned by the beneficiary that generates them ; ii) whenever results have been 
jointly generated by two or more beneficiaries, the joint owners must agree on the allocation & terms (joint ownership agreement). 
 
59 PATHWAYS TO SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIES – Energy efficiency and CO2 utilisation. Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, 2018. 
60 CAPITALISING ON THE BENEFITS OF THE 4TH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION - Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, 2018. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    27 
2. Preliminary copyright, trademark, or patent analysis are conducted by the  interested partner supported by the Exploitation 
leader to check “freedom-to-operate”. 
3. Filing of the related IP protection application  is then followed directly by the relevant partner(s), in accordance with the 
perimeter agreed with the other partners and the perimeter of innovation to maximize the potential for protection of the result. 
Once IP has been managed according to Bio-Uptake strategy and the targeted KER is clearly stated, consortium partners will put 
efforts in reaching target audience (investors (5), Policy makers (1), Stakeholders, business partners & customers (2) (3) through 
its conventional exploitation channels. In addition, the exploitation leader (AIT) will seek for further booster tools to max imise 
output´s impact, such as request guidance to the Horizon Results Booster and generate (with the support of KER owners) a KER 
profile to be published in the Horizon Results Platform (HRP). In this sense, a combination of partners own resources plus potential 
capital from investors and/or cooperation with other business third parties, may speed up the upgrade in TRL  (from 6 to 9) 
and reach before market opportunities. In addition, policy makers may pave the way for a quicker up -take of the project KERs 
by amending or launching new legislation within the Circular Action Plan and The European Green Deal policies : Biobased, 
biodegradable and compostable plastics, global action on plastics, plastics  packaging, microplastics…  creating demand on biobased 
circular products. Industrial partners (POD, CON, MOS) will put efforts in looking for potential clients and business part ies 
interested both in the biobased end -products an also in replication purpose s: enlarging business in new products for the same 
sector and for other sectors. Industrial partners (MOS, SIM, IRI) and technological partners (RTOs) will look for exploiting the 
manufacturing technologies themselves: complete process including operational prototypes & optimised equipment’s (multiplier 
effect). The first strategy will allow industrial partners to grow in production volume and turnover (one-off revenue model). In the 
second strategy the creation of spin-offs and joint-ventures will be promoted as well as the creation of other incomes return 
based on license-royalties payment (combined revenues). 
Table 11: Envisaged Ownership of KERs, Protection measures and Exploitation routes 
KER Ownership Protection & Exploitatio 
KER 4 Manufacturing Processes: 
- Reprocessable Thermosets - RT 
- Highly Customised Thermoplastics - HCT 
- Large Volume Thermoplastics - LVT 
AIT, CTB, CID, SP, AIM, IRI, 
SIM, POD, COM, MOS, LIM,  
In T6.2 the potential to protect these KERs will 
be envisaged. Initially , patentability will be 
sought with particular interest for KER4, 
KER1 & KER2. Whether a patent cannot be 
applied; the Utility Model will be studied too. 
Otherwise, Industrial Secret will be the best 
option. This protection method ology will be 
evaluated too for the rest of KERs,  including 
Copyright & Trademarks options. 
Direct Selling – KER2 & KER3 (industrial 
partners directly exploit KER4 via an 
Exploitation Agreement) 
Service Selling – KER6 & KER5 (training, 
LCA service etc) 
Licence Selling – KER1, KER2, KER4, KER5 
(software, materials formulae, products, 
processes) 
KER 1 Bio-Uptake New Biobased and 
Regenerated materials (formulae) 
SP (bioepoxy + biobased 
dynamic hardener, biobased 
3R thermoset formulation 
+biobased and reversible 
adhesive formulation) 
LIM (bioCF & lignin derivates) 
CID (3R-CANs for thermosets) 
KER 2 Intermediate formats  CTB+CON (thermoplastic 
organosheets and UDTapes) 
SP+CID (thermoset 
organosheet) 
AIT, LIM Pellets formulae 
KER5 Software – DSS & environmental SIM, AIM, IRI, LIM, AIT 
KER6 Training and consultancy UNE, AIT, AIM, CID, LIM, 
CTB, POL, SIM 
KER3 Final biobased industrial products POD, CON, MOS 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    28 
2.3. Summary Table 12: Key elements of the impact section 
 
 
 
 
8 NwL
SPECIFIC NEEDS EXPECTED RESULTS D & E & C MEASURES
TARGET GROUPS OUTCOMES
Making sustainable products the norm in EU 
Strengthen European manufacturing industry
Multidisciplinary teams & Skilled scientists & workforce (in 
biobased-materials manufacturing and digitalization)
Biobased & Circular by design products
Modify workers attitude at 
job (autonomous, attractive, 
safer)
Building a sustainable manufacturing industry
Reducing environmental footprint of waste streams
Leader in MaaS (pre-fabrication, customization, de-
centralization factories)
Adapt/contribute standards 
to manufacture with 
biobased materials
Industrial Stakeholders)
Research & Scientific communities
Policy makers (EU, National, local level)
Working Groups of influence, platforms, 
partnerships & Standardization bodies
Wider audience (public at large)
Investors and financial actors
Plan for the Exploitation, Dissemination and 
Communication
IPRs and exploitation strategy: business potential
Communication tools: 
website, social media, 
press kit, newsletter & 
promotional materials
Create stable & versatile jobs: 24 
direct + 1000 indirect in the short 
term & 1M jobs long term
Contributions to “Do not significant Harm 
Principles” OB4, OB3, OB5
From mass production model to mass 
customisation model: decentralized, cleaner 
& greener, more flexible, smaller factories
Products serving as cradle 
for the 
New European Bauhaus
IMPACTS
New circular sustainable business 
model for the EU manufacturing & 
3 business cases
Lower CO2 emissions [12%-33%]
Biobased products by
39% in EU
KER3 Final biobased 
industrial products
KER5 Software – DSS & environmental
KER6 Training & 
consultancy
KER 4 Manufacturing Processes
- Reprocessable Thermosets - RT
- Highly Customised Thermoplastics - HCT
- Large Volume Thermoplastics - LVT
KER 1 New Biobased & 
Regenerated materials
KER 2 
Intermediate 
formats
Disruptive innovations :
RT: bioepoxy endured pre-impregnated organosheets, semi-
automated process (thermoforming+TSIM simulation+inline
resin monitorization)
HCT: self-reinforced fibres, machine visión, spectroscopic
techniques, free forming, customisation & TSIM simulation
LVT: self-reinforced core, over-injection & bonding-debonding
adhesive, CADMOULD simulation.
Intermediate formats: 
functional behaviour
Open Science practices
Scientific Publications
Training programmes for
upskill scientists &workers
Scientific contribution to
standards & influence on
Policy Makers
2000 fw
450 pt
1000 re
8 Papers
20 Conferences
20 Y. researchers, 40 workers
200 LyRp
3 working sessions & 3 TS/CWA
MF ≈ 1.3
35 Countries
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    29 
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION 
3.1. Work plan and resources  
Bio-Uptake aims to accelerate the market introduction of sustainable products by means of developing new bio-composite formats 
with similar or better properties when compared to non -biobased materials and  demonstrating the green manufacturing of 
sustainable products in the construction, medical and packaging value chains. To do this, WP1 will define the testing protocols, 
design the pilot lines and adapt the assessment methods to monitor properly the impact of the bio based materials, boosting the 
standardisation recommendations and preparing the workforce to implement biomaterial-based manufacturing activities. WP2 will 
deal with the development of the new bio composite  intermediate formats based on thermoplastic and t hermoset matrix 
respectively, while improving and adapting the in-line characterisation methods to the bio-based material requirements. WP2 will 
also explore self -reinforcement and dynamic chemistry technologies to allow the combination of different format s in the same 
manufacturing process and their subsequent separation for boosting circularity. WP3 will tackle the main factors affecting the 
current manufacturing models by testing the new bio-based formats in free-forming, over-injection and thermoforming conformal 
manufacturing processes as well as to adapt and enhance the quality control for the new bio -based end-products. In parallel, 
WP4 will enable the bio-based product design and quality control as well as the process optimisation by preparing the bio-based 
manufacturing value chains for an effective digitalisation. 
The data generated during the bio -based format characterisation, the demonstrations and the process parameterization will be 
used to improve the models of SoA simulation software. The smart systems will be integrated and the pilot lines will be optimised 
in WP5 to demonstrate the enhanced 
mechanical, physical and/or chemical 
properties of the new bio -composite 
formats as well as their c ircular 
functionalities for three uses cases: i) 
ceilings for modular baths , ii) 
orthopaedics feet insoles and iii) lids 
for tertiary packaging - garbage 
collection. In addition, WP6 will boost 
the fast uptake of the new bio -based 
material formats and bio -based 
products by implementing an updated 
and adapted plan for the exploitation, 
dissemination and communication of 
the results. Finally, the activities to be 
developed during the project execution 
will be supported by coherent and 
smooth coordination as w ell as data 
management for interoperability 
following FAIR principles  and ethics, 
which is articulated under WP7. 
 
Table 13: List of work packages 
No Title No Name PM Start End 
1 Manufacturing plan, sustainability assessment and good practices distillation 11 LIM 105 1 41 
2 Optimization and manufacturing of intermediate bio-composite formats 2 CTB 252.5 1 30 
3 Optimization of the manufacturing processes for final bio-composite products 7 SIM 133.5 13 30 
4 Digital systems and Interoperability 5 AIM 85.5 16 38 
5 Demonstrate innovative bio-based material production and bio-based products 1 AIT 102 30 41 
6 Exploitation, dissemination & communication 8 POL 76.5 1 42 
7 Project Management 1 AIT 57.5 1 42 
   Total  812.5   
 
 
 
Fig. 11: Bio-Uptake PERT 
WP7 – Project Management
WP 6 - Exploitation, dissemination & communication
WP 5 - Demonstrate innovative bio-based material 
production and bio-based products
WP 1 - Manufacturing plan, sustainability 
assessment and good practices distillation
WP 2 - Optimization 
and manufacturing 
of intermediate bio-
composite formats
WP 4 -Digital 
systems and 
Interoperability
WP 3 - Optimization of 
the manufacturing 
processes for final bio-
composite products
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    30 
 
 
Fig. 12: Bio-Uptake Gantt 
 
Leader 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
Manufacturing plan, sustainability assessment and good practices distillation LIM
T1.1 User cases specifications and pilot lines configuration AIT D1.1
T1.2 Sustainability and safe assessment LIM D1.2 D1.2 D1.2
T1.3 Standardization activities UNE D1.3 D1.3 D1.3
T1.4 Training for skilled workforce LIM D1.4 D1.4
Optimization and manufacturing of intermediate bio-composite formats CTB Ms1 Ms2 Ms3
T2.1 Extrusion of self-reinforced bio-based fibres CTB D2.1 D2.1
T2.2 Synthesis of bio-based dynamic chemicals SP D2.2 D2.2
T2.3 Preforming of thermoplastic bio-sheets COM
T2.4 Compounding of fibre reinforced bio-pellets AIT
T2.5 Production of thermoset bio-composites  CID D2.3 D2.3
T2.6 In-line characterisation methods  IRI D2.4
Optimization of the manufacturing processes for final bio-composite products SIM Ms4
T3.1 Process modelling SIM D3.1
T3.2 Free-forming of orthopaedics COM
T3.3 Over-injection of tertiary packaging MOS
T3.4 Thermoforming of bath ceillings POD
T3.5 In-line quality control of products IRI
Digital systems and Interoperability AIM Ms5
T4.1 Interoperable embedded platform AIM D4.1
T4.2 Data analytics for adaptive manufacturing systems AIM D4.2
T4.3 Data analytics for product design SIM
T4.4 Hybrid-digital twin SIM D4.3
Demonstrate innovative bio-based material production and bio-based products AIT Ms6-7
T5.1 Smart systems integration AIM D5.1
T5.2 Pilot line optimisation and  testing AIT
T5.3 Validation og user cases in the medical, packaging and construction value chains AIT D5.2
T5.4 Sustainable end-of-life models for new circular and regenerated products MOS
Exploitation, dissemination and communication POL Ms8
T6.1 Exploitation, dissemination & communication plan POL D6.1/D6.2 D6.1 D6.1 D6.1
T6.2 Exploitation activities AIT D6.2 D6.2
T6.3 Dissemination activities LIM
T6.4 Communication and cooperation activities POL
T6.5 Clustering activities AIT
Project Management AIT
T7.1 Coordination Processes, Quality Assurance and Risk Management AIT D7.1
T7.2 Administrative, financial and legal management AIT
T7.3 Data Management Plan AIT D7.2 D7.2 D7.2 D7.2
T7.4 Ethics AIT D7.3
DX: Deliverable;      MsX: Milestone
WP6
WP7
BIO-UPTAKE Project: 42 Months 
WP1
WP2
WP3
WP4
WP5
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    31 
Table 14: Work package description 
WP No 1 Start 1 End 41 Lead beneficiary LIM 
Title Manufacturing plan, sustainability assessment and good practices distillation  
No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of Participant 
AIT 
CTB 
CID 
SP 
AIM 
IRI 
SIM 
POD 
COM 
MOS 
LIM 
POL 
UNE 
PM 12 7 3 2 4 1 1.5 4.5 6 2.5 48 1 12.5 
Objectives: The main objective of WP1 is to put in a common framework all the needs to define the manufacturing pilot lines: 
product specifications, design s, technologies and equipment’s, staff skills, current benchmarks for sustainability  and 
economical assessment, identify current standards etc. In this way the pilot lines for each manufacturing value chain can be 
set up with guarantees.  In WP1, standards monitoring and contribution, LCA and LCC assessments on final Bio-Uptake 
products and specific training actions will be carried out with the aim of facilitating biomaterials up-take and market acceptance. 
T1.1 User case specifications, pilot lines configuration and manufacturing development (Leader: AIT, CTB, CID, SP, 
AIM, IRI, SIM, POD, COM, MOS, M1-M6): End Users will define the requirements that their use cases should accomplish and 
based on the analysis of this information, a list of functional specifications for the industrial demonstrators will be obtai ned. 
Analysis and specificatio ns will include: i) detailed description of the current manufacturing workflows, technologies and 
baseline values for each use case (AS-IS analysis), ii) detailed description of the manufacturing processes and technologies 
to be supported during the projec t (TO -BE analysis), iii) detailed description of the requirements for technologies to be 
developed during the project and their integration in the pilot lines and iv) full validation protocols, for product, process  and 
systems will be produced, considering  the product requirements, the expected process control capacities and the overall 
production targets. These protocols and criteria defined in this task will be employed for the demonstration in WP5 for assessing 
pilot tests after integration of systems developed along the project. 
T1.2 Sustainability and safe assessment (Leader: LIM, All, M1-M40) 
Based on production data for biocomposite intermediate formats in WP2 and bioproducts demo application scenarios in WP3, 
this task will build value chain scenarios representing plausible bioproducts production, use and end-of life (EoL) management 
(e.g. remanufacture or recycling) for the 3 assessed products. These value chains will then b e analysed through life cycle 
assessment (LCA) including the social perspective (s-LCA). System boundaries will be established for entire production-use-
EoL value chains for each product, accounting for multiple remanufacture and recycling loops where relevant (impact on new 
and regenerated products) . Equivalent system boundaries will be established for reference product value chains based on 
conventional materials and manufacturing processes (benchmark). In the first instance, the functional unit for attributional LCA 
foot-printing will be a single use of each product. Inventories of relevant processes and inputs along the value chain will be 
developed using detailed primary data on inputs and processes involved in the thermoplastic and thermosetting manufacturing 
steps. These foreground activity data will be combined with background data from the Ecoinvent v3.7.1 (or higher) database 
to represent, e.g. environmental burdens associated with bio-based feedstock production and electricity generation. Life cycle 
impact assessment will be based on the Environmental Footprint 2.0 methodology, generating indicators of damage potential 
across 16 environmental categories (from climate change, through abiotic resource depletion, to human toxicity). Sensitivity 
analyses around e.g. type of bio -feedstock used and energy sources will inform optimisation of product design and 
manufacturing (WP5). Insight gained from product foot-printing will be translated into a set of best practise guidelines for bio-
composite product fo ot-printing (D 5.2), accompanied by peer -reviewed publications (T6.3). Input and process inventory 
compilation for the LCA will be combined with estimates of e.g. labour requirements and capital investment to undertake the 
parallel life cycle costing ( LCC). Finally, to more holistically quantify the scalable contribution of bio -composite material 
substitutions to wider circular (bio)economy and climate neutrality targets, value chain analyses will be out -scaled to 
deployment scenarios that will be evaluated using prospective, consequential LCA. This will identify total environmental 
savings, and potential trade-offs, associated with what-if deployment scenarios at European scale. New evidence generated 
in this task will be synthesised in a report containing r ecommendations for bio -composite deployment to achieve circular 
economy and environmental sustainability objectives (D1.2). 
T1.3 Standardisation (Leader: UNE, All, M1-M41). The relevant standardization landscape together with applicable standards 
will be identified (M6). The possibility and the extent to which a contribution to standardization can be made will be investigated 
through interacting with the relevant technical st andardization committees (monitoring their information, attending meetings, 
establishing formal liaisons, organizing joint events, etc.), disseminating the project and getting feedback from their members. 
The main outcome is the contribution of Bio-Uptake to the development of new standards in topics related to the project’s 
objectives and based on its results (new  and regenerated  biobased products ). Depending on the ongoing works of the 
standardization committees around the midpoint of the project, this may involve providing information, participating in ongoing 
works, submitting proposals for the modification of existing standards or promoting the elaboration of new standards like 
technical specifications (TS). The development of fast-track standards like CEN Workshop Agreements (CWA) is usually the 
best-suited option in the frame of a Horizon Europe project. Standardization is made in technical committees external to the 
consortium through the consensus of various stakeholders. Thus, project decisions regarding the subject, development track 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    32 
and start of new standardization works are unpredictable now and shall be studied and coordinated during the project life, 
according to the specific standardization environment and under the advice of UNE. 
T1.4 Training for skilled workforce (Leader: LIM, CTB, AIT, AIM, CID, POD, COM, MOS, POL, SP, IRI, M1-M41) 
This task aims at making transfer of knowledge at different levels to current and future European workers and specialists in 
Circular Economy product development and manufacturing practices: 
• From the academic point of view Bio-Uptake will train young generations of scientists and  engineers, by training 
emerging and upskilling established researchers (at least 20 people in new technologies in the field of biocomposites : 
materials, products, processing, characterisation , digitalization ). Across all WPs, approximately 10 postdoctoral  
researchers (PDR) will be involved in the research who will in turn help mentor 10 PhD students (attracting talent that may 
be uptake by the industry and public institutions as new workforce for the jobs to be created). PhD students and PDRs will 
visit partner institutions and companies , not only to develop skills required for composite manufacture, but also to 
broaden and enhance their career options . This will deliver different experiences across knowledge -driven public 
laboratories and customer -centric industrial environments. Details about all secondments or visits will be agreed by 
partners by M12. 
• From the industrial point of view, in-house training of workforce and open training to new staff/workers will be carried 
out. RTOs are closer to the industry needs in terms of developing new products and technologies. An internal training  
programme for transfer of knowledge will be done hand -by-hand between the lead RTO and the industrial manufacturer 
for each value chain to provide new skills so that staff is able to evolve and adapt to new circumstances. At least 4 intensive 
sessions will be organised: AIT-MOS (injection moulding), CID-POD (thermoset thermoforming), CTB-COM (thermoplastic 
thermoforming) and a common one dedicated to digitalisation performed by AIM-SIM-IRI to the three end-user companies 
and interested partners of the project. In addition, at least other 4 open training sessions  will be given by RTOs to 
identified stakeholders oriented to vocational training of professionals (e.g. Fundación San Valero within their Centre for 
Continuing and Occupational Training ), and also to  other potential end -users that can replicate and multiply t he 
applications of the technology. Products and end -of-life practices. In this way, Bio-Uptake will upskill engineers  and 
technical staff across partner RTOs and industry parties to strengthening their innovation potential and competitiveness. 
Deliverables: 
D1.1 Bio-Uptake detailed baseline and expectations (R;SEN;M6;AIT) 
D1.2 LCA and LCC assessment report and recommendations to achieve circularity (R;SEN; M6; M18; M40; LIM) 
D1.3 Report on the contribution to standardization (landscape and new contributions) (R; PU; M12, M24, M41; UNE) 
D1.4 Training Programme: intellectual outputs and session summary (R; PU; M18; M41; LIM) 
 
WP No 2 Start 1 End 30 Lead beneficiary CTB 
Title Optimization and manufacturing of intermediate bio-composite formats 
No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of Participant 
AIT 
CTB 
CID 
SP 
AIM 
IRI 
SIM 
POD 
COM 
MOS 
LIM 
POL 
UNE 
PM 12 20 33.5 43 0 69 1 3 29 0 42 0 0 
Objectives: The main objective of this WP2 is to research, develop and optimise the technologies and manufacturing 
processes required for the development of each of the intermediate biobased formats. In this way the first stage of each demo 
pilot plant is adapted and optimized to be operated with the selected biobased materials. 
T2.1 Extrusion of reinforced bio-based fibres (Leader: CTB, IRI, M1-M24): Mono- and multifilaments of PLA materials, both 
monocomponent and bicomponent (core/sheath), will be developed using low melting grades as matrix and high melting grades 
as reinforcement. Besides low melting PLA grades, PCL grades will also be investigated to develop mono - and bicomponent 
mono- and multifilaments which can be used as matrix material in combination with high melting PLA filaments as 
reinforcement. An evaluation of the potential for extrusion / melt spinning will be done using a pilot scale extrusion proces s. 
The materials will be analyzed according to their processability in textile filaments extrusion (e.g. high draw ratios and extruder 
temperatures) by evaluating the flow behavior via structural and rheological measurements and a full characterization of the 
produced yarns will be performed (tensile strength, modulus, elongation at break, shrinkage triggered by heat and resulting 
shift in mechanical properties and crystalline structure, melting temperature). Different methods of cooling (using a cooling  
water bath or using a cooling drum, air cooling or a combination of both) will be investigated to cool the P CL filaments down 
below their melting temperature of 60°C before reaching the uptake rolls. Unidirectional composite sheets will be manufactured 
by compression moulding to perform a first screening and quality control of the produced filaments.  
Polymer pairs showing appropriate rheological and thermal properties (characterized via capillary and rotational rheometry, 
MFI, DSC, MDSC, TGA and SEM) will be selected for microfibril formation on textile fibre extrusion lines. Filament extrusion 
of fibrils will be obtained via an extrusion process starting from a compounded or dry blend of both polymers (PLA:PCL 5:95 
up to 50:50). The produced filaments will be further stretched on the extrusion line in order to induce the fibril formation.  
Maximizing elongation a nd orientation of the fibrils will be pursued. Filaments drawing without breaking the microfibrils or 
disturbing the internal matrix (voids) will be evaluated. Following parameters are important in the optimization process: 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    33 
temperature profile, shear rate, mass flow, draw ratio etc. Based on the process denied previously, preliminary specifications 
and samples will be set as input for the development of the monitoring system. First approach for the model development will 
be carried out aligned with T2.6. 
T2.2 Modelling and Synthesis of bio -based dynamic chemicals (Leader: SP, CID, M1-M24). This task will  include the 
modelling (to accelerate the stages of preselection guiding the experimental research) and experimental synthesis of reversible 
bonding agents for a) thermoset bioepoxy resins (so called bio-based 3R epoxy resin) and b) to develop a reversible adhesive 
for thermoplastic bioPA/PLA separation. At any case, it will be necessary to define the main descriptor (mo st representative 
physical parameter of a given property) as well as the adaptability of this approach to other physical quantities by the creation 
of new modelling chains. Correlations with experimental work will allow improving the relevance between mode lled and 
experimental data: (This task will also feed T3.1) 
a) In a first stage the bioepoxy matrix formulation will be fine-tuned and upscaled based on Diglycidyl ether of Vanillyl alcohol 
(DGEVA with customisable Tg 70º -120ºC), adequate to meet the  bath cei ling requirements . DGEVA will be pre -
polymerized and formulated with other biobased amorphous oligomeric building -blocks for tunning the rheological 
behaviour and crosslinking density: Monoglycidyl ether (clove oil), Diglycidyl ether (Lignin) and Triglycidyl ether (algae or 
sugar bioconversion) or resveratrol (grape). In parallel, SP and CID will identify and select the dynamic hardeners which 
will combine covalent adaptable bonds (disulfide moieties, imines, esters …) with epoxy reactive chemical moieties such 
as amine or carboxylic acids. Once optimized the chemical composition, SP will upscale it at kg level (≈20kg). 
b) In a second stage , a biobased reversible adhesive will be tuned to satisfy the main specifications considered  for the lid 
demo: (i) implementation via spray coating; (ii) curing cycle consistent with garbage lid manufacturing process, (iii) the 
reversibility commutation temperature must be consistent with the PLA/bioPA thermal behaviour to allow proper creep 
properties. Pre-polymerization of DGEVA is foreseen to allow to increase pendant hydroxyl groups that enhance the 
adhesion. The viscosity (sprayability) will be enhanced  with biobased building -blocks (reactive diluents, plasticizer, 
solvents) and reactivity will be adjusted too. (50-100g for lab characterisation and best formulation upscaled 1Kg) 
T2.3 Preforming of thermoplastic bio-sheets (Leader: COM; CTB, IRI, M6-M30) 
After characterization and selection of suitable PLA and PCL grades in task T 2.1, monocomponent low and high melting 
multifilaments will be produced on an industrial extrusion line at COM. In addition, focus will be given to the tailoring of filaments 
facilitating their further processing and improving the resulting properties. This will include filament sizing and optimal titer  for 
processing to hybrid yarns and weaves; proper spinfinish not disturbing the consolidation process; optimal temperature 
resistance for processing window during consolidation. A selection of the most optimal filaments will be made based on 
mechanical properties, processability to intermediates and performance in the final composite parts. A close interaction with  
WP3 will be establ ished to allow constant feedback. The selected filaments will be combined in different structures and 
transformed into self -reinforced and microfibrillar reinforced organosheets and unidirectional tapes that can be used as 
preforms for the three selected cases that will be developed in WP3. Consolidation temperatures, pressure and time according 
to sheet thickness and weaving pattern will be optimized for each combination of materials (PLA/PLA and PLA/PCL) and 
samples will be characterized in terms of microstructure and mechanical properties. 
Organosheet: thickness - 0.5 mm to 5mm - varying the number of plies and fibre orientation and size  (≈600mm length); and 
UD tapes thickness -0.3mm to 2mm- and with 6-50mm, will be adapted according to final product specifications. Based on the 
process denied previously, preliminary specifications and samples will be set as input for the development of the monitoring 
system. First approach for the model development will be carried out aligned with T2.6 
T2.4 Compounding of fibre reinforced bio-pellets (Leader: AIT; LIM, IRI, CTB, M6-M30) 
BioPolyamide will be used as matrix for the development of biobased pellets aiming at injection of garbage lids. BioPA will be 
reinforced with short carbon fibres coming as inkind from VIBES -BBI project lignin-TPU upscaled fibre. LIM will condition the 
fibre to be used for this application. In addition, wood fibre from recycled furniture coming from FINSA industrial process will 
be also in-kind provided, pre-treated if necessary (by AIT) and tested. The fibres, apart from a mechanical reinforcement, are 
expected to ac t as impact absorbers, noise mitigator and also permits achieving different aesthetical finishing (e.g. organic 
garbage). Extrusion compounding will be used to develop and optimize the biopellet formulations. In case that other additives 
such as impact modifiers or UV absorbers (Sukano). Particular design of the process set-up will be developed: drying station 
for PA and fibres, screw configuration, feeder configuration, adaptation of the cooling system (to avoid moisture uptake) and  
pellet chopping (to respect fibre size and structure). Characterisation tests will be carried out by A IT and with the support of 
(LIM/SP): mechanical tests, rheological behaviour, notch impact, UV resistance, thermal stability (DSC, TGA) and SEM 
microstructure. Lab trials will be carried out to define and characterize the best formulation (1kg each) and the best candidates 
(3-5 selected formulations) will be upscaled for product validation at WP3 (200 -300 Kg).  Based on the process denied 
previously, preliminary specifications and  samples will be set as input for the development of the monitoring system. First 
approach for the model development will be carried out aligned with T2.6 
T2.5 Production of thermoset bio-composites (Leader: CID, LIM; M3-M30) 
This task is aimed at the realization of experimental campaign for manufacturing of thermoset pre-pregs to define the process 
boundary conditions require d to produce these formats based on the different CANs formulati ons obtained in T2.2.a). The  
prepreg manufacturing process will be optimized (resin viscosity, process temperature, process speed, etc) to obtain the most 
suitable enduring prepregs for their final application: prepregs with different curing degrees will be produced and their 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    34 
thermomechanical properties and processability v ia thermoforming will be assessed by studying the pressure, temperature 
and time needed for the thermoforming of the final product. Due to the dynamic character of the here described bio-based 3R 
epoxy resin, this new class of enduring prepregs can be prepared as totally cured prepregs (they will not be on a B-stage) and 
are able to be stored at room temperature (either in rolls, sheets or tapes) and still be appropriate to produce multilayered  
composite parts in WP3. This task will also provide the samples that will be evaluated/analysed in T2.4 for developing the in-
line characterization method (aimed at measuring curing degree). 
T2.6 Development of in-line characterisation methods (Leader: IRI, CID, CTB, COM, POD, SP, LIM; M1-M30) 
Several photonic techniques will be assessed, and monitoring prototypes developed to provide real time data on relevant 
parameters to improve the efficiency and quality of the manufacturing processes. The prototypes will be delivered with an ad-
hoc software to implement the models, acquire and process the data, and show the results using a friendly Interface. The 
systems performance will be validated in the users’ facilities. FAT procedure will be implemented according to ISO 9001:2008. 
The following monitorization prototypes will be developed: 
Inline monitorization of the curing process for the thermoset pre-impregnated sheets considering the mixing ratio of the 
multicomponents (flax fibres, resin and additives). HSI and Spectral reflectance in probe mode w ill be tested by IRI. CID will 
provide representative samples of different curing levels to establish a reference method. Calibration models for the most 
representative formulations performing the required mathematical treatment of the images/spectra to pr edict the degree of 
curing will be developed. If necessary, the temperature or other relevant parameters will be included to improve the accuracy 
of the results. The most promising and cost -effective approach will be selected and a prototype will be design ed, built and 
integrated inline, and validated at CID facilities. 
Inline monitorization of the manufactured thermoplastic filaments providing information on the distribution and 
orientation of the polymeric fibres. IRI will evaluate several spectroscopic techniques, such as NIR, RAMAN, LIBS and XRF. 
The chemometric discrimination will be enhanced by machine vision to provide information on the distribution and orientation 
of the fibres. CTB will provide characterized samples and mathematical processing of t he developed models and the 
images/spectra will be carried out. Depending on the results of the offline trials, the most suitable spectroscopic technique will 
be selected and the architecture of the system hardware will be conceptualized, designed and built for the inline integration at 
CTB facilities including the optical systems, as well as the enclosure and other optomechanical parts. 
Monitorization of the thermoplastic spinning process yarn providing information on the crystallinity of the resulting 
polymer. The crystallinity of the polymer extruded will be monitored applying an at line approach, using the Visum Palm system 
available at IRI (portable infrared technology, provide real time quality control, characterization and chemical composition 
analysis of the incoming material at critical points along the line). In this task, tailor made predictive models will be developed 
for the handheld analyzer. Representative sets of samples in terms of crystallinity will be provided by CTB to establish a 
reference method, develop, and implement the chemometrics -based software. The system performance will be validated at 
CTB´s facilities and transferability to industrial production (COM) evaluated. 
Deliverables: 
D2.1 Report about the development of reinforced fibres (R, SEN, M12, M24, CTB) 
D2.2 Report on biobased and dynamic thermoset resins and adhesives (R, SEN, M12, M24, SP) 
D2.3 Report on manufacturing thermoplastic & thermoset intermediates (R, SEN, M18, M30, CID) 
D2.4 In-line characterisation prototypes (DEM, SEN, M30, IRI) 
 
WP No 3 Start 13 End 30 Lead beneficiary SIM 
Title Optimization of the manufacturing processes for final bio-composite products 
No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of Participant 
AIT 
CTB 
CID 
SP 
AIM 
IRI 
SIM 
POD 
COM 
MOS 
LIM 
POL 
UNE 
PM 10 9 20 3 7 4 9 11 15 29 16 0.5 0 
Objectives: The objective of WP3 is to set up the manufacturing lines of the selected products for each of the value chains. 
In particular, model, simulate, up-grade and optimisation of a semi-automated thermoforming line for thermosets (bath ceilings), 
a press forming process for thermoplastic free forming (feet insoles) and over-injection + mould forming for thermoplastic large 
parts manufacturing (lids for garbage/refuse containers). 
T3.1 Process modelling (Leader: SIM, M13-M30): 
Simulation of thermoforming and injection moulding in order to establish the boundary conditions for each manufacturing 
process. The goal is to define range of process conditions for manufacturing of products, including desing-of-experiments 
based on chara cteristics of intermediate materials formats developed in WP2. This might include to enhance/adapt current 
mathematical models for simulating bio -based materials behaviour during thermoforming/injection together with their 
experimental validation. FEM work based on mechanical and rheological analysis and process simulation will be followed, in 
a concurrent approach to provide an upgraded configuration of the product geometry, which considers both mechanical and 
processing aspects. This might include to redefine the meshing strategy, redesign of parts geometry, taking into account fiber 
orientation, materials combinations (and results and libraries coming from material modelling WP2) and sequence (if 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    35 
applicable), thickness, size, etc. Indications for end -users for the d esign of moulds will be given. At the end of this task a 
redesigned CAD model will be available. 
T3.2 Free-forming of orthopaedics (Leader: COM, CTB, M13-M30): 
In this task, an orthopedic AFO/shoe will be developed and manufactured by using combinations of the self-reinforced and 
multicomponent composite organosheets and UD tapes  developed in task 2.3. The product will be designed to fulfill the 
demand from market. This includes preliminary evaluation of the dynamic and flexural behavior of the part and good processing 
properties, but also to reach the thermo-mechanical requirements. The manufacturing process will include a layup station of 
the blanks (sheet and tape layers) according to design and modeling indications, followed by a heating stage and then pressing 
forming stage (with adjusted temperature , time, pressure, need for ramping , mould  temperature…) that will need to be  
optimized with the required tooling which will be developed. Finally, a trimming station will be required to make the finishing of 
the targeted product. Adapted cutting technologies will be tested to evaluate and avoid any induced/undesired damage. Quality 
criteria and data-sets will define to feed task 3.5 and task 3.1, respectively. 
T3.3 Over-injection of tertiary packaging (Leader: MOS, AIT, LIM, CTB, IRI, M13-M30): 
In this action MOS will define, adapt and demonstrate the manufacturing process of lids for street garbage containers to collect 
municipal waste. The targeted product will combine intermediate formats coming from WP2. The whole manufacturing process 
is the combination of 4 main stations: first the PLA organosheets (task 2.3) will be warmed-up over Tg in an IR lamp to make 
it soft and mouldable. Then the organosheet surface will be sprayed with the CAN adhesive developed (task 2.2) and located 
in the mould cavity. It will be essential to ensure a quick and homogeneous pulverization (tempered the adhesive at PLA -Tg 
will be evaluated). Afterwards, the m ould clamps and stamps the structural -preform. In this stage the formality of the 
organosheets will be evaluated. Then, it will be overinjected with bioPA reinforced pellets (task 2.4). Parameters such as 
melting, noozle and mould temperature, injection pressure, time and cooling will be optimized in order to obtain a high quality 
part without injection defects (e.g. flow lines, vacuum voids, burn marks, weld lines, warping etc) and define the quality criteria 
(to feed task 3.5). Once the process is robust enough, foaming the core structure of the lid will be tested by injecting the bioPA 
using Mucell® (supercritical fluids). The aim is to make the part lighter, use less material and fulfil other requirements such as 
noise absorbance. The last station will be dedicated to par trimming and finishing the lids. Process data-sets will be generated 
to improve simulation models in T3.1 . Characterisation tests to verify reaching basic properties will be carried out.  IRI will 
support the selection of IR camara to monitor the surface temperature of organosheets before the injection process. 
T3.4 Thermoforming of bath ceilings (Leader: POD, M13-M30): 
POD aims in this task at the realization of the experimental program define in T3.1, in order to: 1) evaluate the processability 
of bio-based thermoset sheets/tapes produce in T2.2 in a thermoforming process combined with flax fabrics to produce the 
ceiling structures of modular bathrooms. This will involve the evaluation of different process parameters and conditions of bio-
based sheets, such as plies orientation, number of plies, ply thickness, fibre orientation, heating profile, forming pressure, etc., 
with respect to product characteristics (through -thickness consolidation, mechanical performance, geometry accuracy , etc.). 
In addition, in a second stage the integration of the wood basal core will be carried out by applying a CAN reversible adhesive 
applied to glue the interphase to the thermoformed structure in order to ensure the EoL separation of composite components. 
In this task, process data-sets will be generated to improve simulation models in T3.1 and feed the development of the process 
data-model in WP4. Quality assessment criteria will be defined within this task to feed the in-line inspection solutions develop 
in T3.5 for quality control of the final product.  
T3.5 Fast quality control measures of the final products (Leader: IRI, AIM, AIT, POD, MOS, COM, M13-M30): 
This task will combine different destructive (establishing a systemic study method of randomly selected parts) and non -
destructive testing approaches (MW, US) to identify the most critical defects in order to provide feedback to the manufacturing 
line and make in-line corrections (teaching both the algorithms and staff). POD will prioritize to avoid voids formation and also 
to selectively integrate some moisture sensor with RFID that can measure water absorption at different stages of the process 
(which wou ld be critical for the quality of the bathroom parts). COM will look into the full adhesion of conforming layers 
(e.g.peeling tests) and MOS will require a system to rapidly detect surface defects ( blotches, stains, flow lines…), evaluate if 
there is also any lack of adhesion between the components, finding any internal crack and in foamed samples avoid large 
bubbles or coalescence (US and microscopy observance will be developed).  
Deliverables: 
D3.1 Establishing the manufacturing line for biobased products (R, EU-C, M30; COM) 
 
WP No 4 Start 16 End 38 Lead beneficiary AIM 
Title Digital systems and Interoperability 
No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of Participant 
AIT 
CTB 
CID 
SP 
AIM 
IRI 
SIM 
POD 
COM 
MOS 
LIM 
POL 
UNE 
PM 2 0 3 0 53 4 23 0 0 0 0 0.5 0 
Objectives: i) Definition of communication protocols and data exchange between process modelling software, process 
monitoring and quality monitoring systems; ii) To develop data analytics and Decision Support System to support the design 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    36 
optimization and process parameters optimization ; iii) To develop a hybrid digital twin merging virtual and real data for a 
continuous updating model. 
T4.1 Interoperable embedded platform (Leader: AIM, SIM, IRI, M16-M30): 
This task will be focused on the development of a common embedded platform for process monitoring ensuring interoperability 
across the different machines and processes employed to manufacture intermediate formats and the final products. This 
embedded platform will allow multimodal monitoring combining imaged -based sensor for the inline characterization methods 
and in-line quality control systems developed in T2.6 and T3.5 and analogue signal from the machines/equipment monitoring 
in a synchronous way. The embedded platform developed by AIM will be interoperable with different fieldbuses -e.g. Profinet, 
EtherCAT,…- using different gateways and connectors and the communication layer will be based on a OPC UA server. The 
goal is to provide a data format to ensure data exchange between process parameters and characterization data extracted 
from devices/systems employed for the manufacturing of intermediate formats, and process and monitoring data together with 
part geometry and numerical simulation of final bio -based products. The data gathered during the manufacturing process by 
the platform will be used for, first, process optimization based on data analytics algorithms in T4.2 and, second , for product 
design optimization in T4.3. 
T4.2 Data analytics for adaptive manufacturing systems (Leader: AIM, SIM, IRI, M26-M36): 
This is to develop and implement an adaptative system for manufacturing process optimization based on a cognitive approach 
that uses the information from the characterization of intermediate formats jointly with process parameters’ data acquired from 
WP2 experimental trials and data extracted from the manufacturing of final products (WP3 ). Together with information data 
provided by the quality inspection systems (T3.5). Data -driven algorithms and AI-based pattern recognition solutions will be 
proposed to reveal significant details and dependencies among all acquired data. The final goal is to develop an empirical 
data-driven mod el of the entire manufacturing value chain allowing to recalibrate/modify processes for manufacturing of 
intermediate formats and the final products, increasing robustness against environment and production process variations and 
enabling operators to get a deeper understanding of process parameter relationships crossing the boundaries of each 
processing step. 
T4.3 Data analytics for product design (Leader: SIM, IRI, M28-M38): 
A Decision Support System (DSS) will be developed to aid the Product Engineer in the design of new bio -based products, 
combining different bio-based materials and ensuring not only manufacturing of the actual product but further usability onto 
new or regenerated products. This will involve the development of specific data mining algorithms to extract the relationships 
between process parameters, product quality and material characteristics for a specific product design and with respect to 
future recirculation of bio -composite products (reuse and/or remanufacturing). A Graphi cal User Interface will be created to 
ensure adequate output presentation to the Product Engineer, revealing significant details, interdependencies and effects of 
the design parameters and materials combinations in the entire manufacturing flow. 
T4.4 Hybrid-digital twin (Leader: SIM, M20-M38): 
The goal of this task is the implementation of a Hybrid Digital Twin along the entire manufacturing value chain and aimed at 
improving the smart manufacturing of bio-composite products (WP3). The objective is to create the architecture that will merge 
the product geometry and the numerical simulation design -based information to the data acquired along the manufacturing 
chain (process parameters, materials characteristics and quality monitoring), in order to generate ne w knowledge for a 
continuous updating model of the entire manufacturing process (including intermediate formats and the final products). 
Deliverables: 
D4.1 Interoperable embedded platform (OTHER, SEN, M30 AIM) 
D4.2 Data Analytics and knowledge-based system for adaptive manufacturing systems (OTHER, SEN, M36; AIM) 
D4.3 Decision Support System for Product engineering optimization (R, SEN, M38; SIM) 
 
WP No 5 Start 30 End 41 Lead beneficiary AIT 
Title Demonstrate innovative bio-based material production and bio-based products 
No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of Participant 
AIT 
CTB 
CID 
SP 
AIM 
IRI 
SIM 
POD 
COM 
MOS 
LIM 
POL 
UNE 
PM 30 6 6 2 18 4 3 11 4 15 2 1 0 
Objectives: The aim of this WP5 is to demonstrate the smooth run of the designed pilot lines at operational and digital level 
(now smart), manufacturing a short batch of demonstration prototypes and validating their functional and environmental 
performance according to industrial standards and circular premises. 
T5.1 Smart systems integration (Leader: AIM, M30-M38): 
This task concerned with the integration and implementation of the different sub-systems developed along the project, from in-
line characterization methods (T2.6), fast quality control systems of the final products (T3.5), and communication protocols 
enabling data flow between the different manufacturing stages (intermediate formats and the final products).  It involves the 
sensing, mechanical, and electronics integration of the different quality systems as well as the implementation and integration 
of the embedded platform enabling the synchronous process parameters monitoring. Data gathering from the process (T5.2) 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    37 
together with the product and process modelling data (T3.1) will be the input for the development of the data analytics 
algorithms (T4.2 and T4.3). This task will serve as demonstration of the complete dataflow, merging data from the shopfloor 
and data from process simulation in the three pilot lines. 
T5.2 Pilot line optimisation and testing (Leader: AIT, IRI, POD, COM, MOS, AIM, SIM, M30-M38): 
Bio-Uptake pilot tests will be tested in detail, analysed, and validated against the requirements defined in T1.1 and following 
the validation protocol defined in WP4. A test plan will be defined including iterative trials towards full operation availability and 
conformity of all key process and quality parameters with the process windows defined in WP3 and with respect to the 
characteristics of intermediate materials formats in WP2 . Once optimized the pilot lines for each value chain, batches of 
demonstration prototypes with best candidate materials and optimised designs will be produced for their validation in task 5.3. 
T5.3 Validation of user cases in the medical, packaging and construction value chains (Leader: MOS, M30-M41) 
This task will be focused on the validation of the three demo products according to market and end-user specifications as well 
as ISO standards. POD directly represents the final  construction end-user. MOS is a Tier 1 for lids of the large company 
CONTENUR (and will follow established CONTENUR validation requirements) and CO M is provider and product developer 
based on organosheets of the medical company FILLAUER (FILLAUER will est ablish the main validation tests for the 
AFO/shoe insoles). Each industrial leader will be responsible to carry out the necessary validation tests: 
Construction: Factory Acceptance Test (F AT) procedure will be implemented following ISO 9001:2008 processes.  For the 
final product: The composite sandwich has to match the mechanical properties of current POD ceilings according to ISO 178 
three point bending tests; the fire properties of the ceiling has to match fireclass D -s2,d0, ISO 5660-1 Cone Calorimeter and 
EN ISO 11925-2 small flame test and EN 13823 Single Burning Item; emission tested according to ISO 16000-3:2011(Indoor 
air - Part 3). 
Medical: EN ISO 2062 to determine the single-end breaking force and the elongation at break. For the final product: matching 
the performance of the current orthosis done by FILLAUER client and have to pass their inhouse testing and when approved 
it will be send  for patient testing which takes 12 months. 
Packaging: For the garbage lid, it is essential that it is UV-stabilised, weather-resistant, impact-resistant at low temperatures 
and resistant to heat and chemicals: European Directive 2000/14/EC. 92,0 db: noise emission in the environment by equipment 
for use outdoors (sound power level); European Standard EN 840:2021: Inst allations and equipment for waste disposal & 
treatment ( 840-1: Dimensions & Design and 840-5: Performance requirements & test methods). ISO 14006 Ecodesign. 
T5.4 Sustainable end-of-life models for new circular and regenerated products (Leader: AIT, CTB, MOS, COM, POD, 
SP, M30-M41) 
The goal of this task is to validate that the final prototypes will comply with the conceived end-of-life: i) demonstrate the 
separation of components thanks to the bondi ng-debonding adhesives (wood basal core from 3R -organosheet structure & 
bioPA from PLA organosheet) and set-up guidelines for a proper decommissioning and separation; and ii) propose alternative 
uses of the biobased components to obtain regenerated product s (for the same sector in similar uses or even for potential 
applications in other sectors); iii) whether reuse and remanufacture is not possible, propose and corroborate recycling 
alternatives for the materials  (e.g. recycling tests of the PLA/PCL to reus e it as matrix material ). This task will also feed 
LCA/LCC assessment and results will impact in the eco-design principles of the selected products too. 
Deliverables: 
D5.1 Process dataflows and systems integration (DEM; SEN; M38; AIM) 
D5.2 Operational guide of the Manufacturing processes, prototypes production and validation (R; EU-C; M41; AIT) 
 
WP No 6 Start 1 End 42 Lead beneficiary POL 
Title Exploitation, dissemination and communication 
No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of 
Participant 
AIT 
CTB 
CID 
SP 
AIM 
IRI 
SIM 
POD 
COM 
MOS 
LIM 
POL 
UNE 
PM 13 4 3 3 6 3 3 4 4 3.5 8 21 1 
Objectives: The aim of WP6 is to widely communicate and disseminate the project’s activities and results for strengthening 
Bio-Uptake’s impacts as well as  to maximize the outreach and impact of innovations of the project enhancing market and 
business opportunities, growth and jobs in Europe.  
T6.1 Exploitation, dissemination & communication plan (Leader: POL; All, M01-M42) 
This activity is devoted to defining the overall dissemination and communication strategy. As a result of this task a complete 
an interlinked strategy of the three pillars will be issued on M6 and periodically updated if needed in the respective deliverables 
due to M18, M30 and M42 (dynamic and flexible tool). The Plan will constitute the core document outlining the activities at the 
basis of the project’s dissemi nation and communication activities as well as the guidelines for developing business plan for 
market deployment. More specifically it will identify the target groups and define the communication tools and distribution 
channels. The Plan will be prepared as a collaboration of the Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation leaders with the 
support of the coordinator and project partners/beneficiaries, and will address the following aspects: 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    38 
• Overall communication and dissemination strategy and its expected results; 
• Project identity, logo and graphical layouts guidelines; 
• Identification and segmentation of communication and dissemination targets; 
• Tools needed to implement successful communication activities, such as communication materials; 
• Events relevant to the different sectors involved in the Bio-Uptake project (where partners can represent the project); 
• Calendar of dissemination and communication activities; 
• The communication levels (EU/National/Regional) and the responsibilities/roles attributed to each partner; 
• Guidelines for implementation of communication & dissemination actions: messages to convey, internal reporting rules… 
• Database of stakeholders’ contacts: list of all stakeholders and potential end -users. The database will be implemented 
and allocated in the platform throughout the project lifetime with the contribution of the partners; 
• Pathways for exploitation covering calendar of exploitation activities including exploitation workshops for the consortium 
planning of activities to create links with parallel European initiatives related possibly with different sectors and guidelines 
for the implementation of the long-term market deployment and replication plan of manufacturing for bio-based materials. 
T6.2 Exploitation activities (Leader: AIT; All, M6-M42) 
Following the initial structure of Key Exploitable Results (KERs) defined under Table 11 & Fig. 10, partners will work firstly in the 
definition and sensitivity of knowledge and data, so that critical decision making on exploitation, dissemination, data and 
knowledge protection can be taken. Under this task the following actions will be covered: 
• Identification of own background and third parties background (aligned with the Consortium Agreement) 
• Determine the ownership of results: who owns what?, definition of transfers and conditions for exploitation. 
• Evaluate the best procedure to protect new knowledge and data (Patent fillings, trademarks, utility models, etc) 
• Finally, once the alternatives for protection have been considered, exploitation models will be evaluated at different level 
for the defined KERs: creation of spin-offs, launch of a PhD thesis, further new side research projects etc. The exploitation 
of research knowledge will cover as well the replicability of the training activities/content contemplated in WP1. 
T6.3 Dissemination activities (Leader: LIM; All, M6-M42) 
This Task will manage the dissemination activity plan to maximise impact while controlling confidentiality to protect the IP 
interests of the partners (promoting open access whenever is possible and supporting scientists training and skills – task1.4). 
Scientific results will be disseminated through publications in peer -reviewed international journals  and presentations at 
international conferences and workshops, as indicated in Table 10 and targeting the defined audiences. Particular emphasis 
will be on the collaborative technological advances achieved with EU support, and on the wider applications in other sectors.  
T6.4 Communication and cooperation activities (Leader: POL, All, M1-M42) 
This task will be led by POL, with the help of all the partners to develop a stakeholders’ engagement strategy to clearly identify 
Bio-Uptake target audience groups and propose actions to involve and keep them engaged in the project. The aim of the task 
is to establish communications needs, the best communication channels and the development of suitable communication 
material for each target group in sectors (website, press-kit, leaflets, e-newsletter, infographic, social networks, videos…). See 
Table 9. This will help to prepare and update the suitable Strategic Dissemination Plan section (task 6.1). The list of identified 
stakeholders will be updated as need arises throughout the project, in accordance with any new project results and findings. 
T 6.5 Clustering activities (Leader: AIT, All, M7-M42) 
This task is oriented to interact with projects and networks on similar topics oriented to introduce biopolymer in the market.  
Alliances with ongoing projects (such as collaborative workshops with BIOECONOMY VENTURES – CSA, and whenever is 
beneficial to close Bio-Uptake business cases to run proof-of-concept test trials with POLYNSPIRE, MULTICYCLE, MANDALA, 
DECOAT and VIBES projects  dedicated to sustainable and green chemical recycling ) from BBI/CBE, Made in Europe  and 
other platforms such as Renewable Carbon Initiative, https://renewable-carbon-initiative.com/, European-bioplastics, etc. This 
clustering will be oriented towards opening cooperation, sharing results and exper iences in the processing of biopolymers, 
sharing dissemination forums, and enabling the easier uptake in the market of the solutions developed in Bio-Uptake. 
Deliverables: 
D6.1 Communication & Dissemination Plan & Achievements (including clustering activities) (R;PU; M6/M18/M36/M42; POL) 
D6.2 Exploitation and IPRs strategy (R;SEN; M6/M30/M42; AIT) 
 
WP No 7 Start 1 End 42 Lead beneficiary AIT 
Title Project Management 
No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name 
of 
Participant 
AIT 
CTB 
CID 
SP 
AIM 
IRI 
SIM 
POD 
COM 
MOS 
LIM 
POL 
UNE 
PM 45.5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
Objective: To structure, foster and daily maintain a high level of commitment from all partners; and to provide the consortium 
with adequate tools for guaranteeing timely delivery of all results in the project. To facilitate and follow up the fulfilmen t of the 
project’s key goals, through periodical and detailed control of all tasks/sub-tasks and potential risks; To set up a framework for 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    39 
efficient communication, collaboration, exchange of documents and fast decision-making, The correct management of all legal, 
financial & administrative duties of the project, pondering the special characteristics which the Horizon Europe provides, Aiding 
WP6 towards the transferability of project’s results after its conclusion and its further use by partners. 
T7.1 Coordination Processes, Quality Assurance and Risk Management (Leader: AIT; All, M1-M42) 
This task sets the processes for the overall strategic project management of the project. T7.1 will ensure due decision-making, 
clear and operational internal communication, metrics and timely risk control. T7.1 processes are fundamental for T7.2. 
• Set up a quality assessment mechanism based on project metrics that will be introduced in D7.1, then elaborated as the 
project evolves, and reported in the Periodic Reports 
• Monitor the proj ect for foreseeable potential risks. Promptly initiate contingency plans to lessen or eliminate negative 
effects. An initial list of risks will be introduced-D7.1, then as the project evolves updated & reported in Periodic Reports 
• Establish a bottom -up and top-down communication flow among all the responsible partners that will include decision -
making not only in terms of discussion of internal milestones, risks and deliveries, but also in terms of external positioning, 
key alliances and sustainability of the project’s results 
• Set up management structures assigning clear responsibilities to all relevant partners 
Establish, coordinate and oversee all the project management processes including, but no limited to, transversal coordination 
of all partners and WPs according to the work plan and the project’s objectives, external reviews, internal project meetings,  
compilation and circulation of meeting minutes and action points, internal reporting procedures and communication channels.  
T7.2 Administrative, financial and legal management (Leader: AIT; M12-M42) 
Daily management of all legal, financial and administrative issues; within the consortium and formal communication to the EC: 
• Monitor full compliance with the current regulations of all activities, agreements, amendments, expenditures, IPR 
management and any other relevant issue at stake.  
• Set up a secure, organized and useful collabor ative space for the efficient communication, collaboration and exchange 
of documents among all partners (M3). Maintain and deliver templates for all financial, administrative & reporting duties. 
• Ensure periodic reporting and fluent communication with the E C services and Project Officers for purposes of 
coordination, progress monitoring and reporting; including the preparation and submission of Periodic Reports. 
• Request, collect and review inputs from all partners with regards to any report, official deliver able, document and/or 
information as required by the EC or by the daily routine of the project. This will be an internal reporting, in the form of 
Activity Reports (periodic technical reports plus a follow-up of the Use of Resources and expenses) due every six months  
Implementing any potential change in the Grant Agreement as per decision of the General Assembly and/or any other legally 
enforced reason by ensuring the fulfilment of the contractual obligations in the Grant Agreement. 
T7.3 Data management (Leader: AIT; All M01-M42) 
Data Management Plan (DMP) will be generated, taking into account data for implementation purposes and end-users private 
data to be handled during demonstrations, apart from collaboration in external dissemination and communication  activities 
covering internal and external perspectives of the project. This DMP will be conceived as a “living” document outlining how 
data collected, stored or generated will be handled during and after this project. All data generated during the project will follow 
FAIR and secure principles in order to ensuring the interoperability for data sharing. 
T7.4 Ethics (Leader: AIT; All, M1-M3) 
The objective is to ensure compliance with the 'ethics requirements' that the project must comply with. The general assembly 
will appoint a Data Protection Officer (DPO) and the contact details will be made available to all data subjects involved in the 
research. Templates of the informed consent forms and information sheets will be kept  on file  and the informed co nsent 
procedures in regard to data processing will be collected accordingly. 
Deliverables: 
D7.1 Project Handbook and Quality Assurance Plan (R;SEN; M3;AIT) 
D7.2 Data Management Plan (DMP; PU; M6/M18/M28/M42;AIM) 
D7.3 Ethics Report (R, PU,M3;AIT) 
Table 15: List of Deliverables 
No Name WP No Lead Type Diss.Level Date 
D1.1 Bio-Uptake detailed baseline and expectations 1 AIT R SEN M6 
D1.2 LCA and LCC assessment report 1 LIM R SEN M6; M18;M40 
D1.3 Report on the contribution to standardization 1 LIM R PU M12,M24,M42; 
D1.4 Training Programme: intellectual outputs and 
session summary 
1 LIM R PU M18;M40 
D2.1 Report about the development of reinforced fibres 2 CTB R SEN M12, M24 
D2.2 Report on biobased and dynamic thermoset 
resins and adhesives 
2 SP R SEN M12, M24 
D2.3 Report on manufacturing thermoplastic & 
thermoset intermediates 
2 CID R SEN M18, M30 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    40 
D2.4 In-line characterisation prototypes 2 IRI DEM SEN M30 
D3.1 Establishing the manufacturing line for biobased 
products 
3 COM R EU-C M30 
D4.1 Interoperable embedded platform 4 AIM OTHER SEN M30 
D4.2 Data Analytics and knowledge -based system for 
adaptive manufacturing systems 
4 AIM OTHER SEN M36 
D4.3 Decision Support System for Product engineering 
optimization 
4 SIM R SEN M38 
D5.1 Process dataflows and systems integration 5 AIM DEM SEN M38 
D5.2 Operational guide of the Manufacturing 
processes, prototypes production and validation 
5 AIT R EU-C M41 
D6.1 Communication & Dissemination Plan and 
Achievements 
6 POL R PU M6/M18/M36/M42 
D6.2  Exploitation and IPRs strategy 6 AIT R SEN M6/M30/M42 
D7.1 Project Handbook and Quality Assurance Plan 7 AIT R SEN M3 
D7.2 Data Management Plan 7 AIT DMP PU M6/M18M28/M42 
D7.3 Ethics Report 7 AIT R PU M3 
Table 16: List of Milestones 
No Name WP(s) Date Means of verification 
Ms1 First batch of intermediate formats ready for 
validation 
2 M12 Delivery of physical formats to end users and report 
of preliminary results from D2.1 & D2.2 
Ms2 Second batch of intermediate formats with 
improved performance according to 
manufacturing feedback 
2 M20 Delivery of physical formats to end users and report 
of preliminary results from D2.3 
Ms3 Final batch of fully optimized intermediate 
formats 
2 M30 Delivery of physical formats to end users and final 
results from D2.1, D2.2, D2.3 & D2.4 
Ms4 Pilot manufacturing lines ready to start its 
validation at operational level 
3 M30 Final set up and optimization of the three pilot lines 
as reported in D3.1 by industrial users. 
Ms5 Pilot manufacturing lines ready to start its 
validation at digital level 
4 M38 Digital threat ready to interoperate as described in 
D4.1, D4.2 & D4.3 
Ms6 At least one OK product demo prototype 
per sector (OK ceiling, OK insole, OK lid) 
5 M41 Final manufactured Prototype with good quality and 
functional validation results from D5.1 & D5.2 
Ms7 Demonstrate the remanufacture and 
recyclability of the developed smart 
composites under the proposed EoL 
5 M41 Results coming from D5.2 and EoL guidelines and 
improving actions (if deviations appear) 
Ms8 Achieving training, standardization 
communication and dissemination KPIs. 
1/6 M42 Monitoring training & standardization  WP1, 
communication & dissemination activities WP6, 
results included under D1.3, D1.4 & D6.1, continuous 
reporting in participant portal 
Table 17: Critical risks for implementation 
Description of risk: Likelihood (Probable, 
Remote, Improbable) & Severity: 
Low/Medium/high WP Mitigation measures 
Description of risk L S 
1) Insufficient data on bioplastic 
production, use end-of-life 
provided by partners to 
complete the life cycle inventory  
R M 1 Early & ongoing dialogue with partners to ensure that the necessary data are 
recorded, along with use of relevant default process data from latest Ecoinvent 
database (v3.7.1 or higher).  
2) Not reaching a sufficient 
number of professionals and 
students for the training 
activities planned 
I L 1 The training activities will be planned well in advanced in the beginning of the 
project, by establishing the content and steps required with universities and 
RTOs Promotion in newsletter, social media  and open portals. Increase the 
number of training course, workshops and events. 
3) Low PCL thermal stability, 
degradation during extrusion 
R M 2 Extra stabilized grades will be used  and compatiblizers will be added to 
improve the adhesion between PCL and PLA 
4) Microfibrillar and self-
reinforcing structure produced 
for the PLA/PLA organosheets 
R H 2 In depth study (simulation & experimental) and optimisation of overinjection 
times (shortest as possible). Low melting bioPA. The effect of the adhesive as 
intermediate layer will dissipate (while curing) heat. Mould refrigeration will be 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    41 
is affected (melted) during the 
overinjection step of bioPA due 
to the difference in Tm 
optimised to ensu re fast -cooling. The thickness of the organosheet will be 
increased (more heat needed, more manoeuvre). If previous measures do not 
work, the biopolymer grades will be changed (PLA with higher Tm, test bioPA 
to produce a organosheet – based on current CTB expertise). 
5) Not being able to produce 
bioPA pellets with short CF from 
VIBES project due to lack of 
supply 
R L  AIT (VIBES coordinator) and LIM (VIBES developer of the CF) will ensure to 
construct this interaction between projects by anticipating this batch in both 
projects planning. Otherwise, a batch may be purchase d (depending on kg 
required) from DIFT pilot plant. Trials with oil-based CF will be carried out and 
with other lignin-based developments from LIM to find sustainable alternatives  
6) The obtained construction 
prototype (final product) does 
not meet functional 
requirements 
I H 3/5 The sandwich structure will be re -designed in order to  achieve mechanical 
performance. Different curing grades of resin/hardener will be design and 
tested too (to meet water uptake ratio and comply with indoors normative).  
Further a dditives to enhance specific performance will be included (e.g. 
introduce a layer with basalt fibre in the bath ceiling to reach fire properties) 
7) The obtained medical 
prototype (final product) does 
not meet functional 
requirements 
I H 3/5 Redesign and insertion of additional reinforcement zones. If redesign is still 
insufficient the incorporation of stiffer fibres such as biodegradable or 
biobased carbon fibres would be considered. (biobased CF or alternative GF) 
8) The obtained packaging 
prototypes (final product) does 
not meet functional 
requirements 
I H 3/5 The organosheets will be modified in terms of plies, fibre orientation, thickness 
etc, to ensure obtaining enough rigidity. BioPA grade might be changed to 
ensure toughness. The adhesiv e will be compatible and provide stability. 
Modifications in the lid design to reinforce the final part will be also carried out 
and implemented in the prototype mould. Additives to reach UV resistance or 
decrease clamping noise will added to comply with ISO standards. 
9) Reshapeability of thermoset 
sheets &desired separability of 
PLA/bioPA sheets is not 
achieved. 
R M 2/5 Material modelling, simulations and correlation with experimental work will 
allow an ad-hoc design of the formulations. Increase dynamic bond response 
and wt % if demo prototypes do not reach EoL. Alternative recycling is 
proposed with ongoing EU funded projects. 
10) Computational speed of 
digital twin too low to be 
updated every cycle 
R L 4 The computational algorithms developed will be sufficiently performing and will 
use adequate strategy to optimise the computational time (e.g. parallelisation), 
and the computational power assigned will be adapted 
11) Digital infrastructure 
incompatible to equipment 
R H 4/5 If it is not compatible with existing partners equipment, the d evelopment of 
additional software/hardware interfaces for integration will be carried out. 
12) The performance of AI 
systems has a slower learning 
curve rate due to lack of 
experimental data 
I H 4 If the first iteration of the AI systems doesn’t provide the optimal response. 
Leveraging on bigger experimental datasets will provide the knowledge base 
to boost system performance. Bio-Uptake proposes several demonstration 
steps to ensure a growing dataset for system development 
13) Not reaching agreement for 
the exploitation KERs 
I H 6 Organized extraordinary negotiation meetings between the affected partners 
and activate Consortium Agreement conflict procedure 
14) Accumulated delays in 
tasks/WP cause delays in 
project expected progress 
R H 7 Strict control of the project management with in-time delivery submission and 
milestones control . Addition of more personal resources assumed by the 
partners involved in the delay. Negotiation with EC. 
15) Partner withdrawal I H 7 Exhaustive control of activities, small consortium with agreed and negotiated 
tasks, meditated & measured tasks and efforts. In case difficulties to continue 
appeared, current partners may count on their third parties and collaborators 
to look for further resources (capacity or human resources) if it is necessary. 
Risk management is considered under WP7 as an internal policy 
for their mitigation (periodically reviewed). The following aspects 
are in any case to be included in the risk analysis: 
✓ 
 Identification and categorization of risks (SEVERITY) 
✓ 
 Probability of risk appearance and its impact (LIKELIHOOD)
  
✓ 
 Roles and responsibilities (who is responsible/s for collecting 
the required data? Who is responsible/s for implementing the 
contingency plans? Who is responsible/s for providing inputs 
for risk management? 
✓ 
 Documentation of the risks and of the mitigation of their 
effects 
  
 
Fig. 13: Bio-Uptake risks representation 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    42 
Table 18: Summary of staff effort 
 WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 Total  
1/AIT 12 12 10 2 30 13 45.5 124.5 
2/CTB 7 20 9 0 6 4 1 47 
3/CID 3 33.5 20 3 6 3 1 69.5 
4/SP 2 43 3 0 2 3 1 54 
5/AIM 4 0 7 53 18 6 1 89 
6/IRI 1 69 4 4 4 3 1 86 
7/SIM 1.5 1 9 23 3 3 1 41.5 
8/POD 4.5 3 11 0 11 4 1 34.5 
9/COM 6 29 15 0 4 4 1 59 
10/MOS 2.5 0 29 0 15 3.5 1 51 
11/LIM 48 42 16 0 2 8 1 117 
12/POL 1 0 0.5 0.5 1 21 1 25 
13/UNE 12.5 0 0 0 0 1 1 14.5 
Total  105 252.5 133.5 85.5 102 76.5 57.5 812.5 
% 12.9% 31.1% 16.4% 10.5% 12.6% 9.4% 7.1% 100% 
The overall Bio-Uptake budget is 5,994,886 € with the following distribution: Personnel [62%], Other Direct Costs [17%], 
Subcontracting [1%] and indirect costs [20% being 25% of personnel and other direct costs] 
Table 19: Subcontracting costs’ items 
Subcontracting Cost (€) Description of tasks and justification 
4/SP 30,000€ WP2 Pilot scale production of DGEVA 
7/SIM 44,000€ WP4 Development of thermoforming simulation for fibre loaded sheet with anisotropy 
in bi-axial stretching 
 
The purchase costs for CTB(2), CID(3), SIM(7), POD(8) and COM(9) does not exceed the 15% of the pers onnel costs for 
each participant. Table 20 collects the purchase costs for those partners exceeding the 15% of the personnel costs. The record 
lists cost items in order of costs and starting with the largest cost item, up to the level that the remaining costs are below 15% of 
personnel costs. 
Table 20: ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services)  
1/AIT 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
Other goods, 
works & services 
77,000 Raw materials for pellets preparation (30,000€); Prototype drying line for lignin 
based formulations (25,000€); Consumables and prototype tools for EoL validation 
(22,000€) 
Travel & 
subsistence  
26,000 7 Consortium meetings (2 Person *800€)+ 1Review Meeting  + 7 dissemination and 
technical travels (800€)+ Travel and subsistence costs for invited experts and 
project coordinators (liaison/cooperation activities) 
Remaining Costs 67,715 (12,1%)  
Total 170,715  
4/SP 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
Other goods, 
works & services 
72,000 Consumables: synthetic precursors (lab- and pre-pilot scale) for coupling agents 
and resins, solvents and catalyst, synthesis and treatment solvents needed for 
synthesis and purification, safety lab equipment, Consumables for analytical 
equipment (NMR, DSC, SEC, TGA, Rheometer consumables) (52,000€); 
Patentability study and toxicity/reglamentation studies (20,000€) 
Equipment  31,083 Laboratory equipment for lab scale synthesis (19,000€: 791.7 €/month*24 
month*100% of allocation); Reactor system for pre-pilot scale synthesis (12,083€: 
2014 €/month*12 month*50% of allocation) 
Remaining costs  30,503 (14.8%)  
Total 133,586  
5/AIM 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    43 
Travel and 
subsistence  
44,800 Participation in consortium meeting (8 meetings*700€*2people) + Participation in 
Technical Meetings (WP4,WP5) (6 meetings*700€*2 people) + Equipment 
integration and test (6 travel*3 use cases*2 people*700€) 
Other goods, 
works & services 
20,000 Embedded platform and electronic components for online process monitoring for 3 
use cases (20,000€) 
Remaining costs  24,500 (11,1%)  
Total 99,300  
6/IRI 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
Other goods, 
works & services 
120,000 Parts for the 3 monitoring systems (sensors, optomechanics, specific computer to 
drive and process the data of the developed monitoring systems prototype, machine 
vision camera …) (120,000€); 
Remaining costs  49,000 (13,6%)  
Total 169,000  
10/MOS 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
Other goods, 
works &services 
98,000 Prototype Mould for lid validation (48,000€); Consumables for over-injection process 
(IR lamp adaptation, sensor integration, fast check systems…) (21,000€); Analysis 
for product validation (15,000€); Raw materials for process optimisation and purging 
(14,000€) 
Remaining costs  18,163 (10,2%)  
Total 116,163  
11/LIM 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
Equipment  27,000 Oven ( 15,000€: 357.1 €/month*42 month*100% of allocation ), Mechanical 
characterization equipment (12,000€: 285.7€/month*42 month*100% of allocation) 
Travel and 
subsistence  
17,500 Dissemination at conferences/Seminars 2 PIs, and 2 PhDs (project meetings) 
purposes. This also includes  consortia meetings and attendance at conference/ 
workshop meetings for training and dissemination purposes 
Remaining costs  43,000 (13,7%)  
Total 87,500  
12/POL 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and 
subsistence  
21,000€ Participation in project meetings (7 meetings*1 person*1000€) + 
participation in dissemination events and activities (7 events*2 people*1000€) 
Remaining costs  19,000 (9,5%)  
Total 40,000  
13/UNE 
Purchase Costs Cost (€) Justification 
Travel and 
subsistence  
7,000 Participation in consortium meetings (7 meetings*1 person*700€) + Participation in 
dissemination events, especially meetings of standardization technical committees 
(3 meetings*1person*700€) 
Remaining costs  4,300 (6,7%)  
Total 11,300  
 
  
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    44 
3.2. Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
Bio-Uptake consortium forms a strong platform of experts along the manufacturing of (bio)plastics value chain for composite 
materials. It has been intentionally kept to a minimum number of partners to avoid duplication of efforts. It consists of 13 partners 
with complementary competencies, 6 industries (SP, IRI, COM & MOS as SMEs; and POD & SIM as Large companies) plus 2 
OTHER (POL which is the industrial French plastic Cluster & UNE the Spanish Standardisation Body); 4 RTO partners (AIT, CTB, 
CID & AIM ) and 1 academia (LIM) to give support to the companies in the consortium and to develop the main scie ntific and 
technological activities in the work plan. The undertaking involves 6 European countries (ES, FR, IE, BE, SE, DK). All partners 
have large expertise in participating and coordinating EU projects in previous initiatives (FP7, H2020, Life, etc) in activities closely 
related with Bio-Uptake (see B1 and A sections). Bio-Uptake consortium is totally industrially driven. 
Fig. 14, shows how each partner contributes to the value chain and how the interaction among them is built (complementarity). In 
this sense, Table 4 in the excellence section already introduces the partner collaboration in each demo case. The consortium is 
rich in inter-disciplinary Sciences and includes experts with deep knowledge in the technical aeras (material science, chemistry, 
manufacturing processes, digitalisation, circularity and sustainability, …) as well as Social Sciences and Humanities (business 
development, training methodologies…) and high communication and dissemination  skills (including open science practices, 
gender aspects etc). 
 
Fig. 14: Bio-Uptake partners cover the three manufacturing VC 
Table 21: Access to critical infrastructure 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    45 
Table 22: Partners’ contribution to Bio-Uptake, Benefits taken from the project and potential Exploitation 
Name Role Contribution Benefits Exploitation 
AIT Coord, 
WP5 & 
Exploit 
Leader 
Expertise on project coordination, 
extrusion-compounding & 
injection-moulding of biobased 
composites. Expert in circular 
solution and models for plastic 
products. 
Increase knowledge management in Horizon 
Europe, in working with lignin-based 
reinforcements & over -injection moulding with 
organosheet too. Guide the transfer of 
knowledge and skills to workforce 
(Transfer of knowledge to industry) 
TECHNOLOGY 
SERVICE 
CTB WP2 
leader 
Expertise in fabrics transformation 
technologies, self & bi -component 
fibre structures with outstanding 
mechanical properties 
Enlarge capabilities in synthetic biobased fibres 
and fabrics to attract private contracts, design 
new material formulations and act as knowledge 
transfer to industries 
TECHNOLOGY 
SERVICE 
CID Partner To design the endured pre -peg 
material adequate for industry 
applications and set -up both pre -
peg and thermoforming pilot lines  
Bio-Epoxy + 3RCAN thermoset material and 
their manufacturing technologies (to be 
patented) and exploited in several value chains. 
Transfer of knowledge to industry. 
PRODUCT 
TECHNOLOGY 
SERVICE 
SP Partner Biobased CANs chemistry, 
adhesive and bioepoxy developer, 
characterisation and chemotyping 
Develop new thermoset-based products 
(enlarging current portfolio). New service-based 
material modelling 
PRODUCT 
SERVICE 
AIM WP4 
leader 
Algorithm developer, 
interoperability of data. 
Visual quick quality check  
Provide service for digitalisation manufacturing 
industries related to plastic transformation (and 
others) 
SERVICE 
IRI Partner Development in -line monitoring 
lab-to-pilot prototypes for real-time 
characterisation & correction 
Offer the prototypes developed for curing 
thermosets, controlling microfibre structures 
and intermediate formats quality to industry.  
TECHNOLOGY 
PRODUCT 
SIM WP3 
leader 
Adapt current simulation software 
for injection and thermoforming to 
include new material libraries and 
adapted processes 
Offer a more complete software to plastic 
industry to design and work with biobased 
plastics. More software Licenses. 
PRODUCT 
SERVICE 
POD Partner Knowledge in  the construction 
sector, regarding composites, 
designs, validation and feedback. 
End-user 
Increase the knowledge with a solution of great 
relevance for its products and clients. Modify 
current production technology for a quicker and 
more economic one. Promotion of new business 
in circular economy 
TECHNOLOGY 
PRODUCT 
COM Partner Knowledge in the orthotic sector, 
regarding composites, designs, 
validation and feedback. End-user 
Increase the knowledge with a solution of great 
relevance for its products and clients. Offer 
biobased intermediates with enhanced thermo-
mechanical properties . New business in the 
circular economy 
TECHNOLOGY 
PRODUCT 
MOS Partner Knowledge in the packaging  
sector, regarding composites, 
designs, validation and feedback. 
End-user 
Increase the knowledge with a solution of great 
relevance for its products and clients. Modify 
current technology process for lids production. 
Offer a lighter and more resistant biob ased 
product. New business in the circular economy 
TECHNOLOGY 
PRODUCT 
LIM WP1 & 
diss. leader 
LCA, LCC; Health & Safety , lignin 
based composite materials  
knowledge, open practices in 
academia and training 
Be able to provide specific services to future 
industrial clients in the field: LCA -LCC, 
sustainability, ad-hoc training programmes etc 
PRODUCT 
SERVICE 
POL WP6 & 
Comm. 
leader 
Communication of outputs to 
industry & society. Engaging 
stakeholders 
Transfer of knowledge of Bio-Uptake solutions 
to the French plastic industry 
SERVICE 
UNE Partner Standardization knowledge, 
interaction with working groups , 
upgrade standards 
Broad Services and Commit with its mission of 
acting as a driver for more sustainable products 
in EU 
SERVICE 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Lídia GARCÍA on 23/09/2021 11:40:34 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)