4. Personal Data Page
Does this activity involve processing of personal data? Yes No
Does this activity involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including 
use of preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)?
Yes No
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non-EU countries? Specify the type of 
personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU or from a non-EU 
country to another non-EU country? Specify the type of personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Does this activity involve the processing of personal data related to criminal convictions or 
offences?
Yes No
5. Animals Page
Does this activity involve animals? Yes No
6. Non-EU Countries Page
Will some of the activities be carried out in non-EU countries? Yes No
In case non-UE countries are involved, do the activities undertaken in these countries raise 
potential ethics issues? Yes No
It is planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Is it planned to import any material (other than data) from non-EU countries into the EU or 
from a non-EU country to another non-EU country? For data imports, see section 4. Yes No
Is it planned to export any material (other than data) from the EU to non-EU countries? For 
data exports, see section 4. Yes No
Does this activity involve low and/or lower middle income countries, (if yes, detail the benefit-
sharing actions planned in the self-assessment) Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the activity at risk? Yes No
7. Environment, Health and Safety Page
Administrative forms
Page 105 of 107
Proposal ID 101057049
Acronym BIO-UPTAKE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 24/09/2021 02:08
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants.(during the implementation of the activity or further to the 
use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
Does this activity deal with endangered fauna and/or flora / protected areas? Yes No
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to humans, 
including  those performing the activity.(during the implementation of the activity or further 
to the use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
8. Artificial Intelligence Page
Does this activity involve the development, deployment and/or use of Artificial Intelligence? (if 
yes, detail in the self-assessment whether that could raise ethical concerns related to human 
rights and values and detail how this will be addressed).
Yes No
9. Other Ethics Issues Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I will complete the 
ethics self-assessment as described in the guidelines How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Administrative forms
Page 106 of 107
Proposal ID 101057049
Acronym BIO-UPTAKE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 24/09/2021 02:08
Ethics Self-Assessment
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact
Explain in detail the identified issues in relation to: 
  - objectives of the activities (e.g. study of vulnerable populations, etc.) 
  - methodology (e.g. clinical trials, involvement of children, protection of personal data, etc.) 
  - the potential impact of the activities (e.g. environmental damage, stigmatisation of particular social groups, 
political or financial adverse consequences, misuse, etc.)
Remaining characters 4594
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations
Describe how the issue(s) identified in the ethics issues table above will be addressed in order to adhere to the ethical principles and 
what will be done to ensure that the activities are compliant with the EU/national legal and ethical requirements of the country or 
countries where the tasks are to be carried out. It is reminded that for activities performed in a non-EU countries, they should also be 
allowed in at least one EU Member State.
Remaining characters 5000
Administrative forms
Page 107 of 107
Proposal ID 101057049
Acronym BIO-UPTAKE
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 24/09/2021 02:08
Security issues table
1. EU Classified Information (EUCI)2 Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials requiring protection against 
unauthorised disclosure (EUCI)? Yes No
Does this activity involve non-EU countries? Yes No
2. Misuse Page
Does this activity have the potential for misuse of results? Yes No
3. Other Security Issues Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials subject to national security restrictions? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
Are there any other security issues that should be taken into consideration? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
2According to the Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, “European Union 
classified information (EUCI) means any information or material designated by an EU security classification, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause varying 
degrees of prejudice to the interests of the European Union or of one or more of the Member States”. 
3Classified background information is information that is already classified by a country and/or international organisation and/or the EU and is going to be used by the 
project. In this case, the project must have in advance the authorisation from the originator of the classified information, which is the entity (EU institution, EU Member 
State, third state or international organisation) under whose authority the classified information has been generated. 
4EU classified foreground information is information (documents/deliverables/materials) planned to be generated by the project and that needs to be protected from 
unauthorised disclosure. The originator of the EUCI generated by the project is the European Commission.
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    1 
BIOcomposites in smart plastic transformation processes to pave the 
way for the large-scale UPTAKE of sustainable bio-based products 
Coordinator: PhD. Pere Castell Muixí (AITIIP) – pere.castell@AITIIP.com +34 976 464 544, @AITIIP 
No. ACR. Participant organisation name – Role in the project Country Type 
1 AIT FUNDACIÓN AITIIP  – Project coordinator, improvement of plastic transformation processes, 
exploitation and dissemination of bio-based results & training activities. 
ES RTO 
2 CTB CENTRE SCIENTIFIQUE & TECHNIQUE DE L’INDUSTRIE TEXTILE BELGE  – Self reinforcing 
technologies for thermoplastic bio-fibres & improvement of extrusion processes  
BE RTO 
3 CID FUNDACION CIDETEC –   Enduring technologies for thermoset bio -resins & improvement of pre -
impregnation processes 
ES RTO 
4 SP SPECIFIC POLYMERS – Novel covalent adaptable networks technologies for recyclability, 
remanufacturing and reusing of bio-based formats 
FR SME 
5 AIM ASOCIACION DE INVESTIGACION METALURGICA DEL NOROESTE – Data-driven technologies 
to support the design and production of reusable and recyclable bio-based products   
ES RTO 
6 IRI IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS – Sensor and monitoring technologies adapting current controlling 
systems to bio-based materials  
ES SME 
7 SIM SIMCON – Modelling and Simulation technologies for bio-based formats to enhance current available 
applications 
FR IND 
8 POD PODCOMP – Optimisation of pre-impregnated process & demonstration in construction sector SE IND 
9 COM COMFIL – Optimisation of thermoplastic sheets/tapes production and thermoforming processes & 
demonstration in orthopaedic sector 
DK SME 
10 MOS MOSES PRODUCTS– Optimisation of over-injection moulding process & demonstration in tertiary 
packaging and urban furniture sectors 
ES SME 
11 LIM LIMERICK UNIVERSITY –Material characterisation support and LCA-LCC & HSS IE UNI 
12 POL POLIMERIS – Stakeholder engagement, results communication, support to the exploitation and 
dissemination activities, transferability and replicability activities  
FR OTH 
13 UNE ASOCIACIÓN ESPAÑOLA DE NORMALIZACIÓN – Standardization activities  ES OTH 
 
Table of Content 
1. EXCELLENCE ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2 
1.1. Objectives and ambition ................................................................................................................................................ 2 
1.2. Methodology .................................................................................................................................................................. 6 
2. IMPACT ............................................................................................................................................................................... 18 
2.1. Project’s pathways towards impact ............................................................................................................................. 18 
2.2. Measures to maximise impact – Dissemination, exploitation and communication ...................................................... 24 
2.3. Summary: Key elements of the impact section ........................................................................................................... 28 
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION ................................................................................................ 29 
3.1. Work plan and resources  ........................................................................................................................................... 29 
3.2. Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole ................................................................................................... 44 
 
  
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    2 
1. EXCELLENCE 
1.1. Objectives and ambition 
▪ Objectives 
The general objective of Bio-Uptake project is to ensure a sustainable uptake (increase the use in a 39%) of bioplastic composites 
through boosting a twin green and digital transformation in the European manufacturing industry. In particular, Bio-Uptake solution 
will focus scientific and technology efforts on developing flexible manufacturing processes to produce biobased end-products for 
the construction, medical and packaging sectors based on  the combination of intermediate formats  made of natural  and/or 
biobased synthetic fibres reinforced with biopolymers, which are easily adaptable to new market demands. 
The Specific Objectives of Bio-Uptake project are summarized below: 
SO1. To develop 3 disruptive innovative manufacturing processes  for bio -based products with a better overall 
performance of the current fossil -based alternatives : one for thermoset composites, one for highly customised 
thermoplastics and one for one-shot large volume thermoplastics 
SO2. To adapt and upgrade 6 conformal manufacturing technologies (filament extrusion, extrusion-compounding, resin 
impregnation, press consolidation , thermoforming and over -injection) that constitutes the manufacturing processes for 
deploying biobased materials to substitute traditional materials. 
SO3. To implement a smart digital end-to-end platform for manufacturing biobased materials (design, modelling, process 
simulation, in-line monitoring and quality diagnosis) to ensure product quality and process interoperability required to optimize 
and upgrade  each manufacturing process being demonstrated for each user case  and its scalability to any other 
manufacturing process. 
SO4. To develop  and validate  4 new  biobased intermediate formats  or semi -finished products: 1) endured thermoset 
organosheets, 2) monocomponent & bicomponent thermoplastic organosheets and 3) unidirectional tapes, 4) thermoplastic 
pellets or granulates. 
SO5. To demonstrate the Bio-Uptake solution in 3 manufacturing value chains (VC): construction, medical & packaging 
SO6. To develop 3 end-products (bathroom ceiling cabinet, feet orthosis and garbage container lid)  that are made of more 
than 75% biobased materials and to validate that satisfy the technical and environmental requirements  
SO7. To demonstrate  product circularity  (reusability, remanufacturab ility and/or recyclability) by validating their de -
manufacturing process (due to reversible dynamic chemicals (CANs) and aided by eco-design principles). 
SO8. To create 2 training programmes for upskilling professionals in circular economy and smart & green manufacturing 
practices: one for young generations of scientists & engineers and one for industrial workforce 
SO9. To contribute to their standardization applied to the 3 manufacturing value chains driving biomaterials uptake 
Table 1: Objective’s contribution 
OBJ Bio-Uptake Contributions Means of Verification When 
GO Upgrading TRL of the activities related to functionality, digitalization & circularity plus 
achieving the project KPIs (comm., diss., training, outcomes and wider impact) 
Achievement of 8 Ms M42 
SO1 TRL3→5 (fibre yarns) + TRL4→6 (intermediates) + TRL5→6 (conformal products) 
+ TRL5→6 (in-line monitoring & simulation) + TRL4→5 (digital – interop. algorithm) 
Ms1 + Ms2 + Ms3 + 
Ms4 + Ms5 
M38 
SO2 TRL3→5 (fibre yarns) + TRL4→6 (intermediates) + TRL5→6 (conformal products)  Ms1+Ms2+Ms3+Ms4 M30 
SO3 TRL5→6 (in-line monitoring & simulation) + TRL4→5 (digital – interop. algorithm) Ms5 M38 
SO4 TRL3→5 (fibre yarns) + TRL4→6 (intermediates) Ms3 M30 
SO5 TRL3→5 (fibre yarns) + TRL4→6 (intermediates) + TRL5→6 (conformal products) Ms4 M38 
SO6 TRL5→6 (conformal products) + TRL4→TRL5 (CANs integration) Ms6 M41 
SO7 TRL4→TRL5 (CANs integration) + TRL4 →TRL5 (de -manufacturing, reuse, 
remanufacture, recycling) 
Ms7 M41 
SO8 Achieving KPIs for training as described in Table 10 and task 1.4 Ms8 M42 
SO9 Achieving KPIs for standardization described in Table 10 and task 1.3 Ms8 M42 
▪ Beyond the state-of-the-art 
Biobased materials, due to their intrinsic nature, have demonstrated that they can be adequate candidates with a performance 
good enough to replace petroleum derivates´ in various application areas 1. However, due to differences  in physical and 
thermochemical properties, a direct replacement of the current material with newly developed biobased is often a mistake. To 
reach the full potential of biobased materials product eco-design is essential (part drawing, materials to be used, processability, 
end-of-life etc)2. The novel approach on which Bio-Uptake project relies is based on modularity or pre-fabrication: the development 
of high-tech biobased intermediate formats (organosheets, tapes and pellets). The smart combination of these intermediates into 
 
1 S. Thomas et al (2020). Biopolymers & their industrial applications: From Plant, Animal & Marine Sources to Functional Products. Elsevier ISBN0128192593. 
2 ETC-Eionet Report (ETC/WMGE 2021/2): Business Models in a Circular Economy 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    3 
a final end-product allows to overcome the current technical and environmental limitations to meet the demanding requirements 
of a specific sector/application where a single biobased material doesn´t. Thus, the synergistic potential of composite materials 
will be multiplied by the possibility of combining different intermediate formats to pave the way for the integration and uptake of 
bio-based materials in mass customised manufacturing (manufacturing as a service)3. Moreover, Bio-Uptake solution does not 
involve major machine modifications and large investment in complex equipment, but rather it involves the development of 
peripherals and the adaptation of simulation models to the intrinsic characteristics of biomaterials. 
Three different manufacturing processes will be developed within Bio-Uptake (from the twin green and digital perspective) focused 
on the plastics manufacturing sector, which is on the centrality of a variety of value chains.  These processes are designed to 
address diverse kinds of bio -based composite materials, including thermoset or thermoplastic polymers reinforced with natural 
fibres (including carbon positive materials). Sustainability criteria will be applied since the design p hase to reach circularity by 
design, considering de-manufacturing routes for the separation and recovery of materials to ensure their reuse, remanufacture 
and/or recycling, boosting regenerated new products. To demonstrate the full potential of the manufacturing processes developed 
within Bio-Uptake project, three manufacturing sectors have been selected: construction, medical and packaging . One end -
product has been selected to represent the full potential of biobased materials in each sector: 
Table 2: Comparison of Bio-Uptake new products respect to State of the Art (SoA) products 
Current Product and Manufacturing Process Bio-Uptake Innovations in the Product and the Process 
Demo Case for Construction: Sandwich Panels for the Ceiling for pre-fabricated bathroom pods 
The current manufacturing process used is 
vacuum infusion with conventional Epoxy 
resin and Glass Fibre (fully Oil-based) plus 
a balsa core (in a sandwich structure). 
Handmade &  slow Process, Not 
Recyclable. Large scrap (needs of 
refrigeration/freezer for resin storage) 
Semi-automated process to produce endured pre -impregnated 
organosheets and thermoforming of the sandwich structure with 
the balsa core.  Flax fabric pre-impregnated with Biobased 3R-
CANs-Epoxy (from Vanillyl alcohol – DGEVA, coming from lignin) 
+ wood core with bonding-debonding reversible adhesive 
30% faster process. Reprocesable and Recyclable. Storable at 
room temperature → No scraps (no value lost in the VC). 
Demo Case for Medical: Feet Insoles - Orthopaedics 
Glued layers and assembly of 
cut-outs from different materials 
anatomically shaped. Each 
time a layer has been glued has 
to be finished afterwards: 
manual, multi -stage, time 
consuming, costly and not made of biobased materials. 
Epoxy resin  reinforced with Carbon/Glass Fib res and 
PEEK + Carbon Fibre for AFO high-tech adaptable insoles 
Consolidation of layers (organosheets and UDTapes) 
anatomically structured in a one-shot free forming  (press 
consolidation + thermoforming) . O nly a final trimming is 
required. PLA and PCL (mono and multi component), which has 
the particularity of once the final shape is ready, it can be warmed 
up if necessary, for an anatomical adaptation (which cannot be 
done with epoxy, GF or CF). Reusability and Recyclability. 
34% more efficient, 12% lower costs, 50% shorter process and 
allows to put biobased materials that otherwise is unfeasible....) 
Demo Case for Packaging: Lid for a garbage container (tertiary packaging – big-sized packaging) 
Injection moulding  of oilbased PE 
(polyelythelene) + EPDM  (ethylene 
propylene diene rubber). Average weight 
of a lid for a 10.000L container is 22Kg. 
Requirements for outdoors service life is 
high-demanding (mechanically, 
waterproof, UV resistance…) 
Conforming of self-reinforced PLA organosheet & overinjection 
of reinforced bioPolyamide (short lignin-Carbon and wood fibres). 
This hybridization will enable to reduce by 35% the final weight of 
the lid and by 22% the plastic  material used. BioPA will ensu re 
the lid to withstand outdoors environment  & the application of a 
reversible adhesive on the organosheet´s surface will ensure 
materials´ separation for remanufacture and recycling. 
Bio-Uptake ground-breaking concept tackles 3 pillars: 1) achieving material FUNCTIONALITY through the composite lay-up, 
in which semi-finished structures called intermediate formats permits to better influence in the eco -design and customization of 
properties, allowing to meet technical quality criteria and requirements; 2) introducing process DIGITALISATION by building up a 
digital hybrid twin, that allows the interoperability of manufacturing technologies and enables the training of the workforce to adapt 
and normalize the use of biobased materials in the European manufacturing industry; and 3) ensuring a SUSTAINABLE end-of-
life by introducing scientific novelties in the materials that permits remanufacturing and a controlled de-manufacturing: 
MAIN BREAK-TRHOUGH NOVELTIES that brings Bio-Uptake beyond the State of the Art: 
FUNCTIONALITY: The combination of biobased  intermediate formats to meet industry requirements: sheets  (unidirectional 
tapes + organosheets) based on self-reinforced biobased thermoplastic polymers and endured thermosets, plus thermoplastic 
pellets formulations, will ensure to achieve products with enhanced mechanical, physical and chemical properties  (technical 
disruption). These are conceived as  high-performance semi-finished materials that are not only considerably lighter, but 
that can also include many functions into end-product. In Bio-Uptake project 4 formats can be envisaged: endured prepegs 
using thermoset bioepoxy and flax natural fabrics, ad-hoc biobased organosheets and unidirectional tapes using self-
 
3 EFFRA – European Commission – MADE IN EUROPE: The manufacturing partnership in Horizon Europe 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    4 
reinforce biobased thermoplastic synthetic fibres ( monocomponent PLA & bicomponent  PLA/PCL) and biobased 
thermoplastic pellets (bioPA) reinforced with short biobased lignin fibres: carbon fibre and recycled wood. 
 
Fig. 1: Bio-Uptake Conceptual Intermediate Formats 
The strength and stiffness of a composite build-up depends on its design and in the micro- and macro- structures conferred. 
Regarding micro-structure of polymeric fibres and matrices, it is essential to have a precise controlled on the crystallinity of 
the polymer used (Xc%, size and polymorphisms). In addition, the orientation of the fibres and of the polymer chains, length 
and molecular weight are crucial to obtain intermediate formats with enhanced properties respect to the current SoA. Moreover, 
at macro-structure level, when combining natural and synthetic fabrics and polymeric resin matrices in an organosheet concept, 
the orientation sequence of the plies (layers) and of the fibres within each ply play a crucial role to control the porosity and 
final properties of those composite formats and to provide a structurally efficient design. 
The use of intermediate formats provides flexibility on the design and allows product designers to use them either as main 
structure of the end-product (insoles) or as selective reinforcement (lid container) according to product needs. In addition, 
the accurate characterization and in-line monitoring control of their structure permits to customise the materials obtaining end-
products with increased and customised quality and properties. Intermediates permit to boost manufacturing technologies 
for end-products based on smart conformal technologies, like press consolidation, thermoforming, and injection-moulding 
as well as adapting the manufacturing industry of biobased products for a de-centralised manufacturing-as-a-service model 
(highly customised, decreasing production cost & times, more accessible biomaterials to manufacturers & consumers). 
DIGITALISATION: Building a digital twin to allow a smart and trustful production and interaction across the value chain. Digital 
tools and technologies in every stage of manufacturing are opening opportunities to achieve a whole new level of productivity4. 
However, the current tools and systems have been developed to work with conventional oil-based materials and needs to be 
adapted to the peculiarities of biobased materials to ensure their effectiveness and trustfulness, allowing decision making when 
introducing a new biobased product in the market. This requires a holistic system ap proach that integrates and connects a 
series of complex data-driven events along the entire value chain (Digital Thread) enabling control of manufacturing systems5. 
The novel approach underpinning the digital pillar lies in implementing a digital end-to-end engineering concept embedded 
in the full manufacturing chain , combining design and modelling, process simulation, fabrication, monitoring systems and 
quality diagnosis of products.  
The combination of information technology (IT) -coming from engineering phase- and operational technology (OT) -coming 
from manufacturing phase - enables a seamless data connection between physical assets and information processing 
technologies6 and the creation of an evolved and updated Digital Twin of the product and/or manufacturing processes7. 
In this sense there are two key elements that will allow to build this architecture system: 
a. Digital Thread that allows a seamless dataflow integration of a data-driven pipeline linking the information during the 
lifecycle of the pro duct from  the design, to simulation (CADMOULD and TSIM) to manufacturing, to process in-line 
monitoring (sensors, photonic & visual techniques) and control, to quality assurance (non-destructive tests) of novel bio-
based products (a unified paradigm). 
b. Digital manufacturing as key driver for the implementation of a flexible production  based on a virtual commissioning 
strategy following a holistic simulation-optimization to ensure optimised system performance in order to minimize the ramp-
up phase and to confirm system’s manufacturing behaviour of the new biobased product. 
The innovation going beyond the State of the Art is the development of this digital communication architecture and 
of the algorithm that will enable to match, corr elate and communicate data. A digital infrastructure capable to manage 
and analyse different types of data, and to interoperate across different machines and processes, using single/multiple bio -
based materials combinations, is crucial to successfully build and operate this approach (technical disruption). 
 
4 ROSEN, Roland, et al. About the importance of autonomy and digital twins for the future of manufacturing. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 2015, 48, 3, p. 567-572. 
5 Hozdić, Elvis, et al. A Cyber-Physical Approach to the Management and Control of Manufacturing Systems. J. Mech. Eng. 66(2020)1, 61-70 
6 https://atos.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/atos-smart-factory-ascent-thought-leadership-whitepaper.pdf 
7 Uhlemann, et al. The digital twin: Realizing the cyber-physical production system for industry 4.0. Procedia Cirp,2017,61, 335-340 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    5 
SUSTAINABILITY: Covalent adaptable networks (CANs) are materials (chemical moieties) that can undergo modifications in 
their inner structure based on efficient associative and dissociative exchange mechanisms that enable topology reconfiguration 
without loss of network integrity by thermally activated bond-exchange processes. They structurally resemble thermosets with 
permanent covalent crosslinks but are able to flow in a manner that resembles thermoplastic behaviour only when a dynamic 
chemical reaction is active. In Bio-Uptake project innovations material science related to biobased CANs will allow: 
1) To make thermosets reshapable (thus reusabl e and remanufacturable)  conferring to thermoset the thermoplastic 
properties. The use of prepregs is one of the most extended manufacturing methods consisting of a reinforcement fabric 
impregnated with a thermoset epoxy resin matrix. The epoxy matrix is pa rtially cured (preventing from leaking while 
keeping enough functional groups) and tacky, and in this form is supplied to the composite manufacturer who needs to 
store it refrigerated (typically at -18ºC) or frozen. Afterwards an autoclave processing is required to perform the final curing 
and consolidation; a process which is labour-intensive and high-cost, thought for relatively small production runs. The here 
described bio-based 3R-CANs bioepoxy resin would allow manufacturing a new class of enduring prepregs8, as cured 
prepreg sheets that could still be valid for the fabrication of multilayered composite parts. These makes them processable 
at room temperature and via a thermoforming process, making thermosets more accessible for high volume production 
manufacturing technologies (technical disruption). 
2) CANs have been demonstrated to be excellent bonding-debonding materials9,10. By inducing a controlled trigger external 
stimulus, the change in the polymer topology allows the separation of the structural formats, which combined with chemical 
and biological catalyst processing permits the recycling of all the components. A second type of vitrimerlike-CANs 
biobased moieties will be designed to be conceptually developed as an adhesive with the aim of taking advantage of their 
debonding selectivity and allow the separation of the intermediate formats conforming the final products. In this sense the 
separation between thermoplastics (PLA and bioPA) and thermoset/wood surfaces occurred under a controlled conditions 
permitting its circularity, recyclability and reusability of components (technical disruption). 
The project methodology is designed in a way it is not significantly harming any of the six environ mental objectives of the EU 
Taxonomy Regulation. More details are elaborated in Table 6: Bio-Uptake contribution to DNSH Objectives. 
▪ R&I maturity 
Table 3: Bio-Uptake R&I Maturity 
R&I activity  Maturity: Start TRL→Final TRL 
Transforming 
Commercial Biobased 
Pellets into Self-
Reinforced Filaments 
(SRF) and microfibrillar 
bi-component 
structures SO2, SO4 
TRL 3 →TRL 5: This concept will start developing filaments based on different grades of PLA, 
combining high melting and low melting grades. Then the Knowledge developed will be transferred 
to bi -component biopolymer structures  (using structures of PLA in a PCL matrix) using in -line 
monitoring during extrusion to have a precise control of the micro-structure (with the heat deflection 
temperature of the fibre above the melting temperature of the matrix). Tests will span from lab (CTB, 
hundreds of grams for characterisation ) to pilot scale demonstration (COM, kg scale for 
thermoplastic sheet formats demo-case validations). 
Research & 
development of 
biobased intermediate 
structural formats 
SO1, SO2, SO4 
TRL 4 →TRL 6: By using forming technology, COM will selectively order the developed hybrid 
fibres processed in a press-moulding process to obtain two types of thermoplastic biobased formats: 
unidirectional tapes and thermoplastic organosheets  without losing mechanical properties 
(optimization of prototypes will be carried out using PLA and PLA/PCL to obtain from 5-10 units/each 
for fully characterization to 100 units/each for validation purposes).  AIT will optimise and upscale 
the production of thermoplastic pellets bas ed on bioPA  short lignin-based fibres via extrusion -
compounding (1-5 kg for characterization) prior selecting the best formulation (at least 1 per type of 
matrix) for upscaling demonstration purposes (about 100-200 kg for demo case validation). CID will 
develop and manufacture pre -impregnate biobased thermoset organosheets based on dynamic 
bioepoxy and flax reinforcemnts. Endured pre-preg sheet samples ( 1-2 m2) for characterisation 
purposes, and the best combination will be upscaled for demonstration purposes (about 100 m2). 
Research on conformal 
manufacturing 
technologies to develop 
final bio-composite 
products 
SO1, SO2, SO5, SO6 
TRL5 →TRL6: Ceilings for bathroom pods based on smart endured pre -preg composites  
(bioepoxy-flax) will be demonstrated through thermoset-thermoforming by POD. Feet orthopaedics 
will be demonstrated by COM via press-forming, with freedom operability by using combinations of 
UDT and thermoplastic organosheets. Finally, MOS will manufacture container lids, using as 
reinforcing structure the thermoplastic organosheets in combination of the biobased pellets via over-
injection moulding (press -forming with the mould and injection of molten bioplastic in a one -shot 
process). Optimization of the conformal manufacturing processes (machine level) and quality control 
will be carried out At least 25 final parts of each demonstrator will be produced for validation. 
 
8 3R concept: CID EP2949679A1 patent and building on top of ECOXY project. In addition, precursors for bioepoxy  thermoset resins coming from DGEVA 
developed by SP under ECOXY project will be used as SoA biopoexy resin for 3R modifications. 
9 VIBES project ‘Improving recyclability of thermoset  Composite materials through a greener recycling technology  Based on rever sible biobased bonding 
materials’ —  Grant 101023190 — VIBES — H2020-BBI-JTI-2020 
10 NJ.Van Zee et al. Vitrimers: Permanently crosslinked polymers with dynamic network topology. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2020;104:101233 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    6 
Sensorization of critical 
manufacturing 
processes to design 
new in-line 
characterization 
methods. 
SO1, SO3 
TRL5 → TRL6: Sensorization based on Lab-on-Plant concept (bringing laboratory characterization 
technologies into manufacturing processes via adapted sensors for in -line monitoring. 
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) and Spectral reflectance in probe mode will be tested by IRI to monitor 
the curing process of t hermoset organosheets manufacturing . For the thermoplastic fibres and 
sheets, spectroscopic techniques such as NIR, RAMAN, LIBS and XRF to monitor the polymeric 
structures will be used to conceptualise a hardware inline sensor system that will be implement ed 
at CTB facilities. The crystallinity of the polymer extruded will be monitored applying using the Visum 
Palm monitoring system (infrared spectroscopy characterization & chemical composition analysis) 
Simulation FESEM 
adapted to biobased 
composites SO1, SO3 
TRL5 → TRL6: simulation from an existing predictive model (CADMOULD for injection moulding 
and TSIM for thermoforming) and adapt it to the requirements of the biobased materials used in Bio-
Uptake. Currently there is no model as such for biomaterials. 
Development of a 
digital communication 
architecture for 
interoperability between 
manufacturing systems 
SO1, SO3 
TRL4 → TRL5: Bio-Uptake will focus in connecting product and process lifecycles for a flexible and 
more accurate solution for the manufacturing of novel recircu lated bio -based products with 
increased serviceability by reusing and remanufacturing. Interoperability and connectivity for data 
exchange will be based on the Reference Architecture Model for Industry 4.0 (RAMI), by relying on 
OPC-UA protocol for machine-to-machine connectivity, and process monitoring, and AutomationML 
for modelling and data exchange definition. 
Research related to the 
development and 
integration of CANs 
SO6, SO7 
TRL 4 →TRL 5: SP & CID will develop biobased 3R -CAN moieties  for enduring pre -pegs by 
replicating the concept developed under ECOXY project but substituting non-biobased moieties for 
biobased ones and enhancing the thermo-mechanical stability. Pilot manufacturing of the 3R-CANs 
will be produced and characterized (WP2) to cover enough quantities for demo-case validations and 
circularity evaluation (from 50metres up to 500metres of prepreg). 
TRL3→ TRL5: ad-hoc CAN for bonding-debonding adhesive. SP will design and manufacture the 
reversible bonding agents (based on their own potfolio moieties). SP will apply CAN technology to 
favour the separation plastic formats made of different plastic nature (combinations of PLA/PCL, 
bioepoxy/wood) from lab scale (10-20 g) to pilot scale 500g-1Kg of the best candidate/s. 
Demonstrate de-
manufacturing for 
debonding components 
to ease the 
regeneration of 
products SO7 
TRL4 → TRL5: AIT with the support of SP, will collaborate to define and test the best activation 
stimuli to motivate the debonding of CANs and test the easiness to dismantle of the composite 
components for further reuse and regeneration of products. Thermal technologies (IR; UV light, 
convection heating in oven) will be tested at pilot level to evaluate process efficiency, environmental 
and cost up scalability. Industrial end-users in cooperation with SIM will work on the eco-design of 
the final products and look for industrial symbiosis circularity.  
1.2. Methodology 
▪ Overall methodology 
1. CONCEPTS, MODELS AND ASSUMPTIONS underpinning the work: 
 
Fig. 2: Bio-Uptake Concept 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    7 
Bio-Uptake project presents a holistic solution to resolve  a sustainable scale production of green products based on bio -based 
materials and that are circular by design (promoting reuse, remanufacturing and recycling of components), thus, favouring a green 
transition to build a truly sustainable manufacturing ind ustry. The project aims at establishing new manufacturing processes for 
biobased materials and the overall concept is based on the most relevant key points: 
✓ Design and develop intermediate formats based on biobased polymers (PLA, bioPA and bioepoxy) and vegetal fibres (flax, 
lignin-based Carbon Fibre  and recycled wood).  Modify those polymeric resins with dynamic chemicals (CANs) to make 
thermosets composites reshapeable (3R disulphide vitrimers) and the inte rphase between combination of different 
thermoplastic components easy to split (reversible adhesive) to recover clean flows of materials and formats to be reused or 
recycle. 
✓ In depth characterisation of biobased materials to be used in the manufacturing processing will be applied. Comparison of 
TDS (theoretical material behaviour) with in-line monitoring data (real material behaviour during manufacturing process) of 
the most critical manufacturing steps will be carried out to avoid structural defects that may affect the final quality of the end-
product. 
✓ To match in-line sensor data with ad-hoc process modelling to evaluate the impact of a variable in the quality criteria in the 
manufacturing processes. The software tool is able to assess which is for a pre-selected material: the best solution based on 
the product design, the specifications of the manufacturing process, (Decision Support System) and guide the product 
designers for example in the wt% load of fibres, length or orientation, as well as potential combinations between different 
plastic resins (e.g. during the over-injection process).  
✓ Design of final products (demo cases) considering remanufacturing by applying circular principles by design. Bio-Uptake final 
products are conceived as the combination of intermediate formats, which are the core structure of those final products. The 
eco-design of the sandwich panels for bathroom pods (construction value chain), feet insole orthopaedics (medical value 
chain) and lids for containers (tertiary packaging) will be based on a product design that will include final product requirements 
as well as guidelines for product dismantling /de-manufacture for its reuse into the same or new regenerated products 
(industrial symbiosis principles will be applied among the three selected sectors in the project. However, other potential 
products in the same sector and even other sectors of application will not be excluded). 
✓ To make the data of the  whole manufacturing pilot line interoperable and to create data-based models (virtual) of the 
manufacturing process, so that the data obtained from the different stages of the overall process -engineering and process 
data- can be correlated by using AI to improve the design a final product with a biobased material and to provide the required 
quality aiming at a zero defects process. 
 
2. OVERALL PROJECT METHODOLOGY 
The overall methodology followed in the project is divided in 4 main blocks aiming at accelerating the twin green and digital 
transitions to succeed in building a sustainable manufacturing process for biobased materials . The same methodology will be 
applied to each value chain, adapted to its particularities as described in Table 4. Key efforts and activities are dedicated to: 
1. Materials (develop and validate b iobased materials alternatives from different nature , understand and contribute to their 
standards, taking into account safety and health issues for workers and end-users) 
2. Manufacturing Processes (overcoming technical and digitalization challenges to pave the way for a sustainable and smart 
manufacturing value chain per selected sector and its process replication) 
3. Product (demonstrate the functional validation in comparison with current benchmark while ensuring  circularity by design: 
including eco -design principles and sustainable end-of-life practices for remanufacturing an d recycling ). The synergistic 
potential of composite materials will be multiplied by the possibility of combining different composite formats to pave 
the way for the integration of this kind of bio-based materials in large-scale production sectors. 
4. Contributions to the European industry competitiveness and social welfare: by developing sustainable business models 
that looks over the environment and the creation of new jobs (alignment to the Green Deal). 
 
1 – Materials: In-depth understanding and control of the biobased materials including material sourcing and recycling 
Full characterisation of all the materials to be used in the project. It is important to remark that there are four types of biobased 
materials feedstocks/sources:  
a. Commercial grades and fibres : PLA (Total Corbion), PCL ( Ingevity/BASF), bioPA ( Arkema/Natureplast), Flax 
(Flips&Doobels) used with a double objective: 
i. To define a protocol for the adequate reception, storage and use of commercial materials as well as a consolidated 
characterisation protocol that enables to introduce all the input data required for the manufacturing stages. 
Currently, there exits lack of  material performance and variations in the manufacturing conditions from batch to 
batch of a same material grade that deviate the real operational conditions respect from their technical data-sheets. 
ii. To increase the biobased content  of current petro -based products highly accepted in the market due to their 
functional behaviour (such as the case of PCL in medicine applications) - CTB 
b. Innovative materials designed and produced by own Bio-Uptake partners as result and in collaboration of other EU 
projects: BioEpoxy resin (SP/CID - ECOXY), Biobased Carbon Fibre (LIM-VIBES/LIBRE). 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    8 
Batches are smaller and reproducibility has to be controlled. A characterisation protocol will be defined and followed. In 
this way Bio-Uptake aims at boosting to a pre-commercial stage SMEs and results coming from EU funded programmes.  
c. Recyclates: materials that are biobased but are recycled flows coming from other industrial by -processes. These are 
currently considered contaminants in their own value chain but are considered new feedstock for other value chains 
instead (boosting industrial symbiosis with local resources): wood dust coming from the manufacturing of furniture made 
of recycled wood (kindly provided by FINSA). 
d. Novel multifunctional materials based on combinations of the previous three categories modified with CANs (dual 
functionality). This will modify the rheology and thermal behaviour of the plastics containing them and therefore it is a 
must to ensure a proper characterisation method and identifying critical properties which will have to be monitored and 
controlled during the manufacturing process (SP-AIT in MANDALA/VIBES). 
Identification and alignment to current standards: In case of identifying a lack of coverture in the materials´ characterization 
protocols, define correction measures and bring them to the appropriate standardization group (UNE). 
2- Manufacturing Processes: Setting up the manufacturing pilot lines. 
A detailed description of the unit processes and identification of critical process parameters will be defined. The manufacturing 
processes have been divided into the technologies required to produce the intermediate formats and the final products . In 
addition, the monitoring status and main part defects will be analysed  in advance and depending on the mature of each 
selected technology, specific needs will have to be addressed regarding technical and digitisation challenges. Some are 
dedicated to adapting the tooling and hardware stages of the manufacturing line itself and others to control the structure of 
the material in-line by introducing monitoring sensors that provide real data regarding the transformation process in order to 
take the most of the biomaterial used:  
a. Solving operational technology challenges (IRI): In-line monitoring (machine vision and spectroscopic techniques) 
will be implemented in low mature technologies (extrusion of fibrils and self -reinforced fibres, obtaining intermediate 
biobased thermoplastic organosheets using the self -reinforced fibres, thermoset enduring pre-pregs) in order to reach 
high control of the critical parameters that will provide the high -tech performance quality to the intermediate formats 
above described. This mon itoring will allow to establish correlations with already lab -test characterised materials and 
correct or give indications to the operator to correct the variables of the process, making the process more robust.  
For those technologies considered as high mature technologies (extrusion-compounding, injection -moulding and 
thermoforming) it will be necessary to slightly adapt and optimise the manufacturing process, peripherals and process 
parameters for biobased materials. However, there is no need to impleme nt further in-line monitoring systems as the 
machines used are highly monitored (termocouples, pressure probes, torque control, easy -going user -machine 
interface…and it is more important to ensure data interoperability and provide staff skills qualificatio n (different 
challenges should be overcome). 
b. Solving information technology challenges to boost the use of biobased materials in the selected manufacturing 
processes: Collection of data from the different characterization equipment’s and manufacturing machines to make the 
data “open” allowing interoperability - end-to-end smart algorithm – (AIM) and adapt them to feed the “virtual line” so 
called digital threa d. Real data will serve to feed simulation libraries for over -injection moulding and thermoforming 
technologies in terms of materials behaviour and quality criteria in order to let them extrapolate data and simulate the 
design of new biobased products  (validated in the demonstration selected products: feet orthopaedics, ceilings for 
modular bathrooms and lids for trash containers). Bio-Uptake will support the component design through the numerical 
simulation of the manufacturing process (collaborative data management framework). 
3 – Product: challenges associated to product design, technical validation & environmental performance 
a. Eco-design of the product, considering the type, format and materials used (biobased content) that conforms the final 
product, the assembling and disassembling /de-manufacturing of the components  (AIT). Once the monitoring and 
digitalisation of the processes is finished, the algorithm designed to establish the digital twin will be able to match 
experimental data and extrapolated computer data (coming from process simulation that uses mathematical models 
describing the physics behind each process– SIM) finding and correcting deviations. In this way the initial design will be 
adapted to the new biobased and regenerated materials (using remanufactured parts). Therefore, a supporting tool for 
screening diffe rent designs  and materials based on the new libraries created with Bio-Uptake biobased plastic 
components will be created. This tool will aid industry in next-generation product design. 
b. Validation of the functional performance and end-of-life of the demo-product according to each sector and alignment 
to applicable standards (construction - POD, medicine - COM and packaging - MOS). Concerning the product end-of-
life, the innovations implemented regarding CANs to ensure a proper decommissioning, separation and remanufacturing 
or recycling of the components will be carried out (task 5.4). In case of identifying a lack of coverture in the quality and 
validation protocols, Bio-Uptake partners will define  correction measures and bring them to the appropri ate 
standardization group (UNE). Cooperation with other EU initiatives will be seek too to share and enrich results (task 6.5). 
c. Measure the  impact regarding the environmental and cost perspective for the manufacturing of the new and 
regenerated products: LCA and LCC assessment (LIM, task 1.2) 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    9 
d. Activities aimed at paving the way for the commercialization. Developing sustainable business models for the new 
biobased products by developing an exploitation strategy covering the following steps (AIT): 
i. Definition of Bio-Uptake project results and IPRs identification. 
ii. Identification of Key Exploitable Results 
iii. Definition of the consortium exploitation strategy 
iv. Study about the Replication potential of the manufacturing processes into new sectors. 
v. Industry engagement  activities dedicated to attracting potential customers (dedicated workshops and 
customised meetings to listen their needs and match Bio-Uptake solutions to them). 
4 – Industry & Society: transversal actions that have an impact in the human dimension and the uptake of biobased products 
a. Training programme: aiming at boosting human capital by teaching at academic and vocational levels within the Bio-
Uptake training plan (WP1 – task1.4, LIM).  
i. Industry workforce: to create and transfer  knowledge to the European industry about circular economy and 
sustainable manufacturing, generating skilled workforce capable of using and implementing biomaterial-based 
and digital manufacturing activities. 
ii. Academic students (scientists and engineers): the goal is the development of a training programme to provide 
knowledge to European students in the main disciplines involved in the project,  namely: materials science, 
engineering, and chemical fields…(STEM) teaching them new skills for new arising demand in technical jobs 
(to boost the breeding ground of new talents).  
b) The implementation of a Communication and Dissemination strategy (WP6 - POL): the former one mainly focused on 
the Social Perspective and Policy maker Perspective  and the second one dealing to an open transfer or scientific 
knowledge to peers and strategic industry (exploitation and replication) than can multiply the impact uptake of the project 
(boosting resilience: open-mind and quick adaptation to biomaterials). 
c) Measure the impact of the project in the European industry and society (task 1.2): s-LCA (ISO14040), assessing the 
social and sociological aspects of products, their actual and potential positive as well as negative impacts along the life 
cycle, as well as health and safety issues. The elaborated indicators (e.g. number of jobs created) will be linked to impact 
categories (e.g. local employment) which are related to five main stakeholder groups (e.g., [i] worker, [ii] consumer, [iii] 
local community, [iv] society and [v] value chain actors). 
The above-described methodology is applied to create three manufacturing process that can be applied to demonstrate its 
feasibility and sustainability in each of the selected value chains. If it is applied to the pecul iarities of each type of material, we 
can describe a specific method to define and set up each process (described and summarized in the following tables): 
Table 4: Tables explaining the particularities of each demo case or business case 
Construction Value Chain: Demo-Case → Modular ceiling´s for prefabricated bathroom (more than 87% biobased) 
Partners involved in the value chain: SP (bioepoxy provider, adhesive and lab support for characterization), CID (integration 
of 3R-CANs and set up of flax fabric pre -impregnation pilot line, end-of-life), POD (construction end -user, thermoforming of 
pre-preg organosheet into ceiling structures for bathrooms), IRI ( in-line monitoring precise control of curing stage), SIM 
(thermoforming modelling of final product). 
Materials used for the demo-case: Biobased Epoxy Resin (doped with 3R-CANs) + Flax Fibre + Wood basal core 
CID has developed an innovative and ground-breaking based epoxy resin system 
(patent application number EP14382184 8.1, 2014), by using a dynamic and 
reversible cross -linking system based on a  diamine hardener containing a 
reversible aromatic disulphide bond in substitution to traditional diamines. The use 
of this resin in the manufacture of composite materials allows the development of 
reprocessable, recyclable and repaira ble (3R) thermoset composite materials. 
DGEBA epoxy matrix was used by CID to manufacture carbon fibre-reinforced 3R 
composites 11,12 and, in a more recent work 13, CID used fully bio -based epoxy 
resins developed by SP (diglycidyl ether of vanillyl alcohol (DGEVA) and 
phloroglucinol tris epoxy (PHTE) for the preparation of taylor -made epoxy resin 
matrices to be used in fibre reinforced polymer composites (FRPCs).  Initial 
biobased content of the resin will be of 65% (ECOXY SoA). SP will also work on a 
biobased alternative to 4-AFD hardener to increase the biocontent value over 85%. 
 
11 De Luzuriaga, A.R., et al. Epoxy resin with exchangeable disulfide crosslinks to obtain reprocessable, repairable and recyclable fiber-reinforced thermoset 
composites. Mater. Horiz. 2016, 3, 241. 
12 De Luzuriaga, A.R.,et al.. Correction: Epoxy resin with exchangeable disulfide crosslinks to obtain reprocessable, repairable and recyclable fiber-reinforced 
thermoset composites. Mater. Horiz. 2020, 7, 2460. 
13 Genua, A.; et al.. Build-To-Specification Vanillin and Phloroglucinol Derived Biobased Epoxy-Amine Vitrimers. Polymers 2020, 12, 2645. 
 
Fig. 3: a) Prepreg sheets of fully cured 3R 
epoxy resin with 50 v% of GF prior (left) and 
after being hot-pressed (right). 
b) Prepreg sheets of fully cured reference 
epoxy resin with 50 v% of GF prior (left) and 
after being hot-pressed (right). 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    10 
Manufacturing technologies: intermediate formats Thermoset Organosheet → Flax Fabric pre-impregnated in Biobased 
Epoxy – 3R CANs resin: new class of enduring  prepregs that can be prepared as totally cured prepregs (not be ing on a B-
stage) and are able to be stored at room temperature (either in rolls, sheets or tapes) and still be appropriate to produce 
multilayered composite parts . Set -Up of a semi -automated pre-impregnation line + the final product  thermoforming of 
endured-organosheets for obtaining a multi -layered biobased composite sandwich panel, with a wood balsa core to provide 
certain flexibility and insulation. The wood core will be sprayed with bonding-debonding adhesive. 
 
Fig. 4: Technologies that conforms the thermoset production process, including its intermediate and end products  
Main Validation tests of demo product according to identified Standards : ISO 9001:2008 processes for enduring line. 
For panel: ISO 178 three point bending tests; fire properties D-s2,d0, ISO 5660-1 Cone Calorimeter and EN ISO 11925-2 small 
flame test and EN 13823 Single Burning Item; emission tested ISO 16000-3:2011(Indoor air - Part 3).  
End-of-life scenario pursued: Separation of basal core from organosheet to facilitate their refurbishment and remanufacturing 
thanks to debonding properties of the adhesive (concept based on MANDALA project results).  The thermoset based  
organosheet contains Associative CANs (3R), by applying heat (over the commutation point) and pressure (via thermoforming) 
the organosheets can be reshaped into a new intermediate to be used as component in a biobased regenerated product.  
Digitalization pursued: In-line monitoring to determine the curing level of the developed pre-preg through Hyperspectral 
imaging (HSI) and Spectral R eflectance (SR) in probe mode of the intermediate formats (low mature technology). These 
technologies have been recently used to monitor changes in polymer chemical structures due to temperature stimulation14,15. 
Simulation support: setting up the thermoset pilot line and interoperability among units (digital threat - AIM). Pre-impregnated 
unit: A chemometric model will be developed  (mathematical modelling) and predictions about the degree of curing will be 
obtained. A software intended to process the data and deliver the results by applying machine learning algorithms to improve 
the accuracy of the results will be developed. Thermoforming unit: Results from pre-impregnated unit will feed new material 
libraries required to run simulations for the final thermoforming unit (TSIM software). Remanufacture unit: material modelling 
and set-up of the innovative digital platform for the production of reusable & recyclable thermoset products.  
 
Medical Value Chain: Demo Case → Feet Orthopaedics – medical insoles (more than 75% biobased) 
Partners involved in the value chain : LIM (characterisation laboratory support), CTB (fibres and fabrics, end-of-life), COM 
(upscaling fibres, manufacture of thermoplastic organosheets and free forming of ad -hoc feet orthopaedics), IRI (in -line 
monitoring), SIM (thermoplastic modelling of final product via thermoforming technology). 
Materials used fo r the demo -case: This value chain is conceived to increase the use of biobased content (PLA) in 
applications in which a non -biobased material is highly installed (PCL). P olycaprolactone is considered one of the most 
competitive polymers  in the medical sector due to its high mechanical properties  (toughness) and biocompatibility. More 
recently PLA has been considered for the fabrication of devices that are under constant tensile stress and high elongation for 
the biomedical sector  although its major disadvantage is brittlen ess and low thermal stability 16. PCL (ductile and semi -
crystalline hydrophobic) is compatible to PLA 17  and has been demonstrated to complement it by increasing the mechanical 
performance18   in medical applications such as orthopaedics, scaffolds, implants, fixation…  
Manufacturing technologies: intermediate formats: needs two stages: 1) melt-spinning to produce the filament yarns (100% 
biobased PLA monocomponent or self-reinforced19 fibres & 50%-80% biobased bicomponent PLA/PCL reinforced fibres 
based on microfibrillar structures ) and 2) continuous pressing to consolidate the desired organosheets  (a few layers with 
different direction fibre orientation) and unidirectional tapes (same fibre orientation).  
 
14 Bleszynski, Monika; et al. Visualizing Polymer Damage Using Hyperspectral Imaging. Polymers, 2020, 12(9), 2071 
15 Inga Niedermaier, et al. Quantification and classification in process analytic s using hyperspectral imaging,"Proc. SPIE 11144, Photonics and Education in 
Measurement Science 2019, 1114409 
16 Su S, Kopitzky R et al (2019) Polylactide (PLA) and its blends with poly (butylene succinate)(PBS): A brief review. Polymers 11:1193.  
17 Christopher K. et al (2017), Chapter 19 - Polymer Design and Development, Biology and Engineering of Stem Cell Niches, Academic Press,  Pages 295-
314, ISBN 9780128027349, 
18 Sundar, N.; et al (2020). Dual purpose, bio-based polylactic acid (PLA)-polycaprolactone (PCL) blends for coated abrasive and packaging industrial coating 
applications. Journal of Polymer Research, 27(12), 386 
19 Chengcheng et al (2012). Progress in polymer science, Vol. 37, 6, P 767-780 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    11 
.  
Fig. 5: Technologies that conforms the thermoplastic production process for high customization products: intermediate formats stage  
The final product : the intermediates  will be used to make insole prosthetics by press-moulding (heat-moldable - 
thermoforminglike). The sheets will be cut -to-size and shape for the creation of multi -ply laminates selectively reinforcement 
where the simulation designs consider best. 
 
Fig. 6: Technologies that conforms the thermoplastic production process for high customization products: end-product stage  
Main Validation tests according to identified Standards: EN ISO 2062 to determine the single-end breaking force and the 
elongation at break. For the final product: matching the performance of the current orthosis done by FILLAUER client and have 
to pass their inhouse (mechanical & thermal) testing & when approved it will be sent for patient testing which takes 12 months. 
End-of-life scenario pursued: Insoles may have 3 different end-of-life approaches, Bio-Uptake assesses on the best choice:  
a) Monocomponent PLA: recycling (milled and directly used for injection -moulding purposes, re -melted into pellet s and 
converted back to microfibrillar reinforced polymer composites).  
b) Bicompponent PLA/PCL: mechanically reprocess the PLA /PCL materials try ing to recreate microfibrilles  for the same 
purpose. Otherwise, it may be chemically recyclable to recover the lactic acid and the caprolactone building blocks. 
Assessed via coordinated activities with ongoing EU projects: MULTICYCLE / VIBES /DECOAT 
c) Both polymers are compostable under industrial conditions (hydrolytic & enzymatic degradation - ISO EN 14995: 2007) 
Digitalization pursued: In-line monitoring technologies: The distribution of the fibrils in the matrix will be monitored to control 
the quality of the produced materials. Information will be obtained by (1) machine vision applied to the to the produced 
samples; and (2) spectroscopic techniques to characterize the composition of the materials.  
Simulation support: Artificial Intelligence (AI) analysis will be used to improve the chemometrics discrimination and machine 
learning algorithms applied to determine the distribution  of the microfibrils inside the matrix. A library for this material will be 
created and simulation trials for thermoforming will be done (adapting the TSIM software)  using the eco-designs for the foot 
insoles. Updates on the libraries when using recycled PLA will be set -up too, and deviations from neat PLA (if any) obtained 
and corrected for improving the quality of future regenerated products. 
Packaging Value Chain: Demo Case → Lid for garbage container (99% biobased) 
Partners involved in the value chain: SP (CAN-adhesive designed for bioPA/PLA thermoplastic), AIT (Pellets development, 
end-of-life validation and circularity); CTB & CO M (organosheets production), MOS (garbage lid over -injection moulding and 
product validation), SIM (over-injection simulation), AIM (data collection & interoperability), IRI (in-line monitoring) 
Materials used for the demo-case: This value chain will use commercial and recycled PLA20 (from organosheet reused) and 
bioPA (Natureplast - NP BioPA1010-201, 100% biobased). This PLA/bioPA will be reinforced with lignin derivates: biobased 
short Carbon Fiber 21 (TPU-lignin) and wood dust coming from discarded stages of the recycling of furniture  (FINSA 
stakeholder). Pellets for injection-moulding will be developed (these natural fibres will act as impact absorbers, noise mitigation, 
enhance mechanical performance and provide nicer aesthetical finishing)22-24. In addition, a biobased reversible adhesive will 
be used for debonding overinjected parts of bioPA from structural PLA organosheet, allowing to disassemble targeted 
prototypes and enable the remanufacture and recycling of each independent components. 
 
20 Peinado V, et al. Effect of Extrusion on the Mechanical and Rheological Properties of a Reinforced Poly(Lactic Acid): Reproce ssing and Recycling of 
Biobased Materials. Materials (Basel). 2015;8(10):7106-7117.  
21 M Culebras, et al. Biobased structurally compatible polymer blends based on lignin and thermoplastic elastomer polyurethane as carbon fiber precursors. 
ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 6 (7), 8816-8825 
22 Aparna,S., et al Effect of short CF content and water absorption on tensile and impact properties of PA6/PP blend based composites. Polym Compos. 2020. 
23 Ahmad, H., et al. A review of carbon fiber materials in automotive industry. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 2020,971, 032011. 
24 Peltola, H., et al. Wood based PLA and PP composites: Effect of fibre type and matrix polymer on fibre morphology, dispersion and composite prope rties. 
Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 2014, 61, 13–22. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    12 
Manufacturing technologies: intermediate formats:1) optimising the extrusion-compounding of pellets (wt% loading, fibre 
length and shape, adapt shear profile25  configuration and dosage position26.…) and 2) continuous pressing to consolidate the 
desired PLA self-reinforced organosheets.  
The final product: injection-moulding process by using the PLA organosheet as a structural component. By warming-up the 
organosheet over the material Tg (55ºC) with an Infrared light lamp system , spray the adhesive at ≈same temperature  and 
immediately afterwards locate the s oft organosheet inside the mould. The mould clamps and by pressure confers the final 
preform-shape to the laminate while the adhesive cures. In a second step via over-injection of melted bioPA blends will confer 
the final functional and aesthetical features. Supercritical fluids will be introduced (Mu Cell® technology) to foam the internal 
layer. In this way a lightweight but robust structure will be achieved.  
 
 
Fig. 7: Technologies that conforms the thermoplastic production process for large volume products: intermediate and end -product stage 
Main Validation tests according to identified Standards:  European Directive 2000/14/EC. 92,0 db: noise emission 
outdoors; EN 840:2021: Installations and equipment for waste disposal and treatment ( In particular: 840 -1: Dimensions & 
Design and 840-5: Performance requirements and test methods). ISO 14006 Ecodesign. 
End-of-life scenario pursued: Separation of multimaterial components by inducing a control warm-up to demonstrate CANs 
reversibility (adhesive) and be able to separate the over-injected plastic from the organosheet structure  (peeling-like). The 
separated materials can be either recycled for the same purpose (re -melted and extruded into pe llets) but also other 
remanufacturing purposes will be seek (e.g. for urban furniture products and insulating facades ).  Wether the properties are 
too low, bioPA monomers could be recovered via solvolysis: cooperating with POLYNSPIRE - PA solvolysis recycling process. 
Caprolactone obtained from recycled lids and packaging could be also used for polymerizing PCL for the medial value chain. 
Digitalisation: In-line monitoring : organosheets monitored as explained in the medical value chain; while high mature 
technologies such as extrusion-compounding of pellets and over-injection moulding are already considered smart technologies 
with enough self -monitoring pro forject purposes. However, a  spectral temperature camera  for continuously control the 
temperature of the organosheet during its over Tg heating will be used to ensure achieving high conforming and good wetting 
with the adhesive layer and the melted bioPA. Simulation support:  New libraries for injection -moulding grades of the 
biopolymers developed will be inserted in CADMOULD software. The PLA organosheets materials will be included too for the 
overinjection module as well as the adhesive layer.  
 
▪ Innovation activities feeding the project 
The main national and international research and  innovation activities whose results directly feeds Bio-Uptake and that can be 
considered as the unique state of the art of the consortium  has been collected in the following table. The established link is 
highlighted in blue: 
Table 5: research and innovation activities whose results will feed into Bio-Uptake 
Project [Date & Partners] Key contribution to Bio-Uptake 
VIBES: Improving recyclability of 
thermoset composite materials 
through a greener recycling 
technology based on reversible 
biobased bonding materials. 
(H2020-BBI-JTI-2020; 
GA101023190). [2021-2025; AIT 
(coord), SP, LIM] 
VIBES aims at developing biobased covalent adaptable network materials (D-A, vitrimers 
and supramolecular architecture) of different nature for industrial applications 
(construction, naval, aeronautical) to separate thermoset resins from fibres. Within Bio-
Uptake project, this concept is going to be adapted to be used in the interphase between 
thermosets and thermoplastics, providing a sustainable end-of-life in the separation and 
circularity of the components (intermediate formats) conforming the final biobased 
products.  
MANDALA: The transition of 
Multilayer/multipolymer packaging 
into more sustainable 
MANDALA aims t o develop new adhesives with dual functionality (easy to split and 
barrier properties) with increased biobased and recycled content for multilayer packaging 
(PUR adhesives ) that allows the separation of  multilayer flexible packaging. The 
 
25 Hopmann,C, et al. Method for the Validation of Simulated Mixing Characteristics of Two Dynamic Mixers in Single-Screw Extrusion. Polymers 2020,12,2234. 
26 Imre B, et al. Reactive compatibilization of plant polysaccharides and biobased polymers: Review on current strategies, expectations and reality. Carbohydr 
Polym. 2019;209:20-37.  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    13 
multilayer/single polymer products 
for the food and pharma sectors 
through the development of 
innovative functional adhesives. 
(H2020-BBI-JTI-2018-GA837715) 
[2019- 2023; AIT (coord)] 
knowledge developed has demonstrated the feasibility to separate thermoplastic 
materials of different nature to increase plastic recyclability. As it is in the upscaling phase 
for the delamination technology, Bio-Uptake will take advantage of the technologies used 
to activate the debonding mechanisms that induces delamination (IR, UV, convection…), 
to be a starting point for piloting and upscaling the separation of the final product 
components. 
ECOXY: Biobased, recyclable,  
reshapable & repairable (3R) fibre 
reinforced thermoset composites . 
(H2020-BBI-JTI-2016-GA744311) 
[2017-2020; SP, AIT, CID (coord)] 
ECOXY develops biobased epoxy resins and fibre reinforcements to produce new 
sustainable thermoset composites  (based on 3R -vitrimer technology) . In Bio-Uptake 
project the acquired knowledge and the optimized bio-based 3R resin formulation will be 
adapted and upscaled to  the new applications and manufacturing technologies. This 
manufacturing line will allow to get enduring prepreg sheets at different curing stages. 
These sheets will be layed-up and thermoformed for obtaining a multi-layered composite. 
BIO4SELF: Biobased self-
functionalised self-reinforced 
composite materials based on 
high performance nanofibrillar 
PLA fibres. (H2020-NMP-GA 
685614), [2016-2019, CTB, COM] 
BIO4SELF aimed at fully biobased self-reinforced polymer composites (SRPC) for non-
clothing applications (automotive & home appliances). The expertise on SRPC will be 
used to develop  biobased thermoplastic self -reinforced organosheets (mono and 
bicomponent): 1) combinations of high melting PLA and low melting PLA ; 2)  the 
combination of PLA and PCL microfribrils will be envisaged. The aid of in-line monitoring 
(IRI) extrusion parameters will suppose a quality gain in the control of the manufacturing 
process which can be adjusted to achieve the best properties for these preforms.  
BIONANOPOLYS: Open 
Innovation Test Bed For 
Developing Safe Nano -enabled 
Bio-based Materials And Polymer 
Bionanocomposites For 
Multifunctional And New 
Advanced Applications 
(H2020- NMBP- GA953206) 
[2021-2024; IRI] 
BIONANOPOLYS creates a network of pilot plants and complementary services to speed 
up the introduction of biobased nano-enabled materials into the market through a Single-
Entry Point . Within Bio-Uptake project, advanced monitoring systems for the 
manufacturing of biobased int ermediate products ( crystallinity of microfibrils that 
composed the fibres for organosheets and curing grade of endured pre-pregs) will be 
designed and implemented in order to provide accurate and reliable compositional 
information. Machine vision applied  to the produced samples  and spectroscopic 
techniques to characterize the composition of the materials  will be tailored to the 
manufacturing stages . AI analysis will be used to improve the chemometrics 
discrimination and machine learning algorithms. In addition, surveillance on derived novel 
standards & certification schemes in biobased materials will be transferred to Bio-Uptake. 
INTEGRADDE: Intelligent data -
driven pipeline for the 
manufacturing of certified metal 
parts through Direct Energy 
Deposition processes 
(H2020-FoF-GA820776):  
[2018-2023; AIM] 
This project develops a new manufacturing methodology capable of ensuring the 
manufacturability, reliability, flexibility and quality of a target metal component from initial 
product design. The main input of INTEGRADDE to Bio-Uptake will be the use of 
AutomationML as an inter operable and neutral format, providing data exchange in the 
CAx (CAD/CAE/CAPP/CAM) dataflow. The concept of INTEGRADDE aiming at the 
combination of design and multi -scale simulation and modelling for an  optimal 
manufacturing strategy, will be replicated in  Bio-Uptake to demonstrate the 
interoperability and digitalization of the manufacturing value chains, ensuring a smooth 
and trustful transition for biobased materials. 
ACAPULCO : 
fAbriCation rApide d’emP reinte 
d’oUtiLlage d’injeCtiOn 
French national fund Fonds 
Unique Interminesteriel) 
[2017-2020; SIM] 
ACAPULCO has enabled to work on innovative moulds and to adapt SIM simulation 
software to the needs of new processes and materials. In this sense, th e methodology 
developed will be applied in Bio-Uptake project, in order to adapt the simulation 
programmes of thermoforming and injection-moulding manufacturing technologies to the 
biobased materials and intermediate formats particularities. The behaviour laws suitable 
for these types of materials  will be integrated into the software tools (CADMOULD and 
TSIM), building these competences in the simulation of bio-based materials. 
 
In addition to the previous list, there are other national and international projects that are also relevant for Bio-Uptake State-of-
the-art, from which results will also feed this project. These have been aligned to the key disciplines involved in Bio-Uptake: 
• Regarding further developments of biobased materials to be used in Bio-Uptake: LIBRE - Lignin based Carbon Fibres 
for composites (LIM; H2020-BBI-720707); BAMCO - BAmboo long fibre reinforced biobased epoxy Matrix Composites 
(SP, French national fund Fonds Unique Interminesteriel, 2018); PRESERVE - High performance sustainable bio-based 
packaging with tailored end of life and upcycled secondary use : Development of biobased microfibrillar structures in 
packaging applications ( CTB; H2020-NMBP-952983); SEABIOCOMP - Development and demonstrators of durable 
biobased composites for a marine environment (CTB, Interreg2Seas); NXGENWOOD developing polymers, chemicals 
and nutrients from waste forestry materials (LIM, science foundation Ireland 2019PROG704). 
• Regarding the development of CANs and other approaches to makes the materials and products more circular and 
sustainable: CARBO4POWER - New generation of offshore turbine blades with intelligent architectures of hybrid, nano-
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    14 
enabled multi-materials via advanced manufacturing (CID, AIM: H2020-NMBP-953192); AIRPOXY - ThermoformAble, 
repaIrable and bondable smaRt ePOXY based composites for aero structures (CID; H2020-MG-769274);  
• Regarding product end-of-life, materials circularity and LCA assessment: MULTICYCLE (IRI, CTB; H2020-NMBP-
SPIRE-820695); CIRCPACK - Towards circular economy in the plastic packaging value chain (AIT, POL, UNE; H2020-
CIRC- 730423); POLYNSPIRE - Demonstration of Innovative Technologies towards a more efficient and sustainable 
plastic recycling (AIT, H2020-NMBP-ST-IND- 210496601), Development of advanced, prospective LCA for cascading 
bio-based value chains (LIM, ENVISION doctoral training partnership on sustainable wood value chains, 2017)27 
• Regarding advancements in selected manufacturing technologies  including monitoring, simulation and AI to build a 
virtual interoperable twin: ACROBA - AI-Driven Cognitive Robotic Platform for Agile Production environments  (MOS, 
AIT; H2020 – ICT - GA101017284); ); PRESERVE - High performance sustainable bio-based packaging with tailored 
end of life and upcycled secondary use : Advanced monitoring solutions applied to bio-based material focused on the 
new microfibril formation (IRI; H2020-NMBP-952983); SILICONE28 - simulation of elastomers – thermoset resins (SIM, 
French natio nal fund Fonds Unique Interminesteriel ); DIGIPRIME - Digital Platform for Circular Economy  in Cross -
sectorial Sustainable Value Network: pilots for de-and-re manufacturing on composite and polymers (POL, H2020-ICT-
873111). 
▪ Inter-disciplinary approach 
 
Fig. 8: Bio-Uptake Interdisciplinarity along the Value Chain 
Bio-Uptake integrates partners from different disciplines to provide coverage to all the required developments and specifications. 
The entities involved are highly interdisciplinary and complementary. The Bio-Uptake Work Programme is defined in such a way 
that the i nteraction and collaboration among partners is a must in each WP. In this sense, the manufacturing of products with 
biomaterials is quite a new challenge … a new frontier of science is a multidisciplinary research field combining engineering, 
physics, chemi stry, biology, material science, which allow the production of biobased products … that requires to combine 
knowledge from the following fields (more details in Part A of the project proposal, this is just a representative group of PIs):  
• For Operational/Manufacturing work: chemists (Alain Graillot, Alaitz Rekondo, Henning Bak) regarding the plastics discipline, 
material science (Maurice Collins; Pere Castell, Isabel Schrijver) and even biological science (Laura Rodriguez Turiezno) to 
appropriate combine and produce composites and run characterisation protocols (Davy Van Cauwenberghe) and measures 
to enhance the material itself , manufacturing engineers (Lien Van der Schueren , Hans Knudsen, Anne Beaucamp, Iván 
Monzón, José Antonio Dieste ) to modify and optimise the  manufacturing processes, adapt machines, systems and 
peripherals (Baltasar Lodeiro Señaris ), and process operators  (Mikael Söderberg , Therese Berggren ) to carry out the 
production, optimisation of the machine and guide, receive and multiply the training. In addition, the understanding and 
combination of physics, chemists and engineers for the ad-hoc development and integration of in-line monitoring technologies 
(Sara Sanchez, Victor Olmos, Nicola Palombo Blascetta ). These scientific and technological profiles also cover scientific 
publications, patents and contributions to new standards as committee managers (Steffen Jenkel, Fernando Utrilla). 
• For Digitalisation: informatics (Ludovic Potier), mathematics, software engineers (Romain Chaière), I4.0 system, machine 
learning and artificial intelligence engineers (Lucía Alonso, Carlos Gonzalez Val, Lara Baria Besada, David Nettleton) are 
required to understand how to collect the vast amounts of data, design the mathematical algorithms and make the data 
interoperable as well as understandable for the technicians involved in the process. 
• For Circularity and Environmental Science : chemists (Samuel Malburet), experts in logistics ( David Ponce), business and 
product developer (Birgitha Nyström, Peter Lundmark, Raphaël Mosnier) and environmental engineering (David Styles, Ana 
María López Sabirón). 
• For Social Implications: sociologists (Eva Sanchís ), journalists (Lara Escudero ), supervisors (from industrial partners) , 
professors (from academia and RTOs associate professors)  and business developers  (Berta Gonzalvo , Elena Jubete , 
Annabelle Sion) to ensure a proper communication to the different targeted audience (including to reach policy makers and 
the society in general), as well as be able to properly develop a training  programme and finally guide the exploitation and 
have the business vision. 
 
27 http://www.envision-dtp.org/2017/developing-environmentally-sustainable-forestry-value-chains/ 
28 H. Ou, et al. Experimental characterisation and modelling of rheokinetic properties of different silicone elastomers. Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2017) 92:4199-
4211 (Publication from SILICONE project) 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    15 
▪ Social Sciences and Humanities 
Integrating SSH research across European collaborative projects is essential to maximise the returns to society from investment 
in science and technology. Under the list of SSH disciplines, Bio-Uptake project has identified three of them under the category 
of social sciences, education, business and law. In particular, these are related to: i) Social and behavioural sciences; ii) Business 
and administration; and iii) Education science. 
The creation of an effective after-use plastic economy as a main strategy to promote increased recycling rates of polymers directly 
clashes and influences societal behaviour patterns as well as economics. To contribute creating the after-use plastic economy it 
is important to create connections among all stakeholders in the value chain as well as involve society . This target is achieved 
with the c ombination of the consortium partners and project stakeholder´s. Specific activities with the targeted stakeholders 
(WP6), workshops and round-tables will take place to share different perspectives and get feedback to boost the concept and its 
implementation in a real economy.  Moreover, the creation of novel sustainable business models for the manufacturing industry 
and adapted to each of the selected products and sectors in WP5/6 will boost circular loop business, industrial symbiosis, for the 
real deployment of circular solutions (source and end-of-life), even creating new de-manufacturing businesses and job profiles. 
One key relevant point in Bio-Uptake project goals is the development of a training programme to provide knowledge and skills 
to the European industry workforce about the circular economy and digitalisation good practices as well as to European students 
in the materials science, engineering and scientists (mainly STEM  fields) teaching them new skills for new arising demand in 
technical jobs (to boost the breeding ground of new talents). The training activities will be orchestrated by ULI at the academia 
level (researchers and students), with the support of AIT, CTB, AIM and CID at vocational level (industry) inside WP 1. Thus, it 
will be coordin ated by Professor Maurice Collins , from a more scientific perspective and as expert in biobased composite 
materials, in cooperation with Ms. Eva Sanchís ( AIT - graduate in sociology and training & master in emerging methodologies 
and technologies applied to education, e.g. gamification) who will orchestrate the industrial workforce upskilling training. 
▪ Gender Dimension 
The plastic industry is a considerable employer in Europe. The plastics industry gives direct employment to more than 1.6 million 
people in Europe29. Because of the ubiquitous nature of plastic, we are intrinsically linked with plastic in many ways due to our 
assigned gender roles, affecting us through usage, disposal, and through to how it is recycled, depending on cultural and soc ial 
aspects, economic circumstances, and availability30. There is little documented research and knowledge on the specific roles of 
women and men as agents of change in the management, production and usage of chemicals and plastics.  Although workers 
can be exposed to a toxic soup of chemicals found in most plastics industry environments, women are the ones most likely to be 
most concerned about environmental issues or impacts on health from exposures to toxins and therefore are more prepared to 
take action. This is probably due to its relation to biological factors, like effects on the hormonal system, and on menstruation as 
well as pregnancy and breast-feeding. 
Bio-Uptake consortium is aware of the relevant gender and cultural biases and are familiar with gender analysis frameworks that 
address it, being informed about the EU regulation on achieving gender equality across the project, as stipulated in European  
Union Polices Com (96)67, Com (97)497, Com (98)131, and Com (98)112.  Bio-Uptake follows the EU objec tives for gender 
equality in research as expressed by the European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) and has a strong commitment to promote 
gender equality in the execution of the project focusing from two angles: 1) human resources: ensuring gender balance in decision-
making processes and bodies; and 2) content: guaranteeing gender equity in the research and innovation activities of the project 
and at academic level, since women are sometimes underrepresented in research. In this way we aim at narrowing gender gaps 
as a result of the implementation of measures to improve gender equality in Europe, and in particular in the coming bioplasti c 
manufacturing industry. One of the main outputs of Bio-Uptake project in this matter is related to the communication, dissemination 
and training activities in order to boost more women graduating in science degrees, technology, engineering and mathematics 
(STEM) and more woven actively participating in the plastics labour market. 
The Human resources perspective will be tackled in Bio-Uptake by means of a balanced participation, as close as possible to 
50/50, of both men and women in the teams and among the leading roles during the project. This will be followed up throughout 
the entire duration of the Action and reported  to the EC at the end of each period and as requested. Continuing with this, Bio-
Uptake ensures that at least 40% of the underrepresented sex will participate in the decision -making bodies of the project by 
nominating them in steering roles. The consortium shall guarantee the absence of gender bias in the performance of the decision 
makers. Any bias will be reported, discussed, annotated and eliminated. Not only that, the integration of the gender dimensio n 
will be promoted as well in the management procedures during the project. 
The Content perspective shall include the design and activation of appropriate indicators and monitoring, and revisions of th e 
gender perspective for all relevant activities during the General Assembly meetings and in the Periodic Reports. Such indicators 
and their monitoring will be taken into account with special care in T6.1, which deals with the communication, dissemination and 
training strategic plan. Such plan will include a chapter on gender equity for the three activities, bu ilt with the inputs of all the 
partners involved. Stakeholders will also be invited to participate. The integration of women in research and innovative activities 
 
29 https://www.plasticseurope.org/application/files/9715/7129/9584/FINAL_web_version_Plastics_the_facts2019_14102019.pdf 
30 https://www.wecf.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/PlasticsgenderandtheenvironmentHighRes-min.pdf 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    16 
will be also attained, in part following the European Charter for Researchers – Code of Condu ct for the Recruitment of 
Researchers – and participating in the ‘International Day of Women and Girls in Science’. 
In all, the consortium agrees (1) to guarantee the total absence of inequalities, either maliciously or unintentionally, created during 
or as a result of this research project; and (2) to follow the prescriptions of the GEAR Tool, as published in 2016 by the EIGE, 
including institutional change inside their organizations. Finally, and as a result of the project KER exploitation, Bio-Uptake will 
generate businesses owned and led by women as well as well-balanced gender jobs. In this way, it is expected to reduce the risk 
of dropping-out women from their professional careers. 
All the actions are in compliance with current and under implementation partners´ gender equality plans (public bodies, higher 
education and research organisations): AIT, CTB, CID, AIM, LIM, POL, UNE 
▪ Open Science 
BIO-UPTAKE will conduct Open Science, including infrastructure, technical, legal, professional and implementational support 
from institutions by introducing in its research actions the following practices and activities along with outcome dissemination and 
data management, promoting the main characteri stics described according to the Open Science Wheel 31 and helping to set ip 
appropriate indicators to monitor further the impact of the project: 
• Actions to promote Open research data : Bio-Uptake aims at train and guide researchers (and in particular young 
researchers) attitude towards data sharing by organising along the project at least two  sessions. These sessions will be 
flipped classrooms that will boost the “learning by doing” method. They will be based on open courses following FOSTER32 
learning paths (first watching and studying the videos/lessons by themselves and afterwards having a plenary session to 
debate and put into practice the learned concepts, and putting them into practice with the project selected outcomes). Senior 
Bio-Uptake researchers will participate from these sessions too, so that it serves as retrain and as a discussion/debate 
sessions to update about good practices, new repositories and arising funder policies about data-sharing, that may redirect 
the method used. The research data and bibliographic metadata needed to validate the results presented within the research 
article publications will be stored in the respective area of the repository (e.g. INTEGRADDE: Metal Additive Manufacturing 
Open Repository | Zenodo) and will be follow FAIR principles as stated in the DMP (D7.2). It will serve as a common exercise 
to train the project partners in Open Science good practices. 
• Actions to promote Open Access publications : A dedicated budget for open access scientific publications has been 
reserved, which will be used for “green” or “gol d” publications in reputable journals  (identified in Table 10). Alternative 
repositories such as the Open Access Infrastructure for Research in Europe (OpenAIRE), the R egistry of Open Access 
Repositories (ROAR) and the Directory of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR) or other institutional repositories with no 
cost related to their use such as EOSC, ZENODO (supported by the EC ) and alternative publishing platforms e.g. 
ResearchGate (directly managed by each researcher)  … etc will be also exploited. In all cases, within six months after 
publication, LIM as dissemination task (6. 3) leader will be responsible to collect a machine -readable electronic copy of the 
published manuscript in order to be deposited in the project website either as a reproduction or as direct link to the publication. 
In addition, LIM university library will also act as open repository of Bio-Uptake selected data, metadata and publications. 
Moreover, all the scientific articles disseminated within the project will be access accelerated by using Pre-Prints mode (the 
peer review draft will be uploaded afterwards by the journal). 
• Actions to promote Open scholarly c ommunications: Bio-Uptake most relevant publications will use almetric33 badges 
and platforms to capture diverse flavours of the impact that our research outputs have in the community and society. In this 
way we´ll help the project to have a major impact and promote discussions at scholar and professional level. In this way, Bio-
Uptake aims at covering a gap that only by using citations, researchers cannot reach. It will complement with new indicators 
which are “instantly measurable” (most like in Social Media) that can be applied to other data in general (e.g. software, books, 
metadata…) and will supplement further monitor the real impact of the dissemination efforts carried out by Bio-Uptake 
partners. In this way a project output will be identified (DOI) and monitored through traditional and non -traditional sources. 
Definition and monitoring of project alme trics will be defined in the communication and dissemination plan and will be 
suirvellanced by LIM. In addition, when possible, the papers to be disseminated will participate from Open Research Reviews, 
in order to increase transparency, make the outcomes more inclusive and also train the young researchers to see how the 
constructive critics are received, how these have to be tackled and answer etc, and in other hand research leaders from 
academic and RTO institutions (e.g. LIM, AIT, CTB, CID, AIM…) will also participate in at least 3 Open Peer Reviews when 
they are considered the experts of a topic. In this way, young researchers will be also trained in how a Peer Review is done. 
In this way, Bio-Uptake will educate and skill researchers (helping to upgrade  current senior scientific researchers and training 
the young ones) in incorporating open science skills as part of career development and also recognise and reward these skills in 
recruitment and career progression . Moreover, by putting into practice thes e practices, Bio-Uptake researchers will be able to 
 
31 Providing researchers with the skills and competencies they need to practise Open Science. Open Science Ski lls Working Group Report, 2017. DOI 
10.2777/121253 
32 https://www.fosteropenscience.eu/ 
33 https://www.altmetric.com/about-altmetrics/what-are-altmetrics/#prettyPhoto 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05                                                                                                                         Bio-Uptake 
Bio-Uptake    17 
train the science speech and popularise science by learning how to collaborate and build networks for the general public, pee rs 
and fundraising and investment institutions. 
▪ Data management 
Bio-Uptake is d eveloping a DMP within task 7.3.  Confidential data related to industrial processes and products will be kept 
restricted to the consortium partners and not published until it is protected by partners for exploitation. Only non -sensitive 
publishable data will be eventually shared and made accessible to the research community for verification. Specific procedures 
for publication clearance will be included in the Consortium Agreement. Contractors will have to inform the consortium of the ir 
intention to publish their results that may be relevant intellectual property. Dissemination of intellectual property is granted only 
with the approval of the consortium, making sure that the period of the GA will also address these aspects, to guarantee that no 
conflicts arise between the partners on IPR. Publishable results proposed by partners must be accepted by the innovation board 
and the project coordinator. The CA will also address these aspects. Bio-Uptake will follow a proactive strategy for internal data 
and knowledge management. A preliminary draft of the DMP based on the specific elements of the proposal: 
1. Data summary: Six database (primary data) are envisaged for Bio-Uptake project 
1. Simulation and digital threat: code for modifying the simulation programme, material libraries ( metadata on biobased 
materials), algorithms, product mess (FEA) modifications, numerical data from running simulations, … 
2. Biobased Materials: original & modified/new datasheets, numerical data coming from characterisation lab & workshop tests 
(mechanical, rheological, thermal, microscopy etc), application-integration protocols… (numerical, curves, images) 
3. Manufacturing processes: Data /parameters coming from experimental work recorded from running the manufacturing 
processes (by in-line monitoring prototypes and from probes and sensors coming from smart processes), set up of the pilot 
lines… (numerical data, signals, process curves, metadata, observational, machine drawings and images,…in HDF5) 
4. Product: drawings and modifications over original designs  (CAD: STEP, IGES… ), numerical data from product quality 
check and functional & environmental validations (internal & ISO applied standards, numerical data, observational outcome) 
5. Training exercises, lectures, practices (text, ppt, videos): Interaction between staff, machines & equipment’s, and materials, 
anonymous staff survey… 
6. Data coming from communication and dissemi nation actions: surveys, stakeholder’s feedback , scientific publications … 
(text, observational, numerical data, drawings, images, curves, metadata…) 
2. FAIR Data  
2.1. Making data findable, including provisions for metadata  
A data repository will be managed by the Project Coordinator to store common data, generated metadata files, results, reports 
and deliverables. Partners will have access to the repository for uploading and downloading documents. This repository will be 
based on Microsoft Teams or Google Drive  (folder restricted to the project consortium) . For open Data Repository re3data 
and/or EOSC (European Open Science Cloud). This double copy will serve as security storage. Following, scientific publications 
and articles, the dataset deliverables and the final demonstrator research results will be shared through EOSC  and other 
database (such as ZENODO) to promote the data making FAIR. Files and folders at data repositories will be versi oned and 
structured by using a name convention consisting as follow: BIO-UPTAKE_Dx.y_YYYYMMDD_Vzz.doc