4. Homogeneous and heterogeneous (gas-solid) reactions, mostly at the internal surface of the hottest parts of the preform. 
5. Porous medium structural evolution , which has an influence on heat tra nsfer properties, internal gas flow, and the 
effective reaction rates; it results in less volume for the homogeneous reactions and more or less surface for the 
heterogeneous reactions. This structural evolution is in most cases much slower than the preceding ones. Accordingly, 
a usual assumption is to treat all heat and gas-related phenomena (transport and reactions) as being in a quasi-steady 
state; the porous medium properties may then be updated from knowledge of the latter. 
Preform-scale (or macro-scale) models [93] have to be fed with several material properties related to internal geometry, heat and 
mass transfer, and, in the case of MW-CVI, complex electrical permittivity. This has to be achieved for several states of infiltration, 
which means that the porous medium evolution also has to be simulated [87]. Simple, analytical models were initially produced 
but have been progressively replaced by image -based models, first using a -priori image synthesis [94,95], then using direct X -
ray CMT 3D images [96,97]. This requires some image analysis, in particular fiber and tow detection, the latter obtained, for 
example using local texture orientation analysis [98]. Efficient AI-based tools have been developed successfully for woven SiC -
CEM-WAVE   
 19 
fiber composite preforms [99], as seen in Fig. 1.5. The approach developed consists in a variational segmentation that combines 
μCT with a prior geometric model that is iteratively improved thanks to a specific optimization process. The fidelity of the models 
with respect to the input μCT is evaluated using a measure of similarity including both gray levels and local directions. This method 
allowed building realistic numerical models of woven fabrics that preserve the prescribed weaving pattern, and that are free of 
interpenetration, which makes them compatible with further numerical simulations. Using our approach, models of complex woven 
fabrics, but also of woven composites, could be consistently generated from μCT and can serve as reference models, e.g. to 
analyze in situ tests by providing digital twins.  For the simulation of matrix infiltration by isothermal Chemical Vapour Infiltration 
(I-CVI), a two-scale approach has been developed, based on X-ray CMT images or on synthesized 3D images discretized on a 
regular voxel grid [96], as illustrated in Fig. 1.6. An intra-tow code allows for the precise simulation of the matrix deposition [100]; 
the deposit thickness variations are shown to depend on: (i) the diffusion -reaction competition, which implies a smaller deposit 
thickness in small pores, and (ii) the pore network connectivity. The results are interpreted as local laws for effective parameters 
(diffusivity, bulk reactivity) [101] in a large-scale solver based on Brownian motion [102], capable of simultaneously computing 
the matrix phase amount in the to ws and the seal-coat matrix thickness outside the tows. This code accepts the local values of 
the volume fraction and of the orientation of the fibers. Both codes have been validated with respect to experimental data [103] 
in the case of carbon-carbon composite fabrication. So far, detailed image-based models have focused on I-CVI; more attention 
needs to be paid in the future on the heat transfer laws and the evolution of the effective complex permittivity as the prefo rm is 
progressively filled by the matrix. 
1.4.1.7 Joining techniques of CMCs 
Joining techniques remain a critical tool for reducing assembly time, cost and excessive use of materials. Japan and the USA 
have intensive activity on joining and testing of dissimilar materials; the Joining and Welding Research Institute in Japan, Pacific 
Northwest National Laboratory and NASA Glenn Research Center in USA are specialized in joining technologies and the testing 
of advanced materials. On the contrary, expertise on joining in EU is unnecessarily fragm ented and confined in academia or 
private companies, seldom in contact to each other, limited by non -disclosure constraints, with consequent loss of efficiency, 
duplication of research and waste of money. A strong EU expertise in joining is particularly needed for the new type of lightweight 
composites (such as CMCs) for optimization of existing components, but also for the development of new products and new 
design solutions. In particular, the development of suitable joining processes fits into the context of developing high-performance 
and high efficiency components fo r the European steel industry. If the issues related to joining CMCs to themselves and to 
dissimilar materials are solved, they will be much more extensively used to produce both new components and ‘hybrid’ structures, 
the latter constructed of two or more different types of materials where each contribute its own unique properties that complement 
the properties of the other(s). Such components can be used for a range of applications in industries that include, aerospace, gas 
turbines for energy production, wind energy, furnace technologies, automotive, etc. Non-oxide CMCs are now more often used in 
components for energy production, defense, space and  many other high-performance applications and have great potential to 
replace conventional materials such as metals and superalloys in many applications. However, the joining of CMC to themselves 
or to other materials remains a critical issue. The manufacturing of net-shape and ready to use ceramic components for advanced 
design solutions require large and complex parts, which can be built by joining and integrating discrete units of similar or dissimilar 
ceramics. Thus, joining of ceramics, and their integration remain fundamental issues to be addressed for the efficient use of these 
materials in many applications, whereas they could help in reducing fuel consumption, air pollution and in the optimization o f 
existing components.Many techniques have been developed so far to join non-oxide CMCs, among them: mechanical fasteners 
[104],  metallic brazing [105-109], diffusion bonding [107], glass-ceramic joining [110], the use of MAX -phases [111], transient 
Figure 1.6 - Macro-scale (top) and micro-scale (bottom) infiltration modelling 
by random walkers. Depending on the physicochemical conditions, there 
appear matrix thickness gradients at small scale (bottom right). The macro -
scale code simultaneously handles intra -tow infiltration and seal -coat 
deposition (top right). 
Figure 1.5 - Illustration of the capabilities of our approach. 
μCT (left) and correspond ing segmented model (right) for 
an infiltrated oxide/oxide composite (top) and for a fully 
woven CMC junction (bottom) [99]. 
CEM-WAVE   
 20 
eutectic [112] and spark plasma sintering  [113-114], Liquid Silicon Infiltration (LSI) [115], Affordable Robust Ceramic Joining 
(ARCJoint TM) [116], Solid State Displacement Reactions (SSDR) [117], and Transient-Liquid-Phase Bonding (TLPB) [118]. 
The “RM-Wrap” (RM= Refractory Metals, i.e. Mo, Nb, Ta, Zr) is a novel brazing technique where the refractory metal, shaped as 
a wrap, is used to contain one or more silicon foils. It is a pressure-less joining process performed at 1450°C in an inert, flowing 
argon, environment [109,119]. The wrap is necessary to prevent the molten silicon spreading too fast and  leaking outside the 
joined region during the joining process. The joining materials are in-situ formed composites made of refractory metal disilicides 
including MoSi2, NbSi2, TaSi2 or ZrSi2 embedded in a silicon -rich matrix. Disilicides have high melting temperatures and good 
oxidation resistance at elevated temperature, making them a suitable choice to join ceramics. MoSi 2 has already tested as 
component of a brazing mixture for joining dense sintered SiC samples [120] following a pressure-less joining method based on 
the use of a Mo -silicides mixture. The RM-Wrap process is quick, free from undesired phases and has excellent reproducibility 
and versatility; the quantity of each metal can be modified and more than one refractory metal can be used in the sa me wrap. 
RM-Wrap has been proven to be very effective in joining SiC-based ceramic matrix composites and highly porous SiC substrates 
(SiC foams).  In the case of ox/ox CMCs, the joining material must be oxidation resistant and able to perform well at high 
temperatures (e.g. > 800°C) without any degradation during service life. Furthermore, the selected joining material must have  
suitable wetting properties and a matching coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE), retain its strength at higher temperatures and 
should not react deleteriously with the composite during its service life. Several commercial metallic alloys, including silv er and 
zirconium-based brazing materials, exhibit good wetting and joining behavior with ox/ox CMCs. However, they have a lower 
mechanical strength and poor oxidation resistance at 550°C in air [121], which is much lower than the expected working 
temperatures of ox/ox CMCs (1000°C – 1200°C). Diffusion bonding, on the other hand, requires the use of high pressures, which 
limits the shapes of the components that can be joined [122]. Furthermore, the joining temperature used with MAX phases present 
as the bonding phase is higher than the sintering temperature of ox/ox CMCs [111]. Therefore, there is a great demand for the 
development of reliable oxidation resistant, high-temperature, stable joining materials that will allow designers and engineers to 
successfully employ these CMCs in high-performance structures. Glass-ceramic materials have better oxidation resistance than 
brazing alloys [121] and can withstand higher temperatures for longer times in air [123-125]. To avoid thermal stresses, their CTE 
can be tailored according to the CTE of the substrate. Moreover, by selecting an appropriate glass composition, their volatilization 
in steam can be reduced and they are therefore a good choice for air, wet H2 and steam operating conditions at high temperatures 
[126]. While existing joining technologies will not be ignored, the emphasis will be on new compositions, new processing routes 
as well as new joining strategies; new frontiers of research in joining activity are focused on tailoring of joining materials and 
joining processes for specific CMC (oxide or non-oxide) and precise applications. Research activity will look at bonding techniques 
based on pressure-less, high-temperature, tailored glass-ceramic sealant, brazing by “in situ” high T composite joining materials 
suited for the bonding of non-oxide and oxide/oxide CMCs and ceramics. To reduce the detrimental influence of thermal stresses, 
functionally-graded joints approaches could also be investigated.  In addition, advanced surface engineering methods such as 
nanostructuring of surfaces by plasma etching or laser treatment, mechanical machining, thermal selective modification, etc., will 
all be studied. The combination of these techniques with innovative joining materials/processes will be exploited to maximize the 
interfacial strength of the joints. 
1.4.1.8. Coating techniques of CMCs 
Despite their remarkable suitability for high -temperature lightweight applications, SiC -based components suffer from rapid 
recession when used in combustion environments above 1100°C. This is due to the fact that volatile Si(OH)x species are formed 
when the superficial SiO2-layer is in contact with hot water vapor, which is formed during the combustion of hydrocarbons and/or 
hydrogen. Therefore, Environmental Barrier Coatings (EBCs) especially on non -oxide CMCs are generally required to increase 
the resistance to water vapor corrosion  [127,128]. EBCs generally comprise multiple layers, usually one bond -coat layer, up to 
several intermediate layers, and one top layer. The respective materials have to be carefully selected regarding their coeffi cient 
of thermal expansion (in order to have a high thermo-mechanical stability), chemical compatibility (in order to have a good bonding 
to the substrate and each other and to avoid contact corrosion), and phase stability. The latter is especially crucial for th e top 
layer, which has to have a high hydrothermal stability, low diffusivity and a high resistance against CMAS (calcium-magnesium-
alumosilicate species) corrosion. In addition to their chemical protection purpose, EBCs  can also serve as Thermal Barrier 
Coatings (TBCs), providing a temperature gradient between the coating surface and the substrate surface and therefore raising 
the application temperature of SiC f/SiC components even further. Present EBC s systems for SiC f/SiC composites comprise a 
silicon bond coat, mullite -based intermediate layers and a rare earth s ilicate top coat  [129]. Currently, the most common 
application technique for EBCs is atmospheric plasma spraying (APS) [130]. Nevertheless, APS is not applicable to coat complex 
shapes, as it is a line -of-sight process. Furthermore, the resulting microstru cture usually exhibits cracks and a lamellar porous 
structure. In addition, volume changes due to shrinkage, crystallization or phase transitions during thermal cycling are like ly to 
cause cracks  [131,132]. Therefore, chemical  [133,134] or physical vapor d eposition [135,136] and slurry -based coating 
techniques are of increasing interest. The former allow s for the production of well-defined layers, but is usually time-consuming 
and expansive. Slurry-based coating techniques like dip-coating, spraying or brushing, in contrast, are a cost-efficient, simple and 
economical approach to apply defined EBCs coatings [137,138]. Their main drawback, however, is the necessity to densify the 
respective layers in several thermal treatment cycles, which increases the thermal load on the substrate material and can lead to 
residual stresses. 
CEM-WAVE   
 21 
In the framework of CEM-WAVE, burner operating parameters will be optimized in a way SiC is in the range of passive oxidation, 
guaranteeing long-term operation. In fact, making the SiC f/SiC radiating pipe operating at surface temperatures higher than 
1300°C is not expected to be convenient, due to increased production of NOx. 
At the FHF, EBCs will be deposited on selected oxide and non-oxide CMC samples via a slurry coating technique. The formulation 
of the slurries will be developed and the rheological properties adjusted for the coating process. The EBCs will be multilaye r 
systems free of metallic silicon, comprising at least one bond coat and one top coat. The EBC will be designed to minimize thermal 
stresses during thermal cycling by adjusting the coefficient of thermal expansion to the CMCs substrate. The bond coat needs to 
be chemically compatible with the underlying CMC substrate. For non-oxide CMCs, the FHF has great experience in mullite- and 
zirconium titanate-based bond coat systems. As top coats, rare earth silicates will be considered. The top coats will be designed 
to raise the gas-tightness, which is an important requirement for good corrosion protection. This can be achieved b y minimizing 
cracks in the top coat and by designing the microstructure of the coatings with closed porosity. The thermal treatment will b e 
designed to minimize thermal stress to the substrate material. The overall objective is to provide an EBC system that protects the 
underlying CMC from corrosion during use. 
1.4.1.9 Steelmaking industry & radiant tube furnaces 
The industrialization has been powered by fossil fuels. In the steel industry this has involved using coal-based products, such as 
coke, to reduce iron ore in the blast furnace (BF). Although steel is less carbon-emitting per application than many other materials 
from primary sources, the sheer scale of global steel production means the industry contributes over three gigatons of CO 2 to 
global emissions annually. Global steel demand is forecast to increase from 1.7 billion tonnes in 2018 to over 2.6 billion tonnes 
by 2050 under current consumption patterns. Primary steel is produced by using two types of raw materials: hot metal or pig iron, 
and steel scrap, and through two types of processes: basic oxygen furnaces (BOF) or basic oxygen steelmaking and electric arc 
furnaces (EAF). In BOF steelmaking, about 75% of iron comes from the hot metal produced by BF process, the remaining 25% 
of the raw materials is steel scrap. EAF process uses 100% steel scrap in general, however,  in some plants significant share of 
direct reduced iron (DRI) is used [139]. In steel processing lines, indirect heating of products in protective atmosphere is carried 
out with radiant tubes equipped with gas-fired burners [140]. One of the limiting factors for processing lines performances is the 
radiant tubes damage. This potential damage results from a combination of many parameters  such as operating conditions 
(combustion performances, depending on burner design and control, furnace control,  fuel quality and stability…) and design 
(material selection, geometry, manufacturing…). In current operating  conditions, radiant tubes are exposed to severe thermal 
loading: 
• High temperature up to material temperature limit; 
• Heterogeneous thermal field resulting from combustion; 
• Thermal cycles resulting from furnace control for various production and burner control; 
These stresses account for the observed damage on radiant tubes resulting from  coupled phenomena such as  creep, thermal 
fatigue, and corrosion. The temperature increase needed to reach expected metallurgical performances for new advanced high-
strength steels grades is limited by the mechanical strength of metallic material used for radiant tube. 
Another issue is the efficiency of the radiant tubes. In  all types of radiant tubes, the combustion takes place  within the tube and 
the flue gas leaves the tube at the flue gas outlet. The efficiency of radiant tubes depends on the flue gas outlet temperature. The 
lower the flue  gas temperature the higher is the efficiency of a combustion  system [141]. The lifetime of radiant tubes and 
maintenance costs are also important for t he economical application of the technology in heat treatment appli cations. 
Experimental investigations of radiant tubes in laboratory furnaces and under practical conditions in field tests are important in 
order to develop and improve radiant tubes. Now that the unintended consequences of using fossil fuels have become clear, the 
world needs to find a new way that enable further economic and social development , while minimizing environmental damage. 
This means we need to significantly reduce the carbon footprint of steel, which requires finding new ways to make steel in l ess 
emissions-intensive processes [142]. The BF process has been for the past two centuries the dominating  ironmaking route to 
provide the raw materials for steelmaking industry. Nowadays, over 93% of the total iron production from ores is taking place via 
BF route. Actually, the reduction of iron ore to iron is predominantly achieved using high temperature carbon monoxide (CO), 
sourced from fossil fuels – coke and pulverized coal – which is also used as an affordable source of energy. The most important 
alternatives that are being investigated are : deriving CO from circular forms of carbon  (bio-based and plastic wastes from 
municipal and industrial sources and agricultural and forestry residues), applying the process of electrolysis, or increase the use 
of high-temperature hydrogen gas (as reducing agent with respect to carbon monoxide in DRI process). The latter two pathways 
require vast amounts of electrical energy, which would all need to come from clean sources.  In this hypothetical and yet very 
likely future, the most convenient fuel available in a steelmaking plant would be hydrogen or mixtures of hydrogen and biomethane, 
which will require materials not only able to sustain extreme conditions, such as high temperature or corrosive environments, but 
also phenomena like hydrogen embrittlement for metals and hydrothermal attack for ceramics. CEM-WAVE aims at substituting 
currently metallic alloys employed in radiant tube furnaces with CMC-based components which displays better thermo-mechanical 
properties, both in high temperature and corrosive atmospheres, as well as improved thermal efficiency and lifetime. A small -
scale version of a tube exploiting the benefits of both non -oxide CMCs (higher thermo-mechanical properties) and oxide CMCs 
(inherent oxidatio n resistance and lower cost) will be produced by MW -CVI process to find the better performance/cost 
compromise and validating it in relevant environment expected by the increasing future use of renewable energy sources. 
CEM-WAVE   
 22 
1.4.2 Innovation potential and coverage of the value chains 
Furthermore, additional innovation potential results from the improved processes developed along the project, - using cutting 
edge technologies in the field of sensors, data analytics & modelling and AI that will be used as KER furt her detailed following 
each partner’s exploitation intention.The knowledge and IPs generated by the project will be exploited by partner companies, in 
order to improve their competitiveness, differentiating their products in the market, thereby tapping into increasing market demand 
for high-performance CMCs. 
Table 1.5 - Progress of the CEM-WAVE project compared to other previously funded projects. 
Freedom to operate was al ready given a major insight as it is vital for the commercial exploitation of the results, and a patent 
search has been performed around each of our main technologies reflected in the SoA. An online worldwide patent search has 
been performed using the European patent office Esp@cenet engine covering the following combined search terms: CMC, MW-
CVI, etc. The most relevant patents identified are reported in Table 1. 6. It reflects most relevant patents in our main innovation 
areas highlighting differences with CEM-WAVE. The prior art is rich but there is space for further innovating beyond the state of 
the art that could be patented. The below mentioned patents will be taken into account during the project in two different wa ys: 
Using some of them and evaluate their applicability in the optimization of some approaches of our proposal; Improving and 
overcoming some of them as a result of the success of the CEM-WAVE project. 
Table 1.6 - Results of the patent search focused on the main innovation area of the novel IP considered to be generated in CEM-WAVE 
Project Name, approach and technology Differences versus CEM-WAVE 
C³HARME (Next Generation Ceramic Composites for 
Combustion Harsh Environments and Space) funded 
under the H2020 NMP-19-2015 call. The main purpose of 
C³HARME is the design, development, manufacturing and 
testing of a new class of Ceramic Matrix Composites 
based on ultra -high temperature ceramic matrices 
reinforced with SiC or C fibers suitable for application in 
severe aerospace environments. 
 
The innovation proposed in CEM -WAVE is related to the 
obtainment of high -performance CMCs capable of operating in 
various extreme conditions (high temperatures, corrosive 
environments, etc.). In fact, in a not so distant future, energy -
intensive indu stries (e.g. steelmaking) will have to reduce CO 2 
emissions, fossil fuels consumptions and waste production. As a 
consequence, these industries will have to operate with new 
mixtures of biogas/clean H 2 that will cause more operative 
extreme and fluctuating conditions. The materials currently used 
are not able to withstand future conditions. In CEM-WAVE, thanks 
to the use of solid state microwave technology and new joining 
techniques, by reducing the process time, it will be possible to 
obtain high and impro ved performance CMCs with lower costs. 
The lower costs will allow new market possibilities, widening the 
use of CMCs in a large number of sectors. 
SIMUTOOL funded under FP7 -SME (gran t agreement 
number 286717) developed  a simulation platform for the 
manufacturing of composites through microwave (MW) 
heating. The simulation will include an electromagnetic 
field coupled with heat transfer mechanisms that take 
place during the production process. One of the major 
outputs of the simulation platform has been the successful 
design of a ceramic matrix composite tool with a MW 
absorbing layer, in order to maximize the energy saving 
potential of the MW heating process.  
SIMUTOOL focuses on macro -scale modeling of laminates and 
does not address the chemical vapor infi ltration technique. In 
CEM-WAVE, in addition to modeling the electromagnetic reactor 
cavity, one of the main innovations in terms of modelling activities 
will be the AI -assisted modeling at both the micro and macro -
scale level of the CMC obtained with the MW-CVI process. This 
will allow obtain ing and predict ing the final properties of the 
processed material. 
ROLL-IT H2020-SME1 (Radically innovative technology 
for efficient manufacturing of preforms for ceramic matric 
composite (CMC) brake disks) aims to in dustrialize and 
commercialize a fully automated additive manufacturing 
techniques for shaping of near-to-shape preforms for CMC 
brake disks. 
Thanks to the technology that will be developed in CEM -WAVE, 
it will be possible to obtain high -performance CMCs, e ven in 
complex shapes, assembled thanks to the new joining techniques 
that will also bring to an overall cost reduction of the CMC pieces. 
Patent Description CEM-WAVE differences 
US2020024200 (A1)  
-  Ceramic Composite 
Materials and 
Methods 
Methods of making ceramic matrix composite 
materials are provided. The techniques include 
infiltrating a carbon nanoscale fiber network with a 
ceramic precursor, curing the ceramic precursor, 
and/or pyrolyzing the ceramic precursor. The 
infiltrating, curing, and pyrolyzing steps may be 
repeated one or more times. Composite materials 
also are provided that include a  ceramic material 
and carbon nanoscale fibers. 
Although CEM-WAVE also uses precursors for 
the CMC production, there is a fundamental 
novelty in the heating process that leads to the 
formation of SiC. Thanks to the use of the new 
solid-state microwave techn ology, it will be 
possible to obtain an enhanced heating of the 
material and therefore a greater reaction 
efficiency. Furthermore, there is an energy cost 
CEM-WAVE   
 23 
2 Impacts