1.1 Objectives  
1.1.1 Rationale 
In 2018 the European Commission set the s trategy “A Clean Planet for all”, a long -term vision for a European climate neutral 
economy. In December 2019 the European Green Deal (COM (2019) 640) was published, setting new ambitious priorities and 
aiming at Europe to become the first climate-neutral continent by 2050. Considerable effort is being made towards reaching this 
objective, such as research and innovation on technologies that will allow an intense exploitation of renewable energy, 
improvement of energy efficiency and development of clean, new low-carbon technologies.  
Renewable energies are, by their very nature, inconsistent, fluctuating and potentially generating extreme conditions (such as the 
danger of material embrittlement caused by greater use of clean hydrogen). It is thus of outmost importance to adapt current 
processes to these future changes, to allow increased use of clean and renewable energy for industrial settings. This is particularly 
true in the so -called energy intensive industries, such as steelmaking. Novel materials able t o sustain variable and harsh 
Ref. Ares(2020)788849 - 07/02/2020
CEM-WAVE   
 2 
conditions (high temperature, corrosive environments, etc.) are needed to optimise the shift in energy sources and, at the same 
time, guarantee high-energy efficiency and high-performance. 
Materials with high-performance and energy efficient properties that are potentially able to withstand such demanding conditions 
do already exist but, due to their high production cost, they are currently not used in high energy process industry sectors. These 
materials are the Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs). 
In CEM-WAVE our aim is to introduce to European industries an innovative CMC production process, based on Microwave 
assisted Chemical Vapour Infiltration (MW-CVI) technologies. This novel process, while maintaining the excellent properties 
of the currently used CMCs , will, most importantly, significantly reduce the costs for making components , thus making 
CMCs sustainable for process industries in energy-intensive sectors such as steelmaking.  
CEM-WAVE focuses on the application of this i nnovative production process to develop a CMC -based component that will, in 
turn, allow the creation of a small -scale innovative tube embedded with sensors. The small -scale CMC -based tube will be 
validated both in laboratory reproducing relevant environments of the envisaged future energy source scenarios and in an actual 
radiant tube furnace in the steelmaking industry with the aim of substituting the currently employed Inconel/Stainless steel alloys. 
The research and innovation work will be flanked by AI-aided modelling research to predict the material behaviour. Furthermore, 
Life Cycle Analysis (LCA), Life Cycle Costing (LCC), Thermoeconomic Analysis (TA), including the the waste management 
process, will be undertaken to guarantee that the project follows , at every step, the best directions in term of sustainability and 
future market uptake of the generated results.  
1.1.2 General and Specific objectives 
The general objective of CEM-WAVE is to validate (TRL5) an innovative Microwave assisted Chemical Vapour Infiltration 
technology (MW-CVI) to produce Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs) with a significant reduction in production costs.  
This answers to the need of high-performance materials and components able to withstand fluctuating and extreme future 
processes conditions that industries are going to experience due to increased use of renewable energy sources.  
The cost reduction derived from CEM -WAVE technology will make CMCs affordable to a large palette of industrial sectors 
currently not in condition to make use of this high quality, but currently expensive, material.  
To reach the general objective the following Specific Objectives (SOs) have been identified. For each technical SOs (SO1-SO6), 
KPIs and related target values have been identified and detailed aiming at either a) assess the expected improvement in technical 
/ process indicators, or b) assess the product / process / activity consistency with relevant standards and requirements. 
SO1 – MW-CVI process optimisation for efficient non-oxide CMC preparation: the objective is to optimise the Microwave assisted 
Chemical Vapour Infiltration (MW-CVI) technology for non-oxide-based CMC production. In more detail, the expected KPIs related 
to SO1are: 
Main indicators for SO1 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● Processing time 
● Density 
● Porosity 
● Fibre content 
● Elongation at break 
● Young Modulus 
● Tensile strength 
● Flexural strength 
● Interlaminar shear strength 
● 40÷50 hours 
● 2,4÷2,5 g/cm3 
● < 10% 
● ~30÷45 vol % 
● > 0,4 % 
● 250 GPa 
● 300 MPa 
● 400 MPa 
● 30 MPa 
Related WPs: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
SO2 – MW-CVI process optimisation for efficient oxide CMC preparation : the objective is to develop and then optimise the 
Microwave assisted Chemical Vapour Infiltration (MW -CVI) technology for oxide -based CMC production. In more detail, the 
expected KPIs related to SO2 are:  
Main indicators for SO2 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● Processing time 
● Density 
● Porosity 
● Fibre content 
● Elongation at break 
● Young Modulus 
● Tensile strength 
● Flexural strength 
● Interlaminar shear strength 
● 25÷40 hours 
● 3,4÷3,5 g/cm3 
● 15÷20% for WMCs and <10% for WICs 
● ~40÷45 vol% 
● ~0,5÷0,7% for both WMCs and WICs 
● ~200 GPa (WMCs) and ~300 GPa (WICs) 
● ~150 MPa (WMCs) and ~300 MPa (WICs) 
● ~200 MPa (WMCs) and ~350 MPa (WICs) 
● ~30 MPa (WICs) 
CEM-WAVE   
 3 
Related WPs: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
SO3 – Effective coating and joining techniques : the objective is to define the most suited protocols to perform first coating and 
then joining of both oxide- and non-oxide-based CMCs. In more detail, the expected KPIs related to SO3 are: 
Main indicators for SO3 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● maximum joining process T (non-oxide CMC)   
● maximum joining process T (oxide-oxide CMC)   
● maximum joint in service T (non-oxide CMC)   
● maximum joint in service T (oxide-oxide CMC)   
● minimum joint strength  
● maximum joined area 
● surface complexity 
● maximum EBC process T (non-oxide CMC) 
● maximum EBC process (oxide-oxide CMC) 
● maximum EBC in service (non-oxide CMC) 
● maximum EBC in service T (oxide-oxide CMC) 
● 1500°C 
● 1100°C 
● 1200°C 
● 900°C 
● 15 MPa (or comparable to that of CMCs) 
● 100 mm2  
● flat/curved surfaces 
● 1600°C 
● 1100°C 
● 1700°C 
● 1400°C 
Related WPs: 4, 6 
SO4 – AI-assisted multiscale predictive modelling: the objective is to develop a reliable multiscale predictive model of CMC tubes 
for radiant furnaces using, among others, AI tools. In more detail, the expected KPIs related to SO4 are: 
Main indicators for SO4 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● Scanning and segmentation of CMC specimens 
● Micro- and meso-scale geometrical and transfer properties 
evolution with infiltration 
● Infiltration simulations 
● Optimized infiltration conditions 
● Quality and accuracy of the final numerical meshes 
● Consistency of results w.r.t. actual measurements 
(validation) 
● Validation w.r.t. experimental data on infiltration gradients 
● Verification of diminished infiltration gradients under 
suggested optimal conditions 
Related WPs: 5 
SO5 – Process analytical technology (PAT) and health monitoring : the objective is to make a profitable use of CEM -WAVE 
produced CMCs as a sensor, on the basis of the CMC dielectric properties. The sensorial aspect will be two -fold: a) using MW 
during the CMC production to determine the optimal process conditions. B) during the use of the CMC in radiant tube furnaces  
(RTF) with combined use of IR imaging and electrical analysis. In more detail, the expected KPIs related to SO5 are: 
Main indicators for SO5 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● Sensor robustness  
● Tailored PAT sensors and software   
● Resist process/use conditions, e.g. temperature >1000ºC 
● Imaging capabilities to detect defects and 2 versions for 
process control and health monitoring of CMC embedding 
data driven models for process optimisation 
Related WPs: 3, 7 
SO6 – Small-scale version of the tube (Ox and non-ox CMC) validated in current furnace: the small-scale version of the tube will 
be produced with a length of around 200 mm, a wall thickness of 3÷9 mm and a diameter of 100 mm. It will display improved 
properties compared to tubes based on current materials and the technology will be validated to TRL5 in this relevant environment. 
In addition, the MW-CVI technology will have been upgraded by the use of the latest solid -state sources, which will improve its 
energy efficiency even further compared to current manufacturing practice. The small-scale tube to be tested will have to fulfil all 
the following Key Performance Indicators (KPIs): 
Main indicators for SO6 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● Heat transfer efficiency 
● Emissivity 
● Thermal conductivity 
 
● Max Temperature in application 
● Min Temperature in application 
● Lifetime 
● High temperature impact resistance 
● Corrosion resistance 
● ≥30% 
● >0,8 
● ~20÷30 W/m K (for non-oxide); ~ 2,3÷4,5 W/m K (for 
oxide); 
● ~1200°C 
● ~830°C 
● >20% (>10 years) 
● >160 J/m 
● 0,4 mpy 
CEM-WAVE   
 4 
● Fatigue resistance ● 10.000 cycles 
Related WPs: 7 
SO7 –Sustainable long -term solution : In order to bring the novel composites into the real full -scale market, sustainable 
environmental and economic solutions are intended to be met through three stages; (i) Initial guidance in material selection based 
on LCA/LCC analysis, (ii) Encouraging circular economy principles to steer and optimize the development of CEM-WAVE along 
the value chain including use-phase and end-of-life; and (iii) Risk assessment of the processes with respect to ISO31000 /31050 
to identify the potential hazards to human health and environment, as well as identification and monitoring of the new and 
emerging risks posed by such technologies, in order to develop a reliable methodology for better risk management of high -
performance materials and co mbined components. Proposed sustainable development methodology will enable quantification 
and measurement of eco-efficiency to identify solutions with low environmental impact and high economic viability. The SO7 will 
deliver a scenario model to identify suitable paths to market for the current project but also for future development projects, where 
CEM-WAVE CMCs will aim at higher TRLs. 
Main indicators for SO7 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● Reduction of CO2 emissions and resource utilisation  
● Energy reduction  
● Quantitative risk assessment 
● 20% decrease 
● 30% decrease  
● For minimum 5 alternative solutions 
Related WPs: 8 
SO8 Maximise exploitation, dissemination and impact: It is essential for the results of CEM-WAVE to be used effectively for the 
benefit of European industries. In addition, it is important to position CMCs as competitive solutions for successful future 
exploitation, through which further business cases in other sectors and for other possible applications will be explored, appropriate 
IPR protection sought, and dissemination will be implemented as per the plan described in Section 2. Business models and all 
documentation (marketing, technical, product LCA, etc.) for the future transfer of the CEM-WAVE technology framework to other 
sectors will be generated. Moreover, a stakeholder group will be formed in the initial stages of CEM-WAVE whose members will 
act as a continuous sounding board for the development results and as exploitation and replication partners depending on the 
members’ profile, need and interest. 
Main indicators for SO8 
Key Performance Indicators Targeted Metrics 
● Number and expertise of members in the stakeholder 
group 
● Dissemination activities organised and attended 
 
● Meetings with the external AB 
● Innovative business models developed 
● At least 50 members in the stakeholder group 
 
● At least 16 conferences and 10 articles in high-impact 
journals 
● Organisation of 2 CEM-WAVE workshops 
● 4 Business models validated  
Related WPs: 9 
SO9 Address the barriers and facilitate the i ntegration of the developed processes and materials, primarily in the steelmaking 
sector but also in other relevant sectors, and assess side -effects and risks: CEM-WAVE (WP8-9) will evaluate the current and 
optional future gaps that could be barriers for  the inclusion of the results into the steelmaking application field along three main 
axes: post project financing, technical and political/regulatory barriers. Among such barriers are the lack of internalisatio n of 
externalities, resource pricing; lack of skills and investment in the steelmaking sector; insufficient enablers to improve cross-cycle 
and cross-sector performance due to non -alignment of incentives for transformation between actors within and across value 
chains and so on. A comprehensive risk register will be developed early in the project lifetime and appropriate mitigation strategies 
will be defined by the consortium members. Ultimately, analysis of post project financing, technical and political/regulatory barriers 
for steelmaking sectors will be carried out.