2.1 Expected impacts  
The CEM -WAVE project will result in the development and validation of an innovative CMC production process, based on 
Microwave-assisted Chemical V apour Infiltration (MW -CVI) technologies. The proposed novel process, while maintaining the 
optimal features of CMCs (high toughness, low density, high temperature, wear and corrosion resistance) will significantly reduce 
the costs for making components, t hus making CMCs sustainable for process industries in energy -intensive sectors such as 
steelmaking. Through a cross-sectoral, collaborative systemic approach, CEM-WAVE is expected to make measurable 
contributions in medium-term along with all the expected impacts listed in the SPIRE-08-2020 topic. Furthermore, CEM-WAVE 
covers half of the A.SPIRE sectors (Ceramics, Steel, Engineering, Chemicals - see Fig. 2.1).   
 
saving as the pyrolysis of the precursor is not 
necessary. 
KR20190131834 (A)  
-  Composite Ceramic 
Coating Materials For 
Boiler Tubes With 
Anti-fouling 
Characteristic And 
Coating Methods 
Using Thereof 
Patent on a composite ceramic coating which can 
reduce fouling phenomenon while having good 
adhesion with a metal base material of a boiler 
tube. The present invention corresponds to 55-75% 
by weight aqueous alkali silicate solution; 20 -40% 
by weight of heat resistant ceramic powder. This 
patent will provide a ceramic composite coating 
material for a boiler tube comprising 1 to 5% by 
weight of the active metal. 
In CEM-WAVE thanks to the lower production 
costs of the CMCs, it will be possible to replace 
e.g. the steel parts in the radiant tube furnaces 
of the steel making industry (CEM -WAVE use 
case). In this way, using CMC tubes, the 
thermal efficiency improves and the fouling risk 
is avoided. 
KR20140066812 (A)  
-  Preparation method 
of ceramic -plate 
carbon composites 
using the microwave 
The present patent can uniformly coat the surface 
of a plate carbon body such as graphite and 
graphene with ceramic through a sol-gel method by 
using uniform temperature gradient and rapid 
heating speed in a reactor using microwaves. 
Accordingly, the preparation method of a ceramic -
plate carbon body composite using microwaves 
provided in the present invention can remarkably 
reduce time for synthesis in comparison with the 
conventional room temperature synthesis method 
or general heating method. 
CEM-WAVE CMC production will be different. 
using the microwave, an infiltration of the 
sample (MW -CVI) and not only a superficial 
deposition (MW-CVD) will be obtained. Thanks 
to the new solid -state technology, the heating 
will be homogeneous so it will be possible to 
achieve an inverse temperature profile from the 
center of the sample outwards, which will allow 
to SiC to infiltrate starting from the heart of the 
sample. 
CN108191460 (A)  -  
Method for preparing 
C/SiC composite 
material 
Patent on a method for preparing a C/SiC 
composite material. According to the preparation 
method, the highly -densified C/SiC composite 
material with better mechanical property is 
prepared with a precursor impregnation and 
cracking method repeatedly, compared with an 
existing reaction melting penetration method, the 
method cannot damage the surface of the C/C 
porous composite material, and performance of the 
composite material can be improved. 
With the MWCVI processes adopted in CEM -
WAVE, it will be possible to produce not only 
SiCf/SiC CMCs but also C/SiC CMCs which 
was not attainable before using the old 
magnetron microwave technology. In this way 
the time reduction of the process is guaranteed 
and a cost reduction and a high lifetime of the 
final material is obtained. 
CN108191460 (A)  -  
Method for preparing 
SiCf/SiC composite 
material 
The invention provides a method for integrally 
preparing large complex SiCf/SiC composite 
components, completes the connection of SiCf/SiC 
composites in the manufacturing process, shortens 
the preparation period of the SiCf/SiC composite 
components and lowers the cost. The connection 
method for the SiCf/SiC composite in the invention 
can overcome the disadvantages of great 
brittleness and poor reliability of bonding, the 
surface shape changes of bolted components, and 
easy falling and poor reliability of riveting rivets in 
the prior art. 
The connection (joining) developed in CEM -
WAVE project is different.  A specific ceramic 
inlay will be developed by sintering to be 
applied to the CMC preform with a view to 
obtaining a further improvement in thermal 
efficiency. In this way the joining technique 
adopted will be able not only to c onnect 
different pieces of CMCs but also to improve the 
thermal efficiency. 
CEM-WAVE   
 24 
Energy efficiency improvement of the target production 
and/or operation processes of at least 30% 
World crude steel production reached 1.809 million tonnes (Mt) 
in 2018 [143]. Steel use is projected to increase steadily in the 
coming years to meet the needs of our growing population. 
Steel production is energy intensive. T he iron and steel 
industry is the largest energy -consuming manufacturing 
industry in the world. Improvements in energy efficiency have 
led to reductions of about 60% in energy required to produce 
a tonne of crude steel since 1960. Energy constitutes a 
significant portion of the ste el cost production, from 20% to 
40%. Improvements in energy efficiency result in reduced 
production costs and thereby improved competitiveness [143]. 
World-wide average speciﬁc energy consumption for steel 
making is estimated to be 24 GJ/tonne. The most en ergy-
efﬁcient process requires 19 GJ/tonne for primary steel and 7 
GJ/tonne for secondary steel. In the longer term, the speciﬁc 
energy consumption for making steel from iron ore can be reduced to 12 ,5 GJ of primary steel per tonne. A further reduction of 
up to 2,5 GJ of crude steel per tonne may be achieved when techniques are developed that can recover and apply heat from the 
hot steel at a high temperature. The speciﬁc energy consumption for secondary steel making can be reduced to 3,5 GJ/tonne by 
energy-efﬁcient melting and shaping techniques [144].  
Substituting CEM-WAVE CMCs to the currently used materials (super -alloys - Inconel) in radiant tube furnaces will allow a 
maximum operating temperature increase of 100°C, due to an increased heat transfer e fficiency, maximum operating 
temperature, better thermo-mechanical properties and corrosion resistance . As the radiation goes with the fourth power of the 
temperature (Stefan-Boltzmann Law) and since CMCs have a higher emissivity of Inconel, an increased energy efficiency of 
31% is expected. This energy efficiency will be enhanced by the increased temperature difference between the inlet and the 
outlet: the higher the temperature difference, the higher is the thermal energy exchange. This will, in turn represent, a significant 
reduction of the cost of steelmaking production, estimated to be between 7% and 13%, for steelmaking industrial end -users 
implementing CEM-WAVE results. Finally, due to the selection of energy efficient production technologies (MW-CVI), CEM-WAVE 
will target to achieve an improvement of energy efficiency of producing CMCs of at least 30% compared to the conventional 
process.  
Reduction of CO2 emissions and resource utilization by 20%; 
Roughly 28 percent of global greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions came from industry in 2014 [145]. Unless industry can lower its 
emissions, the world will struggle to reach the GHG reduction targets of 80 to 95 percent that governments set under the Pari s 
Agreement of 2015. Half of industry’s CO 2 emissions result from the manufacture of the four industrial commodities—ammonia, 
cement, ethylene, and steel. Steel is a CO 2 and energy intensive, but highly competitive industry that also enables the 
uptake of major CO 2 mitigation measures in other sectors.   On average for 2017, 1 ,83 tonnes of CO 2 were emitted for 
every tonne of steel produced. The CO2 emission factor for secondary steel is about 35% that of primary steel production 
[146]. The steel industry generates between 7% and 9% of direct emissions from the global use of fossil fuel [147] 
Table 2.1 - The CO2 emission associated with the production of one tonne of steel varies depending on the production route [146 ] 
Production Process CO2 Emission (tonnes per tonne product) 
Integrated steel mill 1,6-2,2 
Scrap based production in a mini-mill 0,6-0,9 
Scrap substitutes (DRI) in a mini-mill 1,4-2,0 
 
The steel industry believes it is very important to be actively engaged as we continue to strive to move towards a low carbon  
society. The European steel industry is committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and making its contribution to meeting 
the targets of the Paris Agreement. The largest steelmaker in the world, ArcelorMittal, which is responsible for approximately 0,7 
percent of all global carbon emissions, ha s set a goal of achieving carbon -neutral operations in Europe by 2050. 35 percent of 
emissions from these sectors come from burning fossil fuels to generate high-temperature heat [148].  
CEM-WAVE addresses a future scenario in which renewable energy source s will be adopted in energy -intensive industries. 
Mixtures of biogases with clean hydrogen are the target of CEM-WAVE. Thus, a reduction of at least 20% CO2 emissions will 
be obtained using  mixtures composed of 20:80 H 2/biogas. To reach the topic  expected impact, without excluding further 
improvements in CO2 abatement by further increasing of H2/biogas ratio, CEM-WAVE have set 20% CO2 emissions reduction as 
KPI in Specific Objective 7. Moreover, the quality of the combustion efficiency (fuel efficiency) of radiant tubes will improve since 
the efficiency strongly depends on the flue gas outlet temperature of radiant tube systems. In order to achieve maximum efficiency, 
air preheating systems use the enthalpy of the flue gas for preheating the combustion air s imultaneously reducing the flue gas 
outlet temperature of such systems. High efficiencies with less flue gas losses result in lower fuel consumptions and lead to  a 
Figure 2.1 – CEM-WAVE coverage of A.SPIRE Sectors. 
CEM-WAVE   
 25 
reduction of the CO 2 emission per ton of product  [141]. Due to the improved thermal efficien cy and thermo -mechanical 
properties the use of CMC materials in a radiant tube furnace while contributing to significantly increase the energy 
efficiency of both the production and operation process by at least 30%, will consequently reduce CO2 emissions by at 
least 20%. 
The assessment of the environmental (LCA), energy and exergy impacts, and associated costs to the new developed production 
processes compared to the conventional ones will be thoroughly analysed during the project itself. Therefore, the suc cess and 
impact of the project will be measured and valorised. 
Increased lifetime of the equipment by at least 20%. 
Since one of the limiting factors for processing steelmaking lines performances is the radiant tubes damage  [140], CEM-WAVE 
aims at substitu ting currently employed metallic alloys with CMC -based components which display better thermo -mechanical 
properties (i.e. creep resistance, impact resistance), both in high temperature and corrosive atmospheres, as well as improve d 
thermal efficiency and lifetime. 
The research and innovation work will be supported by integrated sensors and AI -aided modelling to monitor and predict the 
material behaviour. All these factors contribute to increasing by at least 20% of future radiant tube furnace when using 
CMCs components produced in CEM-WAVE. Considering that the current lifetime of radiant tubes could be ranged between 4 
and 8 years, the consortium expect to extend the lifetime of the selected equipment by at least 12 years.  
2.1.1  Innovation and Economic Impact  
The project, through a systemic and multidisciplinary approach, will test and demonstrate possibilities to reduce the 
production costs of ceramic matrix composites  and to establish new supply and value chains in the materials and 
composites manufacturing economy. The key benefits of ceramic matrix composites over other materials includes high thermal 
resistance, hardness, corrosion resistance, light weight and non-magnetic in nature. Over years, ceramic matrix composites have 
gained significant import ance in industrial applications due to their high thermal and physical properties over single phase 
ceramics and other materials. Growing industrial demand for high temperature resistant, low -weight and density 
equipment is the primary factor driving the g lobal ceramic matrix composites market . CMCs are majorly used in the 
production of aero-entry systems, propulsion subsystems, high temperature radiators, insulations and coatings. Extensive usage 
of CMCs as an individual material component in the production of brake discs, clutches, braking systems is another factor driving 
the CMCs market. Increasing adoption of lightweight composites by the electrical vehicle manufacturers is expected to further  
boost market for ceramic matrix composites during forecast p eriod. Additionally, the increased efficiency and lifetime of CMCs 
compared to currently employed metallic alloys in radiant tube furnaces, will open new possibilities in steelmaking (i.e. use  of 
higher annealing temperatures, new chemistries to process) m aking further more competitive CMC -based components cost 
enabling their wider deployment to almost all industrial lines. CEM-WAVE project has a huge innovation potential, since CMCs 
represent very promising solutions for high temperature applications in strategic industrial sectors, such as transport and energy. 
Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs) occupy a fundamental position in the transport sector (e.g. for elements of combustion 
engines of aircrafts, valve -trains, turbine blades, exhaust systems, cars brak ing systems) and energy sector (e.g. refractory 
materials for silicon foundry furnaces, energy reactors, gas burners and high -pressure heat exchangers). Huge market 
opportunities are expected for CMC provided to overcome the three major identified gaps: high cost, difficulty of processing 
and materials reliability. New and more efficient manufacturing technologies can pave the way to improve material quality, 
reduce processing time, converge towards near-net shape fabrication, trim energy spent and abate production costs. CEM-WAVE 
addresses these challenges by design, modelling and artificial intelligence optimization of innovative high -frequency 
electromagnetic technologies for the production of CMCs: this will allow to drastically reduce the difficulties and costs of production 
while dramatically improving materials reliability. CEM-WAVE will develop CMCs materials that can survive the harsh 
conditions of the future types of fuel that will be adopted in steelmaking plants (e.g. Hydrogen): by pursuing this, the new 
materials will at the same time be able to resist in the current steelmaking plants and fit also current steelmaking industry 
needs to find materials that increase the efficiency of the radiant tubes, by improving the heat transfer and increasing their lifetime. 
The durability and heat transfer characteristics of these materials will be tested in the project for future and current conditions of 
operations and this will be part of the exploitation pla n of the results of the project. CEM-WAVE results will meet huge market 
opportunities for European enterprises contributing to enhance manufacturing capacities in Europe, and thus growth and jobs in 
Europe, in both the short and medium term. Next section addresses the direct targeted markets (CMCs and steelmaking) both at 
European and global level. Nevertheless, the consortium expects CEM-WAVE results will match the market and user needs in a 
cost-effective manner of other energy -intensive industrial sectors, as for instance the cement, metallurgical and c hemical 
industries among the others. 
2.1.2  Socio-economic impacts 
Steel Industry - Global Market Overview: Steelmaking process involves the production of steel from iron ore and scrap. In this 
process, various impurities such as silicon, sulfur, nitrogen, phosphorus, and excess carbon are removed from the sourced iron. 
The global steel market is expected to reach USD 1,01 trillion by 2025. The steel industry is expected to witness a rapid growth 
owing to strong demand from construction, automotive and tran sportation sector over the forecast period. The overall iron and 
steel market is expected to grow due to the rapid urbanization and industrialization in the emerging regions such as Asia Pacific 
and Central & south America. Overall, steel production is the largest iron ore application [149]. 
CEM-WAVE   
 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World crude steel production has been increasing steadily since the 70s, from 595 Mt in 1970 to 1414 Mt in 2010 (Worldsteel 
2010). Geographically, crude steel production in 2009 was concentrated in Asia (comprising China, India, Japan, South Korea, 
Taiwan and South East Asian countries: 65 ,37% of the world total), and China alone accounted for 46 ,30% of the world total 
production. Other major producing areas were the European Union (11,33%), the former Soviet Union (8,03%), and North America 
(US, Canada, and Mexico: 6 ,65%). Production in developing regions was much sma ller. At the global level, crudest  steel is 
produced by primary routes (~72%), while the rest is produced by secondary steelmaking.  
The steelmaking sector is the main market that CEM-WAVE addresses, offering unmatched opportunities for the project 
results exploitation and industrial uptake.  
AMIII USE CASE 
Radiant tubes are used in industry for heat treatment applications in which products are treated under a protective gas atmosphere 
within heat treatment furnaces. Therefore, the heating of such furnaces is performed with indirect fuel-fired systems or electrical 
heating elements. For indirect fired applications, the flue gas of the combustio n process cannot enter into the furnace. The 
combustion takes place within radiant tubes and the heat is transferred—via radiation—from the outer surface of the tube to the 
process. The furnace capacity depends on the number of tubes installed and  it is affected by leaks or cracks on the surface of 
the tubes. Depending on the size of the leak, it could cause various effects ranging from strip pollution due to combustion 
byproducts to a total collapse of the radiant tube. For this reason, when a crack is det ected, it is necessary to close the tube 
resulting in the furnace losing of heating capacity and efficiency.  Due to the high temperature and the use of a protective 
atmosphere the tubes cannot be replaced with the furnace in operation and it is necessary t o stop the completely the line and 
cold down the furnace. This operation requires the line stoppage during at least two or three days, so the replacement of the  
damaged radiant tubes is done during the yearly standstill, and only in case of extreme need, a  specific stoppage for changing 
tubes is planned. So, the limited opportunities of changing the radiant tubes makes very important its reliability.  Other limiting 
factor of the productivity is the maximum working temperature of the radiant tubes. As the th ermal exchange is mainly due to 
radiation, the higher temperature achieved by the tube, the higher is the exchange. In case of metallic radiant tubes, try to  work 
at temperatures higher to 1000ºC lead to damage them and so on, diminish the capacity of the furnace. In case of the current 
ceramic radiant tubes it is possible to achieve temperatures around 1200º C without thermal affection, but these materials ar e 
fragile and do not resist the impact of the strip in case of breakages inside the furnace, problem which could happen from time to 
time. The value of the present project is to develop a material merging the best of bot h materials, with good thermo-mechanical 
properties and able to work at high temperatures, which will make possible to increase the lif etime of the radiant tubes. The 
proposed material should also be ready for the next transformation by the change of the traditional fuels to the new energy 
sources.  
 
Ceramic Matrix Composites Market: The market size for ceramic matrix composites is estimated to be USD 9,4 billion in 2019 
and is projected to reach USD 23,3 billion by 2029 [150]. The Ceramic Matrix Composites market is expected to grow at a CAGR 
of 9 - 10% during the forecast period (2019 -2026). The ceramic matrix composites market was domin ated by the oxide/oxide 
ceramic matrix composites segment, in terms of volume. This is due to the high demand for oxide/oxide ceramic matrix composites 
in aerospace, industrial, and automotive applications. Oxide/oxide ceramic matrix composites are conside red as the material of 
choice in the aerospace, industrial, and automotive industries due to their low weight and high-temperature resistance properties. 
It is also widely used in industrial applications. They are less expensive than SiCf/SiC ceramic matrix composites.   
Figure 2.2 - Steel Production per EU countries in 2015. 
 Figure 2.3 - Steel Market Size. 

CEM-WAVE   
 27 
 
 
North America is expected to be the largest market for ceramic matrix composites, owning to increasing demand from aerospace 
& defense and automotive end-use industries in the region. The market growth is attributed to the increased demand for ceramic 
matrix composites from the aerospace & defense, and energy & power end-user industries.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the automotive sector, the growing need to reduce weight and improve efficiency is driving the demand for ceramic matrix 
composites. This, in turn, will help counter the effect of growing fuel prices and reduce carbon emission. Manufacturers of luxury 
and sports car engines prefer to use ceramic matrix composites in their engine components as they are strong, lighter, and ca n 
withstand very high temperatures. They are expected to increasingly replace conventional alloys and metal components in 
automotive engines as conventional alloys need extensive dedicated cooling air while ceramic matrix components can operate 
with little or no cooling.  The increasing use of CMCs in the aerospace & defense industry is mainly due to its properties such as 
high damage tolerance, fracture toughness, and high temperature, wear & corrosion resistance. It is projected that ceramic matrix 
composites will replace titanium metal- and other composites-based components in aircraft structures. Ceramic matrix composites 
are used in aerospace gas turbine engines, nose caps, exhaust nozzles, and missile propulsion systems in the aerospace & 
defense end -use industr y. Energy & power sectors : the risk associated with introducing ceramic matrix composites in new 
applications is considered to be a big roadblock for the market growth. Market players are anticipating high growth in the ceramic 
matrix composites market in the coming years due to their use in newer applications. For instance, Japanese researchers [151] 
are considering it for building next -generation nuclear reactors. These composites are increasingly finding applications in the 
medical and diagnostic industr y for making implants and diagnostic kits. However, growing environmental regulations and 
high prod uction cost associated with CMC s are the primary factors hindering the growth of global ceramic matrix 
composites market. In effect, the cost of ceramic matrix composites has been a concern for many industries over the last decade. 
Due to the high manufacturing cost and time associated with these composites, gaining customer confidence is a major challenge 
for the market players. The prices of ceramic matrix c omposites are controlled, to a large extent, by the costs of ceramic fibers. 
The prices of carbon/carbon ceramic matrix composites are comparatively lower than silicon carbide/silicon carbide and 
oxide/oxide ceramic matrix composites due to the large-scale production of carbon fibers in the last few years. On the other hand, 
the production of alumina and silicon carbide fibers is still very low. Another factor contributing to high prices of ceramic  matrix 
composites is the manufacturing of the matrix; the production of a matrix needs expensive batch processes at high temperatures 
in a controlled atmosphere. Also, ceramic matrix components involve densification costs and machining costs, along with 
numerous inspection steps if the component is to be used comm ercially or where the risk of failure may endanger lives. Many 
industries consider ceramic matrix composites for a limited number of premium applications owing to the high costs of raw 
materials, fabrication, and inspection compared to monolithic ceramics and other conventional materials. This high cost is a major 
Figure 2.5 - Ceramic matrix composites market by region. 
Figure 2.4 - US ceramic matrix composites market per product 
2015-2025 
Figure 2.6 - Global ceramic matrix composites market per 
application in 2018 
Figure 2.7 - Global ceramic matrix composites market share by end 
use from 2017 to 2026 

CEM-WAVE   
 28 
restraint to the growth of the market. CEM-WAVE will represent an innovative solution to this current problem. In fact, the 
CEM-WAVE novel proposed process, while maintaining the highly performant properties of CMCs, will extremely reduce 
the costs and time for making components, thus making CMCs truly competitive and sustainable alternatives for process 
industries in energy-intensive sectors such as steelmaking. In fact, since the investment cost for the construction of a 
conventional CVI plant system compared to the MW-CVI is almost unchanged what affects the final price is the energy saving 
deriving from the shorter working hours to produce an equal amount of CMC. 
Currently there are two main factors that influence CMC cost: the expensive raw materials (in particular for the SiC fibers) and 
the processing technology. CEM-WAVE project aims to abate production costs, with a sustainable process, lowering the energy 
consumption and processing time. This goal, joined with the current birth of European ceramic fibers producers 
(https://www.bjsceramics.com/bjs-ceramics-2/products/) will certainly open new market opportunities enabling a wider usage of 
CMCs not only limited to energy intensive sectors, leading to a further reduction in the overall cost of these materials. 
2.1.3  Environmental impact  
Global population growth and tremendous economic development has brought us to the crossroads of long -term sustainability 
and risk of irreversible changes in the ecosystem. Energy efficient and eco-friendly technologies and systems are critically needed 
for further growth and sustainable development. Expanding global industrialization will continue to put pressure on energy 
resources, heightening concerns about energy efficiency. At the same time, environmental regulations’ mandates to reduce 
emissions will continue to be an incentive for developing cleaner, more efficient combustion cycles.While ceramic matrix 
composites were originally developed to overcome problems associated with the brittle nature of monolithic ceramics, today the 
composites can be tailored for customized purposes and offer energy efficient and eco-friendly applications, including aerospace, 
ground transportation, and power generation systems .In fact, ceramic matrix composites  combine reinforcing ceram ic phases 
with a ceramic matrix to create materials with new and superior properties (toughness, electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, 
thermal expansion, h igh-temperature stability, high  thermal shock  resistance, high hardness, high  corrosion resistance , light 
weight, non-magnetic and non-conductive properties and versatility). For the processing industry, related benefits of using ceramic 
composites include increased energy efficiency, increased productivity, increased resistance to different substances and 
conditions and regulatory compliance. CEM-WAVE will pursue the reduction of energy consumption and CO 2 emissions both in 
the production process of CMCs developed in the project, and in steelmaking industrial processes, where the CMCs components 
-produced in CEM -WAVE- will be used in the radiant tube furnaces . CEM-WAVE consortium is confident that there will be 
substantial reductions in CO 2 emissions; the quantity and percentage of reduction is therefore both one of our KPIs and an 
expected impact. The reduction of CO 2 of at least 20% is really a KPI of our pr ocess. The full LCA, LCC and TA performed in 
CEM-WAVE definitively will show the benefits of proposed technologies in terms of using optimal amounts of raw materials, 
energy consumption and other energy saving features. Moreover, the foreseen spreading of CMCs in other sectors can allow 
the use of more durable materials, thus immediately decreasing generation of waste . Another indirect good environmental 
impact consists of the development of materials for more efficient engines, allowing a reduction of fuel consumption and thus 
reducing not renewable resources consumption and related pollution/greenhouse effects. 
2.1.4 Barriers, obstacles and framework conditions  
The consortium has adequately examined all the known factors that may prevent CEM-WAVE from achieving its goals. The 
success of the project and the exploitation of the results depend on many external factors. The primary risks/barriers related to 
project implementation are covered in section 3.2 of the Technical Annex. The longer -term barriers and o bstacles towards 
achieving impact relate to moving at the project end from TRL5 into widespread market replication. These barriers can be 
considered in the following areas:  
1. Post-project financing. A key component of WP9 will be to prepare the case for  post project financing from commercial or 
public funding sources to ensure the completion of the journey over the Innovation Gap and through the notorious Valley of Death. 
This will be supported by Life Cycle Costing (LCC) activities undertaken in WP8 and the project management activities in WP10. 
KNEIA is experienced in securing commercial 
investment from long term sources of finance for 
innovative technologies . This experience has 
contributed to the structure of the proposed plan of work. 
It has already identified potential post -project financing 
sources that could be pursued depending on the project 
results and the risks that may arise (both technical and 
economic) which will be tackled in the activities carried out 
in WP10.  
2. Technical barriers. Typical key barriers to the broad 
application of ceramic matrix composites include the lack 
of specifications, databases, attachment concepts, in -
service repair methodology, high cost, and scale -up. The 
technical risks and mitigation strategies covering the 
project delivery have been analysed and are covered in section 3.2. Any scale-up and industrialization of a process will involve a 
Figure 2.8 - Innovation Gap within the TRL scale (source IRIS). 

CEM-WAVE   
 29 
certain level of risk. However, in addition there are risks that competitive actions may result in IP being protected that would limit 
the proposed innovation strategies. It is important that, in obtaining any post-project financing, there is the "Freedom to Operate" 
and that there are no intellectual property (IP) conflicts. Initial IP searches undertaken in the preparation of thi s proposal (see 
section 1.4) have shown that there is Freedom to Operate. However, throughout the project, the partnership will employ due 
diligence in ensuring that IP risks do not become barriers to progress.  
3. Political and regulatory environment . The Kyoto Protocol and various European directives have set binding targets on 
countries to reduce their GHG emissions. Europe depends on imports for a significant proportion of its energy demand, especially 
for transport. Increasingly these import supplies are through state owned enterprises and employed as a foreign policy tool. The 
ambition of this project is to contribute to a more energy efficient processing and manufacturing industry in Europe. All partners 
from CEM-WAVE consortium are committed to fully comply with all applicable regulations and other legal requirements to conduct 
their research in a highly ethical and legal manner. Main regulation related to CEM-WAVE materials will be identified and reviewed, 
updated and addressed in WP8: among them: Environmental Management, UNEP specifications Guidelines for Social Life Cycle 
Assessment of Products, etc.  A special attention will be paid to the expected “Proposal to support zero carbon steelmaking 
processes by 2030”, announced in the recently published “The European Green Deal” as an action to be undertaken before the 
end of 2020.