1.2 Relation to the Work Programme     
CEM-WAVE addresses the topic LC-SPIRE-08-2020: “Novel high performance materials and components”; from a wider point of 
view, CEM-WAVE perfectly fits the context where the topic is placed, i.e. the Le adership in enabling and industrial technologies 
– Nanotechnologies, Advanced Materials, Biotechnology, and Advanced Manufacturing and Processing Work Programme under 
the Sustainable Process Industry (SPIRE) section.  
CEM-WAVE focuses on the steel industry, one of the high-energy demanding sectors which are considered a key part of Europe’s 
manufacturing base and which represents, together with other sectors such as cement and chemicals, 20% of European industry 
in terms of both employment and turnover. The  steel sector is characterised by energy intensive technologies and thus, among 
other targets, it has to optimise its industrial processes to reduce energy consumption and increase the use of renewable sources 
to make it environmentally sustainable. 
 
 
CEM-WAVE   
 5 
How CEM-WAVE will address the Specific Challenge is detailed in the table below: 
Topic Specific challenge How CEM-WAVE will address the challenge 
Energy intensive industries will require a radical 
transformation of their production processes to reach carbon 
neutrality by 2050. Future low carbon technologies and 
processes should address fluctuating and extreme 
conditions, such as high temperature or corrosive 
environments, materials and components that will need to 
be able to be sustained. 
Possible scenarios (WP7 – Task 7.1) to simulate the conditions 
where the innovative CEM -WAVE CMCs will be tested. The 
scenarios, all applicable to radiant tube furnaces, will reproduce 
the expected harsh conditions due to the introduction of 
hydrogen/biogas mixtures used as al ternative clean energy 
sources for steelmaking processes. 
In the same way, they also need to be designed for high -
energy performance 
Thermo-economic analysis (TA) and Energy optimization (Task 
8.3) of processes using CEM-WAVE materials will be performed 
throughout the project. 
Existing components materials and any combination thereof 
have however inherent limitations to meeting new extreme 
conditions. Stress resulting in degradation, corrosion, wear 
and/or deterioration can in particular lead to reduced p lant 
efficiency even plant shutdowns or entire equipment 
failures. The challenge is therefore to develop new, or 
overhaul the performance of, materials and combined 
components. 
Novel CMC components’ properties will be studied and 
compared to the properties  of currently employed materials in 
RTF (key part of the furnaces in the continuous annealing and 
hot dip galvanizing lines). CEM -WAVE components will target 
several Key Performance Indicators such as lifetime (Task 4.1 
and Task 4.4), heat transfer efficie ncy (Task 4.2), hig h 
temperature impact (Task 4.1), corrosion resistance in relevant 
environment (Task 7.1) and health condition monitoring will be 
performed (T ask 7.4 ). Different joining and integration 
technologies will be investigated (WP6) to produce c omplex 
shapes and for easier maintenance and repair in service. 
How CEM-WAVE fits the topic scope is detailed in the table below: 
Topic scope How CEM-WAVE fits the topic scope 
Proposals should develop and test high 
performance materials and combined 
components to withstand extreme and 
varying conditions that are expected in 
future processes, and improve their target 
performance for a long time 
CEM-WAVE will develop CMC -based materials and components (WP1 -3) 
produced by microwave assisted chemical vapour i nfiltration process (MW-CVI) 
upgraded with the latest fully tuneable solid state sources (WP2), improving 
heating uniformity of the sample with a faster and finer control of the operative 
parameters. The CEM -WAVE components will be first characterized (WP4 ), 
joined and coated (WP6) and finally tested in harsh environments (WP7) to have 
an expected lifetime at least 20% higher than currently used metallic -based 
materials in RTF even in future extreme and fluctuating conditions. Accelerat ed 
ageing (Task 4.4) and creep (Task 4.1) tests will be performed to precisely assess 
the increased lifetime of the samples produced in relevant environment. 
Design, including through modelling and 
artificial intelligence, … 
CEM-WAVE will develop new image -based (using X -ray CMT and SEM 
micrographs data) numerical modelling methodologies for the MW -CVI process, 
through AI-aided tools starting from material properties (internal geometry, heat 
and mass transfer properties and complex dielectric permittivity into the operative 
ranges of interest), to determine optimal conditions for infiltration time, material 
quality and energy consumption (WP5). 
… development, processing and testing of 
highly innovative materials with improved 
properties in terms of, e.g., temperature 
and humid ity resistance (corrosion, 
oxidation, thermal insulation), strength, 
functionality, weight, etc .. 
CEM-WAVE will develop, process (WP3) and test (WP7) non -oxide SiC-based 
CMCs, oxide CMCs ( 𝐴𝑙2𝑂3𝑓/𝑌𝐴𝐺 − 𝑍𝑟𝑂2 and 𝐴𝑙2𝑂3𝑓 𝐴𝑙2𝑂3⁄ − 𝑍𝑟𝑂2), 
and joining (WP6) for complex shaped CMC components. All materials will be 
characterized (WP4) to have excellent thermo-mechanical properties up to at least 
1200°C (creep resistance, thermal shock and impact resistance, pseudo -ductile 
behavior). 
…. and components with graded and 
protective coatings, yield strength, 
hardness, and resistance to media 
relevant for specific industrial application. 
CEM-WAVE products are themselves resistant to yield strength and with very high 
hardness. Proper environmental barrier coatings ( EBCs) will be deposited on 
them to increase high temperature tolerance to combustion environments (WP6). 
Components embedded with sensors to 
minimize industrial processing conditions 
constraints 
CEM-WAVE will a) inv estigate (Task 3.3) a new line of the latest generation 
monitoring tools based on the variation of the dielectric properties along the 
densification of the composite, controlling the processing conditions constraints 
and avoiding risks mainly connected to overheating and plasma appearance; b) 
combined use of IR imaging and electrical analysis to perform structural 
monitoring on the walls of the ceramic composite tubes samples potentially 
leading to malfunctions during its use (Task 7.4). 
CEM-WAVE   
 6 
Significant increa se in lifetime of 
equipment by reducing damage and 
degradation such as wear and oxidation in 
high temperature demanding applications 
of productive processes 
CEM-WAVE will employ proper EBCs to improve oxidation resistance and to avoid 
excessive wear mainly  for high -temperature demanding applications thus 
increasing the lifetime of equipment of at least 20%. 
Reduction of environmental impacts in 
terms of waste management and energy 
and resource consumption 
LCA, LCC, TA and risk assessment will be performed in WP8 to assess, among 
other, environmental impacts of processes using CEM-WAVE material. Moreover, 
the increased thermal efficiency of CMCs and the introduction of ceramic inlays 
inside the end leg (made of oxide -oxide CMCs) will allow to reduce pollutan ts 
emission due to the lower outlet temperature.  
As requested by the topic, CEM -WAVE includes a well -defined business case and an exploitation strategy, both thoroughly 
described in Section 2.