2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
A) Dissemination and exploitation of results 
The project results cannot be only oriented towards the excellence in the product itself. The need s and possibilities of the final 
users have to be considered in order to make real the economical payback and revenues of the public and private investment. 
Thus, excellence in dissemination and exploitation is of outmost importance to maximise the impacts obtained in the project. 
Dissemination plan 
Our dissemination plan encompasses a comprehensive series of actions to broadcast the non -confidential results that are 
generated during the project to the widest and most relevant audience possible. The goal is to heighten awareness about 
the results, to contribute to knowledge building in Europe, and to ensure that as many stakeholders as possible have access t o 
these results. This includes: the relevant industrial sectors (ceramic matrix composites, steelmakin g and manufacturing), 
standardisation bodies, retailers, market actors (environmental consultancies, etc.), policy makers, researchers and the academic 
community, mass media (TV, radio and the written press) and multipliers for addressing the general publi c, as well as other 
targeted stakeholders (other H2020, EC and national R&D initiatives, ESIF stakeholders,  A.SPIRE). The most appropriate 
dissemination tools and channels will be selected for targeting each and the expected impacts of our dissemination activities are 
also defined. The consortium will actively disseminate project results with a multi -faceted approach. The partners have an 
excellent track record in scientific publications, conference presentations and a strong history of engagement with ceramic matrix 
composites and steelmaking professionals, scientists, regulators, managers, commercial organisations, and the citizens . All 
research results will be disseminated to the scientific community, using multiple approaches: via scientific journals, conferences, 
the project website and regular newsletters.  This section includes the preliminary version of the Plan for the Dissemination and 
Exploitation of the Project’s (PDER) results, which will be enlarged and updated during the execution of the project. The purpose 
of the PDER is to provide a formal planning document for using and disseminating knowledge throughout the project. The plan 
will facilitate the common understanding of the aims of the dissemination activities, and will assure the disseminatio n does not 
interfere with the IPR management but is at its service. To  protect the exploitation potential, a confidentiality policy will 
underpin our dissemination activities. The consortium experience in collaborative projects points towards the most effective 
default position being that all information is confidential unless otherwise agreed as non-confidential. The dissemination strategy 
will reflect the broad expertise of the consortium and the diverse nature of the project results and related work packages. 
Considering the profile of each target audience, the most appropriate dissemination tools and channels will be selected for targeting 
each and the expected impacts of our dissemination activities are also defined. Within the framework of WP9, the par tners will 
build on and execute this dissemination plan  following a process of analysing : Why – the purpose of the dissemination action; 
What will be communicated – the message; To whom – the audience; How – the method; When – the timing. Performance 
indicators will be established as part of the upgraded plan, such as number of citations (for publications), number of hits on web, 
number of downloads (for electronic documents/materials), number of industry consultations (from tradeshows/exhibitions), 
number of policy-maker engagements, etc. The dissemination of the results of CEM -WAVE will be an important action, once 
identified valuable intellectual property has been protected, in order to reach the widest possible impact to facilitate the take-up 
of the new technologies. For this reason, a comprehensive Communication and Dissemination Plan as part of the Plan for 
the Dissemination and Exploitation of the Project’s results  will be developed under the supervision of the Dissemination, 
Communication and Exploita tion Manager (Cristina Barragan from KNEIA, leader of the Communication and Dissemination 
Team), to ensure a high visibility of the funded actions and help to maximise the impact of the CEM-WAVE results. Dissemination 
and Communication activities will be d efined by the Valorization Committee. Concerning the dissemination plan, it aims at 
divulging, in accordance with IPR restrictions, the main innovative aspects, which evolve during the development of the proje ct. 
In line with the above considerations all p artners will be involved in the definition of the dissemination strategy, which will be 
included in the detailed dissemination plans that will be issued at the end of month 18 of the project. These plans will give  clear 
measures and priorities of how to spread the solutions elaborated by the project consortium to the end users. Our dissemination 
plan will be complemented by a professional communication campaign  (discussed below). This will contribute to efficient 
CEM-WAVE   
 30 
coordination and dissemination of the project outputs across the relevant European and international communities to promote the 
project. Moreover, the dissemination strategy will also consider how it can best be used to maximise the future exploitation of 
the results of the research . CEM-WAVE will c ount on several tools and channels for the dissemination of the project 
results summarized in the following table: 
Table 2.2 - Dissemination channels 
Type of dissemination Target audience Estimated amount 
Leaflets Industry, academia, policy-makers 2 
Press releases All stakeholders 2 
Public website All stakeholders 1 
Newsletter Industry, academia, policy-makers 3 
News via social media (LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, 
SlideShare) All stakeholders 8 
Articles in technical papers Industry 3-5 
Articles at market oriented and economic journals Industry, consumers 3-5 
Peer reviewed scientific papers Academia 8-12 
Presentations at scientific conferences Academia 6-9 
Presentations at technical conferences and exhibitions Industry 10-12 
Webinar Academia and industry 1 
Final symposium Academia and industry 1 
The dissemination activities will be carried out through publications in specialized open access journals of ceramic matrix 
composites, materials, steelmaking and manufacturing sectors. Targeted jo urnals include:  Journal of the European Ceramic 
Society, Ceramic International, Materials, International journal  of applied ceramic technology , International Journal of 
Impact Engineering, Materials & Design, Materials Science and Engineering, New Carbon Materials, Journal of 
Composite Materials, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, Ceramics in Modern Technologies,  among the 
others. All these publications reach a wide spectrum both of the scientific, public administration and technical community. Priority 
will be given to journals that allow Golden and Green Open Access options. Consortium members, except where it is specifically 
agreed otherwise, hold copyright to the publication which will be published under the ‘Creative Commons Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
License’. The CEM-WAVE partners will therefore submit technical papers based on the project results in these journals. Potential 
scientific and technical market-oriented publications have been already pre-defined: 
Table 2.3 - Potential scientific and technical publications 
Topic Estimated 
month 
Target groups 
Ceramic fibre coatings based on ceramic precursors M24 Scientific community  
Porous fibre preforms with adapted properties for use in microwave 
processes 
M24 Scientific community 
Joining of oxide-oxide CMCs by pressure-less methods M24 Scientific community  
Joining of CMCs to dissimilar materials and their characterization M24 Scientific community 
Monitoring and modelling of the processing of CMC M24 CMC converters directly and other 
processing industries in order to give 
more visibility to our solutions 
Optimized ceramic inlays for radiant combustion tubes M24 Scientific/engineering community  
Thermal properties of CMCs for radiant combustion tubes M24 Scientific/engineering community 
Image pattern recognition as a tool for the modelling of ceramic matrix 
composites processing  
M24 Scientific/engineering community 
Image-based microscale modelling of the dielectric behaviour of 
ceramic-matrix composites  
M28 Scientific/engineering community 
Multiscale, multiphysics and AI -powered modelling of ceramic matrix 
composites manufacturing 
M32 Scientific/engineering community 
Corrosion resistance of ceramic matrix composites for radiant tubes with 
biogas combustion 
M28 Scientific/engineering community 
Oxide fibre preform impregnation; vacuum impregnation versus injection-
based techniques 
M24 Scientific community 
Processing of oxide -oxide composites via microwave enhanced 
chemical vapour infiltration 
M24 Scientific community  
CEM-WAVE   
 31 
The effect of process variables on the property characteristics for ox -ox 
composites produced by MW-CVI 
M24 Scientific community 
Joining of monolithic and composite SiC: thermomechanical and 
microstrctural characterisations 
M24 Scientific community 
Joining of monolithi c and composite SiC: thermophysical 
characterisations 
M24 Scientific community 
Water corrosion of monolithic and composite SiC in H2/CH4 mixtures M24 Scientific community 
The publication and presentation activity of CEM -WAVE focuses on interdisciplinary dissemination, which highlights the 
achievements that were possible thanks to the critical mass of experts who get together in the context of CEM-WAVE. Following 
Horizon 2020’s open access policy, the consortium will ensure that peer-reviewed scientific publications resulting from the CEM-
WAVE project will be deposited in repositories and made open, meaning free of charge online access for all the potential users. 
Even though it is believed that Open Access can also boost the visibility of European research , and in particular offer small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) access to the latest research for utilisation, it has to be kept in mind that Open Access will not 
interfere with Consortium decisions to exploit project research outcomes commercially or by patent process. Therefore, the project 
will pay attention to  the legitimate interests of the partners in terms of data protection and IPR issues related to commercial 
impacts of the project outcomes. CEM-WAVE will develop and implement open access to the project research results according 
to the following main conditions: 1) All peer reviewed research articles will be deposited into an on-line repository; 2) To make the 
best effort to have open access to the articles with a delay (embargo) of 6-12 months as maximum.   
An important feature of our dissemination strategy is the “CEM-WAVE Roadshow”: an agenda of events that will be mapped 
for the duration of the project to maximise resources and to bring mutual benefits to events being organised by third part ies. 
CEM-WAVE will schedule the trade fairs, exhibitions, workshops, seminars, conferences, round tables, etc. of relevance in 
Europe and internationally that CEM-WAVE consortium members can attend. Our target is to have CEM-WAVE present in at 
least 18 events in Europe and internationally over the course of the project. A philosophy of ‘not wasting’ any dissemination 
opportunities will be instilled in the consortium and partners will be encouraged to capitalise on the relevant marketing and  
dissemination events they are attending or organising to plan a dissemination activity for CEM-WAVE. Finally, CEM-WAVE will 
gratefully take advantage of specific dissemination events organized by the European Commission to present the project and its 
results as for example A.SPIRE, Environment and Circular Economy Info Days Workshops, European Researchers Nights 
as well as Science Festivals . A preliminary selection of relevant c onferences/events includes: International Ceramics 
Congress (CIMTEC), International HT-CMC conference (HT-CMC 11), International CMC conference, Hannover Messe, 
JEC,  International Symposium on Dynamic Response and Failure of Composite Materials (DRAF), International 
Conference And Exposition On Advanced Ceramics And Composites, Teratec Forum, SRA (Society for Risk Analysis), 
European Ceramic Society conference (ECerS), ICEAF VII, Ceramitec, R2B, etc.  
CEM-WAVE project dissemination activities will link with the broader dissemination strategies of the A.SPIRE Association (of 
which 3 of the 13 partners are associated: ArcelorMittal, ENEA, Fraunhofer): to boost the impact of our project, CEM-WAVE 
will follow the guidelines of the CSA project called SPRING (https://www.spire2030.eu/spring), funded by the SPIRE programme, 
destined to support the sustainab ility potential and the education, training, dissemination and exploitation activities for the 
enhancement of impact of SPIRE projects. In addition, CEM-WAVE will coordinate its dissemination efforts also with the European 
Ceramic Society stakeholder panel, and other relevant industrial association and standardisation bodies at pan-European level. 
CertiMaC, third party of ENEA participating to the CEM-WAVE project, is also member of UNI (National Standardisation Body) 
and of ECTP ( European Construction Technology Platform). We will aim to couple CEM-WAVE with meeting and events of 
these initiatives, to contribute to efficient coordination and dissemination of the project outputs across the relevant European and 
international communities to promote the project results One of the partners, POLITO, is member of the KMM virtual institute (KMM-
VIN) (http://www.kmm-vin.eu/), which gathers more than 60 industrial and academic partners from all over EU: dissemination and 
communication activities such as project description on the KMM Newsletters, dedicated KMM workshops, etc. are foreseen. 
CEM-WAVE will also promote the coordination of common dissemination events with other SPIRE PPP funded projects. In CEM-
WAVE, the plan is to organize a final conference event in month 42 to release the fully evaluated CEM-WAVE project results to all 
stakeholders; the event will be organised by UNIPI. UNIPI will organise a webinar to present intermediate results at M24. The  
webinar approach will allow reaching a wider audience limiting the costs of organisation. Given the partiality of results to be 
presented at M24 the audience could take advantage to a remote dissemination event limiting the costs for participation while being 
duly informed on the latest innovation development in the sector. CEM-WAVE will launch a dedicated website immediately after 
project kick-off (M4 the latest), populating it with regular non-confidential updates on the progress and a real-time “scoreboard” for 
our indicators. Each of the consortium members will leverage their own websites and other online presence (e.g. social media, 
project blogs, newsletters and on-line platforms) to disseminate information about the project and increase visibility of the project’s 
website. All consortium members will leverage their PR networks to publish press releases stating the project objectives and 
collaboration agreements in each participant state to drive early adoption and interest. CEM-WAVE will also use social media and 
dissemination channels to maintain the momentum until preliminary results can be published. In addition, the project will gratefully 
make use of any dissemination route offered by A.SPIRE and the European Commission, including publication of CEM-WAVE brief 
on CORDIS and similar websites.  The project will also develop a comprehensive strategy for activities with the general public as 
CEM-WAVE   
 32 
part of WP9. This strategy will include public engagement, press releases, communication campaigns and publication of articles in 
newspapers and popular magazines; all to be used to communicate the potential impact of CEM-WAVE results for the economy, 
the environment and the society at large. Television is considered a very valuable channel in this sense, for this reason loc al 
channels will be contacted to explore the possibility to participate in dissemination programs. “Futuris” in the “Euronews” channel, 
will also be considered for a wider coverage. The project will take benefit of the EurekAlerts! news -release distribution platform 
hosting news releases produced by universities, journal publishers, medical centres, government agencies, corporations, and other 
organizations engaged in all disciplines of scientific research. Public and non -academic stakeholders will be invited in the press 
releases, in order to raise the attention in the territory of the participating organizations. Both KNEIA and UNIPI will make available 
the support of their communication units, specialised in maximising the media and public outreach as well as in building targeted 
dissemination tools for research and innovation results. 
B) Business Plan and Exploitation of the results 
CEM-WAVE will validate (from a technical, environmental and 
socio-economical point of view) an innovative CMC production 
process to produ ce high quality CMCs for future applications in  
steelmaking and other energy -intensive industrial sectors. As 
such, our project outputs are highly relevant for future market 
exploitation. A preliminary exploitation strategy and business case 
has been conceived considering the contribution of the results to 
patents, to new or existing products, services, infrastructures, 
knowledge bases and standards, to ensure the project innovations 
are delivered to the market. Our intention is to realise all the 
exploitation pathways for the results: 
a) Commercial exploitation- the exploitation route of CEM -
WAVE will be twofold: a) the industrial use of the project 
knowledge and technology developments, for the creation 
of new processes to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts (CEM-WAVE use case will be the use of the 
developed materials in radiant tube furnaces in the steelmaking process); b) the production of the material itself in industrial 
setting, thus improving the material’s production business opportunities. 
b) Further research- providing the knowledge and skills for future spin-out research and development projects that will have a 
high impact for raising the European knowledge base to prepare CMCs for steelmaking and manufacturing products and 
equipment, while promoting these industrial sectors transition to the green economy; 
c) Contribution to standards- the project results will contribute towards a regulation and standard development in the field of 
sustainable development of CMCs. 
The CEM-WAVE project is a mar ket- and exploitation- oriented research and development initiative, our proposed Exploitation 
Strategy is a 4-Step approach, as summarised aside. During the implementation of the project, the most promising results will be 
identified (a preliminary list of potential KERs is listed in Table 2.3.). The expected impacts can only be realised through a robust 
post-project exploitation strategy. Table 2.3 gives a summary description of the exploitable knowledge, products or technologies, 
and results from CEM-WAVE project: 
Table 2.4 -  CEM-WAVE Key exploitable results 
KERs Proposed IPR tool WP Owners Potential/Targeted end users 
Fibre preforms both oxide and non -
oxide CMCs  
Know-how and patents 
to be licensed to 
companies 
1 FHF Textile industry, CMC 
manufactures, plant engineering 
and construction manufacturers, 
Aerospace/Aeronautics sector 
Fibre coating technology both for 
oxide and non-oxide CMCs  
Know-how and patents 
to be licensed to 
companies 
1 FHF CMC manufactures, ceramic 
industry (Refractory, Catalysis, 
Filtration) 
Component coating process and 
coatings both for oxide and non-oxide 
CMCs 
Know-how and patents 
to be licensed to 
companies 
6 FHF CMC manufactures, ceramic 
industry (Refractory, Catalysis, 
Filtration) 
Pressure-less joining process both for 
ox-ox and non -oxide CMCs, easily 
transferable to the industrial scale; 
wider use of CMCs in several 
applications, not only limited to steel 
manufacturing companies  
Patent, licensing to 
interested companies 
6 POLITO CMCs radiant tubes 
manufacturers  
Aerospace/Aeronautics 
Companies 
 
Monitoring system for CMC 
processing 
Patent, licensing to 
interested companies 
3 IRIS Companies converting the new 
CMC materials 

CEM-WAVE   
 33 
Designed ceramic inlays for radiant 
burner tubes 
Know-how and patents 
to be licensed to 
companies 
3-6 CNRS & 
other 
partners of 
LCTS:  U. 
Bordeaux, 
Safran, CEA 
Industries that make use of 
tubular burners 
 
Environmental assessment of the 
composite materials, designed for high 
temperature applications. 
Patent 8 R-Tech Metal industries, aerospace 
companies, consumers  
Fully functional tube for use in radiant 
tube furnaces 
Know-how and 
Patenting 
7 AMIII AMIII itself 
The combination of High-Power Solid-
State Microwave Generators at 
different frequencies 
Know-how and patents 
for license to companies 
and other organisations 
2, 3 FM Manufacturer of high -
temperature furnaces for high -
tech products from the ceramic 
industry, manufacturer of CVD 
systems. 
High temperature IR -Measuring 
Systems for the detection and control 
of the homogeneity of the microwave 
fields 
Know-how and patents 
for license to companies 
and other organisations 
2, 3 FM Manufacturer of high -
temperature furnaces for high -
tech products from the ceramic 
industry, manufacturer of CVD 
systems. 
Enhanced manufacture of oxide 
CMCs via the use of microwave -
heated chemical vapour infiltration 
Know-how and patents 
for license to companies 
and other organisations 
3 UoB CMC manufacturers, aerospace 
sector, chemical industry, steel 
and other materials industries 
Preform impregnation technology  Know-how and pat ents 
for license to companies 
and other organisations 
1 UoB CMC manufacturers and other 
ceramic manufacturing 
companies and organisations 
Manufacture of flat plates and open 
end tubes from oxide -oxide 
composites 
Know-how and patents 
for license to companies 
and other organisations 
3 UoB CMC manufacturers, aerospace 
sector, chemical industry, steel 
and other materials industries, 
other ceramic manufacturing 
companies and organisations 
Potential for obtaining a fibre / matrix 
interphase coating that can act as both 
a microwave absorber and yield good 
composite properties for a weak 
interface ox-ox composite 
Know-how and patents 
for license to companies 
and other organisations 
3 UoB CMC manufacturers, aerospace 
sector, chemical industry, steel 
and other mater ials industries, 
other ceramic manufacturing 
companies and organisations 
Design and manufacture of CVI 
system to UoB 
Know-how and patents 
to protect ATL’s designs 
and allow sale of 
equipment to ed users. 
2 ATL CMC manufacturers and other 
ceramic manufactu ring 
companies and organisations 
serving aerospace and nuclear 
industries 
Upgrade of CVI system at UniPi Know-how and patents 
to protect ATL’s designs 
and allow sale of 
equipment to end users. 
3 ATL CMC manufacturers and other 
ceramic manufacturing 
companies and organisations 
serving aerospace and nuclear 
industries 
Corrosion data for monolithic and 
composite SiC in combustion 
environments 
Know-how for license to 
companies and other 
organisations 
4 ENEA Radiant tubes producers; steel, 
glass, concrete and ceramic 
industry 
Composite SiC for therm omechanical 
application up to 1600°C 
Know-how for license to 
companies and other 
organisations 
6 ENEA CMC manufacturers, aerospace 
sector, chemical industry, steel, 
glass, concrete and ceramic 
industry 
Optimization and automation of the 
operating conditions of single -mode 
and multimode reactors fo r 
microwave-assisted processing 
Know-how and patents 
to be licensed to 
companies 
2,3 IPCF-CNR Manufacturers of high -
temperature furnaces for high -
tech products from the cer amic 
industry, manufacturers o f MW -
assisted processes systems 
CEM-WAVE   
 34 
In-operando analysis of the dielectric 
properties and the infiltration stage of 
the sample. Monitoring of the 
structural properties of the CMC in use 
Know-how and patents 
to be licensed to 
companies 
2,7 IPCF-CNR Manufacturers of high -
temperature furnaces for high -
tech products from the ceramic 
industry, manufacturer o f MW -
assisted processes systems 
Partners will be involved in identifying and addressing the target groups for CEM -WAVE and also future target groups. A set of 
measurable indicators will be established to account for the progress during the implementation of CEM-WAVE and to measure 
the effect/impact after the project ends (in the medium -long run). Additionally, in order to promote th e adoption of the project’s 
solutions after its termination, the final exploitation plan will include a socio-economic impact study that will be performed towards 
the end of the project. The partners will analyse and validate the primary and secondary market potential, and structure a market 
penetration & development plan accordingly. Preliminary market analyses in CMC and steelmaking sector has been performed 
and is described in 2.1. Cooperation with regulatory bodies and third-party sales and distribution licensees in the field of ceramic 
matrix composites, steelmaking and manufacturing  will be implemented. This process has already begun through the concept 
development and pre-project market validation work carried out by the partners within their existing  customer bases. The final 
Exploitation and Business Plan, as part of the PEDR, will be released in month 42. It will be drafted during the project cour se, 
according to IPR restrictions and information resulting from: 
• The knowledge in the CMC field; 
• Evaluation of possible industrial outcome for the research results obtained during this project; 
• Estimation of the economic impact of the processes developed under the project; 
• Observation of market trends and positioning of project results; 
• Market analysis (actual market needs and size in Europe). 
CEM-WAVE exploitation team will periodically review current and future industrial CMCs materials to estimate evolving 
opportunities and threats for the product’s positioning on the market and to ensure that exploitation strategies are up to date. 
Exploitation Interest and strategy of the Consortium Members : The partners have indicated their exploitation intentions for 
CEM-WAVE exploitable results. The expected results of individual partners and the intended method of th e exploitation are 
summarized as follows (Table 2.5): 
Table 2.5 -  Exploitation strategy 
Partner Exploitation strategy per partner 
UNIPI 
Expertise that is gained throughout the project will be used in future projects and future R&D activities; scientific 
knowledge will be exploited in scientific publications and academic didactical activity; possible participation to 
initiatives related to a trademark with the consortium. 
IPCF-
CNR 
Expertise gained from the Project for future projects and commissioned R&D activities; scientific publications. 
Know How from results obtained from the project and technology transfer. 
FM Know How from results obtained from the project for developing and manufacturing High Temperature Microwave 
Ovens under certain atmospheric conditions for the composite and ceramic industry. 
FHF Exploitation of results in scientific publications and know -how use in future projects. Expansion of the technical 
portfolio of the institute in the field of ceramic fibre preforms and EBC coatings. Pat ent of new findings and 
technology transfer to industry. 
UOB Expertise gained throughout the Project will be used in future projects and R&D activities; scientific knowledge will 
be exploited in scientific publications and academic teaching activity. Furthermore, UOB will use the project results 
and expertise gained during the project to expand its portfolio of services offered to industry. Patent of results 
obtained from the project. 
ATL Use expertise gained from project to broaden portfolio of available  ceramic processing equipment to a global 
market. Market new types of equipment directly to ATL’s large existing customer base and to potential new 
customers through attendance at conferences and exhibitions. 
ENEA Expertise gained from the Project for fut ure projects and commissioned R&D activities; scientific publications. 
Know How from results obtained from the project and technology transfer. 
CNRS Exploitation of results in scientific publications and know-how use in future projects. Training and consultancy on 
multiscale MW-CVI modeling. Patent on ceramic inlays and licensing. 
POLITO Expertise gained throughout the Project will be used in future projects and R&D activities; scientific knowledge will 
be exploited in scientific publications and academic  teaching activity. Furthermore, POLITO will use the project 
results and expertise gained during the project to expand its portfolio of services offered to industry. Patent of 
results obtained from the project. 
IRIS Further development (productisation and  customisation service) of the CMC monitoring systems and software 
embedding processing optimisation models. Commercialisation thereof. Use of the knowledge generated in further 
projects related with process control, as well as of the fact new sensors will  have been integrated (IR camera, 
dielectric sensors) in our platform PATBox® wherever relevant for B2B activities. 
CEM-WAVE   
 35 
AMIII Experience from results in the tests to plan future furnaces and define annealing process limits. 
R-Tech 
Expertise gained throughout the Project will possibly used as a standard and replicated in future research projects 
and R&D activities; scientific knowledge will be exploited through dissemination in scientific publications and 
participating in national and international conferences  and exhibitions. The project results and expertise gained 
during the project will expand the portfolio of services offered to the targeted industries. 
KNEIA 
As dissemination and IP valorisation expert, KNEIA is interested in take full advantage of the kn owledge to be 
developed in terms of market mapping, and providing full services of technology valorisation in relation with future 
exploitation of the developed solution. 
Foreseen business approach: The exploitation strategy will start with a comprehensive market analysis of the CMC market,  
which will be conducted among the wide network of CEM-WAVE partners and their close contacts with the CMC community. 
Several inputs (market latency, market potential, adoption rate or uptake, etc.) from the market analy sis will be used for the 
consecutive analysis, in which an economical evaluation using a “cost -benefit” model will be performed. Consequently, several 
alternative strategies will be prepared and prioritized choices will be made so as to propose the most appropriate business model, 
which will hopefully maximize future growth and return on investment for the products developed by CEM -WAVE. Different 
partners have identified the strong potential of the CEM -WAVE products for the development of a spin -off company, and have 
expressed their interest to take advantage of it, so specific consideration to this will be made in the Exploitation and Busi ness 
Plan. During the development of the project, this possibility will be considered at every step taken related to the protection of IPR. 
Various partners in the team have an excellent background in identifying commercial opportunities in the application areas of  
CEM-WAVE. Another exploitation option to be explored will be entrusting sales and marketing of the new products developed to 
an existing international Ceramic composite producer/supplier, since it offers an existing infrastructure. This option must b e 
carefully evaluated and the returns quantified. Whether this or other exploitation strategies that would allow bo osting the 
commercialization of the CEM-WAVE products are selected, IPR management will be considered for assuring the conciliation of 
the rights and eventual compensations of the IP owners.  The project will make use also of different tools to achieve good  
exploitation of the results including PESTLE -analysis, Porter 5 forces analysis and SWOT analysis. Exploitation plans, outline 
financial arrangements and any follow-up will be developed further during the project.  
CEM-WAVE is intended as a strategic proj ect from the industrial point of view, considering that industry and market needs are 
the main drivers of development and integration of the proposed Microwave assisted Chemical Vapour Infiltration (MW -CVI) 
processing technologies. The CEM-WAVE Consortium therefore will address the need of new technical solutions for European 
companies in the field to stay competitive in the market of CMCs, requiring such products at significantly lower cost: this n ovel 
proposed process, while maintaining properties of the currently used CMCs, will extremely reduce the costs for making 
components, thus lowering costs of CMC components that can access other market sectors such as energy -intensive process 
industries (e.g. steelmaking), and able to resis t to future harsher cond itions. Compared with the common expectation of a RIA 
(generally bringing technology from TRL 3 to TRL5), CEM -WAVE is expected to have a strong impact on the real economy 
through the deployment of its solutions in a relatively shorter than average time-frame. This is the case since CEM-WAVE is more 
market-oriented than most RIAs out of a deliberate choice. This approach has been suggested by the results of the preliminary 
market analysis, by the experience in the CMCs sector of multiple partners and by the appealing conditions of the material under 
study that, despite being developed in order to be used in future processes where high properties of CMC will be a requirement, 
can already positively impact current processes in terms of environmental sustainability, energy efficiency, lifetime of equipment. 
It has namely been estimated that it is most likely best to pursue commercialisation immediately, rather than apply for a sec ond 
round of public support to research and innovation (for instance through an IA), because the experience of the partners suggests 
that the ideal time-frame needed to reach high TRLs and ultimately the market is shorter than the one allowed by EU and national 
funded projects (However, the possibility of a Fast Track to Innovation project to develop specific solutions will be considered as 
well).  The Business Model Canvas [152] methodology from A. Osterwalder has been used in order to define the initial business 
plan below, hence to clearly define: value proposition; key partners, activi ties and resources; customer relationships; cost 
structures, revenue streams, value-delivery channels (Table 2.7). The Canvas in the next table summarizes the business models 
for the exploitation of our project results. 
Table 2.7 -  Business Model Canvas  
Key partners 
- CEM-WAVE 
Consortium members 
- Manufacturing sector 
- Steelmaking sector 
- CMCs production 
specialists and 
Industry 
- Scientific community 
Key activities 
- Environmental consulting 
services on steelmaking 
equipment and CMCs materials 
and CEM-WAVE manufacturing 
technologies 
- Cost evaluation of CEM-WAVE 
materials and processing 
- Economic feasibility analysis of 
CEM-WAVE and market 
application 
Value propositions 
- Increased 
understanding of 
environmental and 
cost impacts and 
their transferences 
- Decision support on 
environmental impact 
for product/process 
Customer relationship 
- Effective dissemination 
and marketing activities  
- Organisation of 
workshops, seminars and 
training sessions  
- Online platform for 
support to clients 
- Customer-based 
exploitation strategies 
- Strategic partnerships 
Customer segments 
- CMCs industry  
and composites 
producers 
- Steelmaking 
companies  
- Manufacturing 
industries 
- CMCs research 
agents 
CEM-WAVE   
 36 
- Investors (CMC, 
steelmaking and 
manufacturing sectors) 
 
- Tailored Business strategy: 
Exploitable Results and 
Technological Implementation 
Plan  
- CEM-WAVE 
systems cost and 
performance data 
- Social and socio-
economic benefits 
information 
- Education and 
Training 
- Contribution to 
International 
Standards for CMCs 
products 
- Better management 
of team members 
and cash flow 
- Overall customer 
benefit 
- Engineering and 
consultancy 
companies 
- Entrepreneurs, Spin-
off, Star-up 
 
 
Key resources 
-CMCs solutions  
-Technical and financial 
capability 
-Effective dissemination and 
marketing plan, presence in the 
EU R&D community 
-Client portfolio in the EU 
market 
-Databases on: environment, 
society and market 
-Continuous R&D activities 
Channels 
-Website  
-Academic journals and 
key magazines 
-Periodic newsletter 
-Direct contact with key 
stakeholders (meetings, 
email, etc.) 
-Presence at key 
international conferences  
-Communication and 
Dissemination Plan (as 
part of this initiative within 
WP9) 
Cost structure 
- Staff costs  
- Raw materials 
- Design and prototyping and adaptation of equipment  
- Software and database requirements 
- Travelling expenses for dissemination  
Revenue Streams 
- IP Licensing and Royalties by agreement 
- Direct sales of the products 
- Services (Operation and maintenance) 
- Advertises 
The business plan has three main goals: 
• to enable aligning CEM -WAVE solutions with the existing market needs (therefore, it has been deemed preferable to 
draft a preliminary version already in the proposal phase); 
• to identify a model(s) for an economically feasible exploitation of the different CEM-WAVE results;  
• to favour the identification of a joint solution for joint ownership and exploitation of project results, according to the 
individual business strategies, in strict correlation with the CEM-WAVE PEDR. 
The business plan has been created through the following 4 activities: 
A. Eco system analysis and mapping. 
The value chain has been preliminarily studied and mapped; the actors and the micro/macro environment variables has been 
identified; a strong representation of the full value chain, from the sensors producers to the final users of the CMCs materials via 
the materials developers and IT solutions providers has been selected for participation in the CEM -WAVE consortium. PESTLE 
and Porter methodologies will be applied for the EU market ; such activities, once completed, will be important in order to define 
the competitive environment in which partners will move to offer the added value of CEM-WAVE products and services. A market 
analysis has been conducted and it will be completed (WP9) for the CEM-WAVE new products/technologies, focused on EU. The 
preliminary market analysis results set against the characteristics of the CEM -WAVE solutions (adaptability, low cost, safety 
enhancement, etc.), have suggested to already identify both initial and succeeding target markets. This is reflected in the sector 
choices for market deployment: (i) steelmaking industry; (ii) composites producers; (iii) Sensor and AI modeling: Development of 
new multi-sensing units and AI modelling.  
B. Measurement of the global benefit; 
Building on the preliminary analysis, a full mapping of the most promising applications of CEM-WAVE solutions will be performed, 
and an approach to provide the relevant stakeholders with value selected; it will be a hybrid between the (long established) 
‘project-based system and ‘pre-designed (scale) based system’ – often described as the ‘taxi’ and ‘bus’ systems. Business models 
using the taxi system create value by interacting with specific clients to solve specific problems (for example co nsulting firms – 
such as McKinsey, large law firms, movie makers). Those that utilize the bus system add value by producing ‘one -size-fits-all’ 
solutions in a repetitive manner from a standardized format. CEM -WAVE systems will be hybrid in the sense that t he business 
model will be tailored for specific uses and developed in close collaboration with clients and all stakeholders, but at the same time 
it will target markets whereby, within each one and at times across them, there are ample possibilities of replications, and on the 
basis of modular building stones (CMCs, sensor types, AI algorithms, etc.).  
C. Shaping a business model for sustainable eco-system, on CEM-WAVE product-services offering 
For each target market a preliminary business model has been drafted and it will be refined in task T9.3, starting from eco-system 
analysis and mapping, hence allowing to define how to share the added value deriving from CEM -WAVE products amongst the 
existing (CEM-WAVE Partners) and new actors (e.g.: Stakeholders involved in the Multi-Stakeholders Platform).  
The business models are in each case based on the general CEM-WAVE solution but tailored on the needs and specifications of 
the target markets listed above. This will include also a full consideration of environmenta l and economic aspects. The LCA will 
determine the impact of CEM-WAVE solutions with regard to the environment, with a strong focus on their ability to reduce price, 
extend equipment lifetime and increase energy efficiency (thus reducing energy -related emissions); the intention being both 
CEM-WAVE   
 37 
maximising the environmental benefits and using their rigorously quantified estimating as a marketing tool. With regard to th e 
economic aspects, the focus will be on the reduction of CMCs cost to users and producers.   
D. Definition & Implementation of a disrupting, yet reliable, business plan for the Partners. 
Finally, based on the business models adopted, business plan for the project results will be designed, mixing products and 
services (Task 9.3). This activity will focus on detailing the elements needed to deliver the value proposition to the customer and 
to achieve the business goals for the new CEM-WAVE processes, products and services. It will include financial, operational and 
marketing information. With regard to the financial aspects, when bringing an innovation to the market, a most important factor to 
be considered is the financing of the investment; in the case of CEM -WAVE the up-front investment is not deemed to be large, 
while the operational capital needed is s izable as most activities are labour -intensive and extensive use of testing facilities is 
required. Most importantly, the business plan will also define the best approach, or approaches, to commercialisation from a legal 
and contractual point of view; the most promising routes are considered as of now in-house exploitation by the industrial partners, 
with the additional possibilities of creating a dedicated company for exploitation (possibly in joint -venture with a large CMCs 
producer or user). Indeed, an i ntegral part of the CEM -WAVE Business Plan is the Intellectual Property and Knowledge 
Management described in following paragraph and closely integrated in the CEM-WAVE PEDR. 
AMIII USE CASE 
AMIII use case is of fundamental importa nce because, among the ene rgy intensive industries identified in th e A.SPIRE  
consortium, steelmaking is one of the most representative sector in which is needed the reduction of the environmental impact. 
Obviously, the results obtained in CEM -WAVE can be successfully transferred to other high energy intensive industries  where 
resistance to high temperatures is the key property.  The radiant tubes built with the materials developed in this project should 
substitute the current metallic tubes (casted and Inconel ones). The price of these radiant tubes varies depending on the price of 
the Nickel, but it could be considered that a target price for a W shape casted radiant tube is 8 k€ and 12k€ in case of Inconel.The 
average lifetime of these tubes depends on several factors, but could be ranged between four and eight years, despite higher 
lifetime could be achieved. These values can be used for estimating a range for the cost for the tubes developed with the new  
material, taking a target lifetime of at least 12 years. An installation cost of 1k€ is also included in this evaluation. The higher cost 
of the Inconel is compensated by its efficiency: both materials have similar thermal conductivity, but the thickness is case of 
Inconel is lower (standard 5 mm) than in casted tubes (standard 8 mm) which results in a higher temperature in the surface with 
the same burner power. As the radiation is the power four of the temperature, an increase of 50 -60º C could result in a 20% of 
improvement in the efficiency in the hottest point. As the temperatur e distribution in not homogenous in these tubes, a more 
realistic value could be 5 -10% of improvement, so an average of 7 % is taken in the calculations. To make the CMC -based 
components market competitive with respect to current Inconel  employed materials, the target cost of the tube , including the 
improved efficiency factor and the expected increased lifetime of 12 years, should be in the range of 18-36 k€. Other factors that 
could further reduce  CMC costs could be the possibility  to achieve higher anneali ng temperatures or  new chemistries to be 
processed, but it is difficult to evaluate the economic impact of this improvement because it depends on the market demand. 
Therefore, the exploitation strategy will be defined by the final cost of the radiant tubes and its application to higher temperature 
cycles. A competitive cost will make a wider deployment to almost all the industrial lines possible, meanwhile a higher cost, but 
with the possibility of opening new product capabilities, will be limited to the top lines (technologically adapted to the new products).  
Table 2.8 -  Estimated cast and Inconel materials from current radiant tube furnaces. 
Intellectual Property, knowledge protection and regulatory issues 
Strategy for the management and protection of knowledge and intellectual property rights: To pave the way forward for 
commercial exploitation and dissemination of the project results, the consortium will implement an integral strategy for the effective 
management of the knowledge. The management of the IPR is not expected to present any especial complexity; the selection 
of the Dissemination Communication and Exploitation (DCE) Manager (KNEIA) has been carefully made and the coordinator will 
also contribute to the management of IPR if necessary, based on its resources and competences related wit h the different 
exploitation routes envisaged. The project results will be continuously assessed in terms of novelty, patentability and protection 
as part of an effective knowledge management strategy. For the results obtained, ownership, protection and use will be considered 
in detail. Ownership of patents will be clearly defined and governed by the Consortium Agreement that partners will co-sign. Results 
shall be owned by the participant generating them. To avoid doubt or confusion over ownership, a protocol of procedures will be 
defined, which will be followed by each partner to clearly show the development of the generation of knowledge or results. In cases 
results are generated jointly (i.e. where the separate parts of some  result cannot be attributed to different participants), it will be 
jointly owned. The allocation and the terms of exercising this joint ownership will be agreed in Joint Ownership Agreements. 
However, an overriding principle will be that the participating industry partners are always provided with the access that they 
need to the results to exploit them in accordance with the needs and strategy of their business. As such, access rights to 
Material Estimated cost Lifetime Cost (k€/y) Cost* efficiency (k€/y) Cost 12 years 
Casted 8 k€ 4 years 2.25 2.25 26 k€ 
8 years 1.12 1.12 13 k€ 
Inconel 12 k€ 4 years 3.25 3.02 36 k€ 
8 years 1.62 1.50 18 k€ 
CEM-WAVE   
 38 
results for implementing the project will be granted on a royalty-free basis. Access rights for use purposes will be granted either 
royalty-free, or on fair and reasonable conditions (these conditions will be established in Exploitation Agreements that 
will be negotiated between the requester and granter). Different potential business models  are considered, that could be 
conditioned by intellectual property laws of each country.  
Table 2.9 - Knowledge, results, property and exploitation strategy of CEM-WAVE partners. 
Partner Knowledge/Competences/ 
Background 
Results to which the 
partner will contribute 
Exploitation Interests 
FHF Novel ceramic fibre preforms and technology to 
handle highly stiff and brittle ceramic fibres. 
Adjustment of appropriate open porosity to be 
infiltrated with slurries and by MW-CVI processes 
in orde r to obtain dense and high strength 
matrices. 
Ceramic fibre based 
preforms with adapted 
porosity for oxide and 
non-oxide CMCs 
Technology transfer by 
licensing to enterprises with the 
priority to project partners 
FHF Functional fibre coatings to ensure hig h MW 
absorption and to contribute to fibre -matrix 
bonding and even control bonding (weak to 
strong) depending on the microstructural 
requirements. Technology for the coating of 
ceramic fibres in a continuous and cost -efficient 
roll-to-roll-process. 
Fibre c oatings for oxide 
and non-oxide CMCs 
Technology transfer by 
licensing to enterprises with the 
priority to project partners 
FHF Development of EBC coating systems  with 
closed porosity and with well adapted CTE to 
CMC substrates to withstand severe 
environments with increased lifetime.Technology 
for the application of the slurry based EBC 
systems onto tubes. 
Component coatings Technology transfer by 
licensing to enterprises with the 
priority to project partners 
POLITO The pressure-less joining process is ad dressed 
to all the components made of CMCs which will 
benefit from the development of a new joining 
technology, considering the following further 
aspects:  
1. Reproducibility  
2. Bonding performance  
3. Risk mitigation  
4. Savings in effort  
The most impor tant customer segment is the 
steel industry , but some of the innovations in 
joining process might be useful for  other markets 
(i.e aerospace). 
Joining process and 
joining materials 
developed for oxide-oxide 
and non-oxide CMCs 
Licensing to companies, 
priority project partners 
POLITO Development of new exploitable manufacturing 
technologies based on joining of CMCs to metals 
to enable new design solutions for heating 
element components, with improved reliability 
and in-service performance. 
Joining process a nd 
joining materials 
developed for dissimilar 
materials ( i.e CMCs to 
metals)  
Licensing to companies, 
priority project partners 
CNRS Optimized ceramic inlays  Combustor efficiency 
optimization 
Technology transfer by 
licensing to enterprises with 
priority given to project partners 
R-Tech Risk Assessment, Environmental impact 
assessment  
Risk management of the 
project. Assessing the 
carbon footprint of the 
chosen materials and the 
processes. 
Consultancy to companies. 
CEM-WAVE   
 39 
FM Knowledge and IP related to the Dev elopment 
and manufacturing of technically demanding 
High-Power Microwave Generators 900-930 MHz 
and 2.4 -2.5 GHz, technology for combination 
such frequencies and IR-Systems for microwave 
power control and matching 
Microwave Technology. 
Control Unit (regulation of 
the microwave oven) 
Development and 
manufacturing of technically 
demanding High Temperature 
Microwave Ovens under 
certain atmospheric conditions 
(normal, vacuum, 
overpressure) for the ceramic 
and composite industry 
ATL Knowledge and IP relating to the design, 
manufacture, operation, and maintenance of 
microwave enhanced chemical vapour deposition 
(MW-CVI) equipment.  
Optimised design of MW-
CVI equipment to carry 
out the following: 
1. Ceramic fibre based 
preforms with 
controlled fibre 
loadings and porosity 
for oxide CMCs. 
2. Oxide CMCs with 
controlled matrices in 
terms of composition, 
microstructure and 
macrostructure. 
3. Fibre coatings for oxide 
and non-oxide CMCs 
Manufacture for sale and 
support of M W-CVI equipment 
for the manufacture of oxide 
and non -oxide CMCs in 
aerospace and other markets.  
UoB Knowledge and IP related to the construction of 
oxide fibre preforms and the ability to impregnate 
them with oxide powder particles via slurries with 
a view to controlling the resultant fibre loading 
and porosity,  and hence gas permeability. 
Knowledge of the effect of the process variables 
on the resultant preform properties and their 
consequences on the ability to obtain controlled 
porosity and hence properties in the final oxide -
oxide composite. 
Ceramic fibre bas ed 
preforms with controlled 
fibre loadings and 
porosity for oxide CMCs. 
Technology transfer by 
licensing to companies and 
other organisations with priority 
going to project partners. 
UoB Knowledge and IP related to the ability to fill the 
porosity in the above preforms with oxide 
matrices via the process of microwave enhanced 
chemical vapour infiltration (M W-CVI). 
Knowledge of the effect of the process variables 
on the resultant preform properties and their 
consequences on the ability to obtain controlled 
porosity and hence properties in the final oxide -
oxide composite. 
Oxide CMCs with 
controlled matrices in 
terms of composition, 
microstructure and 
macrostructure. 
Technology transfer by 
licensing to companies and 
other organisations with priority 
going to project partners. 
UoB Knowledge and IP related to the effect of different 
interfacial coatings on the fibres on a) the 
microwave absorption characteristics and b) the 
consequent mechanical properties of the 
composites.  
Fibre coatings for oxide 
and non-oxide CMCs 
Technology transfer by 
licensing to companies and 
other organisations with priority 
going to project partners. 
UNIPI, 
ENEA 
Knowledge and IP related to the ability to fill the 
porosity in SiC preforms with SiC matrices via the 
process of CVI and mi crowave enhanced 
chemical vapour infiltration (MW-CVI).  
Non-Oxide CMCs with 
controlled microstructure 
and macrostructure. 
Technology transfer by 
licensing with priority going to 
project partners. 
ENEA Knowledge and IP related to the joining of 
monolithic and composite SiC, for optimising the 
radiant tube in term of production costs. 
Methodology for joining 
SiC-based materials, for 
use up to 1600°C 
Technology transfer and/or 
licensing 
ENEA/ 
CertiMaC 
Knowledge about the thermophysical and 
thermomechanical characteristics for a joining 
mixture suitable for monolithic and composite SiC 
Data for 
thermomechanical and 
thermophysical modelling 
Technology transfer and/or 
licensing 
CEM-WAVE   
 40 
CNRS/ 
ENEA/ 
UoB 
Knowledge (microstructural and 
thermomechanical changes) about the recession 
in relevant combustion environments (H 2 and 
H2/CH4 mixtures) 
Kinetics data for  
modelling and reliability 
assessment 
Technology transfer and/or 
licensing 
IPCF-
CNR 
Knowledge and IP related to the design of single-
mode and multimode MW reactor cha mbers, 
development of techniques for improving 
energetic efficiency and heating homogeneity, 
automation of the operating conditions, in -
operando analysis of the dielectric properties and 
of the infiltration stage, monitoring of the 
structural properties of the produced CMC when 
in use 
MW power coupling and 
distribution, dielectric and 
structural properties 
Technology transfer by 
licensing to companies and 
other organisations with priority 
going to project partners 
Data Management 
A variety of research data will be generated/collected in the project including (but not limited to): components characteristics data, 
processes and product data, customer survey data, etc. A detailed Data Management Plan (DMP) will be prepared by M6 within 
the activities of WP10 (Coordination and Management). Access will be via the shared area of the project website. A key challenge 
is therefore to ensure the impartiality and accuracy of any data collected as data can become biased towards an individual or  
organisation’s objectives and secondary data may be misinterpreted if it was collected for a different purpose. To mitigate these 
weaknesses, we will triangulate between sources where possible, and look for result confirmation across different data/information 
sources. The project coordinator in collaboration with the project Steering Committee, after the General Assembly gives a precise 
mandate, will take all the appropriate measures to make the data openly available and usable for third parties for study, teaching 
and research pu rposes via licensing or other means. Primary focus in data sharing will be on the data underlying prospective 
scientific publications ensuring the validation of results presented in publications. At the beginning of the research projec t the 
research consortium will decide and agree on the tasks, roles, responsibilities and rights relating to data collection, dataset 
management and data use. During the project, the data will be used by the research consortium members while after the end of 
project all reques ts for further use of data will be considered carefully and whenever possible approved by the principal 
investigator. Permission for data use will be granted providing there are no IPR or confidentiality issues involved or any di rect 
overlap of research questions with the primary research. Ownership of datasets will belong to the project consortium. Datasets’ 
variables and value names will be constructed following general data processing principles (F.A.I.R. data, i.e. Findable, 
Accessible, Interoperable an d Re -usable data). The common metadata schema Dublin Core will be used to store the data 
enhancing an easier data discovery and re -use. Possibility for follow -up utilization of the data will be ensured by documenting 
data collection methods as well as the contents of the datasets. The datasets generated will be archived at the premises of UNIPI 
for data security reasons and in addition archived in a common and – if feasible – open data repository depending on the decision 
of the Management Committee. UNIPI is responsible for curating, preserving, disseminating and deleting the datasets in its 
possession. Retention time for curated datasets is the same as other project materials at UNIPI, by default twenty years. CEM-
WAVE will develop and implement open access to the project research results as explained in section 2.2., making the best effort 
to deposit all peer reviewed research article into online repositories and have open access to the articles with a delay (embargo) 
of 6-12 months as maximum. 
Standardisation as essential tool to reach the market 
To ensure long term sustainability and widest possible use of CEM-WAVE outcomes, the project will interact with the appropriate 
bodies to contribute to standardization as needed during the course of the project an d following through the participation of 
respective consortia members. In particular actions will be directed to Cen, CENELEC, ETSI, amongst others. The standardization 
and fulfilment of regulations of CEM-WAVE products will be scrutinized and assessed. It is worth to mention that CertiMaC, third 
party of ENEA participating to the CEM -WAVE project, offers a wide range of services related to R&D, characterisation and 
certification for traditional and innovative materials and components. CertiMaC is also recognised by the European Commission 
and by the Italian Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport as Notified Body no. 2685 in accordance with the Construction Product 
Regulation - CPR (EU) 305/’11. CertiMaC is also member of UNI (National Standardisation Body ) and of ECTP (European 
Construction Technology Platform). The direct involvement of CertiMaC in the CEM -WAVE project will facilitate the future 
standardization and certification of our new materials. 
C) Communication activities  
Communication activities are considered to be an important aspect of this project, to ensure that we effectively promote our 
project and its outputs, as well as its benefits and impacts to the stakeholders that we want to reach. As one of the keys to 
successfully gaining impact is through our ability to secure stakeholder ‘buy-in’, i.e. the cooperation or positive participation of 
our key stakeholders, they will be the target of our communication activities. It is relevant that citizens are aware of the developments 
and the societal  benefits, especially in the context of the positive impacts for CMCs development and sustainability, and the 
improvement in the production and processes, the economic growth and jobs related to the project implementation, etc. Moreover, 
CEM-WAVE   
 41 
it is important to  communicate the societal benefits as the project is benefiting from tax -payers’ contributions. Through our 
communication activities we have an opportunity to ensure that citizens are informed and feel like they are getting value for money. 
 Table 2.10 - Communication table 
Target Audience Communication Objectives Major channels that will be used 
Industry value chains  and 
Scientific Community 
 
To generate industry and scientific community 
awareness of the project aims and expected 
impacts and to stimulate interest in future 
adoption and investment in the project results. 
The consortium will promote the distribution of the 
research results, especially to industrial C MC 
manufacturers and end -users. Prototypical 
components will be shown on exhibitions in 
different branches with high industrial 
participation like the international tradeshow for 
composites, e.g. the JEC in Paris. 
Professional social media channels 
(thought leadership, blogs, 
business/case studies (documented 
around the performance, feasibility an d 
benefits of our product prototy pes and 
their pilot processes).  Articles in 
technical magazines and journals.  
Participation in tradeshows, 
conferences and exhibitions 
CEM-WAVE Workshops and demo 
days. 
R&D specialists Report about new CMCs materials and t heir 
properties 
Publications in journals. Conferences 
with relevant theme as oral and poster 
presentations. 
CMCs industry, Composite 
Manufacturers, Material 
Matrix Manufacturers, 
Ceramic matrix composite 
distributors and suppliers 
Report about new CMCs ma terials and their 
properties in relevant applications. To 
demonstrate the improved capability and 
efficiency of microwave CVI equipment over 
conventional CVI that we build currently. 
Publications in specialized magazines. 
Conferences with relevant theme as oral 
and poster presentations. 
Standardisation and 
regulatory bodies 
Report about new CMCs materials and their 
properties in relevant applications 
Publications in journals. Conferences 
with relevant theme as oral and poster 
presentations 
Steelmaking Industry To demonstrate the benefits of the new CMCs 
materials as well as their increased sustainability 
throughout the value chain 
Articles in specialized journals and 
magazines. Sectorial conferences. 
Posters/Oral Presentations. 
CMC converters To demonstra te the benefits of being able to 
monitor the process to optimise the resulting 
materials 
Articles in specialized journals and 
magazines. Sectorial conferences. 
Posters/Oral Presentations. 
Consumers and citizens To ensure that consumers and citizens are aware 
of the project developments and the associated 
societal benefits, especially in the context of the 
positive impacts for environmental sustainability 
(CO2 emissions), not to mention the favorable 
impacts for growth and jobs, etc. 
Mass media (press releases) 
Social media (facebook, twitter) 
Through WP9, we will plan out our communication activities and develop the necessary communication tools (project website, 
leaflet, posters, social media accounts, etc.) to guarantee that communication activities will be effectively intertwined with the project 
dissemination effort. Stakeholders and general public engagement and support are crucial to increase the impacts of the project in 
terms of industrial competitiveness, environmental protection and a transition to the green manufacturing economy in Europe.  
To maximise the impact of CEM-WAVE communication activities the communication plan will follow these steps: 
1. Identify and list all possible stakeholders - the target audiences of our dissemination activities will be used as the 
starting point (in addition to any other stakeholders that might be considered important). Up to now an important stakeholder 
on the ceramic market (Sacmi) already manifested its interest about CEM-WAVE results (endorsement letter attached  in 
Annex 4). 
2. Organise our stakeholders - following a stakeholder analysis, the target audience of our communication activities will be 
categorised into “communities of support” for helping CEM-WAVE to realise its ambition, goals, objectives and impacts.  
3. Development of the CEM-WAVE brand - in order to help us in engaging with our stakeholders the principles behind the CEM-
WAVE brand (visually identified through its logo) will be further elaborated and documented. 
4. Design and implementation of effective communication campaigns (and supporting tools and materials) - our aim is to 
generate understanding within the different communities of support as to what CEM-WAVE is seeking to achieve. We will ensure 
regular communication to our stakeholders through these campaigns, which will involve the use of emails, face-to-face meetings 
(in the case of policy-makers), leaflets, posters, the website and social media, etc. A press and media relations campaign will 
be implemented throughout the project to ensure media interest and coverage. This will include direct briefings for selected key 
publications whilst providing them with additional materials to ensure that high levels of coverage are achieved. The impacts of 
these campaigns will be regularly assessed to enable any modifications or improvements to be made to ensure our 
CEM-WAVE   
 42 
communication efforts are effective.  
 
Table 2.11 - Target groups: The project will develop a specific communication strategy towards each of the stakeholders of CEM -WAVE: 
3. Implementation