1.3  Concept and methodology 
1.3.1 Concept 
1.3.1.1 CEM-WAVE overall concept 
The escalating problems resulting from climate change and especially to the environmental impacts of anthropogenic activities  
are getting advisedly exponential attention. This is reflected in the political direction of the recently estab lished European 
Commission: the Communication called “The European Green Deal” clearly outlines the mid-term and long-term objectives, which 
can be synthesised in “to transform the EU into a fair and prosperous society, with a modern resource -efficient and competitive 
economy where there are no net emissions of greenhouse gases in 2050  and where economic growth i s decoupled from 
resource use”. In order to reach those main objectives, several key elements have been identified. Two of them are shared by 
and at the basis of CEM-WAVE: 
• Mobilising industries for a clean and circular economy : energy -intensive industries, such as steel, chemicals and 
cement, are indispensable to Europe’s economy, as they supply several key value chains. The decarbonisation and 
modernisation of this sector are thus essential, as also testified by the recommendations published by the High Level 
Group of energy -intensive industries, which demonstrates  the industry’s commitment to these objectives  [1]. 
Furthermore, EU industry needs ‘climate  and resource frontrunners’ to develop the first commercial applications of 
breakthrough technologies in key industrial sectors by 2030. Priority areas include clean hydrogen, fuel cells and other 
alternative fuels, energy storage, and carbon capture, stor age and utilisation. One of these priorities is towards clean 
steel breakthrough technologies leading to a zero-carbon steel making process by 2030. The proposal to support zero 
carbon steelmaking processes by 2030 is one of the actions expected to be taken in 2020. 
• Mobilising research and fostering innovation : new technologies, sustainable solutions and disruptive innovation are 
critical to achieve the objectives of the European Green Deal; apart from the full range of instruments available under 
the Horizon Europe programme, partnerships with industry and Member States will support research and innovation on 
low-carbon steel making among others. 
In such context, research and innovation are directed in several directions including change of processes which will have to use 
clean energy sources to get lower CO2 emissions. For energy intensive sectors, where very high temperatures have to be reached 
(e.g. steelmaking), the industries will need to follow one or more low -emissions pathways. Concerning steel industry, the tender 
will be to use energy inputs provided from circular carbon technologies, fossil fuels with carbon capture and storage (CCS) a nd 
clean power for hydrogen -based ironmaking processes. Clean hydrogen  is enjoying unprecedented political and bus iness 
momentum, with the number of policies and projects around the world. Two key developments have contributed to the growth of 
hydrogen in recent years: the cost of hydrogen supply from renewables has come down and continues to fall, while the urgency 
of greenhouse gas emission mitigation has increased  [2]. The hydrogen debate has evolved over the past two decades, with a 
shift in attention from applications for the auto industry to hard to-decarbonise sectors such as energy-intensive industries, trucks, 
aviation, shipping and heating applications. Ensuring a low-carbon, clean hydrogen supply is essential; current and future sourcing 
options include: fossil fuel -based hydrogen production (grey hydrogen); fossil fuel -based hydrogen production combined with  
carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS; blue hydrogen); and hydrogen from renewables (green hydrogen). Regardless of 
the hydrogen source. Greener fuels containing h ydrogen (mixtures of hydrogen and bio -methane), that will be used to replace 
current fuels, can cause harmful phenomena such as hydrogen embrittlement for metals and hydrothermal attack for 
ceramics. These conditions would not be sustained by the currently used materials. We thus need a novel material that will be 
able to endure in such future extreme and fluctuating conditions for a long time, and contemporarily maintain its high-performance 
properties. CEM-WAVE is based on the concept that a material able to withstand such conditions while keeping its high 
performances for long times already exists, i.e. Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs) : CMCs are a class of materials that 
show considerable promise to provide fracture-toughness values similar to those for metals such as cast iron, yet are much lighter 
and designed for applications in severe environments (often co mbining high temperatures, high stress levels and corrosive 
atmospheres). Thanks to their exceptional properties, including high toughness, low density, high temperature, wear and corrosion 
resistance, these materials are increasing ly being considered for use in applications where reliable operations under extreme 
conditions are required. Currently they are being introduced into many other new fields and their range of applications will grow if 
CEM-WAVE   
 7 
their manufacturing costs will be significantly reduced [3]. CEM-WAVE innovative idea is thus directed at drastically reducing 
costs of CMC production to allow their sustainable use in sectors where their benefit would be enormous both from the 
environmental impact and from the productivity poi nts of view . To highlight the impact of CEM -WAVE, one of the most 
important European stakeholders on the ceramic market (Sacmi) wrote an endorsement letter. 
Starting from the results of 
HELM [4] (New technologies 
based on physical processing of 
materials for mechanical or 
electro-technical applications  – 
FP7 – NMP – GA N. 280464), 
FP7 project in which 5 out of the 
13 CEM -WAVE partners were 
involved, CEM -WAVE aims at 
advancing Microwave assisted 
Chemical Vapor Infiltration 
(MW-CVI) technologies. The 
use of these technologies will in 
fact (as described in Fig.1.1): 
• Drastically reduce the time of 
CMCs processing, which is one 
of the main components of this 
product costs; 
• The replacement of 
magnetrons with newer solid -
state sources will grant a fast, 
precise and automatic tuning of operational frequency and phase with a high coupling level and a much more uniform 
temperature profile in the preform. 
Thus, CMCs produced with MW -CVI will be cheaper 
but, at the same time  will have higher performances 
than the materials currently used.  
In the steelmaking sector, most  blast furnaces (BF) and 
subsequently basic oxygen furnaces  (BOF), currently 
reduce ir on ore using a high -temperature synthetic gas 
derived from coal and coke as energy inputs. Specifically, 
in steel pro cessing lines, indirect heating of products in 
protective atmosphere is carried out with radiant tubes 
equipped with gas -fired burners (around 50 b urners per 
horizontal furnace and  150 burners per vertical furnace). 
These components are made different grades of Inconel / 
stainless steel, depending on the location  (first leg or end 
leg). In CEM-WAVE we aim at validating the use of non -
oxide and oxide CMCs in radiant tube furnaces instead of 
the currently used material. CEM -WAVE technology will 
reach TRL 5. Demanding for this concept to be feasible 
and to find applicable solutions, CEM -WAVE consortium 
planned the research and innovation activities as described below and in the Figure 1.2. Set-up of the materials and of the 
Microwave technology will be performe d (WP1-2); the hearth of the project activity is the oxide and non -oxide CMC production 
processes (WP3), contemporary material characterisation (WP4), AI -assisted modelling (WP5) and CMCs joining techniques 
(WP6), all feeding each other in a circular proce ss, will identify the best composition and process parameters for obtaining the 
best oxide and non-oxide CMC materials. Sustainability aspects, both in terms of market analysis and environmental impacts will 
be investigated, (LCA, LCC, TA and Risk Analyses - WP8). All these activities will be completed by Dissemination, Communication 
and Exploitation (WP9) and Coordination an d management (WP10) activities. The involvement of several R esearch and 
Technology Organisations (RTOs) with diverse expertise at the international level in Materials Science, and past projects in 
collaboration with material or sectoral industries, will ensure the experience for effective technology transfer from research to 
industrial applications. On top of the well-defined business case, an exploitation strategy has been carefully planned in order to 
give to CEM-WAVE results larger possibilities of being used in other sectors where similar conditions are expected to be in place. 
The multi-disciplinary team (Material Science and & Engin eering, Electronic Engineering, including experts in Electromagnetic 
wave propagation and their interaction with matter, Physicists, Chemists and Environmental Scientists) brings together European 
expertise in all the relevant fields required by the projec t.  Between them, the consortium has the skills needed to achieve the 
Figure 1.2 -  CEM-WAVE WPs strategy and configuration. 
Figure 1.1 -  CEM-WAVE concept: nowadays CMCs are used for niche sectors (aerospace, defense, 
luxury cars, nuclear). CEM-WAVE, thanks to the reduction of the process time and improvement of 
the efficiency, will guarantee a CMCs lower cost to be affordable for new markets and, in cascade, a 
lower cost also of raw materials. 

CEM-WAVE   
 8 
project objectives and to develop and transfer the know-how to further enable industrial-scale exploitation, creating the required 
political and social environment underpinned by economics (business case) that encourages both transfer and adoption of these 
ideas. CEM-WAVE will enable this development and transfer of know -how through its value chain of actors . The participating 
academic and technology institutes ( 8 RTOs) includes both inte rnational experts in MW -CVI processing of non -oxide CMCs 
(UNIPI) and oxide CMCs (UoB), one of the leaders in all process chains of CMCs including fibre and EBC coating (FHF), renowned 
expert in experimental and numerical electromagnetic methods including h igh-temperature dielectric characterization of CMC 
materials (IPCF -CNR), the Italian largest institute on thermo -mechanical and non -destructive testing for CMCs (ENEA), 
internationally renowned group on micro/macro -scale modelling using AI -aided tools of C MCs (CNRS), and the top research 
teams on advanced joining and integration technologies for CMCs including testing and monitoring of the joined components 
(POLITO). The industry participants include the industrial final end -user (AMIII) which is the world’s leading steel and mining 
company, one of the SME leading German suppliers of microwave ovens for industry and research (FM), a SME specialised in 
the development of CVD processes and the construction of industrial CVD equipment (ATL) and a SME expert in development 
of novel monitoring hardware and software solutions (IRIS). CEM-WAVE has identified the essential needs to consider regulative 
constraints (end-user), financial aspects (KNEIA), as well as environmental issues (R-TECH), together with all partners involved 
in the value chains, at an early development stage. The competence and expertise of the Consortium will be complemented by 
the Advisory Board (AB) which will consist of prominent experts, in MW-CVI techniques and in CMC materials both in academia 
and in industrial sectors. The preliminary composition of the AB is: Byungil Yoon (DACC CARBON Co., Ltd., South Korea), Alexey 
Kulik (Soft-Impact Russia), Alberto Ortona (SUPSI, Switzerland), Roland Weiss (Consultant for CMCs, Germany). 
1.3.1.2 Positioning of the project 
From an overall project point of view, CEM-WAVE will start at TRL 3 and will achieve TRL 5 by the end of the project. CEM-WAVE 
can be split in several sub sections, each of them characterised by a well-identified technology (Table 1.1). 
Table 1.1 – Positioning of the project 
 
Technology Initial 
TRL 
Final 
TRL Description 
Manufacturing of ceramic 
based fibre preforms based on 
prepregs and filament winding 
technology 
3 5 Manufacturing of adapted fibre preforms, flat samples and tubes, by usi ng 
coated oxide and non -oxide ceramic fibres (WP1). Adjustment of suitable 
porosity and density for the CVI-MW processing (WP3) 
Coating of non-oxide and oxide 
ceramic fibres for a viable 
fibre-matrix interface in CMCs 
3/4 5 Coating of ceramic fibres in a fast, robust and continuous roll-to-roll process. 
Design of multilayer coatings to provide a weak fibre -matrix bonding for 
damage-tolerant WIC. Coated fibres will be processed to prepregs in WP1. 
Application of EBC coatings on 
CMC to improve life time of 
components 
3 5 Deposition of multilayer EBC coatings on CMC by a slurry coating process. 
Coated CMC test samples and prototypes will be characterized and 
evaluated in WP4 and WP7 under relevant test conditions. 
Production of SiC-based CMCs 
by MW-CVI upgraded with 
solid-state sources 
3/4 5 
Production of pilot -scale SiC -based CMCs samples with different 
geometries by upgraded MW-CVI process (WP3). Materialsand processing 
conditions will be optimized by multiscale modeling (WP5). The material 
produced will be  tested (WP4) and then joined and coated (WP6) to be 
finally validated in relevant environment for the business case (WP7) 
Production of oxide CMCs by 
MW-CVI upgraded with solid-
state sources 
3 4 
Production of pilot -scale oxide -based CMCs samples with dif ferent 
geometries by upgraded MW -CVI process (WP3). The material and 
processing conditions will be optimized by multiscale modeling (WP5).The 
material produced will be tested (WP4) and then joined and coated (WP6) 
to be finally validated in relevant environment for the business case (WP7) 
Characterisation of SiC-based 
CMCs durability and 
performances in combustion 
environments  
3/4 5 Corrosion, thermophysical and thermomechanical tests in simulated 
working conditions (WP4) 
Joining of CMCs produced and 
monolithic SiC 3/4 5 Preparation (WP6) and thermophysical and thermomechanical 
characterisations (WP4) for expected working environments 
Monitoring of CMC process 
and use 3/4 5 
Initial TRL based on the results of HELM project that will be further 
developed to reach in line monitoring capabilities (WP3 during process and 
WP7 during use). The single components such as sensors IR camera, 
software, etc. are market ready for other applications but need to be tailored 
to the use case especially in terms of withstan ding the harsh conditions. 
Specific data driven models must to be developed for close loop control. 
CEM-WAVE   
 9 
1.3.1.3 Other national and international R&I activities linked to CEM-WAVE 
CEM-WAVE will build on prior state -of-the-art as well as Intellectual/Industria l Property belonging to several of the Consortium 
partners. A selection of the relevant projects that are linking research efforts to CEM-WAVE are listed in the following table (and 
further projects can be found in the respective partner profiles). 
 
Table 1.2 - National and international R&I activities linked to BIOHIGH 
Project Partner(s) 
involved Relation to CEM-WAVE 
HELM, High-frequency Electro-Magnetic 
technologies for advanced processing of ceramic 
matrix composites and graphite expansion (FP7-
NMP, 2011-2015-LARGE-5) 
UNIPI, 
IPCF-
CNR, FM; 
ATL, 
R-TECH 
In HELM an innovative hybrid conventional/microwave 
assisted chemical vapor infiltration (MW-CVI) pilot plant was 
designed, developed, validating this technology for the 
production of SiC -based ceramic matri x composites 
(CMCs). The experience gained in the design of the MW -
CVI reactor in HELM will be exploited for the further upgrade 
to solid-state sources. 
High temperature composites using microwave 
enhanced chemical vapour infiltration (funded 
from the US Air Force Research (AFRL), 2016-
2019) 
UoB A microwave assisted chemical vapour infiltration (MW-CVI) 
pilot plant was designed and constructed to allow the 
production of SiC-based ceramic matrix composites (CMCs) 
EXCITE Processing and manufacturing of Ox Ox 
CMCs (funded from the Aerospace Technology 
Institute (ATI), 2018-2020) 
UoB 
A programme of research designed to learn how to produce 
oxide-oxide composites with both low cost processability 
and the required end-use properties. 
MATISSE, Materials’ Innovations for a Safe and 
Sustainable nuclear in Europe (FP7, 604862, 
2013-2017) 
ENEA, 
POLITO 
In WP3 of Matisse project (FP7) high reliability SiCf/SiC was 
studied for continuous operation at 1000°C for nuclear fuel 
cladding 
Nextower, Advanced Materials Solutions For 
Next Generation High Efficiency Concentrated 
Solar Power (CSP) Tower Systems (H2020, 
721045, 2017-2020) 
ENEA, 
CertiMaC, 
POLITO 
In Nextower project, SiC -based materials were 
characterized in simulated and real working conditions 
(thermal cycling up to 900°C) 
EEE-CFCC (2016-2018), FireMat (2019-201) 
(POR-FESR, Emilia Romagna region). 
ENEA, 
CertiMaC 
Development of new low cost CMC as thermostructural fire 
resistant materials 
CMC-Engine, Lightweight structures of SiCf/SiC-
Ceramic for gas turbines of the next generation 
(FHG funded program, grant number 833 886, 
2017-2020) 
 
FHF 
In CMC -Engine project FHF developed a very good 
knowledge about the use of SiC f/SiC-ceramic composite 
materials used in gas turbines. This knowledge can be 
useful as starting point for the production of the new CMCs 
technology. 
CaGeFa, Development of fiber coating and fiber 
preforms by using textile technology for efficient 
CMC´s (funded by the German Ministry of 
Research and Development, grant number: 
03X0143C, 2015-2018). 
FHF 
In CaGeFa project FHF developed a fiber coating 
technology that can be adopted for the preliminary fiber 
coating requested in CEM-WAVE project (WP1). 
Ker_Twk, CMC for aeroengines (German funded 
LUFO project, 2018-2022) FHF 
In KerTwk CMC especially the complete SiC-process chain 
will be investigated with the focus on the fibre coating and 
infiltration processes. 
TraTurb, CMC for turbines (German funded 
BMBF project, 2019-2022) FHF 
In TraTurb SiC -CMC are manufactured by using different 
fibre preforms and matrices, machined and tested by using 
international standards. 
GaMA, new Gas routes for Aeronautic MAterials 
preparation (French Aquitaine Region & Safran 
group project, 2019-2022) 
CNRS 
In GaMa project new Gas routes for Aeronautic Materials 
preparations have been studied. The modelling approach 
adopted and the background acquired can be used for the 
muti-scale modeling of the MW-CVI process (WP5). 
ADMACOM, Advanced manufacturing routes for 
metal/Composite components for Aerospace 16 
(FP7 –FoF.NMP.2013 GA 609188, 2013-20) 
 
POLITO, 
FHF 
In ADMACOM innovative manufacturing technologies 
based on advanced design of interfaces and of joining 
materials between ceramic and metals materials for 
aerospace components , were developed. The knowledge 
can be transferred to the study of the new joining technique 
between ceramic components (WP6). 
CEM-WAVE   
 10 
JOLIE, JOining of LIghtweight alloys to advanced 
FGM mEtal-ceramic materials ( European Project 
MATERA –ERANET Ministry of Education, 
Universities and Research –MIUR 2227, 2013-
2015) 
POLITO 
In JOLIE the research activity of POLITO was focused on 
the study of joining materials and processes for Al -alloy 
/ceramic brake systems. The knowledge can be transferred 
to the study of the new joining technique between ceramic 
components (WP6). 
PROPAT, Robust and affordable process control 
technologies for improving standards and 
optimising industrial operations (H2020 SPIRE, 
GA 637232, 2014-2018) 
IRIS 
PROPAT developed novel sensors and analysers to 
measure properties of process streams and produ cts, 
accurately and in real -time, integrating them into a global 
control platform for data acquisition and data processing. 
This background can be used as starting point for the 
development of new sensors to control and tune the 
operating parameters of pro cess streams and products  
(WP2-3). 
FIRE-RESIST - Developing novel fire-resistant 
high performance composites (FP7- 246037, 
2011-2015) 
 
R-TECH 
In FIRE-RESIST project R -Tech made the LCA and Risk 
Management for the production of novel fire-resistant high-
performance composites. The skills obtained can be useful 
for LCA and RA of the CEM-WAVE project (WP8). 
caLIBRAte, Performance testing, calibration and 
implementation of a next generation system-of-
systems (H2020 GA 686239, 2016-2019) 
R-TECH 
In caLIBRATE project R-Tech carried out Risk Assesment 
for the production of engineered nanomaterials. The skills 
obtained can be useful for LCA and Risk Analysis of the 
CEM-WAVE project (WP8). 
 
1.3.2 Methodology 
CEM-WAVE will be built carefully just like a spider does  with the 
creation of its web (Fig. 1.3). A work that is successful only with 
the integrated contribution of all the work packages, which 
represent the threads woven together. 
More specifically, the ambitious objectives of the project will only 
be reached, because of the well-integrated planned activities of 
the inter -disciplinary CEM -WAVE consortium on the different 
aspects. 
Four main groups of activities have been identified: 
• laboratory Research and Technical Development - RTD 
(WP1 to WP6); 
• industrial validation in relevant environment (WP7); 
• LCA, LCC, TA & risk assessment (WP8); 
• and dissemination and exploitation (WP9). 
All activities will be supported by the management activities 
(WP10). The main approach behind CEM -WAVE is the parallel 
validation of the two class of CMC materials: a) non-oxide CMCs offer the better high-temperature performances in terms of 
thermo-mechanical properties and low density, while b) oxide CMCs are increasingly gaining attention due to their considerably 
lower cost and intrinsic oxidation resistance, albeit their maximum use temperature is generally around 1000 – 1200°C. The CEM-
WAVE business use case well reflects these differences and has been conceived in order to make the best use for both classes 
of CMCs in the RTF in steel making. 
AMIII USE CASE 
CEM-WAVE methodology applied to the selected Use Case: Figure 1.4 shows a radiant tube furnace with actual conditions and 
future conditions, (i.e., in a hypothetical radiant tube furnace fuelled by a mixture of hydrogen/biomethane ( H2/CH4) – these 
conditions will be studied in Task 1.1; in the figure a negative scenario is hypothesised). Since the conditions within the furnaces 
will be clearly variable, the radiant tube will be customised with different materials: several degrees in terms of properties and 
costs will be analysed to optimise the final costs of these components, by placing, in every section, the most convenient material 
possible. Indeed, a certain degree of tolerance will allow the materials in every section to resist t o unexpected conditions or 
fluctuations. A hypothetical plan of the CEM-WAVE radiant tube configuration of the future is depicted in  the right part of Figure 
1.4. Different H2/CH4 will be investigated in order to assess CMCs behaviour in such working conditions during the project thanks 
to the innovative research on the set -up materials (WP1) on the process for producing both oxide and non -oxide CMCs (WP3) 
and the characterisation on the CMCs properties (WP4). 
Figure 1.3 – CEM-WAVE spider web construction. 
All activities are related like braided threads needing everyone's 
contribution for CEM-WAVE success. 
CEM-WAVE   
 11 
In order to make such a tube, CEM-WAVE includes innovative studies on joining of materials, especially between different types 
of CMCs (Ox-Ox – SiC-based CMC), tailoring both joining materials and processes for specific CMC s (oxide or non-oxide) and 
precise applications . CEM -WAVE joining activity will  look at bonding techniques based on pressure -less, high -temperature, 
tailored glass-ceramic sealant, brazing by “in situ” high T composite joining materials suited for the bonding of non -oxide and 
oxide/oxide CMCs and ceramics (WP6). The use of CMC will only be sustainable if the process to produce such materials will be 
optimised to drastically reduce the costs of the CMC production following a twofold approach: integration of fully tunable so lid-
state sources and their automation, opening further new pos sibilities to the MW -CVI process (WPs 2 and 3). Thanks to these 
technologies it will be possible to exploit the material itself as a sensor during the MW-CVI process, thus allowing the obtainment 
of the desired properties and duration of the MW -CVI process (WP2). Building on the CMC manufacturing process monitoring 
strategies developed in WP3, the process analytical technology software platform will be tailored to additionally perform structural 
monitoring on the walls of the ceramic composite tubes samples to detect material structural and composition modifications and 
thus alerting the user for on-time maintenance of the tubes (WP7). To support the product design and optimisation, CEM-WAVE 
will take advantage of micro/macro -scale modelling assisted by one of the most powerful recent key technologies tools, i.e., 
Artificial Intelligence (WP5). In more detail, it is envisaged to propose a consistent multiscale and multi-physics modelling frame 
making use of AI techniques for (i) the preparation of adequate computational domains from µCT scans of fibrous preforms and 
(ii) the acceleration of the balance equations solvers [5], and (iii) the optimization of processing parameters to obtain a pore-free 
infiltrated matrix. All these approaches will bring to a small -scale version of tube that will be tested in laboratory where (after 
ageing tests) it will experience conditions that will allow us to determine its feasibility in future plants powered by renewable energy 
sources; the same component will also be tested in current furnaces at AMIII where it will be placed on a specific support, to be 
also tested in current conditions. The latter is a fundamental part of the project exploitation strategy, which aims at a clo ser 
exploitation of the project results in current furnaces where our material can be introduced, bringing immediate advantages in 
terms of heat transfer efficiency and product lifetime (CMCs are expected to be better performant than currently used super-alloys 
on both aspects).The RTD work and the industrial validation will be supported by LCA, LCC, RA and TA (WP8), that will allow to 
keep the research and validation work on track with the fundamental requirements in terms of material requested properties, 
environmental impact, costs, energy efficiency and  possible risks. Parallel monitoring of other possible commercial exploitation 
venues will be also part of our strategy methodology, that will be based on the constant analysis and monitoring of the results at 
every step and in every part of the project in  order to identify any possible exploitable way for our materials, including other 
sectors. 
1.3.3 Gender dimension  
The CEM-WAVE consortium takes a comprehensive approach towards gender aspects, which includes gender mainstreaming 
and positive actions. In accordance with the Articles 2 & 3 of the Treaty of Amsterdam (1997) and other EU policy directives (COM 
(96) 67 final) and reports (EUR 2002), the consortium is committed to follow the principles of gender mainstreaming. Gendered  
analysis stimulates gender-responsible science and technology, thereby enhancing the quality of life for both women and men 
Figure 1.4 - Comparison between the curren t radiant tube section adopted by CEM -WAVE use case (AMIII) and the CEM -WAVE 
solution for future RTFs. 
CEM-WAVE   
 12 
worldwide. The applicants are conscious of the strategic importance to identify and avoid gender bias in science and technology. 
To this purpose, gender aspects are tackled from 2 points of view: 
1. In terms of project scientific and technical design and execution (methodologies, interpretation of data, dissemination of 
results). The applicants have considered that, due to the objectives of the project, the desig ning of methodologies and 
interpretation of data produced during the project should not be affected by gender considerations. 
2. In terms of project management (researchers’ recruitment, labour and family conciliation). The consortium will operate 
an equal opportunities policy for recruitment. The programme of work will not discriminate against persons of any gender 
and will aim to eliminate any relevant barriers and to encourage  the participation of women in the programme of work 
and its outcomes. All efforts  will be made to encourage participation by women and it will be instigated for all a work 
scheduling that allows for reconciliation between work and family life. Opportunities have arisen in relation with the 
project women scientists. The CO will be in charge of ensuring that gender issues are appropriately considered, for this 
reason a dedicated point will be included in the agenda of the consortium meetings.  
This approach is coherent with EC policy “Strategic engagement for gender equality 2016-2019”, published in December 2015. It 
is noteworthy that there is a strong presence of female researchers, technologists, and industrials in the consortium, a number of 
which are occupying key positions in the project. Several partners are represented by women participating in Project SC, and in 
WP and task leadership roles. A recruitment policy for future researchers and developers for the project is in place and is designed 
to ensure a reasonable level of balance between the sexes.