3.2 Management structure and procedures  
3.2.1.  Project management structure 
CEM-WAVE is a research project that will run for 42  months, bringing 13 partners from 5 countries in close collaboration. The 
dimension of the consortium as well as the multidisciplinary and cross-functional nature of the project requires a hierarchical and 
robust management structure 
in order to ensure a smooth 
workflow.  
The Project Management 
Team will lead the 
administrative and financial 
issues, providing support to 
the Project coordinator and 
the Steering Committee , 
which will handle the day to 
day procession of tasks. 
Fundamental decisions will 
be taken by the General 
Assembly formed by one 
representative of each 
consortium member. The 
Valorization Committee  will be specifically in charge of boosting the market uptake while ensure dissemination does not 
jeopardize IP protection and exploitation interests. 
Project Coordinator (CO) 
Prof. Andrea Lazzeri from UNIPI will be the Project Coordinator. He will take up the administrative/financial and technical/scientific 
management of the project. As CO  he will act as the contact point of the project with the European Commission, and will be 
responsible of resolving any possible administrative/financial, contractual or technical/scientific issue or misunderstanding 
amongst the beneficiaries. His responsibilities will include: 
✓ Monitoring of the project proper implementation; 
✓ Act as intermediary for all communications between the beneficiaries and the EU; 
✓ Submit any information, deliverables and reports to the EC previously gathered from the consortium members; 
✓ Ensure all payments are made to the beneficiaries according to the GA and the CA, and organize the project finances;  
✓ Organize and chair the GA and the Steering Committee meetings; 
✓ Control the overall project schedule and objectives maintenance, establish and monitor progress indicators and identify 
and manage associated risk; 
✓ Maintain regular contact wit h the Steering Committee members and ensure the execution of decisions taken by the 
General Assembly; 
✓ Report the project progress and risks to the EC and the General Assembly; 
Figure 3.2 -  CEM-WAVE project management structure. 
CEM-WAVE   
 60 
The project coordinator will be assisted by the Project Management Team, formed by personnel of UNIPI. This team will 
support also the Steering Committee. They are responsible for the day -to-day management of the H2020 project. They 
are responsible for the organization of meetings, coordination of the reporting, serving as helpdesk fo r queries by the 
consortium and any other task defined in the related WP (WP10). 
Steering Committee (SC) 
The SC consists of the Work-package leaders (WPL) and forms the communication and decision platform concerning scientific 
and technical demands of the work plan chaired by the CO. The SC will provide excellence to the scientific management of the 
project but also reflect both an interdisciplinary and inter-sectoral approach to the overall research objectives of the project. The 
SC will provide strong support to the CO for the overview of the project and for monitoring progress, making strategic decisions 
relating both to the research and to its dissemination, and for ensuring effective communication among the participating 
institutions. The SC will meet at least monthly by electronic means. The responsibilities of the SC include: 
✓ Monitoring progress against the project management plan; 
✓ Reviewing and approving changes made to project resource plan, schedules, scope, goals, cost estimates, etc.; 
✓ Making strategic decisions regarding the prioritization of project deliverables and approving interim deliverables; 
✓ Reviewing and approving the project development strategy; 
✓ Reviewing and suggesting solutions for the issues critical to project success; 
✓ Resolving conflicts between stakeholder groups. 
Work-package Leaders (WPL) 
In addition to its membership to the SC, WPL have the responsibility for the coordination of the technical work of the group 
associated with the related WP. In this role , each WPL will be assisted  by all participants of that WP. The WPL will have the 
following tasks and responsibilities: 
✓ Monitoring of the progress of the technical work on a day-to-day basis in the work package, including scientific managing 
and reviewing process, identifying risks and proposing appropriate actions to the CO and the SC; 
✓ Submit and interim semestral reports to the CO regarding task progress; 
✓ Preparation of deliverables and transmission of documents to the CO and the SC; 
✓ Transmission of deliverables of the partners within the work package to the CO;  
✓ Monitor the execution and submission of deliverables in the WP to the CO; 
✓ Work together with the Valorization Committee to enhance dissemination and exploitation of results; 
✓ Decide on scientific and technical aspects according to the WP; 
✓ Promote communication amongst other WPL. 
General Assembly 
The General Assembly includes one representative from each partner and is chaired by the CO. The assembly meets every six 
months as a regular basis, although extraordinary meetings can be required by the CO. By default, any decision can be taken by 
a majority of 2/3 of the voters, and to vote there should be at least 2/3 of the members present or represented. The decision s 
made by the General Assembly are mainly on proposal by the SC. The General Assembly decides on high-level matters relating 
modifications and amendments of the work plan and the work packages, acceptance of new parties as well as the exclusion of 
parties, budget related aspects, modification of the Consortium Agreement and premature completion/termination of the project 
Valorisation Committee  
The Valorisation Committee is the body in charge of making the consortium to take the best advantage in terms of market of the 
project and its results. The committee is constituted of two distinct teams, namely the Innovation Management Team (IMT) and 
the Communication and Dissemination Team (CDT). 
IMT - The innovation in the CEM-WAVE project will be driven by end-user needs to fully address the expectations of the industry 
clients. The IMT is constituted of the consortium representatives having a deep knowledge of the targeted markets and the specific 
environment of the industrial sectors concerned. ArcelorMittal and FM will be the pillars of Innovation Management Team in the 
CEM-WAVE project, although the complete composition will be defined at an early stage of the project. The IMT will manage the 
implementation of the innovation cycle by pulling R&D activities towards marketable products and technologies and the creation 
of new business opportunities. The IMT will guide R&D activities by giving feedbacks to ensure that the innovation cycle leads to 
successful commercial applications. Key exploitable results (KERs) will be identified by the IMT and key strategic issues, such as 
IPR protection mechanisms, IPR sharing and routes to exploitation will be discussed extensively during meetings of the IMT. The 
IMT will support partners who have generated KERs to prepare business plan canvas and subsequent business plan draft. The 
IMT will work under the lead of Dr. Ciro Avolio of KNEIA who is the designated IMT leader in the CEM-WAVE project. He is the 
right person to stimulate innovation with and for industrial partners within the consortium. The project will have also an IPR 
Manager from UNIPI. With an extensive experience in IP management and exploitation, the manager will assist the partners in 
relation with the protection of the developed knowledge (patent search, patentability study, writing, IP valuation and contra ctual 
aspects) 
CDT- The Communication and Dissemination Team will coordinate all actions related to dissemination of project information and 
communication of project progress and results towards the stakeholder groups as well as to the general public. It will be 
responsible to agree upon the relevant strategy, monitor and evaluate the performed dissemination activities and their impact and 
CEM-WAVE   
 61 
adjust the established strategy accordingly. Although all partners will actively part icipate in dissemination and communication 
activities, it has been decided that members of CDT will be UNIPI (as Coordinator), POLITO (representing research/academic 
partners), FM (representing industry), and KNEIA (as WP9 leader). The CDT will be led by Cristina Barragan  from KNEIA. She 
will be responsible f or leading the consortium in planning and implementing the project Communication and Dissemination 
activities, as well as ensuring the project reaches out to different audiences in the most effective way, and will also ensur e the 
confidentiality of the results is safeguarded until the IP is protected. 
Advisory Board (AB).  This body consists of a voluntary group of experts who will engage with the project on ad hoc basis 
according to the specific needs of CEM-WAVE consortium and on yearly basis at project meetings. This body has no voting rights 
and a confidentiality agreement will be signed with all its members. The composition of AB is set to cover the prominent experts 
both in academia and in industrial sectors, and its final composition and role will be d etailed in the Consortium Agreement. The 
preliminary composition is: Byungil Yoon (DACC CARBON Co., Ltd., South Korea), Alexey Kulik (Soft -Impact Russia), Alberto 
Ortona (SUPSI, Switzerland), Roland Weiss (Consultant for CMCs, Germany). 
3.2.2. Meetings and communication 
The Steering Committee will meet at least monthly as a regular basis by electronic means, in order to ensure the appropriate 
follow-up of the project. The Valorisation Committee will meet every three months as a regular basis by electronic means, where 
aspects in relation with the dissemination, and identification and management of Key Exploitable Results will be discussed. T he 
GA will be convoked every 6 months, although extraordinary meetings can be proposed by the CO in case critical situations arise 
that might require it. During the meetings of the GA, the Steering Committe e and the Valorization Committee will present their 
activities, advances and conclusions.  
3.2.3 Decision-making  
The CO is responsible for submitting relevant decisions in scientific and technical terms, including risk management, to the 
evaluation of the SC. Decisions will be taken by  a simple majority. In case of strategic decisions concerning actions to solve 
conflicts, mitigate critical risks to project implementation, make amendments to the grant agreement, etc., the SC –chaired by the 
CO- will require the decision of the GA. In the GA by default, any decision can be taken by a majority of 2/3 of the voters, and to 
vote there should be at least 2/3 of the members present or represented. In case of this situation, the CO has a quality vote.  
3.2.4 Appropriateness of organisational structure and decision-making processes 
The foreseen organisational structure and decision -making processes take into account the geographic  distances between the 
partners of the consortium and their respective competencies and expectations, the size of the consortium as well as the 
representation of each participating institution. The organisational structure and decision-making processes are tailored to achieve 
the research ambition and expected innovation impact of the project outcomes. Responsibility of each body is clearly outlined , 
and the internal following procedures will ensure each member understands his/her responsibility and the con text in terms of 
process and follow up appropriately pushes for a strong and committed collaboration between the members. The CO will take 
advantage of an experienced Project Management Team, and the Steering Committee will perform a consensual strategic 
management of the project. End-users pulled technologies/products will be useful to ensure the management of the innovation 
and related Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) by the Valorization Committee in its efforts in successfully pushing CEM-WAVE 
outcomes to the market. The functions and bodies at all levels are occupied by the most appropriately skilled and experienced 
persons in order to efficiently address S&T and innovation objectives of the CEM-WAVE project.  
3.2.5  Innovation management 
A key objective of the CEM-WAVE project is the steady translation of exploitable scientific and technological results into market-
oriented products. The approach of the Innovation Cycle by the CEM-WAVE consortium consists in a very pragmatic Innovation 
Management esse ntially driven by commercial actors from steel and ceramic composites i ndustrial sector s. Scientists and 
engineers will closely interact with industrial partners who perfectly know the market needs and volume potential, industrial and 
technological constraints and opportunities as well as regulatory standards to match the demand. The Valorization Committee 
and its related procedures is designed to do not leave to change the identification of exploitable results, but boost on an organized, 
conscious, professional and committed manner the focus on exploitation and market uptake of the research efforts. 
Table 3.2a - List of milestones  
MS 
no. Milestone name  
WP(s) 
Due 
date   Means of verification 
MS1 Communication Plan WP9 6 
A robust communication plan to support the recognition of CEM-
WAVE as a reference in the CMCs market place will be available 
and to secure stakeholder engagement with the project. 
MS2 Coating set-up of high degree 
coverage of non-oxide fibers WP1 10 
The most suitable coating materials and techniques for non-oxide 
fibers will be selected for the subsequent preforms production to 
be used in the MW-CVI plant (WP3). 
CEM-WAVE   
 62 
MS3 Delivery of improved preforms WP1 20 
Selected geometries (plates and tubes) of oxide and non -oxide 
preforms will be send for the infiltration in the MW -CVI plants  
(WP3). 
MS4 Feasibility of solid-state 
technology for MW-CVI process WP2 20 The new solid-state technology for oxide and non-oxide MW-CVI 
processes will be available. 
MS5 Mid-Term LCA WP8 20 
LCA, and LCC analysis wil l be performed. The mid -term results 
will be used to evaluate the sustainability of the innovative CEM-
WAVE processes and applications. 
MS6 Mid-Term Risk Assesment WP8 20 
Risk analysis evaluating technological and non -technological 
barriers will be develo ped to guarantee the feasibility of CEM -
WAVE objectives 
MS7 
Numerical Solution giving 
complete Production of a set of 
optimal processing parameters 
allowing reduction of time and 
improving efficiency 
WP5 25 
A complete simulation of MW-CVI will be carried out to evaluate 
the optimized operative conditions to decrease infiltration and 
increase efficiency 
MS8 Joining of oxide and non-oxide 
CMCs achieved WP6 36 CMC/CMC and ceramic/CMC joining technique will be available 
to produce pieces with complex geometry 
MS9 Production of non-oxide and 
oxide samples WP3 40 
Oxide and non-oxide CMCs samples will be available for physical 
and mechanical characterization and for the testing in relevant 
and future environment (WP 4-7). 
MS10 
Validation of CMCs properties in 
relevant environment and for 
future extreme and fluctuating 
conditions 
WP4-
7 40 
CMCs with tailored properties and high lifetime for relevant user 
case environment and for future extreme and fluctuating 
conditions will be available. 
The management structure has been conceived to minimize risks and facilitate the establishment of mitigation measures, as 
well as quickly address any problem that may arise. The main elements of our risk management strategy are based in 7 key 
aspects: 
1) Early identification of risks: The WP Leaders are responsible for analyzing the possible risk sources as part of the 
regular review of critical risks for implementation list, during the monthly WP team meetings.  
2) Efficient communication: The continuous follow up of the tasks will be guaranteed from the monthly interaction 
amongst WP teams and WP Leaders, and subsequent progress teleconferences with the CO. 
3) Prioritization of risks: The risk tracking will be organized considering its severity (defined as the likelihood and 
consequence). 
4) Full understanding of reason and impact of each risk: An initial analysis of each risk has been performed in order to 
define its impact and likelihood, but this analysis will be reviewed as the project evolves –in coincidence with the 
consortium meetings as default- in order to not underestimate possible deviations. 
5) Track risks and associated tasks: definition of a list of critical risks for implementation, as the basis for a systematic 
review. 
6) Develop preventive tasks for each risk: definition of risk-mitigation measures in the critical risks for implementation 
table.  
7) Establish responses to each risk: as the elements required for the materialization of a risk arise, the SC will put into 
practice without delay the corrective measures required for overcoming the deviations. 
The table below compiles a list of any significant risk identified at this stage of the project preparation and the associated 
contingency plans. Risks in Table 3.2b are related to the overall project and are then complemented by WP-specific risks. 
Table 3.2b - Critical risks for implementation 
Description of risk 
(level of likelihood: Low / Medium / High) WP(s) Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Execution Risks – Partner Related 
Partner leaving the project. Allocated and 
possibly key -part of the work cannot be 
performed, delaying the project schedule.  
Likelihood: Low; Severity: Medium. 
All 
If possible, the affected tasks can be allocated to another 
partner(s). Otherwise, the flexible management structure allows 
quick inclusion of new partners in the consortium if necessary. 
Key-person left or is temporarily not available or 
part of work allocated to one partner cannot be 
performed on time and with expected quality. 
Likelihood: Low; Severity: Medium. 
All 
Consortium partners are involved i n the related areas with more 
than one staff member, ensuring an immediate substitution. 
Furthermore, the project as a whole has technical excellence in 
related disciplines spread across the partners, providing 
CEM-WAVE   
 63 
additional substitution possibilities or an a ppropriate shift of 
resources and responsibilities. 
Execution Risks – Planning Problems 
Resources are underestimated. Part of the 
planned work cannot be completed in 
accordance with plan. 
Likelihood: Medium; Severity: High. 
All 
Such a situation is identi fied early due to regular monitoring. 
Project management bodies will analyse the following possibilities 
to ensure that planned work can be completed: 1) involve further 
partners with available resources, 2) rearrange resources among 
partners, 3) ensure in volvement of organizations’ internal 
resources, 4) re-plan work. 
Project schedule is partly not appropriate (e.g., 
due to changes) – Common project outcome 
and impact cannot be achieved as planned. 
Likelihood: Low; Severity: High. 
All 
Project management c ontinuously monitor and measures 
performed work. Corrective actions (e.g., change of the project 
plan) will be swiftly performed if necessary. In crucial cases, the 
coordinator will work on the plan adaptation in close cooperation 
with EU funding bodies. 
Technical Risks 
Selected raw materials or layer thickness for 
fiber coating does not allow the technological 
application 
Likelihood: Low; Severity: Low. 
WP1 
Inherent in the activity of WP1 the best compromise among 
interphase layer and thermal conductivit y will be analysed to 
optimize the fiber coating. Moreover , the consortium can use 
different materials for required fiber coating properties. 
Application of solid-state technology to improve 
heating efficiency not feasible 
Likelihood: Low; Severity: Medium. 
WP2 
WP3 
Back-up strategy: CEM -WAVE consortium will improve the 
current MW technology to realize a hybrid process in order to 
obtain CMCs with tailored properties for the use case and, at the 
same, time reducing process cost and improving efficiency with  
respect to conventional technologies. 
Final CMC porosity <10% not reached with 
MW-CVI technology 
Likelihood: Medium; Severity: Low. 
WP3 
Back-up strategy: Further coating or further densification cycle will 
be carried out. The addition of these steps do not affect the CMCs 
final cost 
Proposed technology (MW-CVI) is not feasible 
for fabrication of damage free oxide and non -
oxide CMCs with high thickness. 
Likelihood: Medium; Severity: Medium.  
WP3 
Experience with MW heating in other sectors shows that a proper 
choice of MW inlets will enable a complete “illumination” of all the 
components to be fabricated, whatever their degree of 
complexity. Also , the use of multi -physics modelling and 
advanced MW heating should reduce the risk of temperature 
inhomogeneities leading to microcracks and other forms of 
damage. In case of difficulties, modelling will be further carried out 
to find possible technical solutions, like the excitation of additional 
EM modes to mitigate the problems possibly experienced. 
In the CEM -WAVE schedule, the testing 
machines used for the characterization of the 
CMCs are not available (breakage of parts, 
maintenance, etc.) 
Likelihood: Low; Severity: Low. 
WP4 
Due to the wide availability of equipment within the consortium the 
scheduled experiments will be performed at another beneficiary 
avoiding delays. 
The parameters optimized through modeling do 
not reflect the experimental data obtained 
Likelihood: High; Severity: Low 
WP5 
Modeling based on more suitable equations and on AI advanced 
tools, starting from the experimental data collected, will allow the 
simulations carried out to be updated and verified. 
Joining technique to assemble CMCs is not 
feasible 
Likelihood: Low; Severity: High. 
WP6 
CEM-WAVE consortium is able to face this risk by using  a 
previously realised metal/CMC joining process satisfying the end 
user requirements. 
Sensors embedded in the process and in the 
production line of the end user may not be 
effective for evaluating the parameters and life 
of the piece. 
Likelihood: Medium; Severity: Low. 
WP3 
WP7 
During the process, the consortium uses the material itself as a 
sensor by live monitoring the change of its properties. The 
monitoring during the lifetime of the component can, however, be 
performed effectively with modelling activities. 
LCA and LCC reports low feasibility of the new 
processes and products. 
Likelihood: High; Severity: Low 
WP8 
Low feasibility of CEM -WAVE products & processes will be 
analysed constantly to identify, among other criteria, the best 
CMCs properties considering also the CEM-WAVE user case.  
Products with similar assets reaches the market 
during the project duration. 
Likelihood: Low; Severity: Medium 
WP9 
This risk is mitigated by our combination of novel approaches, 
aimed at being protected which design will be facilitated by novel 
modelling. The partners will perform systematic technology watch 
to early identify new products and therefore devise if needed 
CEM-WAVE   
 64 
areas of intervention to go beyond, e.g. by higher technological 
content or lower cost. 
Discrepancies in the consortium for the 
technical approaches. 
Likelihood: Medium; Severity: Low. 
WP10 
Regular communication among WP leaders to solve all technical 
issues. The CO, with support from the Project Management Team 
and the assistance of General Assembly, will control this issue.