1.4 Ambition 
There is an increa sing need in the twenty -first century to develop stronger, tougher and more chemically resistant structural 
materials in order to meet the challenges arising from the rapid increase in demanding requirements across a wide and diverse  
range of applications, from construction to transportation, health to energy [ 6]. Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs) are of great 
interest as thermo-structural materials [7] and were developed initially for military and aerospace applications. Some of the most 
important market ni ches include: thermally loaded components in space applications such as propulsion systems or thermal 
protection systems [8–10], refractory materials for furnaces [11,12] and energy reactors [13,14], and ceramic brake systems [15]. 
Emerging sectors comprise: antiballistic plates [16], gas burners, high pressure heat exchangers [1 7], fuel and solar cells [1 8]. 
Currently they are being introduced into many other new fields and their range of applications will grow if their manufacturi ng 
costs can be significantly reduced [19]. The global CMCs market was valued at US $ 4,857.6 million in 2018 and is projected to 
reach US $ 11,516.1 million by 2026, growing at a CAGR of 11.4% from 2019 to 2026, helped in particular by the demand from 
the aerospace sector. They can be segmented into non-oxide and oxide CMCs [20] with the former offering higher temperature 
resistance (typically up to 1400 – 1600°C) and the latter intrinsically oxidation resistance, thus finding applications where this is 
a critical factor, albeit their maximum use temperature is generally around 1000 – 1200°C. The aforementioned applications will 
significantly fuel growth of the CMCs market. However, their cost has been a concern for many industries over the last decade . 
The prices of ceramic matrix  composites are controlled, to a large extent, by the costs of ceramic fibers and energy intensive 
processing routes. Nonetheless, substantial opportunities will be presented by the energy and power sector, as it is a rapidl y 
growing application segment [21]. 
1.4.1  Advances beyond the state of the art 
1.4.1.1 Processing routes of non-oxide CMCs 
To date, the greatest amount of developmental work has been focused on the non-oxide CMCs and, in particular, carbon (C) and 
silicon carbide (SiC) fiber reinforced SiC-based materials (Cf/SiC and SiCf/SiC composites respectively), since non-oxide CMCs 
have attractive high temperature properties, including creep resistance, microstructural stability, excellent mechanical and thermal 
properties. CMCs reinforced with long fibers are commonly fabricated by infiltration methods [1], in which the ceramic matrix is 
formed from a fluid infiltrating into the fiber structure. These techniques differ from each other in the types of fluids and  of the 
processes for converting the fluid into a ceramic: 
• Chemical vapor infiltration (CVI): infiltration using a preceramic gaseous precursor (a vapor), which yields a ceramic as 
a result of chemical decomposition at elevated temperature; 
• Polymer infiltration and pyrolysis (PIP): infiltration with a lo w viscosity preceramic organo-metallic polymer followed by 
pyrolysis when the polymer converts into a ceramic (multiple infiltration-pyrolysis cycles are required to reach the desired 
density); 
• Reactive melt infiltration  (RMI): infiltration with a liquid m etal, which converts into a ceramic when reacting with a 
surrounding substance (e.g. liquid silicon infiltration, LSI, a type of RMI utilizing molten silicon). 
Generally, all infiltration techniques employ the following fabrication stages: 
− Preform preparation: At this stage the fiber reinforcing phase is laid up and molded to form a preform of the required 
shape, it can be made of stacked 2D layers of fabrics, needled ‘2.5D’ layers, or woven 3D fabric layers; 
− Interphase deposition: Where required, a coating (called interphase) may be deposited over the fiber surfaces before or 
after preform fabrication; 
− Infiltration: The reinforcing fiber preform is infiltrated with a preceramic fluid as outlined above; 
CEM-WAVE   
 13 
− Thermal processing: The preceramic fluid incorporated into the fiber reinforcing structure converts into a ceramic, filling 
the space between the fibers. 
In CMCs, the fiber-matrix interfacial domain is a decisive component controlling the (thermo -)mechanical performance of these 
materials [22,23]. The favored damage-tolerant fracture behavior and high fracture toughness are achieved by a weak bonding 
between the fiber and the matrix [24], while this weak interface needs to be strong enough to have sufficient load sharing between 
fiber and matrix. This load sharing is of importance to achieve a high strength of the CMC materials [25]. In non-oxide CMCs the 
interfacial domain is adjusted by applying coatings, so-called “interphases”, on the fiber [26]. Although many materials have been 
tested as fiber coatings [27], long-term stable damage-tolerant fracture behavior in non-oxide CMCs has only been achieved by 
using BN (boron nitride) or PyC (pyrolytic carbon) as interphases. A drawback of both materials is their limited oxidation an d 
corrosion resistance; if the in terphase corrodes via oxidation, the performance of the CMC degrades. To overcome this issue, 
additional layer(s) are applied on top of the BN or PyC layers [28]. These additional layer(s) (e.g. SiC, Si 3N4, etc.), protect the 
underlying BN or PyC layer during further CMC processing and, to a limited degree, also during use of the CMC [29]. Moreover, 
these layers provide an additional possibility to adjust the bonding of the interface coating system to the matrix [26]. 
Applying the coatings on e very single filament of a tow consisting of several hundreds of filaments with high quality is a great 
challenge. The coatings need to be homogeneous with a high degree of coverage. At the same time, bridging between the 
filaments needs to be avoided in order to be able to further process the coated tows by techniques such as filament winding. 
The fiber coatings can be applied by various techniques, among which Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) and Wet -chemical 
deposition are the most common. Advantages and disadvantages of both CVD and wet -chemical coating technologies are 
compared in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3 - Comparison of advantages and disadvantages of coating ceramic fibers by CVD and wet-chemical coatings technology. 
 CVD route Wet-chemical route 
Advantages • Doping of coatings relatively simple 
• No additional pyrolysis steps necessary 
• Relatively low thermal load on fiber 
• No synthesis of precursors needed 
• High variety of material systems can be deposited 
• Low investment costs 
• Coating set-up simple to modify 
• High degree of flexibility for process design 
• High process speed and through-put possible 
• Low maintenance costs 
• Technology easy to upscale and to implement in 
industrial production 
Disadvantages • Limitations in material systems that can be 
deposited 
• Raw materials often expensive 
• High investment costs for the technology 
• Low process speeds, low through-put 
• Complex infrastructure needed 
• Use of corrosive gases 
• Shrinkage, crystallization or phase 
transformations of the coatings during CMC 
processing or use possible 
• Modification of coating materials needs modification of 
synthesis of precursors 
• Higher thermal load on fibers during pyrolysis of the 
coatings  
• Limited coating thickness 
The fiber-matrix bonding must be sufficiently weak to allow debonding and consequently the relaxa tion of the stress field at the 
crack tip and the bridging of the matrix cracks by the fibers [30]. There are two methods of achieving this; for dense matrix CMCs 
(e.g. SiC-based composites) a low cohesion interphase coating (e.g. pyrolytic carbon or boron  nitride) is applied to the fibres 
before the matrix is infiltrated. CMCs of this type are called Weak Interface Composites (WICs) and toughening mechanisms such 
as crack deflection at the fiber/matrix interface, crack -bridging by fibers and fiber pullout at the crack plane  are operative. An 
alternative approach (e.g. for oxide -based composites) is to ensure that the matrix is weak. Such Weak Matrix Composites 
(WMCs) are characterized by the matrix being porous; the reduced matrix stiffness and strength all ows damage -tolerant 
behaviour, even in the case of a strong matrix-fiber interface. Whilst both approaches work, for WICs the interface coatings may 
oxidize at high temperatures in air leading to brittle failure, whilst WMCs typically display a low overall  strength or, if used at 
excessively high temperatures, the matrix can further densify leading to brittle behaviour. Concerning common non-oxide CMCs 
processing routes, Chemical Vapor Infiltration (CVI) technology is one of the most attractive industrially available methods [31,32] 
to produce fiber-reinforced CMCs. The main advantages are a) the possibility to manufacture complex net or near -net shaped 
components at relatively low temperatures for ceramic processing (typically  1000°C), avoiding potential damage of the ceramic 
fiber textile structures typically used as the preform and b) the ability to control and modify the microstructure of the mat rix. CVI 
methods can be divided into several categories, depending on: 1) the heating method, 2) the pressure  regime, 3) whether the 
process is isothermal-isobaric (I-CVI) or there is thermal/pressure gradient across the perform (TG -CVI, F-CVI/P-CVI). Among 
them, I-CVI is the most commonly studied and used version of CVI [33], although it is recognized as being v ery slow (products 
can take up to 3 months to make) and hence expensive. Polymer Infiltration and Pyrolysis (PIP) is a method where a low-viscosity, 
CEM-WAVE   
 14 
preceramic polymer is infiltrated into a C or SiC fibre preform, followed by pyrolysis in the absence of ox ygen during which the 
polymer decomposes and converts into a polymer-derived ceramic matrix. Widely used high-performance silicon-derived polymer 
precursors available on the market are polysilazane (Ceraset VL -20, Kion Corp), which can be converted into Si CO, SiCN or 
Si3N4 with ceramic yields of up to 90%. The use of preceramic prepregs (C or SiC fiber textiles impregnated with a preceramic 
polymer) is a common method to achieve a stable geometry, however densification requires a multistep (sometimes up to 12 
steps) iteration of infiltration and pyrolysis. 
Liquid Silicon Infiltration (LSI) is used to fabricate SiC -based CMCs. The process involves infiltration of a carbon microporous 
preform with molten silicon at a temperature exceeding its melting point of 1414°C. The liquid silicon wets the open pores, driven 
by capillary forces, on the surface of the carbon preforms. Ensuring the correct pore dimensions is important to achieve complete 
infiltration. If the pores are too small the infiltration passages become choked off, resulting in premature cessation of the infiltration 
process [34]. Although having excessively large pores aids infiltration, it can result in incomplete chemical interaction and the 
formation of a structure with high residual free silicon a nd unreacted carbon. In contrast to the composites fabricated by PIP or 
CVI, ceramic matrices formed by LSI are fully dense (typically >99% of the theoretical density). 
Some of the main advantages/disadvantages related with the various infiltration methods are summarized below (Table 1.4): 
Table 1.4 - Advantages/disadvantages of non-oxide CMC infiltration technologies.  
 CVI PIP LSI 
Advantages • High purity matrices 
• Low temperature (prevents 
fiber damage) 
• Excellent mechanical 
properties 
• Often smooth process 
surfaces 
• Low temperature 
(prevents fiber 
damage) 
• Good control of 
microstructure and 
composition 
• No free silicon in the 
matrix 
• Low cost 
• Short production time 
• Low residual porosity 
Disadvantages • Very slow process 
(~several weeks) 
• High residual porosity (10-
15%) due to bridging 
• High capital and 
production costs 
• Multiple infiltration-
pyrolysis cycles 
• High production cost 
• High residual porosity 
• Low maximum linear 
elastic levels 
• High temperature and highly corrosive 
metal melt (may damage fibers) 
• Residual free silicon 
• Low mechanical properties 
• Rough surfaces need machining with 
diamond tools 
1.4.1.2 Processing routes of oxide CMCs 
The challenge for oxide/oxide composites is to provide an alternative to SiC f/SiC composites with the aim of achieving a lower 
cost material, both by decreasing the cost of the constituent materials and manufacturing, and also by creating composites with 
improved thermal stability in air at elevated temperatures. Oxide/oxide composites typically consist of a porous alumina (Al 2O3) 
or alumino-silicate (Al2O3-SiO2) matrix reinforced by alumina fibers, although a small amount of work has also been undertaken 
into mullite fiber reinforced composites. The latter reveal that mullite-based fiber has potential to offer slightly higher temperature 
capabilities. Whilst both fibers tend to start losing strength by 1200 oC, alumina fibers can lose 90% of their strength by 1400 oC 
whilst for mullite fibers it was only 50% [35]. There is also evidence that some mullite fibers can retain useful strength to 1500oC 
[36]; further work on developing enhanced mullite fibers is still needed though. Meanwhile, the majority of research has focused 
on alumina fibers and the Nextel fibers produced by 3M in particular, though other alumina fibers are starting to be produced and 
investigated for the production of ox-ox composites [37]. There are four Nextel fibers, 720, 610, 440 and 312 in order of decreasing 
temperature capability. The structural grade fibers, 610 and 720, have crystal structures based on α-Al2O3 and do not contain any 
glassy phases, allowing the fibers to retain their strength at higher temperatures. Nextel 610 is a fine -grained single-phase 
composition of α -Al2O3 with the highest strength and modulu s; however, since it is essentially a single phase, the strength 
decreases rapidly at higher temperatures due to grain growth. Its maximum working temperature is limited to 1100°C for long -
term applications. Nextel 720 is α-Al2O3 with SiO2 added to form a mixture of alumina and mullite. It has better strength retention 
at temperature and increased creep resistance due to reduced grain boundary sliding as a result of the mullite pinning the gr ain 
boundaries and hence reducing grain growth during thermal aging. Nextel 720 has proven thermal stability up to 1200°C.  
Nextel 440 and 312 are cheaper and offer even lower temperature capability. Made from varying percentages of Al2O3, SiO2 and 
B2O3 (boria), they contain both crystalline and glassy phases due to the presence of the boria. The glassy phase helps the fiber 
retain strength after exposure to high temperature because it slows the growth of the crystalline phases that weaken the fibe r. 
However, when the fiber is stressed at high temperature, the glassy phas e weakens the fiber due to viscous flow much like a 
glass fiber. A major driver as ox-ox composites move towards production is achieving the cost reductions required to ensure that 
the solutions are market-competitive with titanium and other high temperatu re alloys. This has led to investigations into the use 
of both lower grade fibers and lower cost fabric design. Concerning the latter, this means using those based on higher -denier 
fabrics. Results suggest that a transition to heavier denier yarns and arch itectures has a relatively minor effect on mechanical 
properties or thermal stability whilst offering lower cost composites [38]. Development of dense oxide CMCs is a challenge since 
the oxide ceramic fibers can only be thermally loaded to about 1200°C [36,39,40] and the process for the fabrication of the dense 
CEM-WAVE   
 15 
matrix has to fulfill the requirements for industrial implementation. Because of these challenges, the development of fiber coatings 
for oxide CMCs lags behind the developments for non -oxide CMCs. Rather, porous fiber coatings based on ZrO 2, Y2O3, ZnO, 
Al2O3 or Y3Al5O12 have been investigated to provide a weak interfacial domain in oxide CMCs [41-43]. It has been shown that the 
favored debonding between fiber and matrix occurs during mechanical load, but the friction between fiber and matrix was too high 
and therefore the fiber pull -out effect was strongly reduced. Moreover, at high temperatures coarsening of both the coating 
microstructure and porosity occurred and thus the interface system cannot be considered to be thermally stable for long -term, 
high temperature applications [41,44]. Another concept is the use of the so-called “fugitive coating”. In this case, the fibers are 
coated with a thin layer of carbon, which is oxidized, and therefore evaporated, during further processing of the CMC [45,46]. In 
this case, a thin gap is formed between fiber and matrix. Load sharing between fiber and matrix depends on the thickness of the 
carbon layer and on the surface roughness of the ceramic fiber as well as  on the variation of the fiber diameter along the fiber 
axis. Load sharing between fiber and matrix occurs due to contact points between fiber and matrix. It has been assumed that the 
ceramic fibers are damaged at the contact points with a negative impact on CMC properties and life time [40]. Oxides with a 
layered crystal structure like phyllosilicates, beta-aluminates and magneto-plumbites have also been investigated as interphase 
materials for oxide CMCs [47-50]. Unfortunately, it was not possible to adjust the favored texture of the coating materials. Due to 
high processing temperatures, degradation of the ceramic fibers was observed. Interesting results have been achieved with fiber 
coatings based on rare earth phosphates, e.g. Me3PO4 [51-54]. Studies with different types of these coatings indicate that energy-
dissipating mechanisms like debonding, fiber pull-out and crack deviation can occur under mechanical load [55-59]. It should be 
noted, however, that the latter research was based on CMC fabrication routes that are not viable for industrial implementation. 
The most common processing route used to create oxide matrix CMCs is via the impregnation of oxide ceramic powder slurries 
into oxide fiber preforms. This requires significant control of the rheology of the suspension in order to achieve the correc t 
impregnation characteristics [60]. After drying the slurry, the resul ting powder can be sintered using low cost, conventional, air 
atmosphere furnaces. However, since even the best alumina fibers can only withstand temperatures to around 1200 °C and 
alumina generally requires about 1400°C to sinter, either very fine alumina powders, sintering aids (e.g. mixtures of CuO & TiO2 
[61], though these can affect other properties such as strength) or the use of sol-gel processes are typically required. One example 
of the latter involves the infiltration of liquid alkoxide precursors into the fiber preforms to form a polymeric oxide gel network in 
situ via hydrolysis and polycondensation reactions [30]. The primary issue with sol gel routes is that the first step of gel formation 
and its subsequent pyrolysis are characterized by a low mass yield of the ceramic matrix, leading to a high level of shrinkage 
(80% is not uncommon). A major issue with the standard route to the fabrication of ox-ox composites is therefore the difficulty of 
achieving sufficient control of the density of the matrix due to the need to use higher temperatures than the fibers can withstand. 
Alternatives such as using sol-gel based processes, ultra-fine particles or sintering aids all have their limitations, not least of which 
is the fact that they are slower and/or more expensive and/or affect the final properties of the composites produced. An alternative 
that has not been significantly investigated before is to use chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) to deposit an alumina or alum ino-
silicate matrix within oxide fiber preform of similar composition. The major advantage of using CVI is that, as described earlier for 
silicon carbide, the processing temperature is low, typically < 1000 °C and therefore the fibers are not damaged. In addition, it is 
possible to obtain good control of the microstructure developed. Whilst very little work has been focused on using CVI to prepare 
oxide-oxide CMCs, significant work has involved the deposition of alumina-based coatings using the closely related technique of 
chemical vapor deposit ion (CVD). Both CVI and CVD can usually use the same chemistry, allowing approaches originally 
developed for one technique to be adopted by the other. In the case of the deposition of alumina or alumino -silicates, it is quite 
common to use the chlorides [62] although research has also been undertaken using chemicals such as aluminum tri-sec-butoxide 
(ATSB) or aluminum tri-isopropoxide [63-64].  
1.4.1.3 MW-CVI of non-oxide & oxide CMCs 
In microwave-assisted CVI techniques, sample heating is obtained by means of high-power microwave irradiation, which releases 
energy in the sample through dielectric absorption. This approach enables volumetric heating of the sample, with heating rate s 
essentially limited only by the available microwave power. Moreover, the com bination of volumetric heating with thermal losses 
from the sample surface towards the colder walls of the reactor results in the development of an inverse temperature profile in 
the sample, i.e. the center becomes hotter than the surface. The temperature difference between the center and the surface of 
the component can be quite high, considering the high efficiency of the thermal irradiation governed by a T 4 dependence. 
Controlling these temperature gradients is key to controlling the MW -CVI process.  Based on the ‘inside -out’ nature of the 
deposition, premature pore closure due to crusting can be completely avoided, allowing densification to occur an order of 
magnitude or faster than with isothermal CVI (I -CVI). Experimental work has yielded this inside -out densification pattern in a 
number of different ceramic systems, including SiC, Si 3N4, Al2O3 and ZrO2. By means of the MW -CVI process, high purity and 
high density SiC matrices have been obtained and preforms of very complex geometry can be successfully infiltrated at operating 
temperatures between 900°C and 1000°C. Since the pressure required by the process is low (10-100 kPa), the risk of damaging 
the fibers or of seeing reactions between them and the matrix is limited. Previous work carried out by Binner et al. [65] based on 
SiCf/SiC components (50 mm diameter, 10 mm thick) has shown that, by using microwaves to enhance the CVI process, 
fabrication times can be reduced from several hundred hours to around 100 hours [70] and down to only 25 hours when RF-CVI 
is used to produce Cf-ultra high temperature ceramic matrix composites (UHTCMCs) [68]. Similar results were obtained with the 
MW-CVI pilot plant developed in the European project HELM for the production of SiC -based CMCs (HELM: High -frequency 
Electro-Magnetic technologies for advanced processing of ceramic matrix composites and graphite expansion) [69]. Unlike 
CEM-WAVE   
 16 
existing lab-scale MW-CVI equipment, the design of the HELM MW-CVI pilot plant in Pisa has been developed with the specific 
idea of allowing fur ther industrial scale -up. This approach has led to some complex engineering problems, which have been 
tackled in an original way. In particular, the inner chamber and all the components exposed to high temperature and extreme 
chemical environment have been  made out of conductive graphite. Moreover, this pilot plant can use a combination of 
conventional and microwave heating in order to tailor a suitable temperature profile in the preform to be infiltrated. 
The objective was the production of SiC -based CMCs achieving a reduction in processing time, as well as the identification of 
strengths and weaknesses of the MW-CVI process. Among the latter, the formation of hot spots in the sample and the appearance 
of plasma regions were regarded as the most detrimental  for the efficiency of the chemical process and the achievement of a 
continuous process. Traditional approaches to prevent the occurrence of hot spots consist of the rotation of the object to be  
heated or the inclusion of mode stirrers, i.e. mobile metallic surfaces that dynamically stir the electromagnetic field in the reactor. 
Both of these solutions, however, have severe limitations: they involve moving metal parts that, may get stuck as a consequence 
of dust accumulation in the environment of the reacto r and they provide a limited capability to control the actua l field intensity 
distribution. Many of these challenges have been successfully overcome; SiCf/SiC preforms with dimensions of 100 mm diameter 
by 10 mm thickness, twice those of typical lab -scale samples, have been infiltrated successfully, confirming the advantages 
expected from a MW heating. Specifically, it was possible to work continuously with reproducible and optimal operating conditions 
in terms of transmitted/reflected power via the careful design of the inner MW cavity so that it acts as an overmoded resonator at 
the operating frequencies. Infiltration tests showed an improved reaction efficiency, even allowing for the increase of sampl e 
dimensions, without plasma formation and a good compromise in terms of operating pressure. Deposition rate data resulted in a 
potential reduction of total infiltration time with a predominant infiltration of SiC on central laminae of the sample, confi rming the 
inside-out densification pattern and scaling-up of this technology. Research activities on MW-CVI for non-oxide CMCs will focus 
both on the electromagnetic aspects of the microwave heating and on the chemical aspects of the CVI process. Starting from the 
state-of-the-art results obtained in the framework of the HELM project by the UNIPI and IPCF -CNR teams in Pisa [70] the pilot-
scale MW-CVI reactor, operated so far with magnetron sources, will be innovated with the introduction of fully controllable solid-
state sources (see section 1.4.1.4 below). The aim of this upgrade will be twofold: first, it will enable a complete reproducibility 
and control of the heating conditions, minimising the risk of unpredictable hot spots formation and the activation of plasma 
phenomena. Then, it will allow the implementation of sophisticated heating procedures based on the ‘probe and pump’ technique, 
in which a low power sweep over the frequency range of interest (the ‘probe’) will determine the most convenient frequencies at 
which the high-power ‘pump’ must be done. Moreov er, the possibility to obtain a more homogeneous heating of the sample by 
means of a sequential ‘pump’ irradiation at different frequencies will be in vestigated for the first time.  The chemical aspects of 
the MW -CVI process will be investigated in detail with the aim to optimize the reaction parameters as operating pressure, 
infiltration temperature, reagents ratio and flows. A specific study will be devoted to the effect of a BN/PyC coating of the  non-
oxide CMC fibers, which guarantees the desired pseudo-ductile behavior, increasing at the same time the electrical conductivity 
of the sample. In principle, a thicker BN/PyC coating is desirable in order to improve the mechanical properties of the infil trated 
CMC. However, an excessive amount of carbon in the  CMC can increase the conductivity at a level in which the electrical 
conductivity is so high to shield the penetration of the electromagnetic fields in the sample, in analogy to the behavior of the 
conducting materials. The optimal trade -off between mecha nical and electrical properties will be determined measuring the 
dielectric properties of the BN/PyC coated CMC fibers at the infiltration temperatures. These measurements will be based on a  
rigorous technique, recently demonstrated by the IPCF-CNR team in Pisa [71] which is capable to accurately determine the high 
temperature dielectric properties of samples, also in their conducting state.  On the basis of the measured dielectric properties, 
an extensive analysis on the maximum allowed dimensions of the p reforms to be infiltrated will be conducted, with the help of a 
rigorous numerical modeling based on the Comsol Multiphysics software.  Concerning microwave-enhanced CVI of oxide-oxide 
composites, just two previous research publications have been found [72-74], undertaken by the team led by Prof Lynn Johnson 
at Northwestern University in the USA. In both cases a single mode microwave cavity was used, which very much limited the size 
of the samples that could be processed. Nevertheless, matrix growth was observed to occur from the inside towards the outside, 
i.e. an inverse temperature profile was created as observed in other research on both microwave - and RF -enhanced CVI 
undertaken by Binner’s team, which is now located at the University of Birmingham in the UK [66,68,74-76]. One issue that was 
faced by the Northwestern team, which will also be faced by the Birmingham team in the present work, is that alumina fiber 
preforms do not readily absorb microwave energy. In the first of their two publications, the Northwestern team doped the preforms 
with a fugitive carbonaceous additive carbon to facilitate initial heating by microwaves. This consisted of impregnating the preform 
with a sucrose solution, freeze -drying it and then pyrolysing at 1000 °C under nitrogen t o form carbon. In the second paper a 
susceptor was used in the form of a sleeve of strontium-doped lanthanum chromite. Whilst both approaches worked, the concept 
of using a fugitive additive will be more applicable in the proposed research program since su sceptors are known to degrade 
rapidly with use meaning that they need replacing regularly, which decreases the economics of the process [77]. 
In the proposed research, the investigation will utilize a state-of-the-art multimode microwave cavity. This will allow large samples 
to be made and a greater range of processing variables to be investigated. The work will focus on the use of a range of different 
alumina and alumino-silicate ceramic fibres. Whilst the bulk of the work will be based on the use of the N extel fiber range, work 
will also be undertaken using newer fibers that are available from Germany and elsewhere. Both 2D and 3D woven structures will 
be utilized and facilities exist at the University of Birmingham to measure the gas permeability of the preforms, very useful when 
developing a process route based on the principle of gas flow through the preform. Knowing permeability as a function of gas flow 
CEM-WAVE   
 17 
rates can greatly assist with modelling work (see section 1.4.1.6 below). The work will focus on usi ng aluminum and silicon 
chlorides, which have been successfully demonstrated to yield alumina and alumino-silicates as the matrix phase [72-73], whilst 
a range of different fugitive additives will be explored with a view to enhancing the coupling of the pr eforms to the microwaves. 
One major advantage for this approach for the production of oxide -oxide CMCs by microwave CVI is that the final product does 
not want to be fully dense, rather densities of 85 – 90% of theoretical are desired (see the discussion o f Weak Interface 
Composites and WMC in section 1.4.1.1). Since the rate of deposition during any CVI process decreases exponentially with time, 
the lack of a need to obtain full density will significantly reduce the time required to produce each sample, greatly assisting in the 
ability to make progress. Having said this, as indicated previously, work will also be undertaken on the use of fiber coating s that 
can both absorb microwaves and also function as a weak interface with a dense matrix, allowing Weak I nterface oxide-oxide 
Composites to be manufactured. A comparison of the different properties achieved in the composites will be most useful in 
identifying not only the best manufacturing routes but also the best properties that can be achieved together with an understanding 
of how to tune the properties for different applications. 
1.4.1.4 Improvement of the MW-CVI process through solid-state sources 
Recent advances in solid-state microwave sources [78] led us to analyze the use of this technology for the MW-CVI process. The 
reasons behind this choice lie in the rapid and precise control of the signal frequency, as well as a more stable and reproducible 
distribution of the EM field  [79], with the important possibility, from an industrial point of view, to aut omate the whole infiltration 
process, which in turn opens further new possibilities to this technology [80]. The ability to generate and amplify MW signals using 
solid-state semiconductor devices is not new since this technology has been the cornerstone of modern wireless communications 
for many years. Solid-state MW sources have enormous potential beyond data transmission applications: they are increasingly 
being used also for the purpose of heat and energy generation, enabling greater efficiency and contr ol than currently possible 
with conventional magnetrons  [81].  One of the major deficiencies of magnetron tube -based MW sources is their lack of fine 
control over frequency, power and the phase of the emitted wave, which prevent the implementation of closed-loop control aimed 
at the minimization of the power reflected by the MW reactor. On the contrary, with solid-state MW energy sources, forward and 
reflected power levels can be easily adapted with closed-loop controls thanks to the inherent, precise control over the solid-state 
source emissions in terms of frequency, power and phase  [82,83]. Solid-state MW transistors can also provide 10 times longer 
lifespans than magnetrons, ensuring significantly higher reliability and a reduced cost per working hour.  In order to overcome the 
drawbacks of magnetron-based MW reactors, one of the innovations proposed in CEM-WAVE is the replacement of the high -
power magnetrons with sources based on solid -state amplifiers employing LDMOS transistors.  Currently, the solid-state power 
generators covering the two major ISM bands, 902 -928 MHz (L-Band) and 2400-2500 MHz (S-band), are becoming more and 
more appealing from an economics perspective, thanks to the recent development of high-power transistors. These sources, now 
available also at the kW power levels necessary for MW-CVI, are frequency agile and capable of operating either at a single fixed 
frequency or in a frequency sweep mode that can cover the entire ISM band. The very short response time of the solid -state 
microwave generators and the possibility to pulse their output power can open unexplored possibilities in which the temperatures 
of the product can be rapidly controlled, avoiding hot spots and limiting the occurrence of plasma phenomena, thus reducing the 
risk of damage occurring due to overheating. Moreover, the s olid-state generators can be connected to the reaction chamber 
(MW cavity) via standard coaxial cables, minimizing the space requirements.  
The heating of the sample with solid -state sources is expected to improve the uniformity of the sample temperature, with the 
possibility to dynamically adjust the EM field in the reactor without involving any moving metal parts. In fact, the implementation 
of an automatic and extremely fast (millisecond range) frequency control, necessary to optimize the sample irradiation according 
to its dielectric properties – variable with the temperature and density - will allow a precise and stable heating power control during 
the process [84]. In the framework of the project CEM -WAVE, the benefits expected from the use of coherent sources will be 
maximized by means of a rigorous and detailed numerical modelling of MW-CVI reactors loaded with the samples of interest and 
based on the use of the software Comsol Multiphysics. In fact, thanks to the possibility to precisely select the operating frequency 
and so the mode granting the highest uniformity of the EM field, we will also be able to choose the best location of the samp le 
inside the MW cavity and to predict the effects due to different sample dimension and geometry, as demonstrated in the framework 
of the project HELM  In addition, the fast tunability typical of the solid -state sources will enable a more uniform heating of the 
sample by employing different resonance modes, excite d in a sequential way during the infiltration process. Accordingly, solid-
state sources are the ideal choice for a well-controlled and reproducible reaction, which translates to higher energy efficiency and 
better product quality. All these reasons, together with the steadily declining specific cost, explain the rapidly growing popularity 
of these sources in the community involved in industrial applications of microwave field-assisted heating. 
1.4.1.5 Development of advanced process monitoring tools 
In MW-assisted processes, one of the most critical reaction parameters to control is the temperature of the sample, particularly 
for samples larger than the employed wavelength. In these cases, the sample heating is prone to the formation of hot spots, 
mainly due to the standing wave pattern of the electric field in the reaction chamber. As a consequence, the monitoring of the 
spatial distribution of the sample temperature is a crucial step in the definition of an efficient MW -CVI process. In the most 
advanced approaches, the temperature of the sample is monitored by means of a thermal camera, which can give information on 
a relatively large part of the sample surface [70]. On the basis of the camera reading, the microwave power can be adjusted in 
order to reach the desired infiltration temperature. The use of a thermal camera in the monitoring of MW-CVI processes presents 
specific advantages with respect to the simple pyrometer. Indeed, the large view provided by the former is essential in limiting the 
CEM-WAVE   
 18 
occurrence of hot spots.  In the CEM-WAVE, thermal cameras will be employed to monitor the evolution of the surface temperature 
of the sample during the MW-CVI process. The images captured by the cameras will be acquired and processed in real-time by 
a proprietary sof tware platform in order to obtain a 3D view of the sample surface temperature. The maximum temperature 
detected on the sample surface will be employed to correct automatically the MW power delivered by the solid-state sources, until 
the infiltration temperature will be reached. After the beginning of the infiltration process, the surface temperature monitoring will 
provide the necessary feedback to stabilize the sample temperature. A second innovation of the CEM -WAVE project, deriving 
from the use of therma l cameras and the related reconstruction of the surface temperature distribution, will concern the 
development of an algorithm of ‘frequency jump’, in which the high-power irradiation of the sample will be alternated on different 
frequencies, corresponding  to modes with different field distribution. The use of such modes will help in obtaining a more 
homogeneous sample heating. Role of this algorithm will be to drive the power and frequency emission of the MW sources, in 
order to minimize the thermal gradients. The process monitoring strategies developed in the CEM-WAVE project will include the 
progress of the infiltration reaction. In conventional CVI processes, indications on the stage of the sample infiltration and thus on 
its density usually come from the previous experience. The use of reactor chambers acting as electromagnetic resonators opens 
the possibility of a direct investigation of the infiltration progress, based on the strict relationship between the resonance frequency 
of the electromagnetic mo des and the dielectric properties of the sample that are, in turn, closely related to the density of the 
sample. In the CEM-WAVE project, the resonance frequency of selected modes will be continuously monitored in order to obtain, 
in-operando, a direct information on the dielectric properties of the sample and thus on its density. The information on the dielectric 
properties of the sample will serve to determine the stage of the process, as well as to identify possible anomalies (internal sample 
damages or hot spots). In the framework of CEM-WAVE, monitoring strategies will also be developed for the structural analysis 
of the walls of the CMC tube samples during the tests in highly demanding applications. The structural monitoring of the CMC 
tubes will focus on the detection of possible cracks and on the degradation of the tube material in tests representative of long and 
realistic applications. In particular, two combined strategies will be implemented. The first one, based on an IR camera, will monitor 
the temperature distribution on the surface of the tube, whose alteration during a prolonged use can indicate the presence of a 
local damage (crack) or a diffused component degradation (reduction in the tube density). A second approach will be based on 
the electrical resistance of the tube, determined along its length by means of graphite electrode placed at the beginning and the 
end of the tube, which is sensitive to both both the presence of extended cracks, which increase the electrical resistance, and to 
the density and thickness of the tube walls. The inputs of the two sensors will be correlated in order to minimize the risk of ‘false 
positives’. 
1.4.1.6 Micro/macro scale modeling approach of CVI processes 
The CVI process and its variations [85] are based on the interactions between the transport of chemical species and their reaction, 
both inside and outside the porous medium constituted by the fibrous preform. The presence of thermal gradients strongly alters 
the reaction-to-diffusion ratio and can help a favorable situation development in which matrix infiltration starts from the inside and 
progresses towards the exterior of the porous medium. For instance, a criterion for a minimal thermal gradient allowing such a 
situation [86] has been derived with a simplified model considering homogenized materials properties evolving with the infiltration 
degree. This suggests that a consistent modeling approach to MW-CVI should consider several scales:  
• The reactor scale, considering the whole chamber, the heating devices and the preform;  
• A macroscopic scale, concerning the preform as a whole, considered as locally homogeneous; 
• A meso/microscopic scale, related to the structural and textural details of the preform. The fiber diameter is of the order of 
about 10 micrometers, but larger scales related to the weave, stackings arrangement, etc., may also be present. 
In the case of woven reinforcements, it is common practice to distinguish between the intra -bundle (microscopic) scale and the 
inter-bundle (mesoscopic) scale at which a Representative Volume Element (RVE) of the preform can be defined [87]. 
The principal phenomena that have to be accounted for at macro-scale are: 
1. Microwave heating: this is achieved by solving electromagnetic equations [88,89]; 
2. Heat balance in the preform, including heating power in the volume, radiative and convective losses at the preform 
borders, and heat transfer connecting both [90];  
3. Gas transfer in the infiltration chamber [91], then inside the porous medium, featuring multicomponent diff usion [92], 
viscous transport and Knudsen (rarefied) diffusion.