3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables and milestones  
3.1.1 Overall structure and Pert Chart 
A competitive work plan has been devised in order to deliver on the objectives of the CEM -WAVE project to ensure that it fulfils 
its goals and vision to catalyse the activities to produce novel materials capable to resist to fluctuat ion and extreme future 
conditions and to provide the requirements of the CEM-WAVE use case. KPI have been used as the starting poi nt for planning 
the work that needs to be implemented within the project. All the actions that are required to meet the objectives of this Research 
and Innovation Action have been collectively analysed by the interdisciplinary consortium. It was agreed how  best to distribute 
the workload among the various experts by making best use of their  relevant fields of knowledge, capacity, infrastructure, 
resources. This bottom -up 
planning process has 
greatly facilitated the task of 
arriving at a clear, 
comprehensive and realistic 
work plan (see Gantt Chart 
and Pert Diagram below), 
whereby all partners have 
ownership of the work plan 
and its approach. Of a total 
of 10 WPs aimed at 
accomplishing the broad 
scope of this SPIRE topic as 
previously justified, our 
R&D work  is split into 6 
WPs, connected  with the 
one in which a use case will 
be analyzed, each with 
clear tasks that will enable 
the project’s objectives to 
be fulfilled through a 
coherent structure that will 
also facilitate project 
management (WP10), 
sustainability study  (WP8) 
and the further 
dissemination and 
exploitation of the results 
(WP9).  
Stakeholder CEM-WAVE Benefits and Communication strategy 
Steelmaking industries  
 
 
Production and use  of innovative, sustainable equipment/products for 
the steelmaking sector: contacted through online forums, mailing, events 
and congresses, advertising in sector related magazines. Kn owledge of 
the environmental impact of different materials. Risk identification on time 
will have positive impact to the existing businesses.   
CMCs industry, Composite Manufacturers, 
Material Matrix Manufacturers, Ceramic matrix 
composite distributors and suppliers 
Articles in specialized journals and magazines. Sectorial conferences. 
Posters/Oral Presentations. 
CMC converters Articles in specialized journals and magazines. Sectorial conferences. 
Posters/Oral Presentations. 
Standardisation community Project information and dissemination of project results. 
Academia Articles in specialized journals and magazines. Sectorial conferences. 
Posters/Oral Presentations. 
General public Information about CEM -WAVE and its achievements. Public website, 
datasheets creation, marketing campaigns 
Figure 3.1 – CEM-WAVE Pert Chart. 
CEM-WAVE   
 43 
The first research phase (WP1 and WP2) deals with the preparation of the fiber coating and improve the knowledge of the solid-
state MW technology. CEM-WAVE heart is characterized by WP3, in which oxide and non-oxide CMCs will be produced wity the 
implemented MW-CVI technique. All around there are WPs of support about the WP3 activity: AI assisted modeling (WP5), 
Characterization also in relevant environment (WP4) and joinin g R&D on CMCs (WP6). Contemporary, the CMC gradually 
designed, produced and joined will be tested by CEM-WAVE use case work package (WP7). As described before the work plan 
is encased in a robust environmental and thermoeconomical analysis (WP8), in a fundamental project exploitation, dissemination 
and communication plan (WP9) and in well-established and efficient project management structure and procedures (WP10). The 
work plan is linked to the objectives set out in Section 1.1 and the consortium is confident that this work plan is robust to ensure 
that the project’s S&T and innovation goals are fulfilled.  
3.1.2 Gantt chart 
 
3.1.3  Detailed work packages description 
Table 3.1a - List of WPs 
WP 
No. 
WP Title Lead 
Part. No. 
Leader  
Short Name 
Person 
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
month 
WP1 Set-up preform materials for MW-CVI processes 4 FHF 28 1 20 
WP2 MW-CVI processing of CMCs based on solid-state 
sources 2 IPCF-CNR 69,5 1 20 
WP3 Optimization of the MW-CVI process for non-oxide and 
oxide CMCs 1 UNIPI 118,3 6 40 
WP4 Microstructural, thermomechanical and thermophysical 
characterisations of CMCs and their joints 6 ENEA 75,6 15 40 
WP5 Micro and Macro scale modeling of the MW-CVI 
processes 7 CNRS 25,1 6 38 
WP6 Joining and Coating of the produced CMC samples 9 POLITO 36,02 6 40 
WP7 Validation of CMC in steelmaking relevant environment 11 AMIII 69,5 20 42 
WP8 LCA, LCC, TA & Risk assessment 12 R-Tech 30 1 42 
WP9 Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation 13 KNEIA 62,1 1 42 
WP10 Coordination and Management 1 UNIPI 35,3 1 42 
   Total months 549,42   
Table 3.1b - Work package description  

CEM-WAVE   
 44 
WP No. WP1 Lead beneficiary FHF 
WP title Set-up preform materials for MW-CVI processes 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 5,5 4 0 13,5 1 0 1 0 1 0 2 0 0 
Start Month 1 End Month 20 
Objectives  
• Development of oxide and non -oxide preforms to be processed in WP3 by microwave CVI assisted densification. 
Moreover, the preform will be used for joining experiments in WP6 
• Different fibre preform architectures will be required. The preform thickness will be between 3 mm to 9 mm  
• Different fibre lay-up architectures and fibre orientations will be investigated to achieve an appropriate porosity 
• For the primary stabilisation of the fibre preforms, binder systems will be developed 
• Total porosity and the pore size distribution of the preforms will need to be adjusted 
Description of work  
Firstly, the technical and specific requirements for applications of both oxide and non-oxide CMCs will be defined in more detail 
by AM. This includes especially the sample geometries and maximum service temperature. At the beginning of the process 
chain for the CMC production, both oxide and non -oxide ceramic fibres need to be coated to adjust the interfacial domain 
between fibre and matrix for the production of Weak Interface Composites, WICs (Task 1.1 & Task 1.2), e.g. non -oxide and 
oxide CMCs with low matrix porosity. Note that uncoated preforms will be re quired for the Weak Matrix Composites, WMCs,  
e.g. for the oxide composites with high matrix porosity. At FHF, ceramic fibres will be coated continuously in a roll-to-roll process 
by a wet-chemical route. The technology can provide coated fibres in sufficient quantity and in a reasonable time. The coated 
fibres will be delivered to Task 1.3, where preforms with selected geometries will be developed by techniques such as filament 
winding or prepreg technology based on 2D fabrics. Three manufacturing loops wil l be needed to achieve the most suitable 
preform quality. Commercially available SiC fibres like 2nd or 3rd generation SiC fibres (e.g. UBE-ZMI, UBE-Tyranno SA, NGS-
Hi Nicalon, NGS Hi-Nicalon type S) as well as oxide fibres (e.g. 3M-Nextel 610 & 720) will be necessary to allow manufacturing 
and application temperatures up to 1200°C. The preforms can either be infiltrated first by MW -CVI or be joined first and then 
infiltrated 
Task 1.1 Coating set-up of non-oxide fibres for CMC's production (M1-10) 
Non-oxide ceramic fibres will be coated in a continuous roll -to-roll process at FHF. The coating parameters will be optimized 
to achieve homogeneous coatings with a high degree of coverage and minimized fibre bridging. The latter will be of great 
importance to have flexible tows after application of the coatings and, in turn, flexible tows are required in Task 1.4 to develop 
a stable process for the preparation of the preforms by filament winding techniques. An interface system based on BN and 
PyC with additional layers of SiC or Si3N4 on top of BN will be applied on the fibres. The coated fibres will be characterized by 
various methods such as scanning electron microscopy, X -ray diffraction, chemical analysis, tensile tow testing, etc. in order 
to evaluate the quali ty of the coatings  and potential fibre damage due to the coating process. The coated fibres will be 
transferred to Task 1.4 for the preparation of preforms. 
Leader: FHF Participants: UNIPI, ENEA, IPCF-CNR, POLITO 
Task 1.2 Coating set-up of oxide fibres for CMC's production (M1-10) 
At FHF, oxide ceramic fibres will be coated by a continuous wet -chemical process for the WICs as described in Task 1.1. 
Uncoated fibres will also be made available for the work on WMCs. An interface system based on oxides, such as  yttria-
silicates and phosphates (Me3+PO4-) as well as other microwave absorbing coatings, will be developed. To avoid damaging of 
the fibres due to thermal loads, it will be of great importance to design the coating precursors and the process in such a wa y 
that the maximum temperature of pyrolysis of the coatings does not exceed 1200°C. The coated fibres will be characterized 
using the same methodology used for the non-oxide fibers characterisation in Task 1.1 and then delivered to Task 1.3 for the 
preparation of preforms. 
Leader: FHF Participants: UoB, ENEA, IPCF-CNR, POLITO 
Task 1.3 Preparation of preforms with selected geometries (M11-20) 
According to the specific requirements of AMIII about the preform geometries, at FHF, different kinds of commercially available 
ceramic fibres will be used to manufacture preforms. Ceramic slurries will be developed to build up the primary ceramic matrix. 
These slurries containing ceramic particles can be either o n a water or a resin basis. The  matrix should keep the pre form in 
shape and must exhibit a minimum mechanical strength for the further handling, transportation and MW-CVI processing after 
thorough drying. Both oxide as well as non -oxide CMCs will be based on continuous ceramic fibres with a certain surface 
design or coating applied in Task  1.1 and Task 1.2. Ceramic fibre rowing s, especially when they have a thicker coating, are 
very stiff and therefore highly sensitive to classical textile manufacturing. Therefore, the textile processing parameters must be 
investigated. Since fibre undulation in 2D fabrics often causes fibre breaking during the crimping, the preparation of such 
preforms will be primarily carried out by using a crimping free fibre winding technique. The diameter of the preforms will be  
varied by the winding core geometry. The primary size of the cores defines the final geometry of the samples. By using this 
CEM-WAVE   
 45 
method, tubes up to about 500 mm in length and up to 300 mm in diameter can be realized. Wall thicknesses can be also 
varied from 1-10 mm. In order to minimize tension stresses within the structure, the winding angle of the fibres can be varied 
from about 30° to 90°. After removing from the textile machine, the preforms will be stabilized by a drying and a curing process. 
To stabilize the fibre pre forms thermally and to adjust the porosity, a high temperature treatment process up to 1150°C or 
beyond must be accomplished. A suitable pyrolysis programme for SiCf/SiC and an appropriate sintering process for oxide 
CMC will be carried out. During their h eat treatment, the thermal stability of the selected fibre types has to be taken into 
consideration. All processing parameters will be investigated and developed by using uncoated ceramic fibres in the 1 st loop. 
In the 2nd loop, coated fibres will be used for all of the WIC non-oxide and oxide composites; uncoated fibres will be used for 
the WMC oxide composites. In the 3rd loop, tubular preforms with the best suited porosity to the MW-CVI processes and high 
homogeneity will be manufactured. The processed preforms will be finally checked by non-destructive computed tomography 
method to detect defects such as macropores, delaminations or cracks within the microstructure. These possible defects will 
be minimized by iterative process steps. 
Leader: FHF Participants: UNIPI, UoB, ENEA, POLITO, AMIII 
Deliverables  
D1.1 (M6): Design freeze for coating process for non-oxide and oxide CMCs (FHF) 
D1.2 (M10): Report on coating set-up of non-oxide fibres for CMC's production (FHF) 
D1.3 (M10): Report on coating set-up of oxide fibres for CMC's production (FHF) 
D1.4 (M20): Report on prepared preforms with different and selected geometries (FHF) 
 
WP No. WP2 Lead beneficiary IPCF-CNR 
WP title MW-CVI processing of CMCs based on solid-state sources 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 5,5 27 10 0 1 23 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 
Start Month 1 End Month 20 
Objectives  
• Determination of the dielectric properties of the materials at the temperatures of the infiltration process  
• Identification of the optimal conditions for the efficient microwave heating of the samples 
• Integration of solid-state sources in the existing MW-CVI reactors 
• Definition of an automatic procedure for the tuning of the solid-state sources to the optimal MW frequency 
Description of work  
The activity of WP2 will start with the determination of the dielectric properties of the oxide and non-oxide samples of interest 
and, on the basis of these properties, will continue with the identification of the most efficient operational conditions of the MW-
CVI reactors. The existing MW-CVI reactors will then be upgraded with the passage from magnetron sources to tunable solid-
state sources. The final part of the activity of WP2 will focus on the definition of automatic procedures capable to operate the 
reactors in the most efficient conditions. 
Task 2.1 High temperature dielectric characterization of selected non-oxide and oxide fibres (M1-11) 
The complex dielectric permittivity of t he non -oxide and oxide fibres of interest will be determined as a function of the 
temperature up to 1200°C and at a frequency around 2.45 GHz by means of measurement system available at the IPCF-CNR. 
The measurements will be conducted either in standard at mosphere or in vacuum according to the sample characteristics. 
Samples composed of different fibres, deniers, etc. and including additives designed to improve the mechanical or dielectric 
characteristics, will be investigated. The dependence of the dielect ric properties as a function of the infiltration level will be 
investigated as well. 
Leader: IPCF-CNR Participants: UNIPI, UoB, FM 
Task 2.2 Optimization of the electromagnetic heating process inside the MW-CVI reactors (M1-14) 
The electromagnetic heating p rocess of the sample inside the MW -CVI reactors will be investigated by means of rigorous 
numerical modelling based on the software Comsol Multiphysics. The aim of this Task will be to conduct simulations of the 
reactors in their operational conditions, so lving simultaneously and in a self -consistent way the coupled equations governing 
the electromagnetic and the thermal problems on the basis of the thermal power delivered to the reactor, the dielectric and 
thermal properties of the sample determined in Tasks 2.1, and the temperature of the reactor walls. The main outcome of the 
modelling will be the temperature profile in the sample region, as a function of the electromagnetic field frequency, of the 
balance between the electromagnetic losses in the sample and that in the chamber walls, and of the injected powers. The 
optimization of the operational conditions of the reactor will be conducted with the goal of improving the uniformity of the 
temperature distribution in the sample and the efficiency of the mic rowave heating process. The main control parameter will 
be the microwave frequency, which will be adjustable thanks to the use of solid-state sources. The numerical modelling will be 
conducted on the high-performance computing cluster available at IPCF-CNR. 
Leader: IPCF-CNR Participants: UNIPI, UoB, FM, IRIS 
Task 2.3 Integration of solid-state sources and automation of the MW-CVI reactors (M8-20) 
CEM-WAVE   
 46 
The objective of this task is twofold: first, the integration of new, fully tunable solid -state sources in the e xisting MW-CVI 
reactors; second, the automation of the resulting system. The integration of the solid -state sources with the reactor chamber 
will be implemented by means of a coupling system capable of providing high coupling levels (of the order of -10 dB or better) 
in the typical operational conditions of the reactor loaded with a sample. In order to achieve this result, a suitable coupli ng 
structure will be chosen and employed in combination with an efficient commercial stub tuner. Once the solid -state sources 
have been integrated into the MW -CVI reactors, a procedure will be developed with the aim of automating the tuning of the 
solid-state source emission. Program routines will be prepared to handle a ‘probe and pump’ technique, in which the source 
will first be swept at low power in order to identify the optimal working frequency (the ‘probe’); then, a high-power emission of 
a given duration will be setup at the optimal working frequency (the ‘pump’). At the end of this pumping, a new probe sweep 
will be setup in order to identify the new optimal working frequency, which, in general, changes due to the sample heating. The 
variation of the optimal working frequency along the infiltration process will provide an indication of the progress of the sample 
densification. 
Leader: FM Participants: UNIPI, UoB, IPCF-CNR 
Deliverables  
D2.1 (M11): Dielectric properties of the samples of interest (IPCF-CNR) 
D2.2 (M14): Optimisation of the operational conditions of the MW-CVI reactors (IPCF-CNR) 
D2.3 (M16): Integration of the solid-state sources in the MW-CVI reactors (FM) 
D2.4 (M20): Automation of the MW-CVI reactors (IPCF-CNR) 
 
WP No. WP3 Lead beneficiary UNIPI 
WP title Optimization of the MW-CVI process for non-oxide and oxide CMCs 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 41 14 5 1 16,1 6 0 11,2 2 21 0 0 0 
Start Month 6 End Month 40 
Objectives  
• Screening of the best operating parameters for oxide fibre and CMC production  
• Screening of the best operating parameters for non-oxide fibre and CMC production  
• Developing new sensors for tuning, in real-time, the processing parameters for CMC production 
• Pilot lab-scale production of oxide and non-oxide CMC samples with the new solid-state microwave technology 
• Assessment of the amount of time-reduction for oxide and non-oxide CMC production 
• Obtaining CMC products with properties at least comparable to conventionally heated CVI processes 
• Improving thermal efficiency by introducing a new ceramic inlay 
Description of work  
For both oxide and non-oxide CMC production, screening of the best operating conditions will be undertaken in two separate 
pilot plants: the oxide CMCs will be produced by UoB whilst the non-oxide by UNIPI. In parallel, IRIS will select suitable sensors 
and the related software platform that will be integrated in both pilot plants; these will enable the monitoring, in real-time, of the 
main process conditions and will greatly assist the optimisation process of the best operating conditions. In parallel, new solid-
state microwave generators will be installed in both systems; this will overcome many of the current issues faced when using 
microwave heating technology. Samples of different geometries, from WP1, will be infiltrated to produce a range of samples 
for thermo-mechanical characterization (WP4) and the investigation of different joining techniques (WP6). The improvement in 
thermal efficiency is a key -factor in achieving the primary project goal, hence a new ceramic inlay will be introduced into the 
CMCs to further improve the energy transfer and hence improve the thermal efficiency of the processing. It should be noted 
that microwave CVI has already been shown to be at least an order of magnitude faster than conventional CVI and so the goal 
of the new ceramic inlays is to further enhance this process. 
Task 3.1 Research and tuning of the operating parameters for MW-CVI non-oxide CMC production (M6-18) 
On the basis of the previous experience at UNIPI on a pilot plant for non-oxide CMC production, the parameters to be tuned 
and optimized with the implementation of a new energy microwave source (solid-state technology) will be: 
− Operative pressure: plasma formation must be avoided (which occurs at too low a pressure) whilst, at the same time, 
guaranteeing that SiC infiltration starts at the sample core without the inclusion of surface porosity; 
− Infiltration temperature: this must ensure that a stoichiometric SiC deposit is achieved with the correct crystallinity and 
that undesired secondary reactions are avoided whilst simultaneously avoiding sample damage due to the exothermic 
nature of the main reaction, which can be triggered if the process temperature is too high; 
− Reagents ratio: this must be optimised in order to  obtain the best results in terms of reaction efficiency (g/h SiC 
deposition); 
− Microwave power: the goal is to use the optimal power level from a thermo -economic analysis perspective whilst, at 
the same time, guaranteeing uniform heating of the sample for the entire duration of the infiltration process. It will be 
CEM-WAVE   
 47 
also important to find the best compromise between the MW power and operative pressure in the required gaseous 
environment to achieve the optimum infiltration temperature whilst avoiding plasma formation.  
Once determined, these operating parameters will be adjusted to the different geometries and sizes of fibre preforms coming 
from WP1. This research activity will be carried out in the UNIPI pilot plant with the contribution of microwave optimizat ion of 
IPCF-CNR and FM know-how. The data achieved in this task will be transmitted to WP8 in order to transfer useful information 
for LCA, LCC, TA and Risk Assessment. 
Leader: UNIPI Participants: IPCF-CNR, FM, ATL 
Task 3.2 Research and Tuning of the operating parameters for MW-CVI oxide CMC production (M6-18) 
Oxide-oxide CMCs will be produced by MW-CVI exploting the same benefits expected from the MW heating described in Task 
3.1, with the one exception that, unlike silicon carbide fibres, alumina fibres do not absorb readily MW from room temperature. 
Two approaches will be followed; (i) the introduction of “fugitive additives”, which will be utilised for the manufacture of Weak 
Matrix Composites (WMCs), that will absorb MW helping the first heating of the preforms up to 600°C – 800°C (depending on 
the chemical composition of the oxide fibres); (ii) application of a coating to the precursor oxide fibres that will fulfil two functions, 
a) it will provide the required weak interface, for the manufacture of Wea k Interface oxide Composites (WICs), and b) it will 
provide the required microwave absorption characteristics. On the basis of the previous experience at UoB on a lab scale MW-
CVI facility used to date for non-oxide CMC production, the parameters to be tuned and optimized with the implementation of 
a new energy microwave source (solid-state technology) will be fundamentally the same as those being investigated at UNIPI 
for the non-oxide composite work, i.e.: 
− Operative pressure: plasma formation must be avoi ded (which occurs at too low a pressure) whilst, at the same time, 
guaranteeing that alumina infiltration starts at the sample core without the inclusion of surface porosity; 
− Infiltration temperature: this must ensure that a stoichiometric Al2O3 deposit is  achieved (though it is far less likely to be 
non-stoichiometric than for SiC deposits) with the correct crystallinity and that undesired secondary reactions are avoided 
whilst simultaneously avoiding sample damage due to the use of excessive process temperatures; 
− Reagents ratio: this must be optimised in order to obtain the best results in terms of reaction efficiency (g/h Al2O3 
deposition); 
− Microwave power: the goal is to use the optimal power level from a thermo -economic analysis perspective whilst, at t he 
same time, guaranteeing uniform heating of the sample for the entire duration of the infiltration process. It will be also 
important to find the best compromise between the MW power and operative pressure in the required gaseous environment 
to achieve the optimum infiltration temperature whilst avoiding plasma formation.  
Once determined, these operating parameters will be adjusted to the different geometries and sizes of fibre preforms coming 
from WP1. This research activity will be carried out in the U oB microwave CVI facility with the contribution of microwave 
optimization of IPCF-CNR and FM know -how. The data achieved in this task will be transmitted to WP8 in order to transfer 
useful information for LCA, LCC, TA and Risk Assessment. 
Leader: UoB Participants: IPCF-CNR, FM, ATL 
Task 3.3 Development of advanced process monitoring tools (M10-25) 
IRIS will define the specifications for monitoring the CMC processing together with UoB, UNIPI, and IPCF-CNR. Suitable tools 
for measuring, in -situ, temperature a nd dielectric properties of the CMC at infiltration conditions will be setup and the 
customised interface to the process designed and manufactured. They will be integrated in the respective processes.  The 
temperature of the CMC sample will be monitored du ring the infiltration process by means of a thermal camera operating at 
the temperatures of interest, around 1000°C. The camera will acquire the sample temperature profile looking through a small 
pipe vacuum sealed by means of a quartz window.  The dielect ric properties of the sample will be monitored along the 
processing by means of the optimal working frequency determined in Task 2.3. Indeed, this frequency is defined by the 
geometry of the reactor chamber and by the shape, size, and dielectric properties  of the sample. By means of a rigorous 
numerical modelling, the inverse problem of finding the dielectric properties corresponding to a given optimal working frequency 
can be accurately solved. The software to acquire, store and process the data from the m onitoring tools will be developed by 
IRIS on the basis of its PATBox platform. A design of experiments will be prepared in line with tasks 3.4 and 3.5 to validate  
and calibrate the monitoring. Data driven models will correlate the materials characterisatio n information during process and 
process parameters to the final offline quality control of the materials from WP4 with inputs from multiscale numerical models 
from WP5 as applicable. After an initial training period, these models will be embedded in a decision support tool that will serve 
2 complementary purposes: i) initial process set up depending on a target product characteristic and ii) real process control to 
adjust the process parameters to the optimisation targets based on the data monitored in real time. 
Leader: IRIS Participants: UoB, UNIPI, FM 
Task 3.4 Production of infiltrated non-oxide CMC samples (M15-40) 
In the UNIPI pilot plant with the new microwave solid -state source developed in WP2, CMCs will be produced with quality 
comparable to the materials obtained with traditional CVI process heating but in a much faster time. 
SiCf /SiC disks with a diameter of 100 mm and a thickness of 10 mm will be made in a suitable number to be characterized 
from both a thermal and mechanical point of view in relevant environments in WP4. Some of the samples produced will be sent 
to WP6 to act as the basis for the work on joining, whilst separately a specific ceramic inlay will be developed by sintering  to 
CEM-WAVE   
 48 
be applied to the CMC preform through joining in task 6.4 with a view to obtaining a further improvement in thermal efficiency. 
The objective to be reached for the SiCf/ SiC samples must be at least comparable with the properties of CMCs obtained using 
conventionally heated CVI (density 2.4 g/cm 3) but in an infi ltration time (of ~50 hours), which is considerably less than the 
current benchmark (~1000 h) thus reducing manufacturing costs significantly and so allowing these materials to be used for 
new applications. 
Leader: UNIPI Participants: IPCF-CNR, FHF 
Task 3.5 Production of infiltrated oxide CMCs samples (M15-40) 
In the UoB lab -scale MW-CVI facility with the new microwave solid -state source developed in WP2, CMCs will be produced 
with quality comparable to the materials obtained via conventional green forming followed by sintering but with potentially 
significantly enhanced properties. Al2O3 f / Al2O3, Al2O3 f / Al2O3 – ZrO2 and Al2O3 f / YAG – ZrO2 disks with a diameter of 50 mm 
and a thickness up to 10 mm will initially be made in a suitable number to be characterized from both a thermal and mechanical 
point of view in relevant environments in WP4. Subsequently the size of the best samples produced will be increased to 100 
mm diameter with similar thicknesses. Some of the samples produced will be sent to WP6 to act as the basis for the work on 
joining, whilst separately a specific ceramic inlay will be developed by sintering to be applied to the CMC preform through 
joining in task 6.4 with a view to obtaining an  improvement in thermal efficiency. The objective to be reached for the Al 2O3f / 
Al2O3 samples must be to achieve properties that are at least comparable with the properties of CMCs obtained using 
conventional green forming and sintering (density 3.4 -3.5 g/cm 3), however, since the processing temperature w ill be 
significantly lower (<1000 oC vs 1200 -1300oC) it is anticipated that there will be less strength loss in the alumina fibres and 
hence the properties of the MW-CVI CMCs will be superior. It is currently unknown how the manufacturing costs will compare, 
but assessing this will be a goal of the Task.  
Leader: UoB Participants: IPCF-CNR, FHF 
Task 3.6 Design and processing of ceramic inlays for increased thermal efficiency of CMC samples (M15-40) 
The thermal efficiency of the tube can be greatly enhanced b y the insertion of ceramic inlays that can have the effect of 
increasing the gas turbulence, the gas/solid thermal contact surface and the radiative heat transfer throughout the tube section. 
The task will consist in designing optimal inlays in terms of increased heat transfer efficiency without increasing too much the 
pressure head necessary to have the gases flowing through the pipes. The optimization will be based on computations of heat 
and mass transfer in 3D structures designed by CAD. Then, ceramic inlays based on the obtained design will be produced. 
Leader: CNRS Participants: UNIPI, UoB, POLITO 
Deliverables  
D3.1 (M18): Optimisation of operating parameters for MW-CVI non-oxide CMC production (UNIPI) 
D3.2 (M18): Optimisation of operating parameters for MW-CVI oxide CMC production (UoB) 
D3.3 (M25): Report on advanced process monitoring tools (IRIS) 
D3.4 (M40): Report on production of infiltrated non-oxide CMC samples (UNIPI)  
D3.5 (M40): Report on production of infiltrated oxide CMC samples (UoB) 
D3.6 (M28): Optimal design of ceramic inlays (CNRS) 
D3.7 (M40): Manufactured ceramic inlays (CNRS) 
 
WP No. WP4 Lead beneficiary ENEA 
WP title Microstructural, thermomechanical and thermophysical characterisations of CMCs and their joints 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 39,5 6 0 0 2,6 0 12 7,5 12 0 1 0 0 
Start Month 15 End Month 40 
Objectives  
• The materials, derived from WP3, will be characterised both during development and after it, the latter with the aim of 
fulfilling the industrial application requirements.  
• The materials will have to withstand ageing in the expected working conditions. Considering for example, the materials 
that will find applications as heating elements (e.g. the SiC-based composites). 
• Testing of the high temperature emissivity, thermal conductivity and other physico -chemical, microstructural and 
mechanical characterisation useful for the project. 
Description of work  
In WP4, phy sico-chemical, microstructural and mechanical characterisation will be undertaken to show that the new CMC 
materials that are being developed will perform better than currently used materials, particularly in terms of superior 
thermomechanical properties. On the basis of this increased performance, the impact of the research programme on the 
European steel industry, amongst others, will be estimated. Relevant characteristics will be agreed together with steel producer 
end-user ArcellorMittal (AM). Ceramic o xides have some known limitations when used for high -temperature radiant-heating 
element applications. These limitations are linked to: (1) low high-temperature bending strength, (2) limited impact resistance 
at high temperature and (3) limited creep, wear  and fatigue resistance. Classical solutions for improving some of these 
CEM-WAVE   
 49 
characteristics is to move from monolithic oxide to non -oxide ceramics, and from monolithic to long -fibre reinforced oxide 
ceramics, or to long -fibre reinforced non -oxide ceramics. SiCf/SiC is expected to be an optimised solution for radiant tubes 
production, however hydrothermal corrosion has to be carefully considered, since methane and hydrogen combustion might 
induce “recession” that is the condition in which SiC is continuously co nsumed. EBC could be applied to solve this problem, 
however it is impossible to produce good EBCs inside a SiC-based radiant tube. WP4 would investigate this type of corrosion 
to find the threshold between passive and active oxidation, that is the temperat ure not to be exceeded to avoid SiC 
consumption. 
In WP4, the measure of thermomechanical, optical and thermophysical properties will be carried out for both ox/ox, SiCf/SiC 
and joints (WP6), in the case of SiCf/SiC only in the relevant passive oxidation te mperature range. Ageing tests will be 
performed into static and dynamic conditions (burner rigs).  
Task 4.1 Preliminary water corrosion tests and thermomechanical characterisation on CMC samples and their joints 
(M15-32) 
In this task, CNRS will establish t he passive-to-active threshold temperature regarding water corrosion, in the range 800 -
1300°C, in the expected working conditions (simulating biomethane, hydrogen, or biomethane/hydrogen mixtures combustion). 
This input is necessary to optimise the materials (and in particular SiC based CMC) for their application as radiant tubes, with 
an internal burner. Room and high temperature mechanical characterisation of CMCs samples will be performed by ENEA and 
POLITO in accordance with the international standards,  e.g. ASTM C1359 & UNI EN 12789. In particular, tensile, 4 -point 
bending, C-ring and flexural creep strength up to 1500°C will be measured, whilst impact tests at high temperature will be 
performed by CNRS. In this task, POLITO will be mainly involved with  the mechanical characterisation of the joined samples 
produced in WP6. AMIII will contribute by giving technical information about the expected working condition of the radiating 
elements in their industrial facilities. 
Leader: ENEA Participants: CNRS, AMIII, POLITO 
Task 4.2 Measurement of thermal conductivity and emissivity (M15-21) 
Starting from the materials designed in the previous WPs (ox/ox, SiCf/SiC and the best performing joining solution), a thorough 
thermo-physical characterization of the solutions developed will be undertaken in this task. ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC 
will assess thermal conductivity and specific heat by means of both traditional experimental methods (e.g. heat flow meter) 
and innovative methods (e.g. Laser Flash Analysis - LFA method) up to 1250°C. This will allow the selection of the best 
solutions in terms of thermal behaviour with reference to the application. The employment of proper post-analysis methods will 
enable the evaluation of the different effects such as two -dimensional heat flow, heat dispersion from the sample, effects of 
radiation for temperatures above 500°C and of heat exchange by convection from the sample to the flow of ambient air around 
it. The combination between thermal conductivity and specific heat wi ll enable the determination of a fundamental parameter 
– thermal diffusivity (units: mm 2/s) – a material-specific property that characterises unsteady heat conduction and describes 
how quickly a material reacts to a change in temperature, thus playing a st rategic role in qualifying components / materials 
behaviour in the framework of thermal exchange problems. Moreover, the emissivity, which is the parameter representing the 
ability to absorb, transmit and emit infrared energy, will be measured at high temp eratures by CNRS by means of 
spectroradiometers and/or spectrophotometers. AMIII will contribute by giving technical information about thermal 
characteristics of currently used materials for state-of-the-art heating elements. 
Leader: CNRS Participants: ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC, AMIII 
Task 4.3 Microstructural, physico-chemical and dielectric characterization of CMC samples and their joints (M18-23) 
High temperature thermal conductivity and emissivity are expected to be strongly dependent on microstructure, which, in turn, 
is dependent on the composition and the CMC production process. Microstructure characterisat ion will be mainly performed 
using SEM-EDS, TEM and XRD investigation, which will compare the current traditional materials and the new CMCs. High 
temperature dielectric characterisation will be conducted by IPCF-CNR, both in support of the MW-CVI process development 
(Task2.1) and in the assessment of the finite CMC products. POLITO will investigate CMCs and joined CMCs by micro-CT and 
will perf orm the microstructural characterization (SEM, EDS, XRD) of the joined samples and post -mortem analysis of 
mechanically tested joints, thus giving a continuous and fruitful feedback to WP6 to improve joint performances. 
Leader: ENEA Participants: ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC, IPCF-CNR, POLITO, UoB, UNIPI 
Task 4.4 Measurements of wear resistance, thermal efficiency and accelerated ageing tests (M21-40) 
Wear resistance is a relevant parameter for the application and will be evaluated by ENEA at room temper ature, using an 
abrasimeter (and recrystallized alumina as abrasive agent). 
In order to estimate the thermal efficiency of the designed solutions  FE modelling activity will be carried out by ENEA Linked 
3rd party: CertiMaC on the basis of the expected comp onent geometries (AMIII), experimental thermal conductivity and 
emissivity data. This modellisation activity will be carried out in connection with Task 5.3. The parameters will be employed as 
inputs for the thermal modelling of the components, which will be carried out under the effective working conditions, in steady 
state operation and during the worst application scenario in order to investigate in a predictive way the whole behaviour of the 
innovative new materials in comparison to the current traditio nal ones in use today. The results of the simulations will be 
employed to evaluate the heat transfer ability and to improve thermal efficiency of the selected materials.  
CEM-WAVE   
 50 
Accelerated ageing tests will be performed on the selected CMCs in the expected worki ng conditions, followed by 
microstructural, thermomechanical and thermophysical characterisations (Tasks 4.1-4.3). Micro X-ray computed tomography, 
µCT (POLITO), will permit the correlation of the changes at the macro level (e.g. in the mechanical characte ristics) to 
microstructural changes. Another relevant parameter that could well change in a critical way upon ageing is the fibre -matrix 
interface, which will need a specific, TEM-based study; this will be undertaken by UoB using their TEM, STEM and dual-beam 
FIB. Accelerating ageing tests are the only way to simulate several years of degradation and to ensure that the best materials 
are proposed for the application in steel production. Lower maintenance costs and energy savings are expected in steel 
production, as a consequence of improved characteristics of CMCs compared to currently used materials. This represents a 
relevant part of the project impact, since it affects sustainability of mass production. In order to make these evaluations 
quantitative, WP4 will collect inputs for subsequent analysis in WP8. 
Leader: ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC Participants: CNRS, ENEA, AMIII, POLITO, UoB 
Deliverables  
D4.1 (M32): Water corrosion tests and thermomechanical characterisation on CMC samples and their joints (ENEA) 
D4.2 (M21): Measurement of thermal conductivity and emissivity (ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC) 
D4.3 (M23): Microstructural, physico-chemical characterisation of CMC samples and their joints (POLITO) 
D4.4 (M40): Measurements of wear resistance, thermal efficiency and accelerated ageing tests (ENEA) 
 
WP No. WP5 Lead beneficiary CNRS 
WP title Micro and Macro scale modelling of the MW-CVI processes 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 2,5 0 0 0 1 0 0 18,6 0 0 0 0 0 
Start Month 6 End Month 38 
Objectives  
• Acquire sufficient data on the material reinforcement architecture at various scales 
• Prepare computational meshes for image-based simulations 
• Perform two changes of scales to obtain effective geometrical and (tensorial) transfer laws vs infiltration degree 
• Perform local infiltration simulations for identification and optimization 
• Produce a full simulation of part infiltration by MW-CVI 
• Determine optimal conditions for infiltration time, material quality and energy consumption 
Description of work  
The objective of WP5 is to achieve a multi -scale, multi-physics modelling approach to the MW -CVI technique. Three scales 
have to be addressed distinctly: the intra-bundle, fibre scale (tens of microns); the geometrical REV scale (a few millimetres) 
and the part scale. All scales are related and require specific simulations. 
Task 5.1. Development of new Image-based numerical modeling using AI methodologies for the MW-CVI process (M6-
12) 
This task addresses the preparation of realistic numerical simulation domains from the acquisition of X -ray Computerized 
Micro-Tomographic scans and Scanning Electron Microscope micrographs. The first step will consist of acqui ring sufficient 
image data through X -ray CMT and SEM imaging. Then, image processing tools using Artificial Intelligence will be adapted 
and used to detect the precise arrangement of the reinforcement architecture in the CMT scans. The result will be a segmented 
image with an additional field containing all local orientations of the fibre tows. Next, 3D images will be produced from the  
segmented data and converted into meshes suited for the numerical resolution of the heat, mass and charge transfer model.  
Leader: CNRS Participants: UNIPI, UoB 
Task 5.2 Micro-scale modeling of MW-CVI processes (M13-25) 
MW-CVI process modeling requires the solution of conservation equations for mass, momentum, heat and electrical charge. 
These equations themselves require laws  providing the evolution of the local values of geometrical and transfer properties. 
They are: (i) internal surface area and/or average pore diameter, (ii) ordinary diffusion, Knudsen diffusion, Darcian permeability 
tensors, (iii) heat conductivity tensor,  (iv) tensorial dielectric constant and electrical conductivity (gathered in a complex 
electrical conductivity). All these properties will be obtained by homogenization (or volume averaging) techniques on 
elementary computational domains called Representative Elementary Volumes (REV). First, the techniques will be applied to 
the bundles and will provide effective bundle coefficients as a function of the local fibre density and of the local degree of 
infiltration. Local infiltration will also be simulated in order (i) to obtain, by comparison with actual experiments, a confirmation 
of the diffusion/reaction rate ratio, and (ii) to determine optimal infiltration conditions by varying this ratio. Secondly, the same 
type of computation will be performed again, but at a larger scale: the computational domains will span several tows to that a 
full material REV be considered. 
Leader: CNRS Participants: UNIPI, UoB 
Task 5.3 Macro-scale modeling of MW-CVI processes (M24-38) 
CEM-WAVE   
 51 
This task will solve mass, heat, momentum, species and electrical charge balances needed for the simulation of the MW-CVI 
process, in a computational domain that spans the whole part to be infiltrated. All geometry and transfer coefficients will be fed 
into this model in order to accurately represent the resulting infiltration degree achieved throughout the whole part by the end 
of the processing run. The model will be run under several conditions in order to estimate the impact of parameter variations 
on the final quality of the CMC, as assessed by: its pore volume fraction, thermal conductivity and leak tightness, and, for the 
process efficiency, in terms of total infiltration time , injected microwave power and quantity of source gases used per kg of 
produced material. 
Leader: CNRS Participants: UNIPI, UoB 
Deliverables  
D5.1 (M12): 2D and 3D images at various scales of the fibrous reinforcement and/or fully infiltrated composites (CNRS) 
D5.2 (M18): Suitable computational meshes for all computations (CNRS) 
D5.3 (M25): Effective laws for geometrical and transfer properties as a function of infiltration degree at mesoscale (CNRS) 
D5.4 (M38): Effective laws for geometrical and transfer properties as a function of infiltration degree at macroscale (CNRS) 
 
WP No. WP6 Lead beneficiary POLITO 
WP title Joining and Coating of the produced CMC samples 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 1 0 0 6,02 1 0 2 1,5 24 0 0 0 0 
Start Month 6 End Month 40 
Objectives  
• Develop and test novel joints for oxide and non-oxide CMCs  
• Develop and test novel coatings for oxide and non-oxide CMCs 
Description of work  
The WP is structured with a view to: defining the technical requirements for the joints & coatings that will be needed; identifying 
the joining & coating materials & processes according to the requirements; procuring the materials needed; narrowing the list 
of materials and processes identified based on the results of the preliminary characterization and resulting pe rformance. The 
outcomes of this WP are central to the whole project: suitable joints & coatings will be proposed and tested in close collaboration 
with WP3 and WP4. 
Task 6.1 Developing and testing novel joints for oxide and non-oxide CMCs (M6-30) 
The joining materials & technologies will be selected according to the technical requirements; once identified and procured, 
the materials & processes will be narrowed on the basis of the results obtained during the preliminary characterization and the 
resulting laboratory-scale performance. Special attention will be paid to pressure-less joining technologies in order to provide 
industry-friendly solutions; glass -ceramics, pre -ceramic polymers and brazing alloys with suitable compositions will be 
designed and tested  as joining materials; the CMC surfaces will also be suitably prepared, to improve joint strength and 
resulting performance; mechanical machining, plasma structuring and selective matrix removal of the composite matrix and 
surface modification by chemical reaction will all be studied and used with appropriate joining materials. Laboratory scale 
samples of CMCs joined to themselves and/or to other ceramics will be prepared and tested at room and working temperature 
at J-TECH@POLITO laboratory (POLITO). ENEA will contribute to this task by testing a pressure-less joining method for non-
oxide CMCs based on the use of a high temperature resistant brazing mixture. The most promising results will be transferred 
to WP7 for testing under fluctuating and extreme cond itions and in industrial setting. Continuous feedback between this task 
and WP7 will be of paramount importance for the success of this task. 
Leader: POLITO Participants: UNIPI, UoB, ENEA 
Task 6.2 Joining of the ceramic inlays to the CMC samples (oxide and non-oxide) (M28-34) 
This task will focus on joining of CMCs to monolithic ceramics by using the materials & techniques developed in Task 6.1 and 
that are considered as the most promising. Laboratory scale joined components will be prepared and tested at r oom and 
working temperature at J -TECH@POLITO laboratory (POLITO). The ENEA brazing method will be also evaluated and 
eventually tested for non -oxide CMCs. The most promising results will be transferred to WP7 for test under fluctuating and 
extreme conditions and in industrial setting. Continuous feedback between this task and WP7 will be of paramount importance 
for the success of this task. 
Leader: POLITO Participants: UNIPI, UoB, ENEA, CNRS 
Task 6.3 Deposition of selected coatings for CMC samples (M12-40) 
The coating materials & technologies will be selected according to the technical requirements; once identified and procured, 
the materials & processes will be narrowed, on the basis of the results obtained during the preliminary characterization and 
the resulting laboratory-scale performance. Special attention will be paid to PVD, EPD and slurry based coating technologies 
in order to provide industry -friendly solutions: ceramics, pre -ceramic polymers and functionally graded alloys/structures with 
suitable composition will be designed and tested as coating materials; the CMC surfaces will also be suitably prepared, to 
improve coating adhesion and performance: mechanical machining, plasma structuring and selective matrix removal of the 
CEM-WAVE   
 52 
composite matrix and surface modification by chemical reaction will all be studied and used with appropriate coating materials, 
in tight contact with Task 6.1. Laboratory scale samples of coated CMCs will be prepared and tested at room and working 
temperature at J-TECH@POLITO laboratory (POLITO); the most promising results will be transferred to WP7 for pre-prototype 
test under fluctuating and extreme conditions and in industrial setting. Continuous feedback between this task and WP7 will be 
of paramount importance for the success of this task. At FHF, EBCs will be deposited on selected oxide and/or non-oxide CMC 
samples via a slurry coating technique. The formulation of the slurries will be developed and the rheological properties will be 
adjusted for the coating process. The EBCs  will be multilayer systems comprising at least one bond coat and one top coat. 
The EBC will be designed to minimise thermal stresses by adjusting the coefficient of thermal expansion to the CMC substrates. 
The bond coat needs to be chemically compatible with the underlying CMC substrate. For non -oxide CMCs, FHF has great 
experience in mullite- and Zr-titanate-based bond coat systems. As top coats, rare earth silicates will be considered. The top 
coats will be designed to raise the gas-tightness, which is an important requirement for good corrosion protection. This can be 
achieved by minimizing cracks in the top coat and by designing the microstructure of the coatings with closed porosity. The 
overall objective is to provide an EBC system that protects the underlying CMCs from corrosion during use.  
Leader: FHF Participants: POLITO, UNIPI, UoB, ENEA 
Deliverables  
D6.1 (M12): Report on novel joining materials and techniques for oxide and non-oxide CMCs (POLITO) 
D6.2 (M24): Report on characterisation results for novel joints for oxide and non-oxide CMCs at laboratory scale (POLITO) 
D6.3 (M30): Final report on characterisation results for novel joints for oxide and non-oxide CMCs (POLITO) 
D6.4 (M31): Report on joining of the ceramic inlays to the oxide and non-oxide CMC samples (POLITO) 
D6.5 (M34): Final report on joining of the ceramic inlays to the CMC samples (CNRS) 
D6.6 (M40): Report on EBC coatings on CMC samples and joint materials (FHF) 
 
WP No. WP7 Lead beneficiary AMIII 
WP title Validation of CMC in steelmaking relevant environment 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 7 6 4,5 0 1 0 3 5 2 14 27 0 0 
Start Month 20 End Month 42 
Objectives  
• Testing of oxide and non-oxide CMCs samples produced for future fluctuating and extreme conditions  
• Compare their efficiency with current materials employed in radiant tube furnaces 
• Monitor the evolution and variation of material properties during the aging test 
Description of work  
The work of this WP will consist on testing the CMC in simulated relevant harsh environments. a support will be designed for 
the insertion of the CMCs prototypes and a set of tests will be carried out in the radiant tubes pilot lab of AMIII.  The data 
gathered during these tests will make possible to evaluate the performance of the CMCs in both future possible scenarios and 
in current processes. 
Task 7.1 Evaluation of CMCs samples in relevant environment with future fuel mixtures (M20-32) 
To use biogas mixed with clean hydrogen as fuel for combustion in the next future could make sense if materials used are 
insensitive to main impurities present in biogas (sulfur, siloxane, halogens) and to phenomena caused by the presence of 
hydrogen. In order  to assess CMCs behavior in such working conditions, experiments will be performed on chosen CMCs 
samples under a similar thermal flux produced by a combustion flame chemically modified to be representative of 
biogas/hydrogen mixtures. This thermal load will be carried out by means of thermal spray processes such as flame spray or 
High velocity oxygen fuel spray from a biogas/hydrogen/oxygen mixture to which additives representing the main impurities 
will be added. Using high velocity flame could be an inte resting way to accelerate recession phenomena in order to simulate 
long duration test and compared solution with low recession rate. 
In a first step, working conditions defined by AMIII will be reproduced by means of thermal spray processes and controlled 
using calorimeter. In a second step, a comparison between CMCs sample before and after thermal loading will be performed 
at the lab to estimate recession effect. Microstructural and composition studies on aged samples will be performed. 
Leader: CNRS Participants: AMIII, ENEA, ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC 
Task 7.2 Technical Evaluation of the CMCs applied to the business case (M24-30) 
The technical feasibility of using CMCs in the future for the construction of the radiant tubes depends on several factors: 
- Resistance to the thermal fatigue. A radiant tube suffers fluctuations in the temperature which can limits its lifetime. 
The CMC should resist several heating & cooling cycles without damages 
- Resistance to the high temperatures. The alloys currently used for the construction of the radiant tubes are limited to 
work at temperatures below 1000º C. The CMC must resist higher working temperatures.  
- Mechanical resistance. The CMC must present a higher strength than current ceramic materials used for the radiant 
tubes, which are fragile, and it does not resist mechanical impacts. 
CEM-WAVE   
 53 
- The CMC should present a high heat transfer coefficient and have an overall good thermal efficiency 
With the data gathered during the trials it will be evaluated if the CMC fulfill all these requirements. 
Leader: AMIII Participants: ENEA, ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC, CNRS, POLITO 
Task 7.3 Validation of CMCs samples in current CEM-WAVE use case conditions (M30-42) 
The samples of CMC will be tested in the radiant tubes pilot furnace of AMIII. This pilot plant is in the facilities that AMIII R&D 
has inside the ArcelorMittal plant of Gijón (Spain). The pilot plant was designed for testing commercial equipment or developing 
new one. The samples will be tested in this facility because it can simulate the industrial working conditions. A special support 
will be designed and constructed to carry out the tests on the CMC samples, because the foreseen diameter and length of the 
samples are smaller than the radiant tubes’ ones. This support will m ake possible to place the sample inside the furnace 
chamber and to circulate the combustion gases though it, keeping the gas tightness of the whole device. Once the sample is 
ready, a test campaign will be carried out in which the working conditions will be varied. Different furnace start-stop cycles will 
be carried out, combining different heating ramps and target temperatures. The composition of the gas used as fuel will also 
be varied to evaluate possible effects on the material in case of using alternative fuels to the currently used natural gas. 
Leader: AMIII Participants: UNIPI, UoB, ENEA, ENEA Linked 3rd party: CertiMaC, CNRS, POLITO    
Task 7.4 On line health monitoring of CMCs properties during use (M34-42) 
Building on the CMC manufacturing process monitoring strategies developed in WP3, IRIS will tailor the process analytical 
technology software platform to additionally perform structural monitoring on the walls of the ceramic composite tubes samples 
intended for use in highly demanding processes. T he structural monitoring of the walls of the CMC tubes will focus on the 
detection of possible cracks and on the degradation of the tube walls. Two combined strategies will be implemented. The first 
one, based on an IR camera, will monitor the temperature distribution on the surface of the tube, whose alteration during a 
prolonged use can indicate the presence of a local damage (crack) or a diffused component degradation (reduction in the tube 
density). A second approach will be based on the electrical resi stance of the tube, determined along its length by means of 
graphite electrode placed at the beginning and the end of the tube, which is sensitive to both the presence of extended cracks, 
which increase the electrical resistance, and to the density and thickness of the tube walls. The inputs of the two sensors will 
be correlated in order to minimize the risk of ‘false positives’. 
Data driven models will correlate the real time data from the IR and electrical sensors with inputs from characterisation in 
accelerated ageing conditions provided by WP4 and multiscale numerical models from WP5 where applicable. The platform 
will control the sensors, map their data on a 3D model and apply algorithms to assess the structural health along use (i.e. 
probability of failure) and recommend optimum maintenance for the CMC user.  
Leader: IRIS Participants: IPCF-CNR, FM 
Deliverables  
D7.1 (M32): Report on evaluation of CMC samples lifetime in relevant environment with future fuel mixtures (CNRS) 
D7.2 (M30): Technical feasibility of CMC application to the CEM-WAVE use case (AMIII) 
D7.3 (M42): Report on validation of CMC samples in current CEM-WAVE use case conditions (AMIII) 
D7.4 (M42): Report on CMCs health monitoring during use (IRIS) 
 
WP No. WP8 Lead beneficiary R-TECH 
WP title LCA, LCC, TA & Risk assessment 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 2 1 0,5 0,5 0,5 1 0,5 0,5 0,5 1 1 19 1,5 
Start Month 1 End Month 42 
Objectives  
• Assess the environmental impact of CEM-WAVE processes and products 
• Model the sustainability of CEM-WAVE including different scenarios  
• Risk Assessment of CEM-WAVE processes 
• Steer and optimize the economic sustainability of CEM-WAVE processes and products 
• Assess of energy and exergy impacts comparing the new developed CMCs production with conventional ones 
Description of work  
WP8 will investigate in depth the specifications and requirements to allow the environmental, energetical, cost sustainabilit y 
and risk analysis of CEM -WAVE processes and products. LCA, LCC, TA and RA will be carried out following technical and 
regulatory requirements. 
Task 8.1 Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) (M1-42) 
The environmental assessment of the CMCs will be carried out using L ife Cycle Assessment (LCA) software suite GaBi 
following the internationally recognized methodology ISO 14040/14 044 and compare the performance with current materials 
available in the market. Following the LCA methodological framework: Goal and scope defin ition, Life Cycle Inventory, Life 
Cycle Impact Assessment, Life Cycle Interpretation, R -Tech will compare the physical and mechanical characteristics of the 
CMCs, manufacturing processes, and the end-user specifications. The LCA will be developed in two stages; (i) At the material 
CEM-WAVE   
 54 
level with the characteristic information of the material from the scientific partners, (ii) At protocol level with the end-user specific 
information. The required information includes the functional units with the main inputs/outputs of energy, materials and water 
in the system boundary. Additionally, the energy consumption, the carbon footprint, the water footprint and the inorganic release 
of compounds will be assessed.  
Leader: R-TECH Participants: All partners 
Task 8.2 Life Cycle Costing (LCC) (M1-M42) 
LCC is an analytical methodology for calculating the total cost of a material, technology and product adopted in the project.  
This task will provide the cost profiles of the analysed systems and design of materials, and facilitat e the choice of the 
technological route for the production that have a higher economic benefit for the end -users. Similar to LCA, the LCC will be 
developed in two stages; (i) Devoted to the cost analysis at the material level, (ii) Developed at a product p rototype level in 
collaboration with the end-users, providing a set of economic indicators for further optimization. 
Leader: R-TECH Participants: All partners 
Task 8.3 Thermo-economic analysis and Energy optimization (TA) (M1-42) 
The main objective of this task is to assist the optimisation of the energy and costs that hugely influence LCA (Task 8.1) and 
LCC (Task 8.2). The possible alternatives and criteria (cost and energy) will be defined for different processes in collaboration 
with involved partners and the Multi-Criteria Decision Assistant (MCDA) tool will be used for evaluating the best alternative in 
the given scenarios.  
Leader: R-TECH Participants: All partners 
Task 8.4 Risk assessment (Technological and non-technological barriers) (M1-42) 
The risk management will be carried out following the ISO 31000/31050, considering the main steps; (i) risk identification, (ii) 
risk analysis, (iii) risk assessment and (iv) risk evaluation, together with monitoring and communication. The risk identification 
will be an integral part, updating regularly throughout the project through workshops and surveys. The identified risks, as well 
as the early warnings for possible emerging risks will be constantly monitored by developing an effective monitoring strategy  
in co llaboration with the whole consortium. The identification of the risks of the project will cover the areas, such as (i) 
technological risks (specific materials and process) (ii) Market risks (market adoption and acceptance), (iii) IPR issues and  
exploitation (patents and scientific knowledge management) (iv) Environment, regulations and safety (challenges in Policy, 
Regulation and Law according). 
Leader: R-TECH Participants: All partners 
Deliverables  
D8.1 (M21): Mid-term LCA for CEM-WAVE MW-CVI oxide and non-oxide processes (R-TECH) 
D8.2 (M42): Final report on LCA, LCC for CEM-WAVE products (R-TECH) 
D8.3 (M42): Report on thermo-economic analysis and energy optimisation (R-TECH) 
D8.4 (M42): Report on technological and non-technological barriers (Risk assessment) (R-TECH) 
 
WP No. WP9 Lead beneficiary KNEIA 
WP title Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 9 1 1 1 1,4 1 1,5 1 2 2 1 1,2 39 
Start Month 1 End Month 42 
Objectives  
• Enable potential future exploitation of the project results by disseminating them to the relevant stakeholders  
• Ensure that the findings of the project are widely communicated to the scientific community and the general public 
• Document undertaken and proposed dissemination and communication activities 
• Ensure the project results reach the relevant stakeholders who will use and implement them 
• Guarantee IPR management according to Guidelines of the European Commission within the Consortium Agreement 
Description of work  
In this WP, KNEIA will lead the activities of market strategy, dissemination and exploitation of CEM-WAVE products and results. 
The WP9 workplan is, in fact, encased in a robust project exploitation, dissemination and communication plan that involves a 
Multi-Stakeholders Platform and the scientific community through workshops and promotional material.  Up to now one 
important stakeholder on the ceramic market (Sacmi) manifested its interest about CEM-WAVE results.  
Task 9.1 CEM-WAVE clustering (M1-42) 
This task will ensure that CEM-WAVE is networked with all relevant national and international projects, initiatives and networks 
in EU and internationally, and that the results and impa ct of the project are effectively fully disseminated to all relevant 
audiences: industry, policy, research and academic communities. A dissemination plan will be developed, building on the 
preliminary plan provided in Section 2.2, and the following activities among others will be executed and reported:  
CEM-WAVE   
 55 
- Publishing at least 6 scientific articles in journals and conferences (subject to the IP protection publication policy of the  
consortium);  
- Organizing special sessions and scientific workshops as a part of large conferences with high impact;  
- Using the project and its results in teaching, in course materials and as a subject for theses in universities;  
- Targeted placement of articles and features in relevant trade and industry focused publications;  
- Organisation of the “CEM-WAVE Agenda” at events - an agenda of relevant European and international events that will 
be planned for the 36 -month duration of the project: trade fairs, exhibitions, workshops, seminars, conferences, round 
tables, etc., that the consortium is already planning to attend or organising as part of their ongoing activities. It is expected 
CEM-WAVE will capitalise on these existing events (target: 18 events), as well as the organisation of dedicated CEM -
WAVE workshops. 2 workshops are envisage d, one in the second year of the project and a Final CEM -WAVE 
workshop/conference that will be organised in Italy to be able to showcase the project results and impacts at the end of 
the project; other dissemination and networking opportunities will be the planned demo and training events.  
- Networking with other projects is also very important: it will ensure knowledge interchange and reuse between previous 
and future projects. Importantly, and in line with the call text, we will ensure a close interaction with the other proposals 
selected for funding under the same or closer topics. The networking plan will take relevant projects within international 
stakeholders and other EU / national projects into account (some of them have been identified in Section 1.3). It will also 
focus on networking between consortium partners and their respective areas. Most of the project partners are members 
of relevant networks, groups and associations -such as the SPIRE Consortium, SUSCHEM, etc. These memberships will 
be instrumental to promote cooperation and integration with CEM-WAVE. EU resources and supports will be used where 
applicable throughout the project to support the networking, dissemination and standardisation activities.  
The progress of this task will be reported  in the Interim and Final Plans for the dissemination and exploitation of the project's 
results.  
Leader: KNEIA Participants: All partners 
Task 9.2 Communication plan (M1-42) 
Subtask 9.2.1. Communication Plan and reporting on communication activities 
As di scussed in Section 2.2, we will draw up a Communication Plan that will be effective in engaging with our targeted 
stakeholders during the project in order to engage with them, mobilize their interests and secure their buy -in and support for 
the project. Th is plan will be closely linked with the project dissemination activities and it will be following the steps of a) 
identifying all possible stakeholders; b) organize the stakeholders into “communities of support” for helping us to present o ur 
ambition, goals, objectives and impacts; c) develop the CEM-WAVE brand as a powerful marketing and communications tool; 
and d) design and implement an effective communication campaign. In addition to planning and designing our Communication 
campaign, communication reports at project interim and at the end of the action (D9.6 and D9.9 respectively) will document 
the communication activities that have been implemented and all associated communication materials will be annexed. 
Subtask 9.2.2 Project website 
The project website (D9.1) architecture will be carefully planned to gather the different target audiences who, from the central 
landing page, will be able to navigate easily to dedicated sub-sites depending on their particular area of interest. The website 
will serve as a powerful communication tool to all our target audiences (it will also house a restricted access area for partners 
to store information and facilitate file sharing and internal communication). The public site will present the project brand and 
will provide well-presented non-confidential project information including the project concept, the partners, core objectives, 
related literature, easy to understand infographics presenting the strategic, competitive and economic benefits of the projec t, 
information about Horizon 2020, the ‘CEM-WAVE Green Channel’ of open access publications, links to other relevant websites, 
networks, projects, communities, conferences, etc. The platform will also enable dissemination of the non-confidential results 
of the project (public reports and deliverables, publications as part of our green open access, etc.). It will also house the on -
line training tools and educational materials and will incorporate videos (official project video and eventual videos produced by 
other partners to describe part of the process). At the end of the project, the relevant public information and results will be 
available at this site with the aim to maintain the site as a central virtual hub for our post-project activities for at least 10 years.  
Subtask 9.2.3 Communication and promotional materials 
Project leaflets, posters, project video (D9.3), newsletters and promotional materials (gadgets for tradeshows, etc.) will also be 
designed in order to support project communication and branding efforts. These materials will be reported and Annexed to the 
Communication Reports (D9.6 and D9.9).  
Subtask 9.2.4 Social / digital media channels 
This subtask will capitalise on the tremendous potential of reaching some of our targeted audiences through social media  
channels: a social media grid will be drawn up; it will plot the most appropriate social media channel/sites for targeting specific 
audiences. Appropriate pages will be designed for each channel and a content maintenance plan will be put in place for 
managing the streams of information across these channels to secure and maintain followers. Social and digital media will be 
particularly powerful in helping to create ‘communities of support’ for the project. Community creation will be achieved via tools 
such as: Google hangouts, Reddit, Pinterest and other social media networks such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and 
YouTube. The project will create interest on social media and digital platforms by using visual media, videos, animations, icons 
CEM-WAVE   
 56 
and info-graphic imagery, and importantly, mobile enabled content and richer content experiences for users of any of the digital 
platforms.  
Leader: KNEIA Participants: All partners 
Task 9.3 Exploitation of results and Business model development (M1-42) 
For each of the key exploitable results, a business plan will be drawn up. A draft of these Business Plans will be delivered at 
M24 (D9.4) and final Plans in M36 (D9.7). Built on the information already provided in Section 2.2, the Business Plans will be 
structured as follows:  
• The planned key exploitable results and their expected key applications: development status, facts and figures that facilitate 
the assessment of the potential impact, differences from existing competing products/services, main IPR issues to be 
clarified in the consortium agreement;  
• The exploitation team: partners involved in the exploitation activities providing information on their previous experience and 
business interests, complementing external resources if not in the consortium;  
• The market: the potential geographical and economic size of the market, market trends, main competitors and competitive 
advantage;  
• The business model: marketing strategy, main clients; following inputs from business models in terms of ceramic matrix 
composites and manufacturing technology market supply; 
• The financial projections: sales forecasts, investment needed for covering the costs, additional funding that will be identified 
through e.g. ESIF, national programmes, private funding sources etc., complementary or parallel projects;  
• The commercialization roadmap: the steps planned before the product is ready for the market (i.e. proof of concept, 
prototyping, demonstrations of technological performance and cost effectiveness field trials, pilots, validation and 
standardization issues, regulatory requirements).  
Leader: KNEIA Participants: All partners  
Task 9.4 Multi-Stakeholders Platform (M1-42) 
This task will be directed towards community building and stakeholder engagement through the creation of an ad hoc online 
platform, which will constitute both a stakeholder meeting point and a knowledge sharing place. The project will develop a 
Multi-Stakeholders Platform (MSP) to ensure the engagement, inclusion and active participation of all relevant stakeholders 
and their diverse perspectives. The stakeholders involved will foresee the engagement of representatives of research centers, 
economic and social actors: private companies engaged in several strategic EU applications (furnace industry for steel 
production, aerospace an d energy fields), together with legislators, regulators standardisation bodies and industrial 
participants. The MSP will also be an instrument for knowledge sharing and engagement with other successful projects under 
the Horizon 2020 call LC-SPIRE-08-2020, and other H2020 and future Horizon Europe projects. The role of this platform will 
be to collect the information provided by industry stakeholders identified during the project in order to define common 
development campaigns aimed to unlock the potentials of CEM-WAVE strategies in different EU Countries. This platform will 
be nourished through reports, publications, press briefings and newsletters on project results and other relevant information . 
In particular, the MSP will define a set of relevant topics  influencing the take-off of CEM-WAVE technologies and solutions. 
Among them, a special focus will be dedicated to: standardization issues, supply chain facilitating measures and sustainability 
criteria development for CEM-WAVE products. The involvement of  stakeholders and the valuable inter - communication 
management strategy will be a crucial aspect to be carried out by all project partners. The active collaboration of CEM-WAVE 
identified actors will be the basis to achieve the final target. An online Business Impact Forum will be established, as part of 
the MSP, gathering a wide range of stakeholders with a potential interest in implementing the project outcomes and where a 
return on investment is feasible. This forum will contribute to better focus our b usiness planning, strategies and post -project 
exploitation routes. 
Leader: KNEIA Participants: All partners 
Deliverables  
D9.1 (M6): Project Website (KNEIA) 
D9.2 (M6): Communication Plan and Report, to be updated every reporting period (KNEIA) 
D9.3 (M40): Project video (KNEIA) 
D9.4 (M28 and M40): Business Plans - following robust business plan templates and guidelines (KNEIA) 
D9.5 (M21 and M40): Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project's results (KNEIA) 
D9.6 (M28): Multi-Stakeholder Platform (KNEIA) 
 
WP No. WP10 Lead beneficiary UNIPI 
WP title Coordination and Management 
Part. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Short name  UNIPI IPCF-CNR FM FHF UoB ATL ENEA CNRS POLITO IRIS AMIII R-TECH KNEIA 
Person Months 23 1 1 1 0,8 1 0,5 1 1 2 1 1 1 
Start Month 1 End Month 42 
Objectives  
CEM-WAVE   
 57 
• Coordinate and supervise the project research and innovation activities to be carried out according to the work plan, 
also to monitor and ensure quality and timing of project deliverables;  
• Carry out the overall administrative and financial management and reporting of the project;  
• Manage contacts with the EU Commission and establish effective internal and external communication; 
• Prevent and resolve possible conflicts, ensuring that risk management is an integral part of the project management 
strategy. 
Description of work  
WP10 will: coordinate and monitor research activities, administrative and financial management; coordinate the reporting and 
deliverables production and will address the resolution of possible c onflicts. In addition, it will continuously ensure contacts 
with the EC and compliance with the procedures described in the Grant Agreement and in the Consortium Agreement through 
participation in EC project reviews and regular internal review of periodic reports. UNIPI will be in charge of the administrative 
coordination of the CEM-WAVE project and lead this WP. The WP leaders (FHF (WP1), IPCF -CNR (WP2), UNIPI (WP3), 
ENEA (WP4), CNRS (WP5), POLITO (WP6), AM (WP7), STW (WP8), KNEIA (WP9), UNIPI (WP10)) will  support the 
coordination and project management, e.g. organize and host meetings and will participate in the Steering Committee (SC). 
The Innovation Management Team (IMT) leader and the IPR Manager as well as the members of the Communication and 
Dissemination Team (CDT) will be among the staff member of institutions of the General Assembly as mentioned in section 
3.2.1.  
Task 10.1 Coordination, project meetings and reporting (M1-42) 
Subtask 10.1.1 Establishment of the management guidelines 
UNIPI will estab lish the Management Guidelines that sets out all reporting requirements, deliverable sign -off procedures, 
templates for all project documents, meeting schedules, and participants’ roles and responsibilities. It will allow setting u p 
common rules that will be applied by all. 
Subtask 10.1.2 Coordination and reporting  
The Project Coordinator (CO) will organize, implement, and follow -up a kick-off meeting and face to face meetings (two per 
year). The CO, assisted by the Project Management Team (PMT) and the hosting Partner, will convene and manage the project 
meetings. The progress and results achieved by the project will  be reported in the periodic activity reports required by the 
Funding Agency under the supervision of the coordinators and WP leaders. If nece ssary, recovery actions will be identified 
and activities revised accordingly.  
Subtask 10.1.3 Organization of Kick-off and periodic meetings  
The CO will organize, implement and follow -up a kick-off meeting and yearly face to face meetings (two per year).  The CO, 
assisted by the PMT and the hosting Partner, will convene and manage the project meetings. The task will include preparation 
of related documentation ( e.g., agendas, invitations, documents and reports, minutes, and action lists, etc.) and securing  
location of meeting places/catering. The kick-off meeting will be held early (possibly by Month 1) to familiarize all partners with 
the structure and operation of the consortium, their detailed activities for the following period. The periodic General Assembly 
and Steering Committee (SC) meetings will regularly bring members of project together to provide guidance on the project 
implementation. Additionally, they will represent the opportunity to solve any issues impeding the progress of the project an d 
to approve the appropriate contingency plans. Additional technical meetings through Skype, teleconference and other web -
based means, as well as technical visits will be convened when and where necessary.  
Subtask 10.1.4 Communication and exchange with the European Commission  
Communication and exchange with the EC will be guaranteed by the Project coordinator, who will represent the only interface 
with it. She will act on behalf of and in agreement with the members of the Consortium and will report to the SC and the General 
Assembly any request by the Agency. The coordinator will inform and dialogue with the EC in relation to any opportunity, risk 
and problem, which may arise internally and during the project implementation.  
Subtask 10.1.5 Operational management of project boards  
The objectives and fields of action of each Governing body are described in section 3.2.  
Leader: UNIPI Participants: All partners 
Task 10.2 Overall legal, Financial and Administrative management (M1-42) 
The CO, assisted by the PMT, will supervise and guarantee coherence among project activities and procedures described in 
the Grant Agreement and the Consortium Agreement. The CO will lead discussion on amendments and revisions of these 
Agreements if necessary.  
Leader: UNIPI Participants: All partners 
Task 10.3 Coordination of Knowledge and Innovation management activities (M1-42) 
The CO, assisted by the Project Management Team, will manage the EC contribution and distribute funds among partners 
according to the rules established in th e Grant Agreement and the Consortium Agreement. Financial statements, relevant 
certificates (if necessary) and project reports will be collected and submitted to the EC. The PMT will guarantee assistance to 
individual partners on administrative and financial issues. The CO, in cooperation with the SC, will carefully review the results 
of the project and make them available to the competent project boards listed above and in section 3.2. Results will be 
communicated and shared in accordance with Grant Agreem ent and Consortium Agreement provisions, the Plan for 
CEM-WAVE   
 58 
Exploitation and Dissemination of Results ensuring their complementarity. Actions under this task will be carried out in clos e 
cooperation with the IPR Manager, paying attention to monitoring, managemen t and exploitation of those. In terms of Data 
management, the task will include the definition and put into practice of activities related with guaranteeing the accuracy, 
standardization and security of data, but also protection of scientific data, commerc ialisation and Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPR). This task will be integrated in the execution of the scientific/technical tasks, and the results included in the deliverables 
of the technical WPs, except aspects in relation with commercialization and IPR , that will be tackled in the Plan for 
Communication, Dissemination and Exploitation. 
Leader: UNIPI Participants: All partners 
Deliverables  
D10.1 (M14, M28, M42): CEM-WAVE interim and final reports (UNIPI) 
D10.2 (M2): CEM-WAVE Project Management Guide (UNIPI) 
D10.3 (M6): Data Management Plan (UNIPI) 
 
Table 3.1 c - List of Deliverables 
Del. No. Deliverable Name WP 
No. Leader Type Diss. 
level 
Del. date 
(month) 
D1.1 Design freeze for coating process for non-oxide and oxide CMCs WP1 FHF R CO 6 
D1.2 Report on coating set-up of non-oxide fibres for CMC's production  WP1 FHF R CO 10 
D1.3 Report on coating set-up of oxide fibres for CMC's production  WP1 FHF R CO 10 
D1.4 Report on prepared preforms with different and selected geometries  WP1 FHF R CO 20 
D2.1 Dielectric properties of the samples of interest  WP2 IPCF-CNR R CO 11 
D2.2 Optimisation of the operational conditions of the MW-CVI reactors  WP2 IPCF-CNR R CO 14 
D2.3 Integration of the solid-state sources in the MW-CVI reactors  WP2 FM R CO 16 
D2.4 Automation of the MW-CVI reactors  WP2 IPCF-CNR R CO 20 
D3.1 Optimisation of operating parameters for MW -CVI non-oxide CMC 
production  
WP3 UNIPI R CO 18 
D3.2 Optimisation of operating parameters for MW -CVI oxide CMC 
production  
WP3 UoB R CO 18 
D3.3 Report on advanced process monitoring tools  WP3 IRIS R CO 25 
D3.4 Report on production of infiltrated non-oxide CMC samples  WP3 UNIPI R CO 40 
D3.5 Report on production of infiltrated oxide CMC samples  WP3 UoB R CO 40 
D3.6 Optimal design of ceramic inlays  WP3 CNRS R CO 28 
D3.7 Manufactured ceramic inlays WP3 CNRS R CO 40 
D4.1 Water corrosion tests and thermomechanical characterisation on 
CMC samples and their joints  
WP4 ENEA R CO 32 
D4.2 Measurement of thermal conductivity and emissivity WP4 ENEA 
Linked 3rd 
party: 
CertiMaC 
R CO 21 
D4.3 Microstructural, physico-chemical characterisation of CMC samples 
and their joints  
WP4 POLITO R CO 23 
D4.4 Measurements of wear resistance, thermal efficien cy and 
accelerated ageing tests 
WP4 ENEA R CO 40 
D5.1 2D and  3D images at various scales of the fibrous reinforcement 
and/or fully infiltrated composites  
WP5 CNRS R CO 12 
D5.2 Suitable computational meshes for all computations  WP5 CNRS R CO 18 
D5.3 Effective laws for geometrical and transfer properties as a function of 
infiltration degree at mesoscale  
WP5 CNRS R CO 25 
D5.4 Effective laws for geometrical and transfer properties as a function of 
infiltration degree at macroscale  
WP5 CNRS R CO 38 
D6.1 Report on novel joining materials and techniques for oxide AND non-
oxide CMCs  
WP6 POLITO R CO 12 
D6.2 Report on characterisation results for novel joints for oxide and non -
oxide CMCs at laboratory scale 
WP6 POLITO R CO 24 
D6.3 Final report on characteri sation results for novel joints for oxide and 
non-oxide CMCs 
WP6 POLITO R CO 30 
D6.4 Report on joining of the ceramic inlays to the oxide and non -oxide 
CMC samples  
WP6 POLITO R CO 31 
D6.5 Final report on joining of the ceramic inlays to the CMC samples  WP6 CNRS R CO 34 
D6.6 Report on EBC coatings on CMC samples and joint materials  WP6 FHF R CO 40 
D7.1 Report on evaluation of CMC samples lifetime in relevant 
environment with future fuel mixtures 
WP7 CNRS R CO 32 
CEM-WAVE   
 59 
D7.2 Technical feasibility of CMC application to the CEM-WAVE use case WP7 AMIII R CO 30 
D7.3 Report on validation of CMC  samples in current CEM -WAVE use  
case conditions  
WP7 AMIII R CO 42 
D7.4 Report on CMCs health monitoring during use WP7 IRIS R CO 42 
D8.1 Mid-term LCA for CEM -WAVE MW -CVI oxide and non -oxide 
processes 
WP8 R-TECH R CO 21 
D8.2 Final report on LCA, LCC for CEM-WAVE products  WP8 R-TECH R CO 42 
D8.3 Report on thermo-economic analysis and energy optimisation  WP8 R-TECH R CO 42 
D8.4 Report on technological and non -technological barriers (Risk 
assessment) 
WP8 R-TECH R CO 42 
D9.1 Project Website WP9 KNEIA DEC PU 6 
D9.2 Communication Plan and Report to be  updated every reporting 
period 
WP9 KNEIA R CO 6 
D9.3 Project video WP9 KNEIA DEC PU 40 
D9.4 Business Plans - following robust business plan templates and 
guidelines 
WP9 KNEIA R CO 28 & 40 
D9.5 Plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project's results WP9 KNEIA R CO 21 & 40 
D9.6 Multi-Stakeholder Platform WP9 KNEIA DEC PU 28 
D10.1 CEM-WAVE interim and final reports WP10 UNIPI R CO 14, 28 & 
42 
D10.2 CEM-WAVE Project Management Guide WP10 UNIPI R CO 2 
D10.3 Data Management Plan WP10 UNIPI R CO 6