4. PERSONAL DATA  Page
Does your research involve personal data collection and/or processing?   Yes No
Does your research involve further processing of previously collected personal data 
(secondary use)?
Yes No
5. ANIMALS Page
Does your research involve animals? Yes No
6. THIRD COUNTRIES Page
In case non-EU countries are involved, do the research related activities undertaken in 
these countries raise potential ethics issues? 
 
Yes No
Do you plan to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic 
material, live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or 
flora samples, etc.)? 
Yes No
Do you plan to import any material - including personal data - from non-EU countries into 
the EU? Yes No
Do you plan to export any material - including personal data - from the EU to non-EU 
countries?  Yes No
In case your research involves low and/or lower middle income countries, are any 
benefits-sharing actions planned? 
Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the research at risk? Yes No
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
European Commission  
Research & Innovation - Participant Portal 
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 13 of 15
Proposal ID 752907 Acronym DATAMINE4.0
H2020-MSCA-IF-2016-SE-ST.pdf Ver1.35 20160902 Last saved 14/09/2016 14:53:58
7. ENVIRONMENT & HEALTH and SAFETY Page
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants? Yes No
Does your research deal with endangered fauna and/or flora and/or protected areas? Yes No
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to humans, 
including  research staff? Yes No
8. DUAL USE   Page
Does your research involve dual-use items in the sense of Regulation 428/2009,  
or other items for which an authorisation is required?
Yes No
9. EXCLUSIVE FOCUS ON CIVIL APPLICATIONS Page
Could your research raise concerns regarding the exclusive focus on civil applications? Yes No
10. MISUSE Page
 Does your research have the potential for misuse of research results? Yes No
11. OTHER ETHICS ISSUES Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Please specify Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues described above and that, if any ethics issues 
apply, I will complete the ethics self-assessment and attach the required documents.
✖
How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
European Commission  
Research & Innovation - Participant Portal 
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 14 of 15
Proposal ID 752907 Acronym DATAMINE4.0
H2020-MSCA-IF-2016-SE-ST.pdf Ver1.35 20160902 Last saved 14/09/2016 14:53:58
5 - Call specific questions
Eligibility Researcher (future fellow)
1. Were you in the last 5 years in military service?  Yes No
Other Questions
For communication purposes only, the REA asks for permission to publish the name of the researcher (future fellow) should 
the proposal be retained for funding.
1. Does the researcher (future fellow) give this permission?
Yes No
2. Is there a secondment in Member States or Associated Countries envisaged in Part B of this 
proposal? Yes No
In which sector is the secondment in Member States / Associated Countries foreseen?
Academic Non Academic
Do you already know the organisation to which this secondment will be? Yes No
Name KU Leuven
Country Belgium
In which sector is the secondment in Member States / Associated Countries foreseen?
Academic Non Academic
Do you already know the organisation to which this secondment will be? Yes No
Name University of Skövde
Country Sweden
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
European Commission  
Research & Innovation - Participant Portal 
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 15 of 15
Proposal ID 752907 Acronym DATAMINE4.0
H2020-MSCA-IF-2016-SE-ST.pdf Ver1.35 20160902 Last saved 14/09/2016 14:53:58
Data management activities
A new focus within Horizon 2020 is data management, for example through the use of Data Management Plan (DMP). 
  
DMPs detail what data the project will generate, whether and how it will be exploited or made accessible for verification and 
re-use, and how it will be curated and preserved. 
  
The use of a DMP is required for projects participating in the Open Research Data Pilot in the form of a deliverable in the first 
6 months of the project (possible updates during the project). 
  
Other projects are invited to submit a DMP if relevant for their planned research. 
 
Are data management activities relevant for your proposed project? Yes No
Open Research Data Pilot in Horizon 2020
All applicants can participate in the Pilot on Open Research Data in Horizon 2020¹ on a voluntary basis. This Pilot aims to 
improve and maximise access to and re-use of research data generated by actions. 
  
Participants in the Pilot will be invited to formulate a Data Management Plan (DMP). DMPs detail what data the project will 
generate, whether and how it will be exploited or made accessible for verification and re-use, and how it will be curated and 
preserved. 
Participating in the Pilot is flexible in the sense that it does not mean that all research data needs to be open. Rather, projects 
can define certain datasets to remain closed via a Data Management Plan (DMP). 
  
Please note that participation in this Pilot does not constitute part of the evaluation process. Proposals will not be evaluated 
favourably because they participate in the Pilot on a voluntary basis. 
 
Yes NoWe wish to participate in the Pilot on Open Research Data in Horizon 2020 on a voluntary basis 
1
According to article 43.2 of Regulation (EU) No 1290/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council, of 11 December 2013, laying down the rules for participation and 
dissemination in "Horizon 2020 - the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2014-2020)" and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1906/2006.
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
STARTPAGE
MARIE SKLODOWSKA-CURIE ACTIONS
Individual Fellowships (IF)
Call: H2020-MSCA-IF-2016
PART B
“DATAMINE4.0”
This proposal is to be evaluated as:
Standard EF
Part B- Page 1 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
Table of Contents 
DOCUMENT 1
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS................................................................................................................................................III
1. EXCELLENCE..............................................................................................................................................................1
1.1. Q UALITY AND CREDIBILITY OF THE RESEARCH/INNOVATION ACTION ( LEVEL OF NOVELTY,  APPROPRIATE CONSIDERATION OF
INTER/MULTIDISCIPLINARY AND GENDER ASPECTS...........................................................................................................................1
1.2.  QUALITY AND APPROPRIATENESS OF THE TRAINING AND OF THE TWO WAY TRANSFER OF KNOELWDGE BETWEEN THE
RESEARCHER AND THE HOST..........................................................................................................................................................3
1.3. QUALITY OF THE SUPERVISION AND OF THE INTEGRATION IN THE TEAM/INSTITUTION..................................................................4
1.4. CAPACITY OF THE RESEARCHER TO REACH OR RE-ENFORCE A POSITION OF PROFESSIONAL MATURITY/INDEPENDENCE.............. 5
2. IMPACT........................................................................................................................................................................6
2.1. ENHANCING THE POTENTIAL AND FUTURE CAREER PROSPECTS OF THE RESEARCHER............................................................... 6
2.2. QUALITY OF THE PROPOSED MEASURES TO EXPLOIT AND DISSEMINATE THE ACTION RESULTS....................................................6
2.3. QUALITY OF THE PROPOSED MEASURES TO COMMUNICATE THE ACTION ACTIVITIES TO DIFFERENT TARGET AUDIENCIES.............. 6
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION......................................................................................7
3.1. COHERENTE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE WORK PLAN.............................................................................................................7
3.2. APPROPRIATENESS OF THE ALLOCATION OF TASKS AND RESOURCES........................................................................................9
3.3. APPROPRIATENESS OF THE MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURES, INCLUDING RISK MANAGEMENT.................................9
3.4. APPROPRIATENESS OF THE INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT (INFRASTRUCTURE)........................................................................10
DOCUMENT 2
4. CV OF THE EXPERIENCED RESEARCHER...........................................................................................................11
5. CAPACITY OF THE PARTICIPATING ORGANISATIONS......................................................................................14
6. ETHICS ISSUES........................................................................................................................................................17
7. LETTERS OF COMMITMENT...................................................................................................................................18
Part B
II
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
Participants
Legal
Entity
Short
Name
Academic (tick)
Non-academic(tick)
Country
Dept,/
Division/
Laboratory
Supervisor Role of Partner
Organisation
Beneficiary IRIS x Spain Engineering Group Dr. David F.
Nettleton Host
Partner
Organisation
University
KU
Leuven
x Belgium Department of
Computer Science
Prof. Jesse
Davis, Dr.
Anton Dries
training of the fellow
regarding graph
matching
Partner
Organisation
University
of
Skövde
x Sweden Department of
Computer Science
Prof.
Vicenc
Torra
training of the fellow
regarding data fusion
Data for non-academic beneficiaries
Name
Location of
research
premises
(city/country)
Type of R&D activities
No. of full-timeemployees
No. of
employees
in R&D
Web site Annual
turnover
(approx.
in Euro)
Enterprise
status
(Yes/No)
SME status
(Yes/No)
Innovacio
i Recerca
industrial i
sostenible
(IRIS)
Mediterranean
Technology
Park,
Avda.  Carl
Friedrich
Gauss nº 11
08860
Castelldefels
(Barcelona)  -
Spain
Industrial
transfer,
environmental
optimization,
development
and
processing  of
materials,
food, etc.
48 http://iris.cat/ Yes Yes
Part B - Page 1 of 18
III
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
1. EXCELLENCE
1.1.  Quality  and  credibility  of  the  research/innovation  action  (level  of  novelty,  appropriate  consideration  of
inter/multidisciplinary and gender aspects)
1.1.1. Introduction, state-of-the art, objectives and overview of the action
Although data mining has been in existence for several decades, its application to industrial settings and public organizations
has been limited. In recent years new more robust methods such as kernel based algorithms have become sufficiently reliable
to be used for critical in-line settings such as high-frequency financial trading, PLC monitoring of industrial processes, logistics
of public urban movement (trains, bus, metro) and the incorporation of mobile device technologies (eg. RFID), among others.
However, the success in deploying such solutions depends, apart from the algorithms themselves, on a skilful analysis of the
environment to be modeled, knowledge and data representation, data pre and post-processing (including input factor selection
based on data relevance and reliability), choice of techniques, and so on. The choice of data mining paradigms can be problem
and data dependent. We can contrast different learning paradigms, from the “best of breed”, for example, among the top ten
algorithms in data mining  as indicated in the highly referenced paper by Zhou et al. 3: C4.55, k-Means, SVM 6, Apriori, EM,
PageRank, AdaBoost, kNN, Naive Bayes 4, and CART. This list has remained remarkably static since it was published in 2007,
however more recent lists have added new more specific variants:  
 kdnuggets  poll (2011): methods:  Decision Trees/Rules  59.8 %, Regression  57.9 %,  Clustering   52.4 %,  Statistics
(descriptive) 47.9%, http://www.kdnuggets.com/polls/2011/algorithms-analytics-data-mining.html
 kdnuggets  poll  (2015):  Linear  regression;  Logistic  regression;  k-means;  SVMs;  Random  Forests;  Matrix
Factorization/SVD; Gradient Boosted Decision Trees/Machines, ...
In the specific context of industrial process modeling, neural networks and regression are popular methods, with their respective
specific variants. For example, a Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) subspace technique was used 7 to train a supervised learner
to control the tension of a winding process. A second empirical study 8, modeled the following industrial pullwinding process to
control the friction force of a micro-pullwinding process. The objectives were (i) to train a model to predict the friction and (ii) to
perform a calibration step to find the input values which result in a given friction. The Industry 4.0 framework 1,2, in which the
incorporation of “intelligent” techniques in industrial processes is a central theme, is expected to give a strategic impulse to the
use of advanced data mining techniques to model the data generated by and which describes the in-line production processes.
In the light of the above, the overall aim of this DATAMINE4.0 project is to study real complex industrial processes, execute
data modeling and calibration projects and deploy them in situ, wherever possible. The following scientific objectives are
proposed to significantly advance the state of the art to deliver scientific results that are useful in real industrial settings:
 Review the state of the art for statistical, machine learning/calibration methods as solutions for the Industry4.0 framework
(more specific details will also be studied once case studies are selected).
 To select and execute data mining projects, with special emphasis on Industry4.0 solutions, integrating the needs of end
users and the entire production chain in order to define market requirements. To perform “data audit” studies in order to
obtain all the information necessary for the data mining projects.
 To execute data mining projects “data project”.
 To perform the characterization  of new data  modeling  vs. current, generally  empirical,   process  optimisation  data
management approaches used in industrial sectors. 
 To develop profitable optimized control and parametrization of industrial processes, thus promoting the Industry 4.0
paradigm as well as incorporating machine learning and AI data modeling techniques into mobility and other applications.
 To study applications within the “Internet of Things” (IOT) and Cloud Computing paradigms, processing data from such
technologies as RFID and other mobile devices, wireless peer-to-peer communications for logistics and real time tracking
as dynamic network analysis. This also includes sensor data fusion.
 To study the critical processing aspects to plan the transfer of the results to industrial lines and further in-situ validation to
demonstrate the potential of DATAMINE4.0 to significantly improve the operations of the respective end users.
The developed industrial process data models present the basis for a high performance new process modeling with excellent
calibration properties that will gain wide adoption over time. Scientific knowledge and technology transfer competitiveness
underpins all the themes, including new manufacturing and resulting business models that are essential for the realization of
value. The project will be a significant step forward for data modeling and calibration on in-situ industrial processes. In Fig. 1,
we see a typical development cycle to build a data model and calibrate 9,10,11,12 the inputs for a given output. Different data
modeling techniques can be used for optimization problems of this type, such as non-linear regression 10,11, neural networks 14,
Bayesian Models15 and genetic algorithms13, among others.
1.1.2   Research methodology and approach
A portfolio of successful data mining models will be developed using a two step process 16  in which Step 1 involves conducting
several “data audits” each of which will define the requirements of a data mining project in terms of its business objective(s) and
by Step 1. The “data audit” step requires first the definition of a viable business objective which may be to solve a current
production problem or optimization challenge of an industrial process, for example. 
Part B - Page 1 of 20
1. Davies, R., Industry 4.0 - Digitalisation for productivity and growth, European Parliament Briefing Sept. 2015, European Parliamentary Research Service, PE 568.337 2. Butter, 
M., Fischer, N., Gijsbers, G., Hartmann, C., de Heide, M., van der Zee, F.,  Horizon 2020: Key Enabling Technologies (KETs), Booster for European Leadership in the 
Manufacturing Sector (2014), Study for the ITRE Committee, European Parliament Directorate General for Internal Policies, IP/A/ITRE/2013-01 October 2014, PE 536.282 3. Yu, 
S., Zhou, Z.H., Steinbac, M., Hand, D.J., Steinberg, D. (2007) Top 10 algorithms in data mining. Knowl Inform Syst  14(1):1–37. 4. John, G.H., Langley, P. (1995) Estimating 
continuous distributions in Bayesian classifiers. In: 11th Conf. on Uncertainty in Artificial Int., pp 338–345. 5. Quinlan, J.R. (1993) C4.5 programs for machine learning. Morgan 
Kaufmann. 6. Vapnik, V.N. (1995) The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer Verlag. 7. Bastogne, T., Noura, H., Richard, A., Hittinger, J.M., Application of subspace 
methods to the identification of a winding process. In: Proc. of the 4th European Control Conference, Vol. 5, 1-4 July 1997, Brussels. 8. Nettleton, D.F., Bugnicourt, E., Wasiak, 
C., Rosales, A. Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, 
ICIEMPM 2016, London, United Kingdom, July 28-29, 2016. 
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
This will involve a “consultancy study” of the necessary
data in order to achieve the goal. Then Step 2 “data
project” is the execution and deployment of the data
mining  project  defined  through  a  series  of  meetings
with  the  stakeholders (Management,  IT  Department,
Domain Experts) in order to consensuate the business
objective  and   identify  alternatives  if necessary.  For
example, a viable business objective would be one in
which  a  significant  improvement  is  possible  with
respect to the current performance. Once this is done,
an information and data capture exercise is performed
in order to evaluate if there exists sufficient quality data
in order to analyze and model the business objective
which has been identified. 
The “data project” step follows the typical phases of a
data mining project, assuming that at least part of the
work of data identification and variable selection has
been done in the “data audit” step. (i) Test data sets
are constructed (which can be fused from diverse data
sources such as Excel files, relational databases, text
corpus, flat files, etc.) and these are analyzed in order
to derive insights which enable the definition of new
higher  information  value  factors.  This  can  involve
standard statistical techniques such as correlation, principal components, information gain, k-Means clustering, tree-maps,
hierachical descomposition clustering, rule induction, association analysis, among others. (ii) data models are built based on the
data analysis performed in step (i) using contrasting algorithmic paradigms, such as regression models (linear, non-linear,
logistic), “black box” supervised models (neural networks (e.g. feedforward, recurrent), support vector machines with different
kernels (e.g. radial basis function); “white box” techniques 17,18 such as rule induction (e.g. MPART, J48, ID3, RandomForest),
Bayesian classifers; other supervised techniques, such as Ibk. With respect to Model Calibration, we propose to make some
improvements to the Monte Carlo type method in which Gaussian  random numbers are generated for each input:  firstly by
“remembering” the best solution found to date during the generation of the different combinations; secondly by benchmarking
Particle  Swarm  Optimization  which  has  already  indicated  promising  results  for  an  industrial  calibration  application,  and
represents  a  family  of  artificial  intelligence  paradigms  inspired  in  natural  processes,  which  uses  heuristics  and  rules  to
constantly guide the processing towards an optimal solution.
1.1.3. Originality and innovative aspects of the research programme 
Aiming  to open up new  fields in the  modeling of industrial processes with a holistic approach , this project  involves
unique challenges and a high level of innovation to achieve  major and pressing  objectives for industrial manufacturing
companies. Such  companies  must  balance  customization  with  volume  in-line  production  with  such  issues  as  machine
calibration, translating customer requirements definition into machine production instructions, time series prediction, among
others. The lack of a systematic approach and the required barrier improvements justify further research to develop suitable
methodologies and build a portfolio of successful industrial data modeling deployments in different sectors. Also lacking in the
prior art, development of precise “white box” rule based data models which complement the traditional “black box” statistical and
supervised learning algorithms, and generic parametric solutions which can be customized for different scenarios. This last
aspect is contrasted with the current state of art in which specific non-portable modeling solutions are typically developed to
solve specific problems.
DATAMINE4.0 expects to make a major breakthrough to allow the transfer of results to industrial production lines or
urban environment, for end users  of initially (a) food processing, (b) urban mobility and (c) customized production of
composite materials components, but potentially also in other scenarios  including telecommunications technologies to take
benefit from the fellow’s related expertise . Within the Internet of Things (IoT)  paradigm, this will englobe data coming from
mobile devices, wireless peer-to-peer communications and RFID, among others. Those initial case scenario have been selected
in view of: (i) the number of target end users in such sectors, where IRIS generally already has expertise in terms of providing
other engineering or monitoring services, leading to synergies and indeed a high potential for IRIS when tackling the post-
project business replication of the project results; (ii) their representability of a greater number of case scenarios which may be
transferred to other sectors; (iii) the need of different data mining approaches to cover them leading to a rich training experience
for the fellow; (iv) their having  a high optimisation potential when taking full benefits of the data they generate. Thus, following
the work plan the proposal will:
 Identify and define viable data mining projects  to focus time and effort on business objectives and/or proposals with
sufficient data availability and/or data quality in the industrial production and urban mobility fields.
Part B - Page 2 of 20
9. Martens, H., Naes, T., Multivariate Calibration. Wiley 1989, pp. 79-82. 10. Fitting Linear Models JMP 12 (SAS), 2015. 11. Lavagnini, I., Magno, F., A STATISTICAL OVERVIEW 
ON UNIVARIATE CALIBRATION, INVERSE REGRESSION, AND DETECTION LIMITS: APPLICATION TO GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY/MASS SPECTROMETRY TECHNIQUE, 
Mass Spectrometry Reviews, 2007, 26,1–18. 12. Lyman Ott, R., Longnecker, M., An Introduction to statistical methods and data analysis. Brokks/Cole, 2010 (6th edition), pp. 
604-607, "the inverse regression problem" (calibration). 13. Yazdani, M., Daryabari, A., Farshi, A., Talatahari, S., Application of Taguchi Method and Genetic Algorithm for 
Calibration of Soil Constitutive Models, Journal of Appl. Math., Vol. 2013 (2013), Artic. ID 258721. 14. Despagne, F., Luc Massart, D., Neural networks in multivariate calibration. 
Analyst, 1998, 123, 157R–178R 15. Prudhomme, S., Bayesian Inversion for Model Calibration, RTO-AVT-VKI short course on Uncertainty Quantification Stanford University, 
California, April 15-16, 2011. 16. Nettleton, D.F., Commercial Data Mining - Processing, Analysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects, 1st Edition (2014), Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, ISBN 9780124166028, 304 pages. 17. SIMCA (Soft Independent Modeling of Class Analogies), 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soft_independent_modelling_of_class_analogies. 18. Shmueli, G., To Explain or to Predict? Statistical Science 2010, Vol. 25, No. 3, 289–310.
Fig. 1 Example calibration of a data model
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
 Execute the viable projects defined in the previous step, involving data selection, refinement, modeling and calibration,
choosing the most adequate analysis tools for each task.
 Address  the  calibration  of  industrial  production  composed  of  complex  interrelated  multiple  sub-processes  to  create
parametrizable customized mass production
 With reference to calibration, experiment with new paradigms such as guided Gaussian generators and Particle Swarm
Optimization.
 Deploy the models built in the previous step in real industrial settings, integration in production line and testing.
 Bring new insights including industrial perspectives on identifying and quantifying the benefit from using undisclosed high
valuable sources in order to improve modeling and calibration performance in the context of data modeling for industrial and
mobility applications, in line with the Industry 4.0 movement (see Fig. 2) and the Internet of Things using mobile and RFID
technologies and data fusion from different sensors, where appropriate.
 Use of an algorithm which is a patent application co-authored by Dr. Nettleton  (See Ref. 3, Sec. 1.3.1) in comparison
with other  considered  state of the art data  mining methods. This algorithm  consists of a matching technique  for  data
represented in graph like structures, such as is the case in a wide spectrum of domains such as online social networks,
recommender systems, urban transport planning, logistics and telecommunications and molecular design/drug discovery,
among others. As part of the work, a front end will be developed for the algorithm as a generic demonstrator system. Then for
a chosen case study, the algorithm will be customized for the given data, matching requirement and business objective. The
specific case studied to which it will be applied is expected to be the urban transport project, however other applications can
be chosen as alternatives, if necessary.
For  the  computerization  of  manufacturing,
focussed and market-driven projects such as
DATAMINE4.0  are  necessary  for  ensuring
European excellence in the face of continuous
global  innovations  and  advancement  of  the
worldwide  industrial  manufacturing
technologies, which is typically regarded as a
key  area  of  competitiveness.  One  of  the
specific  objectives  of  the  H2020  industrial
thematic area is to boost European leadership
in  the  manufacturing  sector  as  KETs  (Key
Enabling Technologies). Industry 4.0 refers to
an  industrial  revolution  based  on  cyber-
physical systems, which has its origins as a
German  Industry  initiative.  In  short,  the
technical  challenge  in  this  project  of
performing  data  analysis  and  modeling  to
solve  real  industrial  problems  and  improve
existing processes, will make it possible to perform processes (such as in-line customized mass production) which were
previously impracticable. This is facilitated by the availability of machine learning and statistical function libraries which can be
integrated into industrial systems, in closed loop or outside as an initial calibration step. Data analysis and modeling of complex
production machinery and multiple step in-line processes in pre-industrial scales and that achieves customization competing
with low volume production iis highly innovative. Information on IP is given in part 3.2.3.
1.2. Quality and appropriateness of the training and of the two way transfer of knowledge between the researcher and
the host
During her PhD studies, Natasa has performed modeling of telecomunications network applications at the Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale  de  Lausanne,  Switzerland,  thus  obtaining  both  academic  and  industrial  know-how  and  experience  in  applying
advanced  data modeling  techniques  to real world problems.  During  that time she gained  experience  and insight  in the
development and application of statistical models applied to the testing and development of human mobility, network routing
and simulation. The DataMine4.0 project will allow her to widen the application areas of her statistical analysis skills to other
domains, as well as potentiating the projects using novel algorithms. Also, it will be an opportunity to augment her curriculum in
publications in congresses and journals afin to the DataMine4.0 objectives.
Working in a multidisciplinary network, Natasa will increase and enrich her scientific knowledge in the analysis, development
and deployment of industrial data modeling. She will also have an unprecedented opportunity to deploy powerful data mining
solutions in real industrial production environments and thus contribute to the Industry 4.0 and Internet of Things movements.
She will be trained on new and powerful research and application techniques, transferring from a test environment to a pilot
industrial scenario under the guidance  of data modeling scientists with experience in industrial data modeling validation and
testing, with a team of engineers who will help him to transfer the results to the industrial requirements while giving her
exposure  to  many  transversal  skills.  On  the  other  hand,  we  can  also  learn  from  Natasa's  specialist  knowledge  of
telecommunications network modeling, which in the future will be increasingly a strategic component of IRIS's industrial applied
research projects, making use of mobile and radio frequency identification in new scenarios.
Furthermore, as in IRIS there is very dynamic environment and given the fact that there are numerous projects with academic
institutions, Dr. Sarafijanovic-Djukic will cooperate and learn from some of the best scientists in the field (see section 2.3). Also,
she will spend 2 months each at the University of Leuven - KU Leuven (Belgium) and the University of Skövde (Sweden), where
she will attend courses and hands-on collaboration in order to  obtain knowledge on industrial and applied graph matching and
data fusion, respectively. Both of these themes are key data sciences hot topics and are strongly related to the DATAMINE4.0
Part B - Page 3 of 20
Fig. 2 Evolution towards the fourth industrial revolution: Industry 4.0
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
proposal: graph matching and data fusion to obtaining a strong set of inputs for the data models. Likewise, she will directly
apply learned  knowledge  in the evaluation  and development  of data  mining projects.  In  addition,  Natasa will enrich his
curriculum  with  new  skills  in  innovation  management,  technology  transfer  to  the  industry,  project  and  IP/knowledge
management, as well as extend her article writing and presentation skills for conferences and journals.
Scientific training objectives (SCO) will be fulfilled as a result of the training-though-research under supervision and hands-on
training, through this individual personalised project that has been agreed between the Fellow and the Host (Table 1). Note that
WP2, 3 and 4 contemplate a number of case studies. Audits will typically have a duration of 1-3 weeks and the projects from 2-
6 months. Therefore it is contemplated to complete 3 or 4 case study projects (among those previously listed) during the 2 year
period.   
WP1- Literature background and definition of specifications                                           
SCO - Training on specification definitions for market driven and applied research based on a mapping of the existing research and commercial state of the art
against market requirements for new solutions. Quality Function Deployment. 
Training verification (TV): Presentation of the specifications to the Innovation Committee (IC) and Scientific supervisor and subsequent approval.
WP2- Data Audit – requirements studies
SCO-1) Improved skills in evaluation and requirements capture of data mining projects using data audit methodology; 2) Incremental development approach
based on Evaluation of Business Objectives & identification of necessary and available data. A requirements report is produced for each case study.
TV: Data Audit report for different case studies presented to IC and Scientific supervisor and subsequently approved.
WP3- Data Project – execution of projects
SCO - Execution of projects defined by WP2 (Data Audit) using data miodeling and statistical skills in different data and industry domains; 1) Data acquisition
and pre-processing; 2) Data Analysis; 3) Data Modeling; 4) Testing and verification.
TV: Development of data models in new domains as a new learned skill for the Fellow that will be transferred to the Host. The evaluation of model precision
and improvement on existing methods will allow verifying good practice.
WP4- Transfer of knowledge and technology to industrial scale, industrial validation and production
SCO – Deployment. 1) Integration in Industrial production processes; 2) Transfer of technology          
TV: Successful integration of data models in the industry and its positive comparison with current methods leading to the engagement of the industry to further
uptake this new solution.
Training activities will be scheduled following Table 1 in order to provide structured training needed by the fellow.
Table 1. Programme of training courses to be delivered to the Fellow
No Type of course Short description of course and expected impact for Fellow Date
1 Project Management 
(PM) Training course
Training on ISO certified PM methodologies & procedures, including latest in PM Institute principals and vanguard
lean PM methodologies (e.g. High Level One Page Project Planner method, Sapenta), and Risk Management
procedures that provide skills in improved time, resource & quality management to achieve project objectives.
M1
2
Seminar on 
communication with 
industry
Seminar on effective communication towards decision makers in industry, in order to provide the Fellow with new
skills  that  will  be  beneficial  when  engaging  with  industry  -  Improved  scientific  professionalism  through  the
publication of findings in leading sectorial/industry journals.
M4
3 IPR Seminar Seminar/patent attorney or IP expert - Innovation Management skills M7
4
Practical “data audit” 
studies of real 
companies
Training  delivered  by the  Host  to  transfer  knowledge  to the  Fellow-  Learning  of techniques  to  characterise
standardized properties of interest when executing a data mining project consisting of analysis, modeling and
calibration phases. Training which includes data aggregation/fusion delivered to the Fellow in collaboration with
the University of Skövde (1st SECONDMENT), months 9 & 10.
M8/
M9-10
5
Practical “data project”
data mining of real 
companies 
Training  delivered  to  the  Fellow  in  collaboration  with  the  University  of  Leuven  -  KU  Leuven-  Learning  of
techniques to characterise standardized  modus operandi  when executing a data mining project consisting of
analysis, modeling and calibration phases in an industrial domain. As part of this training, the adaptation of graph
matching algorithm (patent) to a real application (2nd SECONDMENT), months 17 & 18.
M9/
M17-
18
6 Workshop on data 
modeling at IRIS
Overview of the key results and skills of data modeling, analysis and evaluation metrics at IRIS, which will improve
the Fellow’s ability to document and present scientific results to a wide audience M21
7
Training through 
organisation of demo 
sessions to industry
With  assistance  and  guidance  from  the  Host,  the  Fellow  will  improve  her  organisational  skills  through  the
organisation of a demo event to demonstrate the project results to industry, and to give the Fellow exposure to
high level industry decision makers. Industry exposure and an applied, industry-driven research focus
M24
1.3. Quality of the supervision and of the integration in the team/institution 
1.3.1. Qualifications of the supervisor 
The researcher in charge is Dr. David F. Nettleton , the head of the Data Science Group in IRIS who has extensive experience
and know-how acquired over more than 20 years in data mining and statistics projects in Industry as well as applied research in
different Universities. His work has ranged from web user behaviour modeling and analysis, to data privacy analysis, social
network analysis, medical diagnosis and prognosis, among others. Dr. Nettleton has led and participated in R&D projects aimed
at building novel data models and data processing methods, matching methods, developing new analytical methods and
modelling; as well as collaborating with academic labs and other players in the IT industry (including working for 4 years in IBM
Global Services as Business Intelligence Consultant). He has been thesis director of two Ph.D. students, one Masters and four
undergraduate final year projects and has 8 years teaching experience in 3 Universities. Since joining IRIS in 2015, he has
coordinated or been involved in the technical management or scientific contribution in several EU research projects under
H2020 (OpenMind, SmartGran, Sharebox). This makes David an experienced adviser on data science and its application to
provide solutions in real scenarios which are crucial for this research project. Among those most related with the current
proposal, David is Technical Manager of the OPENMIND project (On-demand production of entirely customized minimally
invasive medical devices, GA 680820); has contributed to the SHAREBOX project (Secure Management Platform for Shared
Process Resources, GA 680843) and SMART-GRAN (Development and Commercialisation of a Self-Guided Fluidised Bed
Granulation Solution, GA 666588). 
These projects have afforded IRIS the opportunity to forge active and lasting international collaborations with International
institutes  and  Universities  renown  in  the  field,  such  as  Fraunhofer  Institute  for  Production  Technology  IPT  (Germany),
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium), Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya (Spain), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (Spain), IIIA-
Part B - Page 4 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
CSIC (Spain) as well as numerous industrial enterprises such as Diribet (Czech Republic), Gimacs (Italy), In-Core Systems
(Netherlands) and Inno Pharma (Ireland), among others. Dissemination and outreach to communication media has attracted
significant industry attention.  David will transfer invaluable expertise regarding knowledge in data science and data model
development for industrial applications. In addition to his publication track record, he is author of three complete books,
numerous papers in peer-reviewed and technical journals, Open Access repositories such as Academia, Researchgate and
Arxiv, and has presented work in many international conferences. Dr. Nettleton has over 70 publications (many avialable in
ResearchGate, Academia and Mendeley) with 8 SCI journals, 3 full books as principal author and over 40 congresses. Some
relevant publications are listed below while additional publications from the team are listed in Section 6:
1. Nettleton, D.F.,  Commercial Data Mining - Processing, Analysis and Modeling for Predictive Analytics Projects, 1st
Edition (2014), Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, ISBN :9780124166028, 304 pages.  2. Nettleton, D.F. , Orriols-Puig, A.,
Fornells, A., A study of the effect of different types of noise on the precision of supervised learning techniques. Artificial
Intelligence Review, April 2010, Volume 33, Issue 4, pp 275-306.  3. Local Neighbourhood Sub-graph Matching Method,
International  and  European  Patent  Aplication  PCT/ES2014/065505,  Inventors:  David  F.  Nettleton,  Anton  Dries.  4.
Nettleton, D.F., Bugnicourt, E., Wasiak, C., Rosales, A. Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line Machine Processes, 18th
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, ICIEMPM 2016, London, United
Kingdom, July 28-29, 2016.
1.3.2. Hosting arrangements
IRIS will provide all required administrative and logistic support for Natasa’s settling. The Barcelona area is a perfect place for
relocation of international families like Natasa's as it has all infrastructures and education systems necessary to host non-(yet)
Spanish speaking people (including even a Swiss school, http://www.escuelasuizabcn.es/es/). As such, Natasa, helped by her
family mobility allowance, is convinced that the Marie Curie fellowship can not only be an excellent opportunity for herself but
also a successful experience for her family.
Our candidate has been conciliating her motherhood (2 kids born in 2011 and 2014 respectively) and part time freelancing
during 4 years while also taking the occasion to up-skill by different training regarding statistics. IRIS, which is immersed in a
gender equity culture, and in fact co-founded and directed by a woman, is convinced that such strength can help Natasa to
achieve the goals of the proposal and that giving the chance to women to a fair reinsertion to work after a break linked to the
birth of a child is something that can only help our society grow towards tomorrow's standards in line with improving the, too
often lacking, gender equity spirit in businesses. 
1.4. Capacity of the researcher to reach or re-enforce a position of professional maturity/independence
Natasa has a strong track record in data modeling applied to telecomunications networks and mobility. She obtained Diploma of
Electrical Engineer in Telecommunications at University of Belgrade in Serbia, coming in the  top 3% of the promotion . In
these studies she learnt about different stochastic models of telecomunications systems. This was followed later by her PhD
studies  in  Computer/Communication  Sciences  at  EPFL,  Switzerland,  in  which  Natasa  applied  data  modeling  to
telecomunications  networks  and  mobility.  Her  initiative  to  study  abroad,  moving  from  Serbia  to  Switzerland,  shows  her
independence and ambition for an international projection. Natasa's competiveness and professionalism is shown in her drive
to gain both deep theoretical knowledge and a wide-spectrum of practical skills in order to successfully apply them in real-world
problems. Also she successfully realised her Ph.D studies in combination with starting a family.
With such background, Natasa appears to have the capacity to contribute to DataMine4.0 success which will in turn  maximize
her potential in applying fundamental knowledge in data mining to industrial and urban planning processes . The
mobility afforded by this Fellowship will be a new enriching challenge in Natasa's career. Such international industry-focussed
work experience along with the  know-how and strong networking opportunity  will be invaluable sources of knowledge  to
enhance  Natasa’s  attractiveness  as  an  excellent  researcher  in  the  ERA  and  even  beyond.  Working  within  a  research
organisation, dialoguing and engaging with academics and researchers, establishing research plans, performing experiments in
order to evaluate and publish results, are all aspects that  Natasa is highly familiar with and proficient in. However, industry
needs and motivations are very different to those of the academic community, and indeed the priorities and pace of industry are
often quite different from those of academia. In the context of an Innovation Union, the whole concept of scalability needs to be
at the forefront of a researchers mind when operating in the applied space, whereby the ability to eventually fulfil large-scale
production requirements is paramount for industrial success. The gaps in the academic research provide opportunities (see
2.2.) for Natasa to develop her authorship skills in publishing articles in congresses and journals, as well as project
management and coordination skills  in order to reach the next level as a researcher which will facilitate her in achieving
also a position of professional maturity, diversity and independence . The research experience proposed within DataMine4.0 will
be the next logical step to complete Natasa’s training and is an essential step in her career since: 1) Natasa’s career goal is to
perform applied science and lead her own project ; 2) it provides multidisciplinary and intersectorial scientific training
(including food processing modeling, urban mobility optimization, calibration of customized industrial production) that will be a
complementary  exceptional  experience.  This  will  also  make  use  of  her  telecommunications  expertise  in  choosing
applications which embrace the “Internet of Things” paradigm, requiring, for example, data fusion from heterogeneous
mobile, RFID and other sensor devices;  3) Natasa will benefit from dynamic and proactive exchange  of knowledge in
formulation, processing and implementation of research findings in order to reach scientific excellence and be able to
expand his network for her future career path.  This will be potentiated by two secondments with the research groups of two
distinct universities with strong track records in theoretical and applied data science. The engagement will help in strengthening
initiative and polyvalent skills providing freedom in independent thinking and project management, while still working as a part of
dynamic team with experts in the field (in company or through the external academic collaborations described in section 2.2).
Finally, currently speaking two European languages (English and German), learning Spanish during this Fellowship will make
Natasa even more marketable in international business . In short, this fellowship will be a key step to lead Natasa towards
the career she wants to embrace in the forthcoming years in IRIS and beyond.
Part B - Page 5 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
2. IMPACT
2.1. Enhancing the potential and future career prospects of the researcher
Researchers usually make a choice to either work in academia or in industry. The telecommunications field is somewhat hybrid
in this sense, given that it requires having a presence in both ambits, which is the case of Dr. Sarafijanovic-Djukic and results in
acquiring a dual-competence. As was seen, the scalability of results needs to be at the forefront of a researchers mind when
operating in the applied space, whereby the ability to eventually fulfil large-scale production requirements is critical for industrial
success. This 2 year fellowship in IRIS, a private company, provides the perfect bridge between scientific excellence to the
transversal and applicative skills that complement the academic environment. These skills will further equip her to become an
excellent, well-rounded researcher who is even better prepared to participate in the  European Innovation Union and its
"internal market" for research and transfer scientific knowledge towards industrial applications. Attending meetings with
the research and engineering teams, experiencing the day-to-day procedures in IRIS, being a member of the Innovation Unit,
are invaluable opportunities for gaining an insight of the strategic decision-making and management process within a
commercial  applied  research/advanced  engineering  environment .  There  is  a  strong  innovation  dimension  of  this
Fellowship, which is in line with her entrepreneurial spirit, which has the ambition to boost R&D in order to generate business,
and to strengthen industrial leadership in innovation by helping to bridge the gap between research and industry. Identifying,
protecting, and exploiting valuable IP unite highly powerful strengths, especially telecommunications know-how applied to
projects within the “Internet of Things”. Natasa’s scientific excellence and applicative science will be linked and no further gaps
will exist at the current stage of her career. Natasa is very confident that this Fellowship will contribute abundantly to the
development  of  his  career  in  the  medium  and  long-term,  given  that  he  will  be  involved  in  the  leading  edge  of  the
interdisciplinary  applied  research,  with  thorough  training  in  applying  academic  concepts  in  practice,  and  to  the
opportunity to explore possible future occupations. Indeed, this is timely, as the implementation of science to serve industry
innovation is the main instrument proposed by Horizon 2020. Natasa embraces this ethos and wants to be a major research
contributor to the success of this strategy. As a perfect place to launch herself on that trajectory, IRIS is a company that has
strategically nestled itself between academia and industry, combining a scientific with an advanced engineering expertise to
transition knowledge and technology from the lab right through to production lines in the industry. 
2.2. Quality of the proposed measures to exploit and disseminate the action results
2.2.1. Dissemination of the research results
The expected results of this project will lead to a significant increase in European excellence in the field of applied data science,
especially data modeling and calibration using a diversity of statistical and machine learning techniques applied to Industry 4.0
applications in the context of mobilising European knowledge to take the lead in the Industry 4.0 movement, as well as ambits
which can improve the daily life for millions of EU citizens, such as urban mobility planning.  In addition to the outreach activities
in Table 2, additional effort will be made in terms of outreach to industry. The applicability to industrial and public local
organizations of the DATAMINE4.0 work is expected to greatly benefit the EU industrial and public urban planning sectors and
as a result of increasing competitiveness in the region and penetration in the international market, industrial profitability and
improved life quality for citizens. Moreover, as the project offers case studies in different ambits, initially defined by, but not
limited to the chosen case studies of (a) food processing modeling, (b) urban mobility modeling and (c) customized production
of composite materials components, the knowledge generated during the execution of DATAMINE4.0 will be disseminated in
diverse  areas  of  applications  such  as  the  ubication  of  pedestrian  crossing  and  bus  stops,  medical  composite  device
manufacture, diagnosis and solution of problems arising during industrial food processing . These projects will embrace both
the Industry 4.0 and Internet of Things paradigms, which will be hot topics in forthcoming years.  The dissemination
aspect is important in the case of Natasa she has taken a break of several years due to starting a family, although she has
continued to take new training courses and more recently as freelance Data Scientist. Thus the fellowship is a great opportunity
for Natasa to potentiate her publications and her career, thus, although keeping an eye on the IP protection and confidentiality
of final detailed models, in IRIS and at the secondment institutions we will take special care to make sure that a fair part of the
work can be disclosed in the public domain, targeting quality congresses (ACM / IEEE) and journals (SCI) for submission of her
work. The  supervising researchers, especially Dr. Nettleton (IRIS), Prof. Torra (Univ. Skövde) and Prof. Jesse Davis (ML
Research Group,KU Leuven) have strong track records in publications in the Data Science field and are currently very active in
journal and congress submissions. Another key aspect of dissemination will be the guarantee of Open Access to publications.
This can be done by additional payment to Journals, but also can be achieved by choosing green open access publications, by
publishing pre-print versions in online repositories, preferably indexed in scientifically recognized search engines like Scopus,
such as Academia, Researchgate and Arxiv, among others.
2.2.2. Exploitation of results and intellectual property
Once the public results are listed, the good management of the confidential IPR will maximise the exploitation potential as
further discussed in 3.3.4. In a research scenario where industry is an active collaborator, patentability is an important factor to
be considered. A basic patent review show a priori freedom to operate. This search will be deepen in the project building on IP
skills gained  by the  fellow.  The Results  generated  will be defined  as they  emerge  considering  issues  such as  novelty,
patentability and protectability. A review and analysis of the most appropriate IPR tools to protect the results will be carried out
and patent (or other IPR) applications will be filed for.  Trade/Industrial secret and know-how could also be powerful IP tools. 
2.3. Quality of the proposed measures to communicate the action activities to different target audiences
In keeping with the public engagement principles of the 'European Charter for Researchers' and 'Code of Conduct for the
Recruitment of Researchers', this project will ensure that the research activities are presented to society. In relation to the
benefits for  the Fellow of performing these outreach  activities, direct engagement  with the public will help her  to better
understand public interest in priorities for science and technology and also the public's concerns. In addition to peer reviewed
papers to be delivered in the research Work Packages (WP), a comprehensive Outreach Activities Plan is presented in Table 2.
Part B - Page 6 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
Table 2. Plan of Outreach Activities
Activity
Type Description Target KPIs Expected impact
MC
Ambassador
actions
Visits  to  schools  of  the  Polytechnic  University  of  Catalonia
(UPC)  and  secondary  schools  in  the  local  community  to
promote  research  field  and  about  benefits  and  rewards  of
being a researcher
University
students,
secondary
students
- Minimum of 4 visits to be 
made over 2 year project
- Over 150 students reached
To  attract  more  young
people to take up scientific
careers  and  to  promote
Europe  as  an  attractive
place to study and perform
research.
Workshop
Day
 “A  future  in  Science”  workshop/activity  day  for  school/uni
students at the IRIS facilities/ the campus of the UPC in areas
related to the raising of scientific awareness (to be organised in
conjunction with the Mayor’s Office)
University
students &
secondary
students
- 1 day activity (half day 
seminar, demonstration 
session, tour of facilities, career 
guidance sessions) 
- > 150 students reached
Press
releases
(PR)
Written communication about the project that will be directed at
members of the news media and edited to ensure the purpose
of announcing something ostensibly newsworthy.
General public
- 2-3 PR issued at key points 
- 5 regional or national 
newspapers & media channels Increase awareness among 
the general public of the 
importance of R&D 
investments and how 
scientific achievements can 
have a direct and positive 
impact on people's lives.
e-
Newsletters
A web-based document to be released on the internet for the
attention of the public at large (e.g. Wikipedia). General public
- 4 newsletters published - 300-
500 downloads of each 
newsletter
Articles in
newspapers/
interviews in
TV
Through collaborations with the Mayor’s Office and using the
Marketing  Dept.  in  IRIS,  feature  articles  and/or  local  TV
interviews will be organised with the Fellow
General public - At least 2 press articles or TV 
interview
Marie Curie
project video
Video clip about the project, the Fellow and the MC experience
on YouTube, IRIS website... General public - Over 1000 views
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION
3.1. Coherence and effectiveness of the work plan
In the following we detail the Work Packages, Tasks, Milestones and Deliverables. Four core Work Packages are designed to
lead the researcher through a logical sequence of phases, each of which builds on the previous one. WP1 collects and
organizes the necessary background knowledge in the context of DATAMINE4.0, focused on applied research, but also
containing novel approaches which will add to the current state of the art. As we described in Section 1.1, a methodology
consisting of two major phases will be applied to design and execute different data mining case studies. This is reflected in WP2
(data audits/requirement studies) and WP3 (data projects). These are followed by WP4 which contemplates the deployment
phases in which successful projects are implanted in the business/organization of the collaborating entity. Finally, Training,
Outreach and Management activities are described in their own respective work packages (Wps 5, 6 and 7, respectively).
Part B - Page 7 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
WP1- Literature background and definition of specifications
Start Date M1 End Date M3
Objectives  To position  the research activities in line  with the state of the art, hot topics and market requirements To identify and confirm current
approaches, methodologies and tools for an applied research context of intelligent data modeling/calibration, statistical analysis, machine learning and artificial
intelligence techniques, knowledge and data representation, as well as contempory algorithms, software packages and approaches for data mining. All of this
will be performed with an emphasis on the Industry 4.0 paradigm.
Task 1.1. Literature up-dating.  Algorithms, techniques and methodologies to be used. Relevant up-to-date “best of breed” case studies with cost-benefit
analysis to identify high potential projects.
Task 1.2 Definition of the research specifications Specific market requirements for the implementation of new applications for intelligent data modeling in terms
of  technical  feasibility  and  within  the  Industry  4.0  context.  Identification  of  sectorial solutions,  definition  of  process  specifications,  critical parameters.
Commercial viability and market potential of applications and their cost/benefit. Metrics for quality control and evaluation of results and impact. 
Deliverable(s): D1.1 Document/Report of the state of the art and literature review (M3);  D1.2 Document/Report of the research specifications (M3)
MLs & KPIs ML1.1 Specification report and its approval (by IRIS IC) as a reference document for the R&D effort for the remainder of the work plan (M3)
WP2- Data Audit -viability studies
Start Date M4 End Date M14
Objective  To carry out requirements studies of different scenarios in industry/commerce/business/public entities, applying a systematic methodology that
fulfils specifications defined in WP1.  Visits, interviews and meetings with stakeholders in organizations/companies in order to elicit information about project
objectives, data required/available and necessary resources.  To quantify the evaluation using a systematic methodology to calculate cost/benefit for each
potential project.   Based on the quantified evaluation of cost / benefit, choose the top most viable business objectives, preparing a corresponding report with
a detailed justification for each.  Three generic application areas for the case studies will be (but not limited to): (a) food processing modeling, (b) urban
mobility modeling and (c) customized production of fibre reinforced plastic components. Others may be defined later.
Task 2.1 Requirements study. For each case study, follow a systematic methodology to elicit key information: business objectives, available data, data quality
and availability, inputs and outputs.
Task. 2.2 Recommendations and specification report. Based on the requirements study, recommendations are made in terms of necessary data and execution
plan for the project. The defined case studies will be used for next WP.
Deliverable(s) D2.1 Report on the requirements for each data mining project (M8); D2.2 Recommendations and specification report (M14)
MLs &KPIs ML2.1 Identify at least 1 project from each case study main area (M11); ML2.2 All top viable projects identified and requirements defined (M14)
WP3- Data Project – execution of projects
Start Date M6 End Date M20
Objective  To execute the projects defined in WP2   To build data models with the best set of inputs and ouputs in each case  To calibrate data models
(where appropriate) To characterise processes automated by data models in comparison with previous/current methods  To identify data models which
can subsequently be deployed in WP4
WP3 will be run in parallel with feedback from WP2. (Note that in some cases, given aspects of the data audit in WP2 are re-executed, for example, in order to
obtain new data / data values)
Task 3.1 Pre-process of data . For each viable case study, data identified in WP2 is obtained (extracted from proprietary databases, etc.) and preprocessed
into an adequate form for data modeling. This includes data cleaning and consolidation, identification and processing of erroneous and missing data.
Task 3.2 Pre-analysis of data, identification of subsets of inputs highly related to outputs . For each viable case study, o nce adequate datasets are available
from the previous Task 3.1, a pre-analysis can be conducted to select inputs and outputs for data modeling. This includes sampling, derivation of new factors,
variable selection using techniques such as PCA.
Task 3.3 Application  of different  data  mining  techniques  to  data to build  models . Depending  on  the  type  of data modeling  (prediction, classification,
explanatory, time series, etc.) different algorithms and paradigms will be tested to build models. The algorithms which give the most consistently high precision
will be chosen.
Task 3.4   Calibration (where appropriate) of data models for desired outputs . This step will be applied where calibration is necessary (e.g. to find optimal inputs
to produce a given output and thus assign these values to, for example a PLC for customized manufacturing processes).
Deliverable(s) D3.1 Datasets prepared in an adequate form for analysis (M13); D3.2 Detailed report on data pre-analysis for each case study (M16); D3.3
Data models for each case study (M18); D3.4 Calibrated data models (where appropriate) (M20)
MLs&KPIs ML3.1 Dataset preparation and pre-analysis done (M16); ML3.2 Data models implemented (M18); ML3.3 Data models calibrated (M20)
WP4- Transfer of knowledge and technology to industrial scale, industrial validation and deployment
Start Date M14 End Date M24
Objective  To deploy application of the selected data models of selected case studies in pilot scale facilities  To evaluate the results and improvement
versus expectations for calibrative/classificative/predictive data models  To draw up recommendations for full scale industrial deployment of data models on
production /real environment and evaluation with their real applied needs 
WP4 will be start as soon as availability of data models is granted for the respective case studies from WP3. 
Task 4.1 Transfer of knowledge and demonstration of the results by deployment at pilot/ pre-industrial scale . The scaled up deployment of the best data
project models developed in WP3 will be carried out for each pilot installation of the selected collaborating SME/Organization.
Task 4.2 Validation of DATAMINE4.0 for data mining project deployment vs. expectations . The best data model deployments obtained in pilot/ semi- industrial
scale will be used for validation tests with support from the Fellow to demonstrate their feasibility to replace or optimize currently used methods
Deliverable(s) D4.1 Report on deployment of data models produced at semi-industrial scale (M22); D4.2 Report on the use of DATAMINE4.0 validation for
data mining project development and deployment (M24)
Mls & KPIs  ML4.1 The selected project data models are successfully deployed in the pilot locations (M22); ML4.2 DATAMINE4.0 is recognised as suitable
approach by its deployed site stakeholder (M24)
WP5- Training Activities 
Start Date M1 End Date M24
Task(s): Task 5.1 Scientific training. Task 5.2 Structured TA. Task 5.3 Complementary training. See sections 2.2. & 4.2.3.
Deliverable(s) D5.1 Report on scientific knowledge transferred from the Fellow to the Host (M22)
D5.2 Report on knowledge transfer sessions delivered and materials (M24)
WP6- Outreach Activities
Start Date M1 End Date M24
Task(s) Task 6.1 Marie Curie Ambassador Activities. Task 6.2 Preparation and dissemination of materials. Task 6.3 Communication with the media, industry
and scientific community. See section 3.2.1.  
Part B - Page 8 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
Deliverable(s) D6.1 Public report on the project outreach activities (M24) 
WP7- Management Activities
Start Date M1 End Date M24
Objective  To perform structured and coherent Management activities linking together all the project components and maintaining communication with the
Research Executive Agency (REA).  To manage the knowledge/results generated during the project for heightened impact. 
Task(s) Task 7.1 Management of project resources. Task 7.2 Implementation of project management procedures. Task 7.3 Interface and reporting to the REA
Task 7.4 Knowledge management.  See sections 3.2.2 and 4.2.4
Deliverable(s) Contractual reporting.    D7.1 Register of IP outputs and protection routes (M24)
3.2. Appropriateness of the allocation of tasks and resources
The work plan has been drawn up jointly by the Fellow and IRIS and both parties are confident that it is achievable and realistic.
The objectives have been used as the starting point for drawing up an appropriate work plan, with dedicated WPs, broken down
into tasks, with clear outputs as deliverables. This plan is considered realistic and achievable by both parties for effective
implementation within the competitive 2 year timeframe, and offering a good level of ambition to ensure the Fellow benefits from
the research work for improving her skills and capacity. The objectives and tasks involved in each research WP are described in
Section 3.1, along with the expected deliverables and clear Milestones (MLs), Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that will help
assess the progress of the project (note the training that the Fellow will benefit from as a result of the implementation of each
WP is discussed in 1.2.). For the other WPs, outreach and training tasks are briefly presented and are further described in
management activities (section 3.3).
3.3. Appropriateness of the management structure and procedures, including quality management & risk management
3.3.1. Project organisation and management structure
Our practical and effective management structure is based on a simple, yet effective structure (Fig. 3), whereby the Fellow acts
as the Principal Investigator and Project Manager for the internal research team. She will report directly to the Data Science
Group Leader, who will provide supervision and support to the Fellow in the management and implementation of the work
programme and the project team. Both will form part of the Innovation Unit body in IRIS that reports on a quarterly basis to the
Innovation  Committee  (IC).  Day-to-day  engagement  between  the  Fellow  and  the  Project  Team  in  IRIS,  inner  academic
communications  such as group meetings,  design discussions,  presentations  will ensure informal yet highly effective  and
continuous knowledge transfer from the multidisciplinary team to the Fellow. The Fellow will also benefit from the support and
expertise on project management principles, as well as fina ncial and administrative management of European projects, tra ining
on processes and procedures followed in IRIS in keeping with their ISO 9001:2008 and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management
Systems for R&D&i approved processes. The work plan, which includes the objectives and milestones that will facilitate the
management of the project and the assessment of its progress against what was planned. 
3.3.2. Research and/or administrative risks that might endanger reaching the action objectives
The process of risk identification and management will be based upon the principles and guidelines of the FERMA (ISO)
Standard. The risk management process will be based on a list of coordinated activities embracing the 7Rs and 4Ts of (hazard)
risk management. A list of a priori risks has been identified and is listed below along with the contingency plan in each case.
WP2 R1.1-One or more of the initial projects/objectives studied are inviable. CP1.1-This risk is low as the list is open and consists of initial case studies
suggestions with number of sub-options but a backup list of potential projects and alternative business objectives could be defined. 
WP3 R2.1-Requirements study incorrect, unforeseen problems in carrying out project. CP2.1-The requirements studies will be rigorous and realistic and
only if absolutely necessary, we could reduce expectations and/or adapt/revise objectives (affecting a specific case study and not all). Typical
problems at this stage are to do with data quality, objectives, data availability. Dr. Nettleton has a wide experience of mitigating these types of
problems in real projects.
WP4 R3.1- Models and calibration work well in test environment but not in production. CP3.1- Start validation work early enough to allow iterations with
previous WPs. Identify what are the differences between the test and production environments and make adjustments to models and calibration, try
different paradigms (families of algorithms), and algorithms within the same paradigm. R3.2 Patent algorithm (graph matcher) does not work or
cannot be implemented. CP3.2 – Although this approach is only one of the considered, limiting the impact of the risk, it is expected to be most
suitable for urban case study. The graph matcher has already passed a proof of concept test with a commercial company (Nubelo online
employment web) and has been adapted to different uses (such as social network search and data privacy). Dr. Nettleton is co-inventor, has the
source code and in depth knowledge of how to adapt the algorithm to new data and contexts.
All
WP
RN.1- The candidate decides to prematurely leave the project due to work profile not corresponding to expected one and/or due to lack of matching
of her skills with the needed one. CPN.1 The selection procedure has been rigorous and has taken into account this risk during selection whereby
Natasa appeared to best fit the project needs among the other candidates shortlisted. After discussing the proposal through several meetings, the
candidate has agreed to, and indeed improved, the proposed work. The secondment placements are also designed to augment the skills of the
candidate, as well as the transfer of know-how and support by IRIS through the supervision of Dr. Nettleton.
RN.2- The candidate decides to prematurely leave the project for personal reasons. CPN.2 We have a personal commitment from the candidate
and a concrete plan for taking care of her family arrangements and requirements (see Section 1.3.2).
RN.3- One or more of the secondment institutions fails to fulfil one or more of the secondment requirements (including pulling out completely) or
lack of supervision. CPN.3 The secondment institutions, with whom there is previous relation and confidence, has carefully chosen. Also, both
institutions have the necessary know-how in Data Science and multiple persons who could be supervisor. Finally, we have two secondment
institutions so we expect a worst case scenario of one failing having the other as backup in which case we could have the option of extending the
stay, and/or establishing an agreement with another University and/or organizing tutoring in remote without forgetting that IRIS already had most of
the core required knowledge to train Natasa and supervise the work, including some knowledge of graph matching and data fusion.
RN.4 Failure of IRIS to host the researcher. CPN.4 IRIS has a strong track record of supervision of undergraduate, Masters, Ph.D and post-doc
supervision, including one current Marie Curie Research Fellow in the Materials Science field. Also, IRIS is currently active partner in many H2020
projects with pipeline of work in hand reaching 3-4 years ahead, many new proposals being prepared and has its own lines of industrial monitoring
hardware, thus it represents a stable partner for applied science projects and training (see Section 1.3.1). Also, this proposal represents a strategic
area for IRIS in order to potentiate its offering of services so the likelihood of the host losing interest in the project is null.
Part B - Page 9 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
3.3.3. Progress monitoring and project management procedures
In relation to the project management procedures that will be followed to ensure that the project is successfully managed,
IRIS operates to proven standard project management and ISO 9001 principals, founded on sound project planning and
subsequent monitoring and controlling of the execution of the workplan. These project management procedures consist of:
Technical Workplan Review and Updating; Issues Management; Scope Management; Risk Management; Conflict Management;
Communication Management; Document Management; and  Quality Management (using the QFD tool) . IRIS has edited a
comprehensive handbook of project management procedures with supporting tools and documentation, which will be clearly
explained to the Fellow through induction training. Following the training and induction period (1-2 weeks), the project will
officially start with the Kick-Off meeting that will be chaired by the Fellow and in which the Project Scientific Supervisor and the
Project Team will participate. Afterwards, the project will adhere to the following meeting and reporting schedule:
Meeting type Frequency Who attends Associated Reporting
Project Team 
Meeting Weekly - Project Manager/PI (Fellow)
- Project team
Weekly  report  from  team  to  the  Project  Manager  (using  standard
template)
Scientific 
meeting Fortnightly - Project Manager/PI (Fellow)
- Data Science Group Leader (Scientific Supervisor)
Project Manager reports progress of the work to the Scientific Supervisor
(using One Page Project Planner tool in use in IRIS)
Innovation
meeting
Monthly to 
IU, quarterly 
to IC
- Project Manager/PI (Fellow) & Scientific 
Supervisor (as part of the Innovation Unit IU)
- Innovation Committee IC
Report to the IU on a monthly basis and to the IC on a quarterly basis on
the  status  of  the  project  and  its  IP  outputs  as  well  as  the  possible
applications of the knowledge and results generated to other fields.
All meetings require an agenda circulated to attendees where record key statements, recommendations and actions (who, what
and when)  will be documented.  Project will also adhere to the reporting  and review meeting requirements of the Grant
Agreement with the REA. The IRIS intranet will be used as a tool for facilitating the project management effort, whereby the
Project Gantt (presented above) will be dynamically managed in a “One Page Project Planner” version for enabling High Level
Project Management. IRIS follows an agile development methodology for the operational development of tasks within projects
based on the Kanban method, which will also be used for the development of tasks within this project. Exposure to such
methodologies will be a new experience for Natasa providing invaluable insight into R&D project execution. The Gantt Chart
presents the work plan showing timing of different WPs and project trainings, secondments, events, etc. 
3.3.4. Intellectual property rights
The IPR ownership and access  rights will be
organised, with the default agreement being the
IRIS  will  own  the  IP  generated  during  this
project. Since the IP is mainly generated in WP2
and 3 and then transferred to WP4, it will be
used in industrial trials but also sold as a non-
exclusive licence to the case study partners with
the  aim  to  license  it  further  to  sectorial
companies post-project. Regarding the Fellow,
IRIS will still keep a fellow as inventor on the
subscribed IP. Early protection strategies will be
in place to enable Open Access Publications for
ensuring impact for the Fellow. In the case of
the sub-graph matcher  patent,  co-invented by
Dr. Nettleton, the supervisor of the work in this proposal and owned by the Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona, its use
for research as planned in DATAMINE4.0 is granted for free with a  license agreement under fair and reasonable conditions,
especially in view of the improvements herein planned that will extent the attractiveness of the patent, will be facilitated to IRIS,
should it be needed for post project exploitation.
3.4. Appropriateness of the institutional environment (infrastructure) 
IRIS will provide  the Fellow with a work contract  that complies with all Spanish law and with the European  Charter  of
Researchers requirements. In relation to the measures that IRIS will undertake for training, mentoring/tutoring the researcher,
IRIS has first of all worked closely with the Fellow in order to agree in the work plan following IRIS methodologies and ISO
9001:9002 and UNE certified procedures for its internal research projects. Moreover, a dedicated WP (WP5) will ensure a
systematic and structured approach to training (see 1.2), which will allow for effective operational planning and execution of the
scientific, structured and complimentary training activities during the project for the benefit of the Host. In relation to facilities for
in-house training, IRIS has its own auditorium and demonstration rooms for knowledge transfer to industry where the Fellow will
organize workshops, lectures and conferences related to project. Host will also ensure that Fellow can benefit from their
international collaborations, it will be hugely beneficial for both the Fellow and the projects in question, that the Fellow has
contact with a number of the very relevant and synergistic European applied and industry/market driven R&D projects that are
active in IRIS. DATAMINE4.0  and the training of the Fellow  could benefit from synergies with other projects at IRIS to perform
also quick exploratory tests regarding the potential of e.g. the in-line process modeling as in the H2020 OPENMIND project or
the big data processing (the online streaming repository being built in the H2020 SMART-GRAN project). Further information on
the equipment and infrastructure to be used in the project can be found in the Section 5. 
Mentoring provided by the team of engineers and data scientist in IRIS  will be supplemented by the expertise offered by
academic partners , ensuring a  research mentoring vision that is complementary to applied R&D. Based on the its core
expertise in chemometric modeling and data science, IRIS has pioneered the Industry 4.0 concept (featured on the End Page),
a  key  integrated  environmental  development  strategy,  which  is  being  employed  in  a  number  of  EU  and  private  B2B
development concepts, and which has generated significant interest from industry. DATAMINE4.0 will enable the generation of
achievements that will further IRIS’s strategic interests (refer to 2.2).  
Part B - Page 10 of 20
Fig. 3 DATAMINE4.0 Management Structure and the Project Management Procedures
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
4. CV of the Experienced Researcher
PROFILE
Natasa Sarafijanovic-Djukic
Country of Birth:  Serbia
Date of Birth: 15/09/1974
Current Country of Residence: Switzerland
Languages: English (working proficiency), German (B1 certificate), 
French (basic), Serbian (native tongue)
Previous sections showed the excellent match between Natasa’s background and the DataMine4.0 project, as well as her
international adaptation skills, her learning capacity and strong will.  She was in the top 3% of students at University of
Belgrade.  She worked in Ericsson Belgrade as a GSM Engineer for 2 years where she gained an industrial experience in
telecommunication networks as well as valuable communication skills with clients. Driven by motivation to further develop and
practically apply her mathematical talent and programming skills and by ambition to pursue an international research carrier,
she moved to Switzerland to do her PhD studies in Computer/Communication Sciences at EPFL. The main contributions of her
PhD thesis are statistical modelling of realistic human mobility and application of these models to the design and development
of routing algorithms  in mobile networks. This work resulted  in 4 scientific articles that she presented  in 2 international
conferences and in 4 national conferences in Switzerland efficiently communicating her scientific findings to a wider public.
During her teaching activities at EPFL she has shown an excellent skill to explain a complex course material to students. After
her PhD she has collaborated in several data science projects as a freelancer. During these projects she gained an experience
in more recent advancements of machine learning techniques (such as deep learning). Through all her professional and private
endeavours she has shown an excellent problem solving abilities and an extraordinary persistence to make these endeavours
successful. 
DataMine4.0 will allow her a direct involvement within industry projects further developing her scientific skills in applied data
modeling and analysis in different domains and further developing her communication and presentation skills, while living a new
experience abroad.   
EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Main degrees:
09/2003 – 02/2010 PhD in Computer Science at the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
Dissertation: Collaborative Routing in Mobile Partitioned Networks
Supervisor: Matthias Grossglauser
Conducted part time with concomitant professional experience described in next section
10/1994 - 01/2000 Diploma in Electrical Engineering in Telecommunications at the Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Additional training:
09/2014 - 02/2015 Data Science Specialization ( 9 courses + Capstone Project)
Johns Hopkins University on Coursera
01/2016 - 03/2016  Machine Learning course (grade:100%)
Stanford University on Coursera
11/2015 - 02/2016  Big Data (4 courses) 
University of California, San Diego on Coursera
12/2015 - 04/2016 Python Specialization (5 courses + Capstone Project)
University of  Michigan on Coursera
03/2014 - 07/2014 Oracle Certified Professional, Java SE 7 Programmer
10/2014 - 01/2014 Oracle Database SQL Certified Expert
04/2010 - 03/2011 Intensive German Courses (levels, A1, A2 and B1)
Part B- Page  11 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
WORK EXPERIENCE
Aug 2012 - present
Data Scientist, Freelancer
Collaboration on different projects in a diversity of commercial and industrial applications, including a project with Gilad Bar Illan
(Tsuroni  LTD,  Israel)  from  Mar  2015  to  Nov  2015  on  trading  algorithms  and  social  media  research  and  development;
development of a system to collect real-time social media data and store it in a MongoDB database; A text classification model
for the spam and non-spam messages based on machine learning; An information  extraction algorithm of specific information
related to trading. Tools used: R programming, MongoDB.
(Note: maternity leave May 2011 – July 2012)
Sep 2003 - Feb 2010
Research (as part of PhD study) and Teaching Assistant, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
The results of her research work:
 Forecast of a future position given the random waypoint mobility model
 A stochastic model of human mobility (Heterogenous Random Walk)
 COGRAD: an algorithm for learning the mobility model in a distributed way
 Island Hopping: a novel efficient routing algorithm for mobile ad-hoc delay-tolerant networks
 A mobile-ad hoc network simulator 
As a teaching assistant for a Computer Networking course, she designed, development and supervision of the JAVA distributed
multi-threaded applications for the course projects. Tools used:  Objective CAML, JAVA, Matlab, shell scripting
(Note: maternity leave January 2004 – September 2004)
Oct 2000 - Aug 2002
GSM Engineer, Ericsson Belgrade, Serbia
Installation, trouble shouting, and developing software fixes for Ericsson GSM mobile networks
PUBLICATIONS (4 peer-reviewed)
2009 Piorkowski, M.,  Sarafijanovic-Djukic, N. , and Grossglauser, M. A Parsimonious Model of Mobile Partitioned
Networks with Clustering, COMSNETS 09, Bangalore, India, January 2009. Cited by 194.
2008 Piorkowski, M.,  Sarafijanovic-Djukic, N. , Grossglauser, M., On Clustering Phenomenon in Mobile Partitioned
Networks, First ACM SIGMOBILE International Workshop on Mobility Models for Networking Research, Hong
Kong, May 2008. Cited by 28.
2006 Sarafijanovic-Djukic,  N.,  Piorkowski,  M.  and  Grossglauser,  M.,  Island  Hopping:  Efficient  Mobility-Assisted
Forwarding in Partitioned Networks, IEEE SECON 06, Reston, VA, September 2006. Cited by 131.
2004 Sarafijanovic-Djukic,  N., and  Grossglauser,  M.,  Last  Encounter  Routing  under  Random  Waypoint  Mobility,
NETWORKING 04, Athens, Greece, May 2004. Cited by 34.
Sum of citations (Google Scholar, 12/09/2016): 387
Part B- Page  12 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
CONFERENCES
Oral On Clustering Phenomenon in Mobile Partitioned Networks, First ACM SIGMOBILE International Workshop on
Mobility Models for Networking Research, Hong Kong, May 2008
Mobility-Assisted  Forwarding  in  Partitioned  Networks,  NCCR MICS  5th  Scientific  Conference,   Zurich,
Switzerland, October 2006
Island Hopping: Efficient Mobility-Assisted Forwarding in Partitioned Networks, IEEE International Conference on
Sensing, Communication and Networking, Reston, USA, September 2006
Posters Collaborative Routing in Mobile Partitioned Networks, NCCR MICS 6th Scientific Conference, Zurich, Switzerland,
January 2008
Island Hopping: Mobility-Assisted Forwarding in Partitioned Networks, NCCR MICS Annual Workshop, Neuchâtel,
Switzerland, July 2007 
Routing in Delay-Tolerant Networks, NCCR  MICS 4th Panel Review and Scientific Conference, Loewenberg,
Switzerland, September 2005
Last Encounter  Routing under  Random Waypoint Mobility, NCCR MICS 2nd Scientific Conference,  Ascona,
Switzerland, October 2003
SKILLS AND TECHNIQUES
o Data Science:
 Probability and statistics, stochastic processes and stochastic modelling
 Machine  learning  algorithms:  linear  regression,  logistic  regression,  support  vector  machines,  decision  trees  and
random forest, naive Bayes, ensemble methods, K-means clustering, dimensionality reduction – PCA.
 Deep learning: forward neural networks, recurrent neural networks, convolutional neural networks
 Natural language processing: text classification, information extraction, language modelling, neural machine translation
o Software:
 Programming:  Python, R, Matlab, Java, Objective Caml , C, shell  scripting
 Deep learning: Keras library
 Relational Databases  (Oracle, MicroSoft SQL Server),  NoSQL Database (MongoDB)
 Big data: basics of Hadoop – HDFS, Map/Reduce, Spark, HBase, Hive, Pig
 Tools: latex, git and github, cvs
Part B- Page  13 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
5. CAPACITY OF THE PARTICIPATING ORGANISATIONS
Beneficiary    Investigacio i recerca industrial i sostenible, SL. (IRIS) /Spain
General 
Description 
IRIS is an advanced engineering company that specialises in process monitoring and control, and process optimisation. Our commercial
division offers advanced monitoring and control solutions based on: NIR chemical monitoring (handheld device and in-line solutions);
hyperspectral imaging solutions for foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis; data management solutions for data
processing, decision support, automation and data analysis (big production data). 
Our research division has three core research lines:
Optical  and  spectroscopy  technologies  (e.g.  MEMs  spectrophotometers,  fluorescence  and  Raman)  for  process
monitoring for on-line and PAT applications in food, pharmaceuticals and the process industries
Data Processing & Information systems
Novel  processing  technologies  (ultrasound,  plasma,  microwave…)  for  process  intensification  and  non-thermal
decontamination  
Sustainable  processing technologies: waste valorisation strategies, biocompounds and biopackaging for the circular
economy
The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 48 staff with a turnover of €3.8 M. We are based over two sites (Barcelona
and Dublin) that are equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an
electronics/telecommunications lab. 
IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and  also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. IRIS is an industry
member if the following sectoral networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO.
IRIS has four main research lines: optical & spectroscopy technologies, data processing & information systems, novel processing, and
sustainable processing. In the context of data processing & information systems, the objective is to develop intelligent data management
and decision  support systems  for smart manufacturing, processing  and agriculture. The technologies  used are: Cloud, Predictive
modelling, Data mining and Deep Learning. This research is aligned with the Industry 4.0 framework for the advanced automation of
industrial processes. We currently have six H2020 projects in this area (Propat, IbD, Sharebox, Smart-Gran, OpenMind and Preview).
IRIS has strong skills and experience in data modeling and statistical models/analysis derived from its involvement in specific data
analysis and modeling tasks for Chemometric modeling, as well as analytical and IT monitoring systems in many FP7 and H2020
projects. For example, in the Smart-Gran H2020 project, IRIS is responsible for building a big data processing platform in the cloud for
processing data from pharmaceutical production plants distributed all over the world; the Hypera device, designed and built at IRIS, is
able to detect foreign-bodies and other non-desired bodies through spatial quality chemometric modeling.
Role  and
Commitment
of  key
persons
(supervisor) 
The scientist in charge of the supervision of the project, Dr. David F. Nettleton, holds a bachelor's honours degree in Computer Science
(1984) from the University of Wolverhampton (UK), a master's degree in Computer Software and Systems Design (1985) from the
University of Newcastle upon Tyne (UK) and a PhD in Artificial Intelligence (2002) from the Technical University of Catalunya (UPC,
Spain), the latter with the distinction “excellent cum laude”. Since the start of his research career in 1993, Dr. Nettleton has built
significant expertise both in academic and applied R&D and is as such perfectly suited to supervise the fellow in the planned research,
having been involved in a mentoring role with numerous researchers in the University and in Industry, throughout his career. He has
worked in the IT industry for 30 years, starting as an intern in the Atomic Energy Research Establishment in Harwell, UK, followed by 3
years in a major UK software company (Systems Designers) where he participated in high level projects, such as FOLIOS (office
automation for the UK Foreign Office). On coming to Spain he worked for Carburos Metalicos (1989-1990) as a technical engineer
before embarking on a business startup (DSE, 1990-1993) specialized in Expert System software implementation and consultancy.
From 1993-1995 he was contracted by Menarini Laboratories as programmer/analyst to develop the production quality control IT system
(complying with ISO 9000-3) and a clinical trials system in Ingres 4GL. From 1995-1997 he embarked again on a business startup (TAD
Sistemas), dedicated to data mining consultancy and products (Clementine), carrying out vanguard data modeling/analysis projects in
Spain for a major television company (TV3), a retail bank (Bankpyme) and a major health insurance company (Sanitas). After a 1 year
stay in Coritel (a major software developer in Spain) as project manager of large teams, David was hired by IBM Global Services as a
Business Intelligence Consultant, where he participated in projects for important IBM customers such as Iberia, INTA - National Institute
of Aerospace Technology (Spain), General de Depositos (Portugal), Zurich Insurance, among others. At IBM he made extensive use of
the powerful IBM Data Mining workbench, Intelligent Miner for Data. After leaving IBM he decided to embark into the academic world
(University Pompeu Fabra) as associate lecturer and member of the Web Research Group (led by Dr. Baeza-Yates, VP of Yahoo!
Research). At the UPF (2004-2015) he worked on a diversity of projects, aimed at modeling the behavior of users in Internet, especially
for search engines. During 2 years (2006-2008) Dr. Nettleton also taught part time (as full lecturer) the final year course of Artificial
Inteligence of the Computer Science and Telecomunications degree studies at the Ramon Llull University (URL), also collaborating with
the GRSI (Intelligent Systems) research group at the URL. Additionally, he worked for 3 years part time (2010-2013) for the IIIA-CSIC,
specializing in data analysis and algorithmic modeling applied to privacy preserving data mining and obfuscation (as member of the
ARES research group - Advanced Research on Information Security and Privacy). In recent years he has specialized in graph analysis
applied to online social networks (Spanish Ministry Hipergraph and Ares projects) which resulted in a patent application for a graph
matcher in  colaboration  with  a researcher from the  Katholieke  Universiteit  Leuven  (KU Leuven).   Since  he joined  IRIS, he  has
successfully collaborated in several European research projects  relevant to the present research topic on data mining  applied  to
industrial processes such as aforementioned OpenMind, Sharebox and SmartGran projects.
Key
Research
Facilities,
Infrastructure
and
Equipment 
IRIS is an international company, with its main facility in the Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia, a campus of the Polytechnic University of
Catalonia in Spain, and a branch facility in the campus of the University College Dublin and has all the necessary infrastructure and
resources in order to respond to the needs of the project. 
In  particular,  IRIS  is  well  equipped  with  IT  infrastructure  of  hardware  and  software  for  data  processing  and  analysis  (relational
databases, general statistical software packages such as StatGraphics and MatLab and specific statistical software packages for
Chemometric modeling (SOLO). Also, for machine learning and AI paradigms IRIS uses Weka as a GUI and as a Java based API
library, and Dlib as a C++ based API library for embedded applications. In terms of hardware, almost all the computers in IRIS hace 64
bit processors with 4 or 8Gb memory.  A rack configuration of servers and hard disks is also available for parallel processing and big
data application. IRIS also has access to academic and research repositories through a partnership with the UPC University Campus
Part B- Page  14 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
where IRIS is located.
The team at IRIS is an international team of 48 staff, comprising researchers, engineers, project managers and support staff from Spain,
Ireland, France, Italy, Colombia, Cuba, among others but also Serbia which could help in Natasa’s insertion. The data science teams in
IRIS include Telecomunications and IT Engineers who have a strong track record in FP7 and H2020 of building IT and data processing
applications.
Independent
research
premises? 
Yes
Previous
Involvement
in  Research
and  Training
Programmes 
Active collaboration with the Universidad Politecnica de Catalunya (UPC), whereby IRIS provides industry mentorship and training to
MSc and PhD students. IRIS has successfully mentored 4 MSc. students, as well as 2 PhD students, and a Post-doc student is currently
doing her research programme in IRIS through a Marie Curie Fellowship (specializing in Environmental Science). During FP7, IRIS has
been involved in close to 40 European projects (SMEs, NMP, KBBE, EraNET, etc.) and is now involved in close to 15 H2020 projects.
The scientific supervisor for this project, Dr. Nettleton, has been tutor to two PhD candidates, at the UPF – Pompeu Fabra University,
Barcelona, in relation with data analysis research (big data graph processing and recommender systems, respectively), as well as a
masters student (big data research) and engineering students and graduated professionals. David also has teaching experience in three
Universities with first, second and final year University and engineering students at the Pompeu Fabra University, Ramon Llull University
and European  University, in  terms of magistral (theory) classes, tutorials and practical classes in computer science  and artificial
intelligence.
Current 
involvement 
in Research 
and Training 
Programmes 
Mentoring/tutoring of research students is something that IRIS is experienced at and committed to. Through our ongoing collaboration
with UPC, IRIS currently hosts 2 bachelors student as well as 1 PhD student and a Marie Curie Fellowship in Materials Science. IRIS
has a programme for internships and has agreements with a number of local and international schools and institutes for the placement
of interns in the company as part of their studies. IRIS also has experienced staff in supervising the creation of research methodologies
for setting up and validating experiments. The supervisor is still involved in informal knowledge transfer of experience to students or
peers.
Relevant
Publications
and/or
research/inno
vation
products 
In addition to the publications mentioned in Section 2.3.1, further work published is as follows:
Rosales Lavielle, A . “Monitorización en línea para el control de calidad a tiempo real”, BTA (Barcelona Alimentation Technologies)
Congress, 21-24 April, Barcelona.
Nettleton, D.F., “Data Mining of Social Networks Represented as Graphs”, Computer Science Review 7(I):1-34 · February 2013.
Nettleton, D.F., “Information loss evaluation based on fuzzy and crisp clustering of graph statistics”. In: Proc. 2012 IEEE International
Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), Brisbane, Australia, June 2012 (pp. 1-8).
Nettleton, D.F., Salas, J., “A Data Driven Anonymization System for Information Rich Online Social Network Graphs”, Expert Systems
with Applications Volume 55, 15 August 2016, Pages 87–105. Impact factor 2.24 (SCI 2014/2015)
Nettleton, D.F., A Synthetic Data Generator for Online Social Network Graphs, Soc. Netw. Anal. Min. (2016) 6: 44. doi:10.1007/s13278-
016-0352-y
Nettleton, D.F., Salas, J., Approximate Matching of Neighborhood Subgraphs — An Ordered String Graph Levenshtein Method, Int.
Journal of Uncertainty Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems 24(03):411-431 · June 2016. Impact factor 0.619 (SCI 2013)
Hypera  (IRIS project)ID H2020-SMEINST-2-2016-2017, "Affordable Hyperspectral Imaging System for on-line foreign body detection
and  chemical  composition  analysis",  https://ec.europa.eu/easme/en/sme/8301/affordable-hyperspectral-imaging-system-line-foreign-
body-detection-and-chemical
Sharebox (IRIS project)  H2020 SPIRE-06-2015 Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources 
http://sharebox-project.eu/
Smart-Gran (IRIS project) H2020-SMEINST-2-2014, Development and Commercialisation of a Self-Guided Fluidised Bed Granulation
Solution, http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/196401_en.html
Partner
Organisation University of Skövde, Sweden (secondment 1)
General
description 
The University of Skövde  is a modern university located in the south of Sweden and has approximately 11000 students and 414
educational staff, structured in 5 schools. The university has many collaborations with international and local companies, including
mentoring programs and visiting scholars, and is located close to the Gothia Science Park. The School of Informatics has a close
relationship to society, well established infrastructure and a stable financial base, giving the conditions to engage in both Swedish and
international  education  as  well  as  research.  Research  at  the  School  of  Informatics  covers  topics  such  as  artificial  intelligence,
cognitive/interactive systems, distributed real-time systems, information systems, software systems and media, technology and culture.
Their research received high ratings in the ARC13 research evaluation study. The school´s research is frequently funded by European
Union, The Knowledge Foundation, Vinnova and industry partners. The Skövde Artificial Intelligence Lab (SAIL) conducts research
within applied AI in close collaboration with industry. Current research activities are focused on reasoning under uncertainty, deep
learning,  visual  analytics,  transparent  decision  support,  data  privacy  and  recommender  systems.  In  terms  of  education,  SAIL  is
responsible for the University's master program in Data Science, the first of its kind in Sweden. The SAIL research group currently has 2
full professors, 3 associate professors, 5 senior lecturers, 1 post-doc and 7 PhD students. 
Their main role in the project will be to second IRIS in the training of the fellow regarding data science research and big data. They will
bring an academic mentoring capacity in the project and complement IRIS’s more applied research focus. 
Key  Persons
and Expertise
(supervisor) 
Prof. Vicenc Torra. Leader of Skövde Artificial Intelligence Lab. Computer Science at Technical University of Catalunya (1991) and PhD
Computer Science (1994) at Technical University of Catalunya. Previous positions. Assoc. Prof. Research Track (1999-2014) at the
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (IIIA-CSIC), Assoc. Prof. (1991-1999) at the Universitat Rovira i Virgili. Visiting researcher at the
University of Tsukuba (Japan). Since 2014 he is Full Professor of Information Technology. His research interests include approximate
reasoning (fuzzy sets, belief functions and imprecise probabilities), data privacy (statistical disclosure control and privacy preserving data
mining), aggregation operators and data fusion, decision making and game theory,  and have led to the publication of over 100 scientific
papers. Prof. Torra is currently organizing the 4th Swedish Workshop on Data Science (SweDS 2016, Skövde, Sweden , the 9th Intl.
Summer School on Aggregation Operators (AGOP 2017, Skövde, Sweden)  and the 14th Intl. Conf on Modeling Decisions for Artificial
Intelligence (MDAI 2017, Kitakyushu, Japan).
Part B- Page  15 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
Selected projects in which Prof. Torra has been coordinator and/or participated as senior researcher: SMASH: Multi-agent systems and
their  application  in  hospital  services  (1996-2001)  Funded  by:  CICYT  (Spanish  government)  (Contract:  TIC96-1038-C04-04);
STREAMOBILE: Streaming of multimedia content on mobile devices with micropayments (2002-2004) Funded by: CICYT (Spanish
government) (Contract: TIC2001-0633-C03-02); e-AEGIS: Electornic shield for balancing consumer privacy and transaction security in
the information society: privacy in data bases (e-AEGIS/DB-privacy) (2007-2012) Funded by: MEC (Spanish government) (Contract:
TSI2007-65406-C03-02);  ARES:  Advanced  Research  Team  into  Information  Security  and  Privacy  (2007-2012);  Funded  by:  MEC
(Spanish government) (Contract: 21302); co-Privacy: Sustainable privacy for a sustainable information society (co-privacy/DBprivacy)
(2012-2015) 
Funded by: MEC (Spanish government) (Contract: TIN2011-27076-C03). He will act as supervisor of the fellow.
Key
Research
facilities,
infrastructure
, equipment 
The research group is currently active in multiple data science and data mining projects, including big data analytics, data fusion,
distributed decision making, reasoning about uncertainty, deep learning (including Boltzmann machines and belief networks), visual
analytics, recommender systems and data privacy. Many of these projects are being carried out in collaboration with leading edge
industrial companies.
No specific infrastructure is required for data science and data mining projects except statistical software packages, machine learning
software libraries and case study data which are available.
Previous  and
Current
Involvement
in  Research
and  Training
Programmes 
Current projects of the SAIL Research Group include: “A smarter society through Big Data analytics” financed by The Knowledge
Foundation; “Big Data Fusion (BISON)” financed by The Knowledge Foundation with c ollaborating partners Advectas AB, AstraZeneca
AB, Huawei Technologies Sweden AB and Takara Bio Europe AB; “HMI for Distributed Decision-Making” financed by the Swedish
Governmental Agency for Innovation  Systems (VINNOVA)  with   c ollaborating  partners  Saab Aeronautics AB; “New Opportunities
through Visual Analytics for Big Data” financed by The Knowledge Foundation with c ollaborating partners Combitech AB and Takara Bio
Europe AB.  All of these projects are relevant to the present research topic on data science / data mining case studies and which cover
aspects of big data analytics, data fusion and knowledge representation and processing.
In terms of teaching the key person involved (Prof. Torra) is a full professor with teaching responsibilities in computer science and data
science.  Prof. Torra has been thesis director of 6 Ph.D. students and the Research Group currently has 1 post-doc and 7 PhD students
and have recently initiated a Masters degree course in Information Science.
Relevant
Publications
and/or
research/inno
vation
product 
Torra, V.  and Narukawa, Y. (Eds.) (2015). Modeling Decisions for Artificial Intelligence: 12th International Conference, MDAI 2015,
Skövde, Sweden, September 21-23, 2015, Proceedings. Paper presented at 12th International Conference on Modeling Decisions for
Artificial Intelligence, MDAI 2015, Skövde, Sweden, September 21–23, 2015. 
Torra, V. (2015). Transparency and Disclosure Risk in Data Privacy. In Proceedings of the Workshops of the EDBT/ICDT 2015 Joint
Conference (EDBT/ICDT), Brussels, Belgium, March 27th, 2015, pp 246. 
Abril,  D.,  Torra,  V. ,  and  Navarro-Arribas,  G.  (2015).  Supervised  Learning  Using  a  Symmetric  Bilinear  Form  for  Record
Linkage. Information Fusion 26, 144–153. 
Nettleton, D.F. , Sáez-Trumper, D.,  Torra, V. , “A Comparison of Two Different Types of Online Social Network from a Data Privacy
Perspective”, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 6820, pp 223-234, 2011.
Nettleton, D.F., Torra, V., “Data privacy for simply anonymized network logs represented as graphs - considerations for graph alteration
operations”, International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems, December 2011, Vol. 19, No. supp01: pp.
107-125. 
Partner
Organisation KU Leuven, Belgium (secondment 2)
General description The KU Leuven is a renowned research-oriented university, carrying out fundamental and applied research in all academic
disciplines with a clear international orientation. It was founded in 1425 and has more than 30000 students and over 4400 full-
time researchers. KU Leuven’s Department of Computer Science consists of seven research groups has  30 professors, 300
master  students  and  150  doctoral students.  One  of  its  research  groups,  the  lab  for  Declarative  Languages  and  Artificial
Intelligence (DTAI) is participating in this proposal. Its subgroup on machine learning has four faculty members (Luc De Raedt,
Hendrik Blockeel, Bettina Berendt and Jesse Davis), around 5 post-docs and over 25 doctoral students. The ML group is
internationally  renowned for its research on machine  learning and data mining  for structured data (e.g., graphs, relational
databases, etc.), statistical relational learning, probabilistic programming, and constraint programming among others. Next to
fundamental research, DTAI applies its developed techniques to problems in health-care, prognostics, robotics, computer vision
and mechatronics, natural language processing, sports and the life sciences.
The ML group's main role in the project will be to support IRIS in training the fellow on applying data mining to graph data. They
will bring an academic mentoring capacity to the project and complement IRIS’s more applied research focus. Dr. Anton Dries of
the  ML  Research  Group  has  previously  collaborated  with  Dr.  David  Nettleton,  and  they  are  co-authors  of  the  previously
mentioned graph matching patent application, which we hope to exploit in this proposal.
Key  Persons  and
Expertise
(supervisor) 
Prof. dr. Jesse Davis is an associate professor of Computer Science at KU Leuven. He received his PhD from the University of 
Wisconsin – Madison (supervisor: David Page) in 2007 and spent three years as post-doctoral research at the University of 
Washington (supervisor: Pedro Domingos). He joined the faculty at KU Leuven in 2010. Jesse’s research interests include 
machine learning and data mining for relational data, statistical relational learning, transfer learning, probabilistic graphical 
models, and empirical evaluation. Furthermore, he is interested in challenging applications in health care, sports, and natural 
language processing. According to Google Scholar, he has been cited over 2500 times. He has been (co) PI on numerous grants
(national, CHIST-ERA) and received an EU FP7 Marie Curie Career Integration Award.  He is an action editor for the Machine 
Learning Journal and was program co-chair for ILP 2014. He will act as co-supervisor of the fellow.
Dr. Anton Dries is post-doctoral researcher in the ML group. He obtained a PhD in Computer Science at KU Leuven in 2010, for
his  thesis:  “Data  streams  and  information  networks:  a  knowledge  discovery  perspective”.  He  has  more  than  10  years  of
experience in Data, Graph and Stream Mining. He has co-authored more than 30 peer-reviewed articles and has 1 patent
application on graph matching (as a co-author with Dr. David Nettleton). His research mainly focuses on data mining, machine
learning and probabilistic/constraint programming. He will act as co-supervisor of the fellow.
Key  Research
facilities,
infrastructure,
The research group has wide experience and knowledge in data mining and machine learning. The group currently focuses on
applications  in  the  life  sciences  (especially  chemo-  and  bio-informatics),  in  constraint-based  data  mining  and  inductive
databases, and statistical relational learning (combining probabilistic models with logic). The group is actively developing several
Part B- Page  16 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
equipment important software systems such as the probabilistic programming language ProbLog (see https://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/software/
for a full list of open-source software). and several systems for learning with probabilities and/or structured data (e.g. ProbFOIL,
LearnSDD, ACE, …).  Furthermore, the group has access to the Flemish Super Computer for running large scale experiments.  
Previous  and
Current Involvement
in  Research  and
Training
Programmes 
Members of the group have been involved as coordinators or principle investigators in many European projects, including the
ESPRIT III and IV projects ILP (Inductive Logic Programming I and II), EU FP7 IST FET project BISON, and the EU FP7 FET
project ICON, among others. Current projects include: FWO-TBM Mobile monitoring of joint loading profiles in persons with
degenerative  hip  and  knee  problems  MMJLP;  ERC  Advanced  Grant  Synthesizing  Inductive  Data  Models  (SYNTH);  FWO
Updates  and  Provenance  in  Data  and  Knowledge;  SMGIS;  KUL-C3  Knowledge-Based  Software  Engineering:  IDP4;  FWO
MERCS: Efficient modeling of big data with multidirectional ensembles of decision trees, CHIST-ERA ReGROUND: Relational
ground  through  affordance  learning;  IWT-SBO  Hypermodelling  strategies  on  multi-stream  time-series  data  for  operational
optimization HYMOP.
The team is involved in teaching classes on machine learning, data mining, and big data. Furthermore, the group offers a class
on Data Science and another on Coping with Big Data to members of industry and the wider university community.  The group
supervises a large number of master theses every year, in addition to mentoring PhD students and post-doctoral researchers. 
Relevant
Publications  and/or
research/innovation
product 
De Raedt, L. , Dries, A.,  Thon, I., Van den Broeck, G., Verbeke, M. “Inducing Probabilistic Relational Rules from Probabilistic
Examples”, International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI'15)
Guns, T.,  Dries, A.,  Tack, G., Nijssen, S.,  De  Raedt, L. , “MiningZinc: A  modeling  language  for constraint-based  mining”,
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-13)
Nettleton, D.F., Dries, A. , “Local Neighbourhood Sub-graph Matching Method”, International and European Patent Aplication
PCT/ES2014/065505, 2013/2014.
Nettleton, D.F., Torra, V.,  Dries, A., “A comparison of clustering and modification based graph anonymization methods with
constraints”, International Journal of Computer Applications 95 (20), 2014
Van Haaren, J., Davis, J., Ben Shitrit, H., Fua, P. “Analyzing Volleyball Match Data from the 2014 World Championships Using
Machine Learning Techniques” ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2016)
Bekker, J., Davis, J., Choi, A., Darwich, A., Van den Broeck, G. “Tractable Learning for Complex Probability Queries” Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2015)
6. ETHICAL ISSUES
During the preparation of this proposal, in keeping with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an Ethics Self-Assessment
was performed with the completion of the Ethical Issues Table (EIT) in the Part A. It can be concluded that this project does not
involve any sensitive ethics issues. 
Part B- Page  17 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
7. LETTERS OF COMMITMENT
Part B- Page  18 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
Part B- Page  19 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
DATAMINE4.0 – Standard EF
    
ENDPAGE
MARIE SKŁODOWSKA-CURIE ACTIONS
Individual Fellowships (IF)
Call: H2020-MSCA-IF-2016
PART B
„DATAMINE4.0“
This proposal is to be evaluated as:
Standard EF
Part B- Page  110 of 20
This proposal version was submitted by Arnau FATJO on 14/09/2016 14:55:23 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public-private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Participant Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integrity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can be verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Participant Portal. 
(http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/portal/page/faq)