3.2  Management structure and procedures .................................................................................... 57
3.4  Resources ..................................................................................................................................... 64 
4  Members of the Consortium .................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
4.1  Participants ........................................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
4.2  Third parties involved in the project ............................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5  Ethics and Security ................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
5.1 Ethics ................................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
5.2 Security ............................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
 
  
     
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 3 of 124  
  
1 Excellence  
  
‘You can't solve a problem on the same level it was created. You have to rise above it to the 
next level’  
(Albert Einstein, scientist)
1.1 Objectives   
The last decade has experienced 
a strong increase in technological 
developments for improved 
material functionality. One of 
these involves surface 
treatments, which employ 
complex (multilayer) structures 
designed to provide 
multifunctionality in a single 
solution. Within this text, for the 
sake of simplicity, we will refer to 
these complex multilayer surface 
treatments as ‘coatings’. 
 This  definition  includes 
functional and performance 
coatings on textiles, paints on 
plastics, foil lamination and 
adhesion layers for plastics 
 parts  (polymer-polymer 
 and polymer-metal 
 connections).  These ‘coatings’ 
 have  a  wide  range  of advantages and benefits but currently cannot be recycled because of 
their hybrid nature.   
The main goal of DECOAT is to enable the circular use of coated parts by  
developing novel smart polymer material systems, and their corresponding recycling processes, 
currently a missing link – see figure. We will demonstrate the project results via concrete use-cases 
for outdoor gear, household electronics and automotive parts. A systemic approach for delivering 
breakthroughs all along the value chain will be followed, see figure.  To reach this ambitious goal and 
to maximise the impact of our DECOAT project on the textile and plastics sector, w e define the 
following concrete key objectives (KO):  
• KO1. Development of a toolbox of triggerable materials for debonding on demand suitable for 
use on textiles and plastics. Result: ‘coatings’1 that can be removed by various triggers, e.g. thermal 
via infra-red, heat or steam (targeted temperatures 100-150°C), chemical treatment or ‘microwaves’2.  
• KO2. Development and design of triggerable debonding coating solutions for ‘disassembly’ of 
parts or objects and for ‘removal’ of the coating from the multilayer structure. Focus is on acrylates, 
polyurethanes and PVC materials. Result: generic disassembly and removal solutions for punctual 
connections (0D), linear joints (1D) and planar coatings (2D).  
                                                           
1 ‘coatings’ refers here to coatings, paints and adhesives as defined above and as will be used for simplicity throughout this whole document  
2 ‘microwaves’ will be the most likely option (although it could also be another form of electromagnetic heating like Rf heating -see also section 
1.4.1) and as such will be used for simplicity throughout this whole document  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 4 of 124  
• KO3. Automation of sorting according to the required trigger. Result: pilot line enabling to sort the 
coated textiles and plastics based on the separation trigger incorporated.   
• KO4. Integration of debonding systems in a continuous pilot plant recycling line for coated 
parts. Result: pilot line enabling the recyclability of coated parts (flexible and rigid). The system will 
integrate the following elements: sorting and grinding, t he novel debonding system, mechanical 
recycling and melt extrusion, all steps running in a continuous way.  
• KO5. Demonstration via  use cases (outdoor gear, household electronics and automotive parts) 
using the pilot recycling plant and the adapted coating processes during manufacturing. Result: 
circularity demo of the use case products. Technology and processing for the use cases brought to 
TRL 5, accompanied by a plan for upscaling & industrialisation.   
• KO6. Assessment of environmental impact and implemen tation of safety -by-design (safe 
product, safe production and safe use and recycling). Result: full LCA study for the debonding 
concepts; reduced uncertainties and risks for human and environmental safety of DECOAT solutions.   
• KO7. Exploitation and busine ss plans  for the DECOAT results, including for the use cases 
manufacturing guidelines to ensure implementation at industrial scale. Further, for the more generic 
results (design-material concepts) a thorough analysis will be done for wide scope exploitation within 
the textile and plastics sectors. Result: tailored business plans for DECOAT (company) partners, 
public research roadmap and a strategy to further exploit and develop the generic DECOAT results, 
as a basis for implementing the market creating potential of the DECOAT approach.   
• KO8. Dissemination and communication among relevant European communities. The main 
target is the European materials and recycling community, supplemented by the wider stakeholders 
group, both for getting extra feedback durin g project implementation and for promoting our results.  
Result: raise awareness, engage for collaboration and  
 adaptation/integration of the project developments in applications beyond those covered within 
DECOAT.
1.2 Relation to the NMBP work plan  
The DECOAT products will be designed to enable separation (and thus recycling) by incorporating smart 
additives in the adhesive that are activated by a specific trigger (e.g. heat, humidity, microwave, chemical, 
mechanical). Additionally, an efficient sorting  process correlated with the trigger and a pilot recycling 
plant will be developed to illustrate circular use. In this fashion, DECOAT will directly respond to two 
of the three types of materials design objectives put forth in the call scope : ‘Design of polymer 
material structures with intrinsic sorting/recycling abilities ’ (bullet point 1) and ‘ developments of 
separation and recycling technologies’ (bullet point 3).   
NMBP-26-2018 call - challenge & scope DECOAT response  
products with smart intrinsic recycling and/or Three product families using multilayer coated parts are 
targeted: backpacks, sorting abilities household electronics and automotive parts. Each of them will be 
made from multi-layered materials that allow debonding for recycling and that can be sorted via the trigger 
mechanism. These are representative for a wide range of coated and painted textiles and plastic based 
consumer goods.  
harmonise with circular economy principles The 3 basic circular economy principles are 3: (i) Design 
out waste and pollution; (ii) Keep products and materials in use; 
(iii) Regenerate natural systems. DECOAT will enable coated, 
hybrid and painted materials to harmonise with principles (i) 
and (ii)  
help industry to better match the EU DECOAT targets the re-use and recycling of waste materials from 
environmental targets at the same time as households to increase to a minimum of 50%4. We will mainly 
                                                           
3 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/overview/concept   
4 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/targets.htm  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 5 of 124  
contribute for improving their competitiveness ‘plastics’. DECOAT will also contribute to the EU 
environmental targets for the automotive sector5.  
design of polymer formulations with smart DECOAT will make use of a toolbox of smart additives: 
microwaveable additives,  additives, microcapsules or bonding/ debonding adhesives for separation.   
developments of separation and recycling DECOAT will tailor microwave technology, heat, steam and 
dissolving to technologies enable separation of the coating from the textile or plastic.  
demonstrate the actual circular use of such A pilot will be developed for the use cases to demonstrate 
the circular use of materials through re-processing of recycled the materials. Both closed -loop (for 
same application) and open-loop (across products applications but of same value level) recycling will 
be considered.  
evaluation of properties of re-processed Properties of the use case products made with the reprocessed 
materials will products in an industrial environment be evaluated by the RTDs and by the DECOAT 
manufacturers (DECOAT end-users) according to their normal testing conditions.  
full Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of the LCA is included in DECOAT activities and is a Key Objective. 
Scope: raw material production and life -cycle material acquisition and processing, manufacturing, 
distribution and transport, use phase, end of life, and benefits  and loads beyond system boundaries 
(secondary systems).  
 Activities should start at TRL3, 
…achieve TRL5  
DECOAT approach fulfils this criterion, see section ‘positioning of 
DECOAT’
1.3 Concept and approach  
(a) Overall concept underpinning DECOAT  
The playing field. Increasing recycling is crucial, especially for plastics and textiles, as illustrated by 
the recently published European strategy on plastics6 or the voluntary engagement of the plastics 
industry to recycle 50% by 20407. However large the need and however impressive the targets, today 
only 6% of new plastic materials used stems from recycling8. Also within the textile industry the use 
of recycled material is limited: for clothing only about 1% is closed loop, ca 12% cascade recycling 3. A 
great deal of work is underway to improve this (al so via European projects), focussing on technical, 
economic and logistical aspects. As a result, we assume in the near future well-established networks 
throughout Europe where waste is collected and brought to local recycling facilities. At first, this 
network will deal with the current generation of products and materials that are not made for recycling. 
Consequently, only a small fraction of all materials is being recycled because the cost to the yield and 
quality ratio is too high compared with the one of virgin materials. Therefore, the next steps are products 
designed for recycling and made of intrinsically recyclable materials . This concept is being 
developed, e.g. for high added value applications like aerospace. However, for vast application areas 
this principle is not very advanced yet.   
                                                           
5 2000/53/EC directive  “… for all end-of life vehicles, the reuse and recovery shall be increased to a minimum of 95 % by an average weight per 
vehicle and year.”  
6 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/plastics-strategy.pdf   
7 https://www.plasticsconverters.eu/single-post/2018/01/16/European-Plastics-Industry-works-towards-50-plastics-
waste-recycling-by-2040   8 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/plastics-factsheet-
industry_en.pdf   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 6 of 124  
The identified need . DECOAT will implement a solution for a specific class of hard to recycle 
items: textiles and plastics parts with (multilayer) ‘coatings’. For plastics, these can be found eg in 
automotive, construction and electronics consumer goods. For textiles, typical uses are for technical 
textiles (outdoor gear, protective clothing, automotive applications and construction) and interior textiles 
(e.g. upholstery, mattress covers or curtains). The coating c an be added for performance or aesthetics 
reasons. Coating, paints or adhesives have to possess excellent adhesion because of the durability of 
the coated product, and as such cannot easily be removed. Consequently, full objects are discarded, 
even though the coating often only comprises some % of the total weight . With DECOAT we will 
reduce the amount of waste material to the specific 
adhesive. This holds for end-of-life products but it is 
also one of the types of production scraps that are 
not efficiently recycled yet. Within this larger topic of 
debonding an emerging specific challenge is how 
to deal with scrap and end-of-life parts containing 
integrated electronics (from smart textiles, smart 
plastics and wearables).   
DECOAT proposed solution: enable the recycling 
of coated parts, which refers to a two -level 
approach: (i) ‘disassembly’ is separating the 
connections among the different physical parts; (ii) 
‘debonding’ or ‘removal’ refers to the removal of 
coatings or tie layers from the fabric or plastics object. 
This 2-step approach is illustrated in the figures for a 
backpack. These two steps can be performed 
separately (or simultaneously in some cases) during the recycling process. DECOAT triggerable 
separations mechanisms will be suited for both steps and fill the missing gap for circular use of coated 
parts (see sketch in section 1.1). Within DECOAT, we will focus mostly on the 2nd level, i.e. the removal 
of coatings. But, the same principle of triggered debonding enables the disassembly step. So, DECOAT 
developments are relevant for both steps and we will refer to the processes as ‘debonding’.   
Interdisciplinary aspects : DECOAT combines expertise and knowledge from several disciplines: 
polymer chemistry, physics, coatings and paints, textil es and plastics processing, recycling, 
design, and environmental science . This is needed and allows tackling the interdisciplinary issues 
required for reaching circularity. One such key issue is to tune the existing knowledge on triggerable 
materials to industrial requirements for coated textiles and plastics.   
Stakeholder involvement: interaction with the stakeholders is deemed crucial, especially with the 
waste actors. Therefore, ISWA has been added as partner , a worldwide association of solid waste 
actors that promote sustainable waste management and perform dissemination and policy work. For 
further strong interaction with a wide group of stakeholders, the DECOAT Advisory and Support Group 
(ASG) has been established, containing 17 members from coating a nd recycling companies, industry 
associations, a public authority, standardisation bodies and a publisher, see also section 3.2.1.1f and 
section 4 for a detailed description.  
Societal engagement: DECOAT results will create a new market of recycling coated textiles and 
plastics, which will lead to job creation. Of special interest is (partial) disassembly which enables repair, 
e.g. in small local workshops.   
Positioning of DECOAT: Main technology elements, starting and targeted TRL are 
summarized in the table below:  
Technology element – assessment of status  Start  Target  
Microwaveable (MW) additives exist but manufacturing and design methodologies 
need to be developed for integration in coatings and paints for the DECOAT 
3  5  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 7 of 124  
applications. Rely on triggering of MW additives for fast curing thermoset resins 
and polyester annealing, which is well-established.  
Microcapsules for debonding coatings:  concepts based on heat, steam, microwaves 
are shown at lab scale (CTB and NTUA). R&D needed to validate debonding in 
relevant environments.  
3  5  
Bonding/debonding adhesives: industrially available (e.g. INDAR) for applications with 
metals and ceramics but needs to be transferred to polymeric/textile materials  
4  5-6  
CreaSolv® process was developed for recycling of soluble thermoplastics. It will 
be applied to dissolve polymeric coatings from textiles and polymer surfaces. 
After separation, the coating polymer can be recovered from the solvent. Suitable 
solvents need to be developed for specific coating chemistry.  
3  5  
Trigger assisted mechanical recycling: mechanical recycling as established in paper 
industry will be modified to treat plastic parts and textiles that contain coatings 
and/or paints by incorporating additional elements (debonding system & sorting 
technology) and redesign other ones (grinding & drying system)  
4  5-6  
Automatic sorting technology: is used in the plastic recycling sector, based on a 
number of monitoring technologies. The right technology is to be selected and 
calibrated for novel DECOAT triggerable materials.  
3  5  
Summarized: we start from technologies with TRL 3 ( -4) and target TRL5 ( -6) by the end of 
DECOAT. As much as possible conventional processing technologies will be used , which eases 
scaling up. We will continuously monitor the performance of the technologies along the project to ensure 
reaching TRL 5, as first steps towards future commercialization. Linked (inter)national research and 
innovation actions.  
Project Acronym (type of project) - Link with DECOAT  Partner  
(C=Coord)  
EcoMeTex (FP7) - Separation layer for carpets based on expandable microspheres, will 
be further developed as one of the separation technologies  
CTB  
RADIACAM (UK) - Microwaveable yarn for disassembly of mattresses and car seats  CTECH  
MARKERS (BE) – Markers for better sorting towards recycling  CTB (C)  
RECYCOAT (BE) – recycling of coated materials, eg separation by means of steam or 
infrared using additives  
CTB (C)  
FiberEUse (H2020) – Large scale demonstration of new circular economy value-chains 
based on the reuse of end-of-life fibre reinforced composites  
MAIER  
SMARTFAN (H2020) - Development of smart composites with self-healing capsules and 
carbon nanomaterials/ smart recycling activities  
NTUA  
BYEFOULING (FP7) - Synthesis, functionalization and up-scaling of nanoparticles for 
marine coating applications. Encapsulation based on Layer Double Hydroxides (LDH), 
Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) and  
Polyoligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) for controlled release of antifouling compounds  
NTUA  
LORCENIS (H2020) - Synthesis of carbonaceous nanomaterials and super absorbent 
polymers8  
NTUA  
SHELL (GR) - Synthesis of carbon nanotubes and nano-/micro capsules for coating 
applications  
NTUA  
INNOVIP (H2020) – Solvent based separation of composite films applied in vacuum 
isolation panels (VIP) in order to recycle film components during End of life treatment.   
IVV  
                                                           
8 Kanellopoulou I.A., Karaxi E.K., Karatza A., Kartsonakis I.A.., Charitidis C.A, Hybrid superabsorbent polymer networks based on crosslinked 
poly (methacrylic acid) encapsulated with Si02 for novel applications, 5th International Conference of Engineering Against Failure, 20 - 22 June 
2018 - Chios Island, Greece  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 8 of 124  
FORCYCLE (DE) – CreaSolv® process has been used to separate polymer/polymer and 
polymer/metal composites by dissolving one polymeric component of the composite   
IVV (C)  
FOURMI (FR): Development of thermo-strippable paints for the selective paint removal 
of aircrafts  
RESCOLL   
Wear2™ (UK) – The innovative Wear2 technology provides the capability to easily 
disassemble garments with the application of a simple end-of-life treatment using MW 
technology.  
CTECH  
REBIOFOAM (FP7) – The development of a flexible and energy -efficient pressurised 
microwave heating process to produce 3D -shaped renewable bio-polymer foams for a 
novel generation of transportation packaging.   
CTECH  
LIBRE (H2020): Novel precursor fibre materials from blends of modified lignin and 
biopolymers for carbon fibre. Includes use of dielectric susceptors to enhance the heating 
efficiency using MW or Rf energy.   
CTECH, 
CTB  
ECODISM (FP7) - development of debondable glazing adhesives for ELVs  RESCOLL  
ECOBULK (H2020) – Circularity in automotive sector (among others)  IRIS  
URBANREC (H2020) New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into 
high added value  
RECycled products   
AIMPLAS(C) 
CTB  
EXTRUCLEAN (LIFE+): Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances 
during the recycling process of polyethylene hazardous waste packages, employing 
supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2)   
AIMPLAS(C)  
eCircular - The EIT Climate KIC eCircular Flagship programme will accelerate the 
circularity of plastic -based material systems and dematerialisation of plastic demand, 
with the vision of a reaching a carbon -neutral material system by 2050. The Flagship 
thrives for digital innovations for waste prevention and their up-scaling.  
ECOMAT  
  
(b) Overall Methodology:   
For describing the general DECOAT methodology, we group the DECOAT activities according to lab -
scale, pilot scale and demonstration. The supporting activities are mentioned separately.  
Materials and material structures R&D at lab scale   
‘Triggerable mate rials’: R&D on the  microcapsules, nano -additives, their integration in coatings, 
characterisation of their effects when triggered. We will develop a portfolio of techniques, each will be 
characterised, listing the strengths and weaknesses for the respectiv e application domains. Integration 
in a coating system, directly in the coating or via a primer.  Triggerable debonding coating solutions 
both for the ‘disassembly’ of parts (‘1st level) and for the ‘removal’ of the coating from the substrate (2nd 
level).   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 9 of 124  
Process development at 
pilot scale:  Sorting 
technology: Research on 
sorting to discriminate post-
consumer and post 
production waste based on 
type of debonding trigger to 
ensure the materials can be 
identified & guided  to 
 the  fitting  recycling 
technique.  
Piloting of a recycling line 
for coated parts: conception, 
design and building of an 
actual pilot line, performing 
test runs on generic coated 
textiles and plastic parts, 
validation via the recycling of 
the use cases prototypes.  
Demonstration of circularity 
via use cases (see sketch): 
The novel coatings will be 
applied in the existing 
processes by the 
manufacturers/ endusers via three use cases. The (small scale) production of products will undergo the 
recycling process, the recovered  materials  will  be characterised and re-used. 
Evaluation of the reprocessed products.  
  
Transversal activities:  
Environmental & safety assessment : detailed assessment of environmental (full LCA) aspects and 
development of an ecodesign tool. Ensure Safety -by-Design implementation via use of non -hazardous 
substances, e.g. for microcapsules or solvents (EC Regulation No. 1272/2008). Apply proper recycling 
and waste treatment (Directive 2008/98/EC).   
Innovation management : Economic assessment (full cost of ownership, business plans); 
dissemination: raise awareness from early on to maximise wide uptake of DECOAT results; 
communication to promote public awareness of circular economy values; focus on interaction with wider 
stakeholders and with the ASG.   
Coordination: efficient project implementation, project risk management.  
Gender analysis . We will follow gender driven innovation  and develop gender neutral 
demonstrators. DECOAT partners have a strong focus on women’s employment (e.g. at VAUDE 65% 
women, including the CEO and 33% of executive positions) 9. Further, our innovation activities will 
consider the gender dimension and consider the needs, motivations and differences of females where 
applicable, inspired by how takin g gender into account has yielded new research results and sparked 
creativity10. DECOAT will consider the relevance of the gender dimension in communication & training.
1.4 Ambition  
DECOAT aims at overcoming obstacles from current recycling technologies by designing coating 
formulations with smart additives, which allow adequate sorting, separation and recycling . 
Developments of separation and recycling technologies will be investigated and new separation 
                                                           
9 Source: http://www.vaude.com/angebote/nachhaltigkeitsbericht/2013_Nachhaltigkeitsbericht_screen_ENGL.pdf   
10 Londa Schiebinger (2008). Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 10 of 124  
technologies utilising novel mechanical and chemical recycling procedures will be validated, to meet the 
EU's circular economy and environmental targets.  
1.4.1  Progress beyond state-of-
the-art  
Building further on the available 
knowledge, expertise and patented 
IP within the DECOAT consortium, 
we will  research and develop a 
debonding system based on 
triggerable additives, mechanical 
recycling, chemical recycling 
(Creasolv process) and latest 
coating (monitoring) technology. We will investigate two debonding systems: (i) a single layer with the 
trigger inside and (ii) a two -layer system 
consisting of a standard coating and a ‘primer’ 
layer (see sketches). Note that ‘primer’ is used 
here as common name for tie layer or primer or 
base layer. For selected combinations of the 
coating-substrate materials, we will research 
several triggers and several options for the actual 
removal of the coating (process conditions, 1-step 
versus 2 -step). The output will be a portfolio of 
debonding strategies, mentioning for each of the 
solutions the pros and cons. This novel information will form the basis for our DECOAT demonstration 
of circular use of coated parts but also be made available to the wider stakeholder community for further 
use.   
In the next paragraphs we describe the concrete progress beyond the state-of-the-art that DECOAT 
ambitions for (i) triggerable materials, (ii) optical monitoring for process optimisation and sorting 
of the coated waste, (iii) actual recycling and (iv) eco-design aspects.  
(i) Triggerable materials and related debonding systems – mainly related to WP1 & WP2 work  
Coatings that debond on demand  lose their adhesive function when an external trigger is applied. 
Partner CTB researched a novel separation layer for textiles by embedding thermally expandable 
syntactic microspheres (in FP7 project ECOMETEX). Separation concept was shown on lab scale in 
boiling water, which is not an efficient process as it needs extensive energy (heating, drying). Partner 
RESCOLL developed an innovative, patented (see section 1.4.2) interfacial debonding adhesive 
technology (INDAR™ Inside ) permitting the dismantling of structural aerospace assemblies without 
damage and was used for selective thermal stripping of aircraft paints. Partner NTUA has developed a 
variety of ‘smart’ nano- and microcapsules based on various materials (ceramics, metals, polymers), 
that react on external stimuli (water, mechanical stresses, microorganisms, etc), in projects LORCENCIS 
and BYEFOULING (see also project table above). Partner CTECH developed additives for interaction 
with microwaves. Based on that, a unique patented (polyester) yarn was developed, which disintegrates 
during microwaving12. This yarn enables easy and inexpensive removal of e.g. zippers (disassembly 
step). DECOAT novelty: Using the available IP and expertise, we will develop triggerable additives for 
water-based coating formulations with a lowered debonding tempe rature as compared to existing 
procedures, although exceeding the processing and working temperature required/set by industrial demo 
cases. A sufficient difference between the manufacturing, maximal service and the debonding 
temperature will be ensured and will be realised by improving the heat direction towards the additives, 
e.g. by heat focussing layers or thermal conductive paints. Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured 
copolymers, Super Absorbent Polymers (SAP) and novel hybrid microwave susceptible materials (based 
on metal nanoparticles, silicon carbides and multiwall carbon nanotubes MWCNTs) will be investigated. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 11 of 124  
Separation will be done by heat sources (like steam, microwaves and IR) that are available at industrial 
level to avoid the need for a dditional, or only very limited, drying. To reach a clean surface after 
debonding, we focus on controlled interfacial decohesion. For detection purposes, fluorescent molecules 
will be added on the “smart” additives (dyes).  
The table below gives an overvie w of the materials to be developed and the polymer coating 
matrices to which they can be added. Already a first matching between the trigger mechanism 
and the polymer matrix is made , based on the chemistry of the particles and what is available in 
literature. As mentioned this is a first matching, further investigation within the DECOAT project is 
needed. Below the table, each of the triggerable materials is discussed, giving more info on their 
synthesis and the challenges for their use in an actual debonding system.  
Triggerable materials  Coating 
Polymer 
matrix  
Triggers  
Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers  
Core: e.g. poly(propyl methacrylate) or poly(butyl methacrylate)   
Shell: e.g. poly(4-vinylpyridine-co-methacrylic acid), ethylene-glycol-
bismethacrylate,   
Functionalised with: organic dye (I), iron oxides (supermagnetic 
nanoparticles)  
Acrylic, PU13 
PVC14  
Heat / Steam 
(Temperature)  
Super Absorbent Polymers   
Core: Cross-linked poly(methacrylate-co-ethylene glycol 
dimethacrylate)  
Functionalised with: organic dye (II), iron oxides (supermagnetic 
nanoparticles)  
Acrylic 
Epoxies15  
Selective  
Solvents (H 20 
or organic 
solvents)  
Microwave assisted materials  
MWCNTs (decorated with metal nanoparticles or grown on SiO2 
nanoparticles)  
Susceptors: Metaloxide nanoparticles (e.g. ferroelectric oxide 
particles), BaTiO3, siliconcarbide, ZnO, silica or alumina Blended 
with high dielectric polymer  
PU16  
PVC17  
Epoxies18  
MW 
irradiation  
Blowing agents (INDAR)  
Blowing agents: azodicarbonamide and polycarboxylic acid  
Blended into formulations for primers, combination with other triggers  
Epoxies, PU19   Heat / Steam 
(Temperature)  
Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers  
Partner NTUA has vast experience in synthesis and development of tailored microcapsules and 
nanoadditives with functional properties (currently at TRL3)20,21,22. Partner DEVAN has built over the 
years a strong IP portfolio of microcapsules for various applications23.  
DECOAT novelty: we will make progress on the following topics to realise this triggerable material:  
                                                           
12 Patent WO2013/189956A1, see also www.wear2.com   
13 M.Hirose, et al.,The structure and properties of core-shell type acrylic-polyurethane hybrid aqueous emulsions, Progress in Organic Coatings, 
31, (1–2) 1997, 157-169  
14 A. Gharieh, et al., Preparation of core–shell impact modifier particles for PVC with nanometric shell thickness through seeded emulsion 
polymerization, Iranian Polymer Journal 23(1), 2013  
15 I.A. Kartsonakis, et al., Multifunctional epoxy coatings combining a mixture of traps and inhibitor loaded nanocontainers for corrosion 
protection of AA2024-T3, Corrosion Science, 85, 2014, 147-159.  
16 E. Orgiles-Calpena, et al., Effect of Amount of Carbon Nanotubes in Polyurethane Dispersions, Macromolecular Symposia, 2012.  
17 K. Trommer, et al., Processing and Properties of Carbon Nanotube PVC Composites, L. Appl. Chem., 2014, 10  
18 J. Zhang, et al., Functional interphases with multi-walled carbon nanotubes in glass fibre/epoxy composites, Carbon, 48, 8,  2010, 2273-2281 
19 EP2265681 (B1), EP2519596 (B1), EP2519565 (A1), EP1611217 (B1), EP1814935 (B1) 20 A.C. Balaskas, T. Hashimoto, M. Curioni, G.E. 
Thomson, Nanoscale 2017 9:5499-5508.  
21 A.C. Balaskas, I.A. Kartsonakis, L.-A. Tziveleka, G.C. Kordas, Progress in Organic Coatings 2012 74:418-426.  
22 I.A. Kartsonakis, A.C. Balaskas, E.P. Koumoulos, C.A. Charitidis, G.C. Kordas, Corrosion Science 2012 57: 30-41.  
23 Patents EP1658131 (B1), US2008193761 (A1), US2016009596 (A1)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 12 of 124  
Microcapsule core: selection of polymers with thermo-responsive properties or inclusion of active 
ingredients that help delamination of textile layers (eg. poly(propyl methacrylate) or poly(butyl 
methacrylate).  
Microcapsule shell: selection of suitable shell components to enclose the core material. In thermo-
responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers, a protective thermoplastic shell with tunable 
glass transition temperature (T g) and melting temperature (T m), will be tailored to have a higher 
Tg than the core’s polymer. The Tg is highly related to segmental polymer chain motion. As polymers 
warm up, the shell with the high Tg will act as a protective coating for the polymeric core, which will be in 
melting conditions at elevated temperature. When the ambient temperature surpasses the Tg of the shell, 
the inner core (material) will have a high chain mobility enabling detaching of the surfaces. At this defined 
moment the core material is released from the capsule, triggering debonding. On the one hand, the shells 
should not react with the core material and on the other hand they should have a good chemical 
compatibility with the surrounding matrices. E xamples of possible materials are: melamine resins, 
polyurea/polyurethanes, polyacrylates. In addition, the shells should provide a good storage for the active 
ingredients during the entire lifetime of the products, and only rupture/or release the active i ngredient 
when triggered (end of the product life).  
Functionalization of the protective thermoplastic shell to increase its compatibility with a wide 
range of ‘coating’ formulations, also for INDAR technology (see below). The main materials: PU, PVC, 
acrylic, epoxies. Of potential further interest: amino, cyanates, isocyanides, hydroxyls, sulphonamides, 
and phthalates. DECOAT consortium is aware that some forms of these substances have restrictions, 
so REACH compliance will be checked (see also Task 6.1).  
The use of the microcapsules in the debonding system: The microcapsule concentration (ca. 5% or 
less) and cross-linking density of the adhesive will be tailored and optimized, for strong adhesion during 
product use but also for ease of debonding at end-of-life. The latter will be achieved by exposure to heat 
as this will melt the shell, and thus activate the core. Homogeneous heat dissipation and activation of the 
microcapsules will be obtained by adding superparamagnetic nanoparticles (Fe 3O4). Applicatio n of 
irradiation will locally (=near the microcapsules) raise the temperature 11,12. The aim is to develop 
materials that will be able to create ‘soft flexible points’ 
inside the crosslinked adhesive network in the presence of 
the external stimuli, thus improving detachment.  
Summarizing, the trigger mechanism for the thermo-responsive 
core-shell nanostructured co -polymers relies on the different 
physical properties (T g) between the core and the shell 
materials that construct the primer layer. The induction of heat 
onto the core-shell materials above the Tg of the organic shell, 
results in the different polymer chain mobility enhancement between the core and the shell. The outcome 
is the reduction of the attachment between the primer layer and both the top coat ing and substrate, 
enabling the detachment of the top coating from the corresponding substrate.   
Super Absorbent Polymers (SAPs)   
SAPs can absorb and retain extremely large amounts of a liquid relative to their own mass. Water -
absorbing polymers, which a re classified as hydrogels when cross -linked13, absorb aqueous solutions 
through hydrogen bonding with water molecules. In deionized and distilled water, a SAP may absorb 300 
times its weight (from 30 to 60 times its own volume) and can become up to 99.9% liquid.  
DECOAT Novelty: The SAP materials  will exhibit a spherical shape with a two-layered structure: the 
polymeric core will be a lightly crosslinked hydrogel and the outer surface will be a highly crosslinked 
                                                           
11 Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, Volume 435, 2014, 99-104.  
12 Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Volume 302, Issue 1, 2006, Pages 267-271.  
13 Kabiri, K. (2003). "Synthesis of fast-swelling superabsorbent hydrogels: effect of crosslinker type and concentration on porosity and absorption 
rate". European Polymer  
Journal. 39 (7): 1341–1348  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 13 of 124  
layer. The water absorption capacity of the SAPs is influenced by the nature and relative amounts of 
monomers used in the synthesis 14. In this sense, the regulation of the crosslinker amount (both in the 
core and shell material) will be the key -property to achieve the desired degree of water absorben cy 
for the debonding effect as well as the required protection of the hydrophilic core for obtaining a stable 
waterborne formulation15. Clearly, the amount of crosslinker is a decisive parameter for the swelling 
behaviour of hydrogels and the aim is to achi eve a compromise between the crosslinking level and a 
stable gel structure16,17.  
The effect of the pH on the water absorbency of 
the SAP spheres will be also investigated. The 
dispersion of the coreshell SAP materials will be 
investigated in an aqueous solvent where 
swelling equilibrium experiments will be 
performed to study water absorption at different 
pH. When the pH favours the repulsive forces 
between the polymeric chains, the water 
absorbency is increased. On the other hand, 
when a screening effect of the polar groups of the polymer chains takes place, the repulsive forces 
between the charged polymer chains are minimized and the water  
absorbency in greatly decreased. Based on this phenomenon 27, the pH value of the waterborne 
formulations developed will be selected based on the value where the minimum water absorbency is 
observed. In this way, the SAP materials will be in a not swollen state during their incorporation in 
the coatings and they will be activated only upon the trigger. The trigger mechanism for the core -
shell hydrophilic SAPs relies on the different ability of the core and the shell materials to be swollen under 
variation of pH. Therefore, under the influence of water with specific pH value, the SAPs can enhance 
their shape due to the water absorption resulting in the reduction of the attachment between the primer 
layer and both the top co ating and substrate, enabling the detachment of the top coating from the 
corresponding substrate.  
To apply the MW trigger, these structures will be also functionalized with  thermally-responsive 
magnetic nanoparticles (eg Mn-Zn ferrites or Ni or iron oxide) which will be selected based on the Curie 
temperature that matches the crosslinked layer’s melting point18. This functionalization will make the shell 
more susceptible to heating so that the shell can be selectively molten, as described also for the case of 
the thermo-responsive core-shell co-polymers, allowing the lightly crosslinked hydrophilic core to absorb 
a large amount of water, causing the swelling and activating the debonding.  
To apply the Creasolv process,  lipophilic super-absorbent polymers32 for the absorption of the 
desirable organic solvents  will be prepared by selecting the appropriate compounds  both for the 
polymer chains that control the compatibility with the media and the ionic groups that are dissociable in 
polymer gels (e.g. alkylammonium salts). Candidate materials include acrylate monomers copolymerized 
with methacrylates as crosslinkers to yield lipophilic polyelectrolyte gels. The nature of the organic 
solvent and specifically its polarity (dielectric constant) will influence the swelling behaviour of the SAP 
materials produced. For this reason, the ionic group content will be adjusted t o avoid the formation of 
physical interactions which will negatively influence the swelling behaviour of the lipophilic SAP. The 
trigger mechanism for the core-shell hydrophylic SAPs relies on the different ability of the core and the 
shell materials to be swollen under the presence of an organic solvent. Thus, under the influence of an 
                                                           
14 Kabiri, K., et al., Superabsorbent hydrogel composites and nanocomposites: A review. Polymer Composites, 2011. 32(2): p. 277-289.  
15 Chang, S., et al., Multi-scale characterization of surface-crosslinked superabsorbent polymer hydrogel spheres. Polymer, 2018. 145: p. 174-
183.  
16 Goncalves, A.A.L., et al., Synthesis and character ization of high performance superabsorbent hydrogelsusingbis[2 -(methacryloyloxy)ethyl] 
phosphate as crosslinker. Express Polymer Letters, 2016. 10(3): p. 248-258.  
17 Cipriano, B.H., et al., Superabsorbent Hydrogels That Are Robust and Highly Stretchable. Macromolecules, 2014. 47(13): p. 4445-4452.  
18 A. S. Ahmed y R. V. Ramanujan, Curie temperature controlled self-healing magnet–polymer composites, J. Mater. Res., 
2015. 30 (07): p. 946-958. 32Ono, T., et al., Lipophilic polyelectrolyte gels as super-absorbent polymers for nonpolar organic 
solvents. Nat Mater, 2007. 6(6): p. 429-33.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 14 of 124  
organic solvent that has enhanced chemical affinity with the shell material, the SAPs can enhance their 
shape due to the organic solvent absorbtion water resulting in the reduction of the attachment between 
the primer layer and both the top coating and substrate, enabling the detachment of the top coating from 
the corresponding substrate.  
Hybrid materials reacting to MW triggers  
Two forms of dielectric heating are commonly used industrially differing in wavelength of the 
applied electromagnetic radiation. These are Rf heating using wavelengths at 27 and 40MHz and 
MW heating using 2.45Ghz and 896MHz . Depending upon the material to be processed, there are 
advantages and disadvantages of using the different forms of radiation, but the main advantage is the 
direct heating of the material by the application of the radiation with no external heat transfer or hot 
surface required. Using Mw and Rf can be done either as a batch system or a semi batch system. In the 
latter case the materials are placed into a screened cavity and then heated by the application of the 
desired power for a defined time. This gives some advantages in the design because the system can be 
enclosed ensuring no leakage of radiation. Materials can be introduced in containers, treated and then 
removed to be processed further. Continuous processes are also possible for both Rf and MW systems 
for example conveyers can be used to introduce and remove the materials into the applicator zone.    
The main microwave absorption mechanism of a polymer is reorientation of the dipoles  when 
submitted to an electric field, the presence of these groups in the molecule is necessary. Some polymers 
contain groups with large dipoles, such as epoxies, amino, cyanate, isocyanides, hydroxyls, 
sulphonamides and phthalates. The materials with the best dipole mobility exhibit high absorption 
efficiency and the efficiency of the coupling depends on the strength of the dipole, its mobility and mass, 
as well as its dipole matrix state. The choice of the polymers and the formulation will therefore need to 
be investigated for an optimal heating effect. By applying electromagnetic radiation to a material, 
movement of the molecules via dipole interactions with the oscillating electric field is induced, resulting 
in molecular friction. This leads to dielectric heating of materials.  
  
Comparison of Rf and MW heating key properties  
Parameter  Rf  MW  
Applied heating efficiency  order of 60%  order of 65%  
Uniformity of heating  Good   Can be less uniform   
Impedance matching  Can be difficult for certain applications Easily applied   
Energy delivery  Accurate and fast   Less controlled   
Remote power sources  Ok  Ok with waveguide transfer to the applicator  
Screening to comply with EMC  Easy   More difficult  requirements  
Tailor heating to materials  Easy   (More) difficult    
Common characteristics  
Volumetric heating –no external Dielectric heating does not require physical Low shear transport 
(conveyorised possible) heat transfer contact with the product  
Typical susceptors that are used nowadays for MW heating  are metaloxide nanoparticles (e.g. 
ferroelectric oxide particles e.g. BaTiO 3, siliconcarbide, ZnO, silica or alumina). To date, use of 
microwave heating in carbon -based materials research of is limit ed, mainly focused on liquid 
solutions. However, more rapid and efficient heating is possible in electron-rich solid materials, because 
the target materials absorb energy of microwaves effectively and exclusively. Carbon -based solid 
materials are suitable for microwave -heating. Specifically, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have excellent 
electrical properties resulting from sp 2 networks of carbon atoms. The number of free electrons which 
can migrate freely over the whole of the layer is about one per each carbon at om. The free electrons 
enable CNTs to absorb microwave energy considerably and to be heated effectively by 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 15 of 124  
microwaves19.The tuning feasibility of the permittivity value by changing MWCNTs concentration (1-5%) 
has been also proven20.  
Other applications like annealing, regeneration and detection based on microwave heating of CNTs have 
been reported.  
DECOAT novelty:  
The main idea is the possibility to include susceptors in a primer layer  to provide a heating effect 
to separate the substrate and the top coating. The susceptor may also be part of the actual coating in 
case of a single layer. The bulk polymer would need to be a low dielectric material to avoid MW heating 
of the bulk. The aim  is to provide selective heating in the area of the susceptor, to either melt (and 
remove) the primer and thus also the coating on top, or to melt the entire coating itself and remove the 
coating layer.  
For the heating, we will start with MW heating as mo st likely option. Also Rf will be tested and the 
possibility to add (as extra) some radiant heating component. In DECOAT, it will be investigated which 
would be the best energy source, or combination, to use in order to achieve the effect.   
To tune the heating and to make it more uniform, we will optimise the % and type of additive. We will 
also investigate the addition of MW transparent material such as silica or alumina to disperse the particles 
and moderate the heating effect. Indeed, heating needs to be limited to prevent thermal runaway causing 
melting or charring of the bulk polymer. Issues might occur if the component contains e.g. metal parts 
(e.g. fixings/brackets) which could cause arcing or materials fillers that heat strongly in a MW/Rf field. 
This potential variability of feed would need to be considered, even though we will try to limit the variability 
via the previous disassembly step and the monitoring and sorting of the waste.   
We will start making formulations with common susceptors  such as small metal particles (nano 
particles), ferroelectric oxide particles e.g. BaTiO3, silicon carbide or blends with high dielectric polymer. 
The primer layer or the coating will need a lower melting point compared to the bulk 
material.   
A novelty for tar geted MW heating will be the exploration of carbon -based 
particles, like carbon powder, MWCNT and CNT/MO  (Metal Oxide) 
nanocomposites (see picture on the side 21). The latter are a new generation with 
interesting properties that not only combine the properties of CNTs and MO but also 
hold new properties caused by the interaction between them. Additionally, use of 
these materials in a polymer coating formulation can overcome some common 
disadvantages. For example, metal oxide nanoparticles tend to agglomerate because 
of their dangling bonds. In CNT/MO composites, depositing nanoparticles on the surface of the nanotube 
prevents their agglomeration. The aggregation of nanotubes in aqueous media is solved by 
functionalization. As a result, these nanocomposites are  attractive for a wide range of applications 
compared to the isolated nanoparticles because CNTs act as a carrier to stabilize the nanoparticles, 
maintaining their integrity. This will help the induction of the heat through MW and Rf inside the coating, 
since CNTs will work as a thermal conductive network inside the polymer matrix, which should 
be very beneficial for the debonding functionality. The result will be the reduction of the attachment 
between the primer layer and both the top coating and substrat e, enabling the detachment of the top 
coating from the corresponding substrate.  
(ii) Automated Sorting technology based on DECOAT triggerable additives – mainly related to 
WP3 & WP4 work  
For the actual recycling of DECOAT products to be implemented in a future waste management 
configuration, an efficient and automated sorting is requ ired based on the material composition 
                                                           
19 T. Kim, et al., Microwave heating of carbon-based solid materials, Carbon letters Vol. 15, No. 1, 15-24, 2014.  
20 M. Giorcelli, et al., Microwave absorption properties in epoxy resin Multi Walled Carbon Nanotubes composites, 2013 International 
Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications (ICEAA), Italy, 9-13 Sept. 2013  
21 Vinod K. GuptaandTawfik A. Saleh, Synthesis of Carbon Nanotube-Metal  Oxides Composites; Adsorption  and Photo-degradation  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 16 of 124  
for defining the respective recycling route and for separating them from non-recyclable parts (e.g. 
standard coated parts not including triggers). Due to the lack of recycling options, textiles are often not 
separately collected or sorted and automotive non -metallic parts shredded as a mixture that is 
energetically valorised at best, plastics (especially packaging, WEEE) are industrially sorted via 
spectroscopic identification systems (e.g. NIR, X -ray, colour, laser an d combinations)22 or even hand 
sorting. The latter is unreliable and not suitable for the DECOAT materials as the smart additives cannot 
be seen by human workers. Partner IRIS has experience in developing tailored fast online VIS/NIR 
spectroscopic tools for plastic processing monitoring to identify precisely their composition and to detect 
traces of unwanted substances23,24.   
NIR absorbance spectroscopy is well established as a technique for inline sorting of a wide range of 
materials, including agricultural products such as food products; minerals 25 and plastic waste 26. In 
particular, Steinert GmbH41 provides a wide range of sorting machines with NIR imaging, handling plastic 
waste, household waste, compost, building waste, and minerals produced by mining. Waste plastics are 
especially suited for NIR absorbance characterisation, as they exhibit strong spectral features in the near 
infra-red. Conversely, most plastics have similar appearance and shapes in the visible wavelength range, 
so using conventional machin e vision for sorting is not effective. Allied with this, a large proportion of 
waste plastic materials will be presented as macroscale objects of a single material type, which means 
they are easily imaged using the spatial resolution available with common hyperspectral cameras.   
Challenges remain in sorting plastics, including distinguishing materials that have multiple component 
materials, such as coatings, colouring agents and fillers, or separating objects that are dark coloured, or 
which have been used for containing different materials, including hazardous ones.   
Recently, the addition of fluorescent markers has been developed as a way to add specificity to 
objects that are difficult to sort based on NIR spectroscopy of their basic material type. Such organic 
dyes absorb light of a particular wavelength and emit light with a longer wavelength. This property, called 
fluorescence, can be detected with extremely high sensitivity and therefore, only a very small 
concentration of a fluorescent dye is suffic ient. Coatings with a thickness of ~ 1 µm require a dye 
concentration in the order of some parts per billion, to enable the detection of the fluorescence. Such a 
small concentration in a thin layer is not visible to the eye and does not affect physical pro perties like 
mechanical strength.  
In terms of process control of transparent organic coatings, such a system has been recently 
developed, with the involvement of partner IVV, by the Fraunhofer Polymer Surfaces Alliance 
POLO®27. For the excitation of the dye molecules a (monochromatic) light source (LED, laser) is required, 
and a digital camera can be used to detect the fluorescence light. Depending on the dye’s optical 
properties additional components such as filters might be necessary. These properties can  be used to 
tag materials and coatings28 and for example determine coating thickness. In addition, some dyes show 
a fluorescence effect, whose intensity and wavelength is influenced by the surrounding molecules, the 
pH, the ionic strength of the medium, or by the viscosity of the matrix, showing a stronger fluorescence 
depending on the cross-linking degree of the resin.  
                                                           
22 Plastic handbook chapter 8: PLASTICS RECYCLING AND BIODEGRADABLE PLASTICS, Susan E. Selke:  
23 OPTIJECT project (Grant Agreement no. 262623), www.optiject.eu  
24 B2B contracts for the detection of good batches of recyclates as well as for HSI-based monitoring solution for plastic identification in recycling 
line  
25 Steinert KSS Optical Sorting Machine, Steinert GmbH, Widdersdorfer Str. 329 – 331, D-50933 Cologne, Germany. 
https://steinertglobal.com/mining/industrial-minerals/  
26 PICVISA Ecopack, PICVISA Optical Sorting, C/Isaac Newton, 2, 08280 Calaf (Barcelona) España, 
http://picvisa.com/en/p/productos/ecopack-plastic-sorting-21-18 41 https://steinertglobal.com/magnets-sensor-sorting-units/sensor-
sorting/nir-sorting-systems/  
27 https://www.polo.fraunhofer.de/de/Aktuelles/downloads.html  
28 Holländer et al., (2015). "Process control for thin organic coatings using fluorescence dyes." Progress in Organic Coatings 88: 71-74.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 17 of 124  
In terms of sorting, fluorescent markers are already well established as a means of sorting cells or other 
biological species29.  
A prototype system has been developed to sort small flakes of plastic, by the addition of fluorophores30, 
which reduces the minimum size of an object that can be sorted, and handles more complex polymer 
blends. A commercial fluorescent marker and sorting sy stem for polymers is offered by Polysecure 31. 
This system requires the addition of fluorophores to the polymer itself, and in sufficient quantities for 
detection, and so the amount of fluorescent material required is a limiting factor to the general use of this 
technology. A new product under development by Nextek Ltd., called PRISM32, is based on the addition 
of fluorescent inks to the labels of plastic containers, which strongly reduces the amount of fluorophore 
required, but presents challenges if the labels have been partially removed or degraded in handling.  
Fluorescent markers are typically produced in the form of molecular dyes/ nanoparticles. Dyes are the 
most cost -effective fluorophore, which makes them attractive for waste sorting. However, where 
nanoparticles are already deployed as functional additives, such as paramagnetic oscillators, it should 
be possible to add the functionality of fluorescence to existing particles, or microspheres. Such dual-use 
particles have been developed for combined canc er-cell imaging and destruction 33. Commercial 
fluorescent paramagnetic microspheres are available 34, while customised particles will be investigated 
that are suitable for material properties of debonding adhesives under development. While carbon 
nanotubes-based nanocomposites are expected to require fluorescence dyes, other standard metallic 
nanoparticles (eg iron oxide) can be identified using standard X -ray fluorescence spectroscopy without 
dye addition. Dispersion of nanoparticles in thin films can be char acterised by diffractometric 
techniques35.  
DECOAT novelty : In terms of process control, fluorescent dyes, applied in ppm (parts per million) 
concentrations in core and shell of the triggering materials, and resulting in a specific fluorescence will 
be used  in the design the microcapsules. The detection system records the fluorescence intensity 
distribution, which finally will be converted into volume distribution of the core and shell within the coating. 
Moreover, the curing states of the core and shell can be imaged by using special dyes. The advantage 
of such a system is to measure and control all thickness/curing state relevant parameters at the same 
time during production. In terms of sorting, these fluorescent markers in the core-shell will be unique to 
the microcapsule and its triggering mechanism, and therefore allow sorting each part to the appropriate 
channel and process for debonding and separation. The amounts of fluorophore are limited, and localised 
to the region of the part containing the adhesive layers, so that in the case where more than one additive 
is present, they can be identified separately, and a multiple stage recycling route can be implemented. 
All in all, we will research and optimise the hardware based on tailored photonic techniques  and 
software using advanced chemometrics analysis and combining several technologies as 
required for identifying each relevant material . They will be adjusted to sort bonded and coated 
materials. Similar techniques will be used to control proper removal and quantify residues as needed to 
ensure quality of reprocessed substrate material and for the tracking important parameters of the core 
shell synthesis, nano/micro composites dispersion and coating thickness as determinants of trigger 
efficiency.  
                                                           
29 David W. Galbraith, Flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell sorting in plants: the past, present, and future, Biomédica 
2010;30(Supl):65-70  
30 S. Brunner, P. Fomin, Ch. Kargel, Automated sorting of polymer flakes: Fluorescence labeling and development of a measurement system 
prototype, Waste Management 38 (2015) 49–60  
31 Polysecure GmbH, Engesserstrasse 4a, 79108 Freiburg / Germany, http://www.polysecure.eu/en/product-marker-solution/product-marker-
solution/  
32 Nextek Ltd., Level 2, 1 Kensington Gore, London SW7 2AR, United Kingdom. http://nextek.org/portfolio/sorting-with-markers/  
33 Shang-Hsiu Hu and Xiaohu Gao, Nanocomposites with Spatially Separated Functionalities for Combined Imaging and Magnetolytic Therapy, J. 
AM. CHEM. SOC. 2010, 132, 7234–7237  
34 Spherotech Fluorescent Magnetic Particles, Spherotech, Inc. 27845 Irma Lee Circle, Unit 101, Lake Forest, IL 60045, USA  
35 http://optinanopro.eu/optinanopro01/files/2018/06/ApplicationNote-Texture.pdf  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 18 of 124  
(iii) Upgraded mechanical and chemical recycling process – mainly related to WP4 work  
Trigger assisted mechanical recycling. Mechanical recycling is often most preferred from economic 
viewpoint. However, it is often limited in capabilities, e.g. for remov al of contaminants. A well -known 
method is using a continuous high speed centrifuge to remove water and other impurities during plastic 
recycling. To our knowledge, combination with a trigger is not known at pilot or industrial level.  
DECOAT novelty: develop a continuous recycling pilot line to separate the coating from the coated 
plastics and textiles part by using a high speed industrial centrifuge (mechanical separation) that 
integrates the trigger mechanisms and that can be combined with the novel sorting technology. 
The idea is to start with grinding in medium size parts (3 x 3 cm), to have the material pass through an 
activation step (e.g. microwave, IR or steam oven tunnel or chemical bath), to trigger the debonding and 
to start the separation process. The centrifuge movement will permit that the coating, even if its weight 
is comparable to the weight of the substrate material, will go out of the system fairly easy. Finally, the 
‘decoated’ polymer (plastic parts, textile fibres) will be extruded and pelletized to be used again for melt 
extrusion. CO2 will be introduced during the melt extrusion process to remove residual amounts 
of coating and VOCs.  
Chemical recycling via CREASOLV process : This is a solvent based selective extraction process 
developed by partner IVV that allows pure plastics at the molecular level to be recovered due to their 
specific solubility. It has no by-product (solvents can be used in closed loop endlessly with only few ppm 
lost in each cycle) and a very low environmental impact demonstrated by peer-reviewed LCAs36,37. Unlike 
general chemical recycling that generate monomers requiring a new polymerization step, Creasolv® 
generates polymers. One further advantage is that via successive steps with tailored solvents, even 
mixed input materials can be recycled. Furthermore, due to the mild processing conditions (no 
supercritical conditions), the polymer maintains its properties as opposed to mechanical recycling. So 
far, CreaSolv® has been applied to standard thermoplastics like PS, PE, PVC, PA, etc. It has also already 
been successfully tested on lab-scale for recycling of PVC/PET composites38.  
DECOAT novelty: the process will be adapted for typical textile and plastics coatings enabling the 
recovery of selected coating materials . In combination with DECOAT core/shell microcapsules and 
lipophilic SAPs, the CreaSolv® treatment will be researched as a potential method of triggering, e.g. by 
triggering the swelling of SAP’s and also as a method to remove remaining contaminants after the 
application of a previous (mechanical) debonding process.  
(iv) Demonstration of circular use and related eco-design– mainly related to WP5 work  
Circular use of raw materials of coated parts . DECOAT emphasises on the removal step, i.e. the 
separation of the coating from the substrate. However, we also want to show that it is possible to recycle 
the materials, coating and substrate afterwards.   
DECOAT novelty: DECOAT ambitions to show this ci rcular use and wants to demonstrate it for one 
generic coated textile and for one generic coated plastics case. We want to select two such generic 
systems and will show circularity of the material use. For the actual debonding, we will apply the most 
suitable technology developed within DECOAT. For the recycling of the coating and of the substrate 
material, we will rely on the best available technologies at that moment.   
Difficult to predict already now but some good candidates: PVC coated PES fabric and ABS coated PUR. 
The actual recycling of the thermoset PUR is outside the scope of DECOAT but several efforts (eg H2020 
projects URBANREC, see also section 2.1.2) are ongoing. DECOAT will rely on these efforts for showing 
the circular use.  
                                                           
36 https://polystyreneloop.org/content/8-downloads/presentations/10-lca-of-etics-eol-treatment-of-eps.pdf    
37 Freegard, K.; Tan, G.; Morton, R. 3rd interim report on WRAP Project PLA-037. The Waste & Resources Action Programme, Banbury (UK), 
2006.  
38 U.Knauf et al. Recycling of PVC/PET composites - Production of pure and homogeneous recyclates, and process monitoring – Kunststoffe / 
Plast Europe Vol 90 (2) 24-26, 2000  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 19 of 124  
Further, we want to also make prototypes of actual parts for the use cases presented by the end-users, 
see also next section. These prototypes will be based on eco -design of the coatings, implementing the 
DECOAT findings. The outcome will be strategies to design single and multilayer coating solutions for 
textile and plastic substrates using our DECOAT developments. A public tool will be released that helps 
to integrate DECOAT technology in the eco-design of coated parts.  
  
1.4.2 Innovation potential  
The innovation potential of DECOAT is rooted in the current need for improved high tech material 
solutions for implementation of cost efficient solutions for recycling of coated textile and plastic 
parts. A significant contribution can be delivered to the eme rging remanufacturing industry in 
Europe by helping it to extend to plastic parts.  
Recycling of coated plastic parts . The current technology for recycling 
painted parts is based on chemical bath, which is expensive, prone to 
contamination, and difficult to implement on small scale (so for SMEs 
that need to recycle the scrap). The technology is only available in some 
large recycling companies and OEMs. This chemical bath has a removal 
efficiency of ca 9598,5%. The current 1,5% of coating that remains 
causes a dramatic loss of properties in the recycled material . Taking 
all this into account, the innovation potential targeted by DECOAT is to 
(i) find alternatives for the current chemical baths  for a more 
environmental-friendly process that is easier and cheaper to implement at 
small scale/companies; (ii) achieve a removal efficiency of >99% in a 
single step , leading to higher quality recycled material at market 
affordable price.   
Market size coated plastics : European plastic parts production was 
almost € 37billion euro (Eurostat – 2016 data). Assuming that ca 20% is 
coated, we find a European market value for coated plastic parts of 
more than €7 billion . For the coating materials themselves (acrylates, 
polyurethanes,…), the worldwide market on plastics was valued at ca. € 5 
billion (2015). The global demand for automotive coatings is ca. 3 million 
tonnes, with the European share over 20% (2016)39.   
Recycling of coated textiles. In the past recycling of PVC coated PET fabrics and pilot scale recycling 
has been tried, using chemical recycling, e.g. TexyLoop55. Further, textile recycling mainly focusses on 
shredding of uncoated textile fabrics (typically production waste, also some post -consumer) into short 
fibres that are reused for non -woven production. And alth ough coated textiles are often used, no 
economically viable solutions targeting a reasonable value after recycling exist today. The innovation 
potential targeted by DECOAT is to present coating solutions made with recycling in mind, both from the 
design and materials side. Moreover, the corresponding techniques will be developed. This innovation 
potential is on medium -term as DECOAT will offer a novel option, in -between the existing pure 
mechanical and chemical recycling, for dealing with coated textiles and plastics.  
Market size coated textiles : The global coated fabrics market is projected to reach almost €25 
billion by 2021, at a CAGR of more than 4% in terms of value, during the forecast period, 2016 to 202140. 
The European textile coatings market is projected to witness growth over 4% up to 2024 . Rising 
industrial, transportation, and building & construction are driving the market for textile coatings. Along 
with these, increasing quality and performance standards in textile coating based fabrics are also driving 
                                                           
39 https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/news/global-plastic-coating-market and http://www.european-coatings.com/Markets-
companies/Coatings-market  55 Recycling of flexible composite materials – see: www.texyloop.com   
40 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/coated-fabric.asp and https://globenewswire.com/news-
release/2016/11/23/892449/0/en/Global-Coated-FabricsMarket-2016-2021-Market-is-estimated-to-reach-USD-20-41-billion-in-2016-and-
is-projected-to-reach-USD-24-91-billion-by-2021.html   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 20 of 124  
the market. Recent market potential of microencapsulated products/ additives is estimated at ca. 
€5 billion, growth ca 5 -7%/y41 and ca. €1 billion within the technical textile and clothing industry 42, 
focusing on applications like medical, sportswear and leisure.  
The global textile coating binders market is dominated by thermoplastics (2015 data): PVC -
Polyvinyl Chloride (ca 40%), Polyurethane (ca. 20%) and Acrylics (ca. 7%). PVC is the most used coating 
for various applications due to its low cost, easy weldability, and easy coloration and printability. PU 
benefits from being an eco-friendly textile coating, and is widely accepted and preferred by manufacturers 
in North America and Europe. Applications for coated textiles are very diverse, but main areas are: 
transportation, building and construction  and (technical) clothing , e.g. for ou tdoor, workwear, 
protective clothing43.   
Although currently limited, there is a strong driver for using coated textiles for daily clothing as it 
has been shown that the coating is reducing microfibre losses during washing by up to 50% 44. 
But, having to deal with coatings would hamper and delay the current emerging recycling of textiles even 
more. This is a potentially very large opportunity DECOAT technology can tap into.  
Recycling of automotive plastics. During the process of recycling ELV (End-of-Life Vehicles), most of 
the metal is recovered from cars, and the rest of materials and parts are shredded to obtain what is called 
ASR (automotive shredder residue) 45. This ASR represents 20 -25% of the original car weight, it 
contains typically 20 to almost 50% plastics and most of it is currently landfilled or burned . The 
EU directive (2000/53/EC), demands that only 5% of total ELV is landfilled. The plastic separation in the 
ASR is complex and the purity that is currently feasibly is not enough to have productive  mechanical 
properties in the recycled plastic. It is stated that “ The recovery [of plastic material] has remained 
marginal; yet it should develop rapidly now, given the EU requirements regarding material recycling. 
Manual dismantling allows cleaner recove ry, yet it is severely limited by productivity …. Conversely, it 
seems illusory to recover really clean materials, such as PUR, after passing them through a shredder, 
even though washing procedures have been tested ”61. Therefore, rather than focussing on s mall 
incremental improvements, DECOAT proposes a radical novel approach.  
The global automotive industry is set to reach 114 million cars in worldwide sales annually by 
2024, with an expected growth on average of 2.8% 46. Within the EC report ’GEAR 2030‘ 47 (2017), the 
opportunity for building novel or extending existing value chains for a circular automotive sector is 
highlighted, as well the possibility for novel business models, eg for the recycling or re -use of (spare) 
parts. DECOAT feeds directly into this  opportunity, by providing novel technological solutions for both 
disassembly and recycling. The high-end premium car segment which uses a lot of aesthetics 
coatings (ca. 13% of MAIER’s turnover) is ‘booming’: it increased with more than 50% from 2010 to 
201648.   
Of special interest for the automotive sector is the increased use of composite parts, especially in 
electric vehicles. This currently hampers the EoL processing as recycling of composite parts is much 
more difficult as (coated) metal parts. Therefore vehicles are designed that are easier to recycle, eg by 
making them easier to (partially) disassemble, even in a robotised manner. This offers a huge opportunity 
for the recycling industry and linked activities. DECOAT technology for recycling parts fits perfectly in this 
scheme.  
Opportunities exist also for trucks and busses, the latter are covered by partner MBT. Although less 
common then cars, there are roughly 1 million so -called HDOR (Heavy duty and off -road vehicles) 
                                                           
41 Source: Gerald Rafler, Head of the Fraunhofer Institut Applied Polymer Science, Potsdam (2016)  
42 Estimate based on European Textile Association statistical data on technical textiles and clothing segments  
43 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/textile-coatings.asp (2016)  
44 A New Textiles Economy (2017), see: https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/a-new-textiles-economy-redesigning-fashions-
future   
45 A. Buekens, X. Zhou, Recycling plastics from automotive shredder residues: a review, J Mater Cycles Waste Manag (2014) 16:398–414  
46 https://www.consultancy.uk/news/13900/global-car-market-to-break-through-100-million-in-sales-by-2020  
47 https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/26081/attachments/1/translations/en/renditions/native  
48 Statistica Charts: https://www.statista.com/chart/9309/super-luxury-car-sales-are-booming/   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 21 of 124  
discarded every year. Disassembly is much more common and far advanced with some brands for metal 
parts (iron, steel, aluminium, up to ca 75-85% of the total weight). Remaining challenge is dealing with 
complex multi-material parts (with electronics). DECOAT technology could contribute.  Emerging 
market: recycling of smart textiles and plastics with integrated electronics. The market for smart 
textiles and wearables is expected to enter an exponential growth phase  from an expected total 
world market of nearly 1.5 bn US$ by 202149 to almost 3 bn US$ for the EU market alone in 202450. Eg 
DECOAT partners MBT, MAIER  and CTAG are working on integrating electronics into various 
(interior) car elements. Next to the actual manufacturing, a missing solution to recycle the smart plastics 
hampers the market introduction. Therefore, we will also look into this emerging automotive application.   
Remanufacturing is the process of returning a used product to its original performance specifications 
(from the customers’ view). It is a strategy to reduce manufacturing's environmental impacts while 
boosting profitability. If considered during the early stages of a product's design, the concept of ‘active 
disassembly’ can be applied enabling the rapid and non-destructive disassembly of products with minimal 
component damage, which facilitates remanufacturing. DECOAT technology can aid to implement active 
disassembly, easing the actual disassembly (DECOAT – 1st level) and for making it easier to upgrade 
used parts by removing the coating so that it can be recoated. Remanufacturing is especially of 
interest for the automotive market. The worldwide automotive parts remanufacturing market (focus on 
metal parts) was valued at US$ 33.16 Billion in 2016 and is estimated to grow at a CAGR of 6.6% from 
2017 to 202551. DECOAT technology could help to extend it also to plastics parts. Note that this is much 
stronger than the actual automotive market (worldwide 2.8%, in EU only 1.7%). Economic benefits for 
both remanufacturing companies as well as the customers are considered as the biggest driver for the 
overall automotive parts remanufacturing mark et. Remanufacturing aids in reducing cost pertaining to 
major parameters such as material, machining, production time, energy, fuel and labour costs, among 
other. In addition, present -day automobiles are made flexible so that they can easily incorporate 
remanufactured parts without affecting the performance of the vehicle. Remanufacturing goes wider 
than the automotive sector : the EU Remanufacturing Network estimates the current size of the EU 
remanufacturing industry to be almost €30bn, employing around 19 0,000 people. Their market 
study shows that the industry could triple to €90bn by 2030 and employ as many as 255,000 people52. 
As DECOAT technology will also be able to apply on large full parts, it can contribute to and 
benefit from the remanufacturing opp ortunity. The ERN study 53 identified the top barriers for 
remanufacturing becoming more widespread, i.e. volume/availability of a ‘core’ (used part intended to 
become a remanufactured product) and quality of the core. For coated parts, DECOAT technology 
answers to those barriers. The aerospace sector was shown as the sector where remanufacturing is 
currently being used most. On 2 nd and 3 rd place are automotive and EEE (Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment). The INDAR technology of partner RESCOLL is indeed already emerging in the aerospace 
sector. Our goal is to make it also enter other sectors, like automotive and EEE. This shows that DECOAT 
will also be useful for further development for disassembly of parts for these sectors (and debonding of 
coatings).  
The global adhesives market was valued at ca. €35billion in 2015 and is projected to reach ca. €50billion 
by 202154. The share of debondable adhesives is nowadays only ca. 0.5% of the general adhesives 
market. The water -borne adhesives (= DECOAT scope) accoun t for ca 50% of the global market. If 
DECOAT results reach 1% of this market, we can address a global market of ca. €170-250million.  
The above motivates the selection of the DECOAT use cases: watertight backpack for outdoor 
gear (VAUDE), power switches an d sockets for household electronics (PANASONICS) and 
                                                           
49 Kamitis – Smart Textiles Study 2016-2021  
50 Grand View Research - Smart Textiles Market, Smart Fabrics Industry Report (2017)  
51 https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/9b2rfv/global_automotive?w=4  (2017)  
52 https://www.circle-economy.com/european-remanufacturing-industry-estimated-at-e30bn-with-potential-to-triple-by-2030/#.Wy-ubExuJZU  
(2016)  
53 Remanufacturing Market Study by ERN, Oakdene Hollins (2015)  
54 Global Adhesives and Sealants Market– Trends and Forecasts (2016 - 2021), edited in October 2016 by MORDOR INTELLIGENCE  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 22 of 124  
automotive parts (with integrated electronics) (MBT, MAIER) as applications and sectors where 
recycling of coated materials is needed but no economically viable solutions are available yet.  
FREEDOM TO OPERATE. The consortium carried out a patent survey to specify possible opportunities 
not only to achieve knowledge advancements, but also to proceed in technological advancements in 
terms of patenting. The survey was conducted in the spirit of investigatin g and detecting unexplored 
areas and approaches of the field and to avoid possible overlapping with existed protected intellectual 
knowledge. The consortium decided that although a number of patents exist in similar fields, DECOAT 
project offers a huge opportunity to achieve technological advancements beyond the state of the art.  
  
Patent No – Title   Short Description   DECOAT’s Innovation potential  
CN105710044A:  
Intelligent  
classification 
system for 
 recoverable  
garbage   
Intelligent classification for recoverable garbage: 
infrared (IR) sensor, metal detector, core control 
classification module and voice prompt module 
(IR sensor and metal detector used for detecting 
type of garbage.  
DECOAT will develop an 
automated sorting technology 
based on triggerable additives.  
CN100386453C:  
Method for 
decoating on 
 waste 
 plastic metal 
   
The present invention relates to a method of 
recycling scrap metal, in particular a plastic 
waste containing metal plating layer 
simultaneously recycling waste plastic and metal 
plating method faded.  
DECOAT will develop a method 
for decoating a paint layer from 
a plastic substrate in order to 
recycle both the coating and the 
substrate  
US20140287299A1:  
Heat-Debonding  
Adhesives  
A debonding tool provides current to conductive 
contacts on the conductive laye r for generating 
heat in the heatgenerating layer when it is 
desired to debond the structures that are 
attached together in electronic devices, using 
the adhesive member.  
DECOAT will develop 
triggerable primers for 
interfacial debonding for 
electronic dev ices, automotive 
parts and textiles  
US5100494A:  
Structural bonding 
and debonding  
system  
The pieces are debonded or separated by 
passing a relatively high electrical power through 
the heating element, to soften or melt the 
adhesive.  
DECOAT will use triggers such 
as microwave, Rf irradiation, 
heat and steam together with 
smart nanomaterials, f or 
softening/melting adhesives.  
US7901532B2:  
Method  and 
apparatus  for 
bonding  and 
debonding 
adhesive interface 
surfaces  
Invention utilises thermoexpanadable 
microspheres and thermal energy to debond 
interfaces in an adhesive system or as vehicle 
carriers. It discloses a method of curing the 
adhesive system prior to the debonding step so 
that the same adhesive system may be used for 
both phases. It is especially useful in the 
automotive industry for end of vehicle life 
dismantling.  
DECOAT will use super 
absorbent polymers as 
microspheres which will react to 
moisture and heat. The 
applications are not only limited 
to automotive industry, but also 
to  
electronics and textiles  
US20150202858A1: 
Laser film 
debonding method   
A laser-based coating removal method debonds 
a film from a substrate rather than ablating the 
film. Laser light is transmitted through a 
transparent film to an underlying bonding layer 
for bonding the film to one or more additional 
films and/or a substrate. The la ser light is 
absorbed at the bonding layer and the 
transparent film is released. In some 
DECOAT will use microwave 
and Rf irradiation instead of 
laser light. Automate d optical 
sorting will be also 
implemented.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 23 of 124  
embodiments, after the transparent film is 
released it is able to be physically removed.  
US6288158B1: 
Modified 
superabsorbent 
polymer 
 based  on 
polyacrylonitrile 
emulsions  
The surface of a polymer containing hydrolyzed 
polyacrylonitrile in the form of particulates, is 
modified by crosslinking in a water/alcohol 
reaction mixture and in the presence of silica. 
The resulting product features improved 
absorbency under load and lesser degree of gel 
blocking  
DECOAT will synthesize a new 
generation of SAP’s 
functionalising their surface 
with thermo -responsive 
coatings and decorating them 
with metal oxide nanoparticles.  
US6537341B2:  
Process for 
recycling fiber 
 composite  
materials  
A process for recycling composite materials that 
comprise fibers and a matrix includes exposing 
the composite material to electromagnetic 
waves in the form of microwaves. The 
electromagnetic waves induce an introduction of 
energy into the composite material, leading to a 
separation of fibers and matrix. The separation 
operation can be assisted by a suitable solvent.  
DECOAT will develop a 
recycling route based on 
microwaves and Rf irradiation 
for coated plastics and textiles. 
In combination with the above, 
the Creasolv process will be act 
synergistically.  
  
In spite of the existing prior art (described in section 1.4.1), according to the knowledge of the partners, 
no patents exist that block the envisioned developments and innovations. Quite on the contrary, several 
DECOAT partners own key patents related to the developments. An overview of the most 
important ones:  
  
DECOAT scope  DECOAT partner – relevant patents  
Debonding 
adhesives  
RESCOLL: proprietary INDAR technology via patents EP2519596 (B1), EP2519565 
(A1), EP2265681 (B1), EP1814935 (B1), EP1611217 (B1)  
Microcapsule 
production & 
application  
DEVAN: has an extensive know-how, through the PCT/IB2006/050605 patent, for 
the grafting of a covalent bond between the microcapsules’ shells and the textile 
fibres. The incorporation of these microcapsules into fabric substrates creates new 
functionalities for the treated materials.  
Microwaveable  
trigger (for yarns)  
CTECH: ‘Article assembly disassembly system’ - Patent WO2013/189956A1  
Nano- and 
microcapsules  
NTUA: "Multifunctional Coatings including Nanocontainers with Self-Healing, 
Antibacterial and  
Photocatalytic Properties" - Patent no 1007721; ‘Hybrid Coatings including 
Nanocontainers with Antifouling Properties" - Patent no 1007729; "Functional Multi-
stimuli responsive polymeric nanocontainers-microcontainers as drug delivery 
systems" - Patent no 1007882.  
Creasolv®   IVV: “Process for recycling soluble polymers or polymer blends from plastic 
containing materials” - Patent No EP0894818B1; “Method for increasing the 
concentration of at least one polymer from a polymer containing waste material, and 
polymer recyclate” - DE102013212813A1; “Method for recycling plastics and use of 
thereof” - EP1888677B1.  
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 24 of 124  
The DECOAT consortium is convinced that the triggered debonding approach presented here is 
still largely uncharted and that opportunities are multiple to patent IP, including options to extend 
and elaborate some of the existing patents of DECOAT partners.  
   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 25 of 124  
2 Impact  
‘Do not go where the path may lead, go instead where there is no path and 
leave a trail’  (Ralph Waldo Emerson, writer)
2.1 Expected impacts   
DECOAT fits extremely well in the European Circular Economy strategy as it aims for a systemic 
innovation for the recycling of coated textile and plastic materials. The materials solutions will 
build further on latest (carbon) nanotechnology, microencapsulation and polymer developments 
and lead to several scientific and technological breakthroughs. DECOAT results will create new 
markets for triggerable additives, optical material detection systems and for recycling equipment 
and processes. Together this amo unts to over 150 million annual turnover, i.e. the potential to 
directly create ca. 500 jobs.  Moreover, DECOAT materials and process innovations will give a 
competitive edge to a relevant share of the European companies active along the coated textiles 
and plastics value chains that could generate a total turnover of ca. €1.7 billion, implying  that 
DECOAT would further help to secure ca 5.000 jobs.  
2.1.1 Expected impacts set out in the work programme  
In the subsections below, we list how DECOAT will respond to each of the expected impacts of the call. 
We focus on the impact within and beyond DECOAT and try to illustrate both aspects.  
2.1.1.1 Meeting the EU's circular economy and environmental targets while demonstrating a clear benefit, 
i.e. more efficient or economic than the state of the art in order to enable market uptake in the 
short to medium term  
Efficiency aspect: The current disposal methods for coated textiles and plastics are landfilling, 
incineration or (very limitedly) chemical bath recycling, that all have severe disadvantages.  
Incineration55 conventionally leads to the release of significant greenhouse gas CO2, pollutants like NOx, 
SO2, and particulate matter. Additionally, heavy metals a nd dioxins are emitted. Given the high energy 
content, much of the heat is recovered as energy source. However, the residual product consists of 
bottom ash, fly ash, and air pollution control residue, which is currently also landfilled. The incineration 
process involves a flue gas cleaning process, which may give rise to externalities to wastewater. For 
landfill71 disposal, the main emissions are CO 2 and CH 4. Moreover, leachate is released to the 
surrounding soil and water. In addition to environmental impact, both incineration and landfill processes 
require facilities with serious disadvantages, e.g. for the people living in the vicinity. Chemical baths are 
currently used to remove coatings and to recycle the left -over fraction but they are very limited and  
cumbersome from environmental side (see section 1.4.2). These dramatic impacts will be avoided by 
the DECOAT innovations, as instead of being disposed of, the majority of the original material can get 
a secondary life-cycle. This saves on the production o f virgin material, thus contributing to significantly 
reducing emissions throughout the value chain.   
DECOAT offers a solution to coated plastics and textiles recycling via the development of triggered 
debonding of coatings via improved mechanical or chemical recycling, resulting in a highly promising, 
efficient alternative to current recycling and material design standards.  
Economic aspect: for doing the extra sorting and activation of the trigger, an additional cost during 
recycling of ca €80 -100/ton is  estimated (including OPEX and CAPEX), largely depending on the 
stimulation mechanism (e.g. infrared vs microwave). This is an economic attractive proposition as the 
current process of non -coated plastics recycling, including extrusion  and pretreatment (grinding, 
washing, drying) costs ca. €300-400/ton. So, coated parts recycling can be enabled by ca. 20% extra 
cost compared to non -coated parts, which is close to but below the only current solution 
(solvolysis ~ €500/ton).   
                                                           
55 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/econ_eva_landfill_report.pdf  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 26 of 124  
Contribution to EU’s circular economy and environmental targets , which specifically 
recommends accounting for the entire plastics value chain 6. The primary focus of the EU circular 
economy for plastic use and production is to promote the reuse, repair, and recycling needs of plastic 
value chains through enhanced sustainable design. DECOAT directly addresses these challenges by 
developing a smarter initial design to plastic and textile coating that can be removed upon end -of-life 
status, allowing a high percentage of t he original material to go on to a second life -cycle. This directly 
supports the EU’s goals to achieve a “modern, low-carbon, resource and energy-efficient economy” while 
making “a tangible contribution to reaching the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals an d the Paris 
Agreement”.  
2.1.1.2 Create new technologies and business opportunities for the recycling industry across Europe, 
especially in the area of composites and plastics where the challenge is high  
Key DECOAT result: novel technologies for triggerable coatings ( KO1, KO2)  
For: (i) R&D driven SMEs in area of chemistry, formulation, paint, adhesives, … (ii) product designers & 
developers  
Impact: For group (i): a novel market will be created of (additives for) coatings, paints and 
adhesives that are f ulfilling the recycling need . The global adhesives market was valued at ca. 
€44billion in 2016, and is expected to register a CAGR of 5% during the forecast period (2018 -2023)56. 
This sector contributes more than €13 billion to the EU economy and employs more than 41,000 
people. The share of debondable adhesives is nowadays only ca. 0.5% or ca. €65 million of the 
general adhesives market. Our results will contribute to increase this market share as we expect to 
generate a market of DECOAT triggerable additives of ca. €20 million (see part D2 of the PEDR). 
The DECOAT partners will be ideally positioned to capitalise on this growing market: RESCOLL expects 
the project to lay the basis for a new product line of debondable adhesives and primers for textiles and 
plastics products. RESCOLL has the capacity to scale-up to production via its subsidiary company STILZ 
Chimie to which it wants to transfer the developed technology (royalty based agreement), and which is 
currently capable of producing up to 20 tons/year. DEVAN will be able to continue to fuel the growth of 
their turnover in microcapsules products based on DECOAT results. CTECH is using already 
microwaveable additives but so far only in yarns via the extrusion process. DECOAT will allow different 
market sectors to be entered, notably for coatings for textile and plastics.  
For group (ii): the DECOAT concepts will be useful for designers and product developers as they can 
use these new concepts for making ‘recyclable-by-design’ products. Further, DECOAT will boost 
repair services as DECOAT results can also be used for developing products that allow easy repair by 
enabling easy exchange of parts (via another use of the disassembly concept of DECOAT). This is 
relevant for local workshops that want to offer repair services but also for a large brand like VAUDE who 
already offers repair services. Finally, DECOAT triggerable material solutions will also be useful 
for other application areas where it is needed to separate materials for recycling. This is for example 
the case for coated plastic parts in construction or for the composites sector, fueling also additional 
sectors like aeronautics and marine etc. For the latter, DECOAT solutions could be used to weaken the 
interface matrix -reinforcing fibres so that recycli ng becomes easier. Further, as mentioned before 
DECOAT solutions are also an opportunity to recycle the emerging smart textiles and plastics and 
wearables. ALL DECOAT partners will benefit from this exploitation beyond the initial DECOAT scope 
but it will be especially interesting for the research partners in the project (CTB, AIMPLAS, IVV, CTAG 
and NTUA) for whom this offers a way to exploit results beyond DECOAT.  
Key DECOAT result: novel recycling processes based on combination of mechanical and chemical  
recycling with a triggerable material ( KO4) and the linked automated sorting ( KO3).   
For: (SME) players in the recycling industry, that are more and more emerging; established recyclers of 
plastics and companies that design and build turn-key recycling lines  
                                                           
56 Innovations in Multi-material Joining Technologies, Frost & Sullivan 2013  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 27 of 124  
Impact: typically for common coated materials, only mechanical recycling is now econ omically feasible 
as full chemical recycling is not cost efficient. DECOAT (via partners IRIS and AIMPLAS) offers a way 
to upgrade existing mechanical processes  by adding tools that requires limited investment, for 
activating the trigger and for automated sorting. Once DECOAT triggerable materials come on the 
market existing recycling lines will have to be upgraded for the sorting . Key DECOAT result : 
demonstration of circular use of the demo cases products ( KO5).   
For: (i) DECOAT end-users PANASONIC, MBT and VAUDE; (ii) manufacturers, and their suppliers, of 
coated textile and plastics based consumer goods, eg TIER 1 for automotive, textile manufacturing 
sector, coatings and paints industry, … Impact: For group (i) DECOAT will create direct business 
opportunities. Partner MAIER employs ca. 2400 people with a 300M€ turnover, and owns plants in 
Spain, Italy, the UK and Czech Republic . It is supplier of plastic components for the most important 
automotive OEMs (e.g. PSA Group, TOYOTA, AUDI, RENAULT, JAGUAR -Land Rover, GM, BMW, 
NISSAN, etc.). Being the first on the automotive market to offer DECOAT triggerable coating solutions is 
expected to give an important competitive edge that could relevantly boost ca. 20 -25% of the product 
portfolio. Partner PANASONIC is part of one of the largest brands all over the world and the Panasonic 
Eco Solutions Türkiye plant is one of the largest companies that produce on this scale in one place in 
Europe (100.000.000 pcs/year). PANASONIC employs more than 250.000 people all over  the world. 
Panasonic Eco Solutions Türkiye focusses on the products that are mainly targeted in DECOAT, e.g. 
Power Switches and Sockets, Group‐Sockets, Fuse Boxes, Low‐Voltage Switchgear Products, Meters, 
Automated Meter Reading Systems, Building Automati on Systems. DECOAT results are relevant for 
15% of the product portfolio. Partner VAUDE ranks among Europe's leading outdoor brand names and 
employs over 500 people in Germany. Its product portfolio comprises full range of outdoor gear: 
backpacks, shoes, t ents, garments. The use of more sustainable and recyclable materials opens up 
commercial opportunities as being at the forefront there is a winning marketing argument. Goal is to 
integrate the technology as a start in a ‘coated backpack’ line, comprising ca 10.000 backpacks per year 
(average weight ca 1.5kg). This would be ideal to reach the larger public. Partner MBT , ca. 6000 
employees, is one of the largest manufacturing companies in Turkey. Mercedes -Benz Türk is the 
country’s leading bus and truck expor ter. Today 80 % of the buses produced by Mercedes -Benz Türk 
are exported to more than 70 countries, especially to Western Europe. DECOAT will bring MBT the 
important competitive and commercial advantage of recycling know-how and possibility for procurement 
of cheaper (secondary) raw materials. MBT has turnover of ca. €3.3 billion, the share of the busses in it 
is ca. €520million, the share of the trucks is ca. €870million.  
For group (ii), the wider European community of manufacturers and users of coated plastics and 
textiles, DECOAT will offer concrete examples that can be adopted to vastly extend the share of 
products (parts) that can be recycled in their own product portfolio. This will leverage the DECOAT 
impact as this wider community is large in EU: total plastics industry: ca €350 billion turnover (data from 
EUPC); textile & clothing sector: ca €170 billion turnover (data from EURATEX).   
Key DECOAT result: environmental, safety & economic assessment of triggerable material 
solutions ( KO6, KO7).   
For: manufacturers faced with need to separate complex products  
Impact: ECOMAT, IRES and OSM will be able to use the gained expertise for offering consultancy 
services. Using the DECOAT tool (see Task 6.5), industrial partners will be able to channel the imp act 
assessment of the products to their life cycle scenario and respective business models.  
DECOAT business opportunities and market creation potential will lead to job creation: DECOAT 
results are relevant for ca. 3.5 million tons of waste worldwide (see  section 2.1.1.3). As argued in part 
D2 of the PEDR, DECOAT is well -geared to reach ca. 280kton (8% share, which will bring important 
opportunities all along the value chain. For calculating the opportunities we refer to part D2 and we 
assume that 1 full time job corresponds to €350k. This leads to the opportunity of installing the DECOAT 
recycling equipment (optical detection, MW equipment, Creasolv system), which is estimated in total at 
€35million. Although this is a one -time opportunity, the related pos t-installation services, maintenance 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 28 of 124  
and upgrades are expected at 20% of the initial installation cost, leading to a continuing turnover of ca 
€7million annually or ca 20 jobs. Further we have the market of triggerable additives: €20 million per year 
or ca. 60 jobs; the recycling of the coated parts: €140million per year or ca. 400 jobs. In total this means 
DECOAT has the potential to directly create ca. 500 direct jobs.   
DECOAT developments will contribute to the competitiveness of the European manufactur ing industry, 
which is an important employer, for example: automotive sector: ca. 3 million manufacturing jobs (EC 
data); textile & clothing sector: 1.7 million jobs (EURATEX data). It is calculated in part D2 of the PEDR 
that DECOAT materials and process innovations will give a competitive edge to European 
companies active all along the coated textiles and plastics value chains that is relevant to a total 
turnover of ca. €1.7 billion, implying that DECOAT will help to secure ca 5.000 jobs.   
2.1.1.3 Demonstrate a potential reduction in landfill waste volume by > 50%  
DECOAT will lead to a decrease in landfilling by an estimated 75% as the largest fraction of coated 
parts (the bulk) will be re -used. Indeed, the coating itself does (in most applications) not relevantly 
participate to the volume. Nevertheless, to account for potential damage at the coating interface, we 
assume a 5% loss of the bulk volume. Depending on the type of recycling used in combination with the 
trigger, it might be possible to recycle the coating material. However, here we assume the coating itself 
is not recuperated, so 5% volume remains landfilled. One further element to take into account is that the 
recycling process of the bulk itself will not be perfect. A fair estimate is to assume 80% efficiency. So, ca. 
75% of the volume of the initial coated waste can be recycled, see also the concrete case study in section 
2.1.4.  
This reduction is relevant for in total almost 3.5 million tons of coated plastic from cars, electrical 
and electronic equipment and coated textiles. This number is calculated based on the following 
data and estimates57:  
• Automotive parts: ca. 2.1 million tons of coated plastic come from end -of-life vehicles (ELV) 
per year. Motivation: 27 million cars are discarded every year 58, at 225 kg plastic per car (15% of 
average total car weight 59) leads to ca. 6 million tons plastics ELV from cars of which ca. 35% is 
coated/ painted. As these coated plastics are part of the ASR of EoL vehicles, this fraction is mainly 
landfilled (see also section 1.4.2).   
• Heavy vehicles parts: ca. 800 ktons of coated plastics. Motivation: ca. 1 million heavy duty vehicles 
reach yearly the EoL stage in Europe60. Taking the average weight per vehicle (15 ton61) and 15% of 
plastics we have ca. 2250ktons plastic waste. We assume again that ca. 35% of these parts is coated/ 
painted.   
• Electronic goods: ca 200 ktons of painted plastic come from electronic goods ( (W)EEE = 
(waste) electrical and electronic equipment) per year. Motivation: ca. 3.45 million ton of WEEE is 
yearly collected (Eurostat 2015). On average, ca 20% is plastics62. Further, we assume that ca. 30% 
is coated/painted, which leads to ca 200ktons.  
• Coated textiles: ca 350 ktons are wasted per year that could be recycled using DECOAT solutions. 
Motivation: the total market for coated textiles is ca. 1 million ton / year63. The combined share of PU, 
acrylic and PVC (=DECOAT scope) is ca 70%. Furthermore, due to improved collection practices, 
we estimate tha t ca 50% of the products will be available for recycling (currently only 25% 64 but 
increasing trend), which leads to ca. 350 ktons.   
                                                           
57 The estimate of the ‘coated’ fraction for the various sources is based on the best available knowledge of the (end-user) partners of the 
DECOAT consortium  
58 Automotive Recycling. Devalued is now revalued’ Plastic Market watch. SPI (2016)  
59 ‘Automotive The world moves with plastics". Plastic Europe (2013)  
60 M. Saidani et al. ‘Heavy vehicles on the road towards the circular economy: Analysis and comparison with the automotive industry’ Vol 135 
108-122 (2018).   
61 ‘Research on the Weight of Buses and Touring Coaches’, see: https://www.iru.org/sites/default/files/2016-01/en-nea-bus-2007.pdf   
62 Seyring et al. (2015). Study on WEEE recovery targets, preparation for re-use targets and method for calculation of the recovery targets  
63 MarketsAndMarkets report (2017)  
64 http://www.foeeurope.org   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 29 of 124  
2.1.1.4  Reduction of the carbon footprint of the corresponding products by > 30% (based on a full Life 
Cycle Assessment).  
The actual carbon footprint, and other relevant environmental parameters, will be calculated during 
DECOAT via a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). The study will include all life cycle stages as represented 
in the figure below, impacts of each of them shall be considered during the assessment. At this moment, 
we estimate the potential of the proposed technologies for carbon footprint reduction. To do so , we 
consider the first use of virgin materials in an open loop product system, where no changes occur 
in the inherent properties of the recycled material. Here, the “business as usual” baseline 
scenario comprises the assumed current End -of-Life (EoL) treatment (landfill and incineration), 
and the DECOAT scenario comprises recycling of the bulk material from the p roducts in their 
EoL. This recycling would allow to receive the “emission credits” due to avoided emissions during the 
virgin bulk material production that the recycled material is intended to replace (avoided burden 
approach). These credits are deducted from the total impact of the product as a part of the EoL stage. In 
exchange, the impacts of the triggerable debonding process and the average composition of the coated 
parts to be recycled are also allocated to the product system.   
  
 
  
The emissions from logistics, use, andfill disposal and incineration are assumed to be equal for both EoL 
scenarios, and thus not included in the inventory for the current calculations. This and all other 
methodological choices will be further analysed and  evaluated in dedicated sensitivity analyses during 
the execution of the full LCA. Thus, the total impact can be expressed as follows:  
TOTAL = Bm + Cm + Bpr + Cpr + EoL, where  
EoLavoidedburden = Erecycling – Credits  
However, the credits shall be calculated based on the impact of the primary production of bulk material 
and recycling efficiency. The formula was used to derive the generalized calculations on the 
potential of DECOAT to reduce environmental impacts of prod uct systems, as well as a case 
study of a coated PVC product was made to validate the general approach and make it tangible. 
Tables below show the results, including further assumptions for the generalized calculations. Baseline 
scenario:  
Intermediate  Calculation  Generali sed: CO2eq  Example PVC  
waste  CO2eq  
calculation  assumptions  value  unit  value  unit  
Virgin bulk material  Bm  Bm = 0.8*B  Bm comprises 80% of 
the material impact  
 0,95  kg/kg  1,9  kgCO2/kg  
Material processing  Bpr  Bpr = 0.2*B  Bpr comprises 20% of 
the material impact  
 0  kg/kg  0,38  kgCO2/kg  
Coating material  Cm  Cm = 0.5*C  Cm comprises 50% of 
the coating impact  
 0,05  kg/kg  0,2  kgCO2/kg  
Coating processing  Cpr  Cpr = 0.5*C  Cpr comprises 50% of 
the coating impact  
 0  kg/kg  0,25  kgCO2/kg  
Total Baseline  T = 
Bm+Bpr+Cm+Cpr  
T=B+C     1  kg/kg  2,73  kgCO2/kg  
  
Ra 
w materials  
acquisition and  
processing for  
bulk material  
( 
Bm) and  
coating  
material (Cm) 
  
Manufacturing  
of the product  
( 
processing of  
the bulk  
material and  
the coating  
Bpr+Cpr)   
Logistics 
  
EoL treatment  
including  
disposal and/or  
recycling  
( 
Erecycling)  
with Credits  
acquisition)  
Use 
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 30 of 124  
DECOAT scenario:  
Intermediate  Calculation  Generalised: CO2eq   Example PVC  
 waste  CO2eq  
 calculation  assumptions   value  unit  value  unit  
Virgin bulk 
material  
Bm  Bm = 0.8*B     0,95  kg/kg  1,9  kgCO2/kg  
Material 
processing  
Bpr  Bpr = 0.2*B     0  kg/kg  0,38  kgCO2/kg  
Coating material  Cm  Cm = 0.5*C     0,05  kg/kg  0,2  kgCO2/kg  
Coating 
processing  
Cpr  Cpr = 0.5*C     0  kg/kg  0,25  kgCO2/kg  
DECOAT 
debonding  
(Erecycling)  
R  R = Cpr = 0.5*C     0  kg/kg  0,25  kgCO2/kg  
Bulk material 
recovering 
efficiency  
EffBm  EffBm      80  %  80  %  
 Coating material 
recovering 
efficiency  
EffCm  EffCm = 0  Pessimistic 
assumption, no 
coating material 
recovery  
 0  %  0  %  
Recovering bulk 
material (Credits)  
Bmrec =   
Bm*EffBm  
Bmrec =      
0.8*B*EffBm  
 0,76  kg/kg  1,52  kgCO2/kg  
Recovering 
coating material 
(Credits)  
Cmrec =   
Cm*EffCm  
Cmrec = 0      0  kg/kg  0  kgCO2/kg  
Total DECOAT  Trec =  
Bm+Bpr+Cm+Cpr + 
R – Bmrec - Cmrec  
Trec = B+1.5*C -    
EffBm*0,8*B   
 0,24  kg/kg  1,46  kgCO2/kg  
Environmental impact reduction in two scenarios:  
Intermediate  Calculation  Generalised: CO2eq  Example PVC  
waste  CO2eq  
 calculation  assumption  value  unit  value  unit  
Total Baseline  T  T=B+C     1  kg/kg  2,73  kgCO2/kg  
Total DECOAT  Trec  Trec = B+1.5*C - EffBm*0,8*B       0,24  kg/kg  1,46  kgCO2/kg  
Footprint reduction 
(ΔEOL)  
Tred = Trec – T  Tred = 0.5*C - 0.8*B*EffBm    -0,76  kg/kg  -1,27  kgCO2/kg  
DECOAT impact   
(relative reduction)  
Trel=-Tred/T  Trel=EffB*80%(B/T) – 50%(1-   
B/T)  
 76,0  %  46,5  %  
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 31 of 124  
On the generalized level, the relative reduction of 
environmental impacts due to DECOAT introduction can be 
expressed as a function of the bulk material recovery 
efficiency (recycling rate), and a contribution of bulk material 
to the total product’s environmental impact. The distribution 
of relative reduction values dependent on the two 
parameters is presented in the graph on the right.  
With the assumptions made about the contribution of the 
bulk material into the total environmental impact of the 
product (80%) it is necessary then to keep the recycling rate 
(efficiency of recycling) above 62.5%. However, for the 
target applications, the B/T ratio if not expected to in the 
lower ranges, and the recycling rate is expected to be 
designed above 95%. Thus, the products’ performance will 
realistically always be in area on right upper side of dashed 
line, i.e. we will comply with and even outperform this expected impact. Additional benefits that were 
not included would further reduce the environmental impact during waste  
handling i.e. the reduced emissions that result from not incinerating or landfilling the materials, and 
possible recycling of the coating material.  
Under current circumstances, the production of 1kg of coated PVC results in 2.73 kgCO2/kg virgin 
material. The DECOAT process would cut the carbon emission by 46%  (1.46 kgCO2/kg virgin 
material), assuming that the DECOAT process has a material recovery efficiency EffB of 80% (this reflects 
a 20% loss due to processing energy and lost base material during processing). This also means the 
DECOAT process would result in a 76% reduction in waste generation  (80% efficiency results in 
0.76 kg virgin material recovered per kg virgin material input into the system). These initial outcomes 
of the case study show that DECOAT expected impacts exceed the desired 30% reduction in 
carbon footprint and also the 50% reduction of landfilling (see section 2.1.3).   
  
2.1.2 Improving innovation capacity and market creating potential  
Innovation capacity comprises the internal ability to respond to external opportunities with an 
innovative solution that leads to profitable business . DECOAT claims to signi ficantly increase 
the innovation capacity in the coatings, adhesives and paintings sector and the related value 
chain (material suppliers, end users) by combining two external opportunities: (i) the global need 
for recyclable coated parts (= market pull) a nd (ii) the large(r) scale and low(er) cost availability 
of smart multifunctional additives such as nano - and microparticles (carbon -based among 
others) (= technology push). DECOAT developments and results aim at capitalising these challenges, 
both from pure technical standpoint as from supporting activities (standardisation, LCA, benchmarking) 
as described below.   
DECOAT will  boost the innovation capacity of the debonding technology providing partners 
(RESCOLL, DEVAN,  
CTECH, IRIS, MAIER)  by demonstrating  the advantages of their materials and processes for 
different use cases for VAUDE, PANASONIC, MBT and MAIER. A direct advantage for the end-users 
will be the reduced cost for sourcing material as the cost of recycled material (at ca. €500/ton, see section 
2.1.1.1) will be lower as virgin ones.   
An important aspect for the improved innovation capacity for these technology providers, mainly SMEs, 
is that the DECOAT partners with high visibility and brand ownership (VAUDE, PANASONIC and 
MBT) will support these technology providers in getting the DECOAT solutions into the market. Such 
flagship early adopters are important to realise the innovation potential (e.g . for market pull effect and 
‘enforcing’ their suppliers to use DECOAT technology, guarantee for re -use of recycled materials, 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 32 of 124  
marketing efforts) from which DECOAT will form the basis. The end use cases are summarised in the 
table below.  
The goal is that by the end of DECOAT exploitation agreements will be signed among DECOAT 
partners for the further development of the results. Given the expectation that full market readiness 
of the DECOAT developments will still take some extra investments, this will be i mportant to set the 
follow-up actions to get to a higher TRL level towards a successful market deployment of DECOAT 
results on medium to long term.  
 DECOAT use cases   
  Use case  Recycling drive & 
challenge  
Estimated impact  
VAUDE  
Water-tight bike bag  
  
Fabric material: PES, TPU 
coating  
Ca 28%-72% substrate-
coating(!)  
Weight fabric: ca 700g/m2 
Currently no solution to 
recycle these coated fabrics, 
also not of the production 
waste (bag produced in 
Germany).  
Case relevant for all PU 
coated fabrics (of VAUDE)  
Typical outdoor gear 
consumer is very 
environmentally 
minded. VAUDE 
wants recyclable 
products as a world 
first for its clients.   
VAUDE already has a  
strict policy on 
corporate social 
responsibility and  
also has its internal  
‘Green Shape  
Standard’65  
Quantities of a typical 
product line are ca. 
10.000 pieces/year, 
resulting in 
approximately 30t/year. 
DECOAT technology 
relevant for several 
product lines: bike bag, 
several backpacks, rain 
coats,…  
VAUDE manufactured in 
total over 2.5 million 
products in 2016, total 
turnover ca.  
€ 100 mio. DECOAT 
relevant on mid-term 
for ca 35% of turnover.  
PANASONIC -   
Switches & sockets  
  
PC, ABS and PC-ABS as 
substrate materials. Three 
types of ‘coatings’: (i) Foil 
Print with alu foil (ca 50µm); 
(ii) Chrome coating via 
dipping (primer of copper, 
chrome top layer); (iii) 
Painted layer, based on 
styrene-acrylic emulsion (ca 
15µm)  
PANASONIC wants to  
produce a ‘green 
line’ of products that 
are fully environ -
mentally friendly 
without 
compromising on 
the aesthetics.  
PANASONIC produces 
ca 60 tons of coated 
plastic switches, sockets 
and other coated 
electronics parts.  
DECOAT approach  
expected to be 
integrated in ca 80% of 
them within 5 years after 
project end  
MBT - Cockpit part  Substrate material is a 
polyurethane (PUR) foam.  
Coating is an ABS foil.  
ABS foil mechanical 
recycling and  PUR 
chemical recycling  
Both parts are 
currently not 
recyclable.   
Up to now, no 
regulation for ELV in 
case of buses and 
trucks. MBT wants to 
be pro-active and 
engage in increased 
recycling  
MBT manufactures 
yearly ca 4000 busses. 
Plastic parts make up ca 
15% of the weight. 
Expectation is to have at 
least 50% of coated 
parts using DECOAT 
solutions.   
                                                           
65 http://csr-report.vaude.com/gri-en/product/greenshape-concept.php   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 33 of 124  
MAIER – exterior 
automotive part: Rear 
door garnish  
  
Material: ABS  
Minimum-Maximum process 
temperature: 210-250ºC  
Size: 
900mmx200mmx50mm  
Total weight: 400 gr (2% 
coating) Coating thickness: 
ca. 50 µm vs thickness of 
the plastic 2 mm Coating: 
PUR (acrylate), 
primer+Colour+Clearcoat  
MAIER wants to 
validate a coating for 
automotive sector 
that can be easily 
debonded from the 
plastic substrate. 
This will  
make decorated 
components easier 
to recycle so the 
materials can be 
reused for the very 
same applications, 
which is currently 
impossible because 
even the smallest 
amount of impurities 
produce surface 
defects on 
aesthetical parts.  
For each part, expected 
sales are typically ca. 
200.000 pieces.   
Expectation: 3-4 parts 
can integrate DECOAT 
technology  
within 5 years after the 
project, corresponding 
turnover in the range of 
€ 5mio.   
Turnover of MAIER is 
expected to reach 
€385mio in 2018, a 
strong growth up from 
€296mio in 2016. On 
longer term, DECOAT 
results are relevant for 
up to 20% of MAIER 
turnover,  
corresponding to roughly 
€90100mio, taking into 
account the expected 
continued growth.  
MAIER – interior automotive Material: ABS/PC  
part: Fascia  Min. and max. process  
temperature: 210-250ºC 
Size: 230x280x80 mm  
Total weight: 200 gr (1,5% 
coating)  
Coating thickness: ca 30 
µm vs thickness of plastic 2 
mm Coating materials: 
thermoset PU (acrylates). 
One layer. Colour.  
  
The market creating potential of DECOAT stems from the systemic innovation of making coated 
textile and plastic parts recyclable.  This means novel markets for triggerable additives (for 
partners RESCOLL and DEVAN), for optical monitoring systems (IRIS) and for the recycling 
systems (CTECH). This implies that on medium to long term a new novel value chain will be created for 
recycling of coated parts, building on initial DECOAT developments.  
For realising the DECOAT impact, a 
crucial part is that waste streams 
with triggerable coatings have to be 
made available in suitable form and 
in sufficient amounts . There are two 
main inputs: production waste and EoL 
post-consumer waste. We have 3 
streams to consider: coated textiles, 
consumer electronics components and 
automotive (see table with overview).   
For production waste, there should 
be no issues: triggerable coated 
items should be collected 
separately, which is no problem as 
manufacturing compan ies have now 
already several separate waste types 
they collect. Logically, it will take 
some years before sufficient 
products with DECOAT -based 
technology reaches the EoL stage . 
The  
real strength of the DECOAT technologies is exactly that it is also suited for EoL because the triggerable 
coated waste can be detected and thus processed separately.   
Waste 
stream  
Production waste  EoL waste  
Coated 
textiles  
(roles of) fabrics , 
scraps → Directly 
processable  
Textile-based 
products,  → Need 
removal of 
accessories   
(buttons, zippers,…)   
Crucial: collection 
logistics  
Consumer  
electronics  
individual parts / 
halffinished products 
at OEM →Directly 
processable / some 
disassembly  
Full products  
→ Need shredding/ 
disassembly   
Already commonly 
collected  
Automotive 
parts  
individual parts at Tier 
1 →Directly 
processable  
Car parts & ASR  
→ Need disassembly  
Crucial: improve logistics 
for high(er) degree of 
disassembly of target 
valuable parts  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 34 of 124  
We illustrate the case of coated outdoor textile products. On short term, partner VAUDE will offer 
its clients the option to send back its EoL products  that include DECOAT technology. That way, 
items will be grouped together and can be recycled. On medium term, collectors of EoL textile (like group 
De Boer Recycling Group – ASG member) will have to install the optical detection equipment for 
triggerable coatings and thus separate this waste stream. Then, they can send it to recyclers (transitional 
phase) or recycle it themselves (longer term). This will require them to extend their current recycling 
equipment with equipment based on the DECOAT recycling plant.   
Also for the recycling of coated electronics parts, an extension of the current waste processing 
equipment to separate triggerable coatings and to channel that fraction to DECOAT recycling 
lines. This will be implemented by players like REMONDIS (member of DECOAT ASG). Full recyclability 
of its products will be a competitive advantage for PANASONIC.   
For the automotive parts, the situation is more complex and DECOAT has to rely on supporting 
developments in vehicle disassembly . Indeed, currently only a smal l fraction of the vehicles is 
dismantled, only hazardous components or very valuable ones. The rest is all together shredded and 
separated. Focus in that process is on the recycling of metals, the rest is called the ASR or automotive 
shredder residue (see also 1.4.2) and is a highly mixed stream, containing also (some) shredded coated 
scrap. To avoid low yield and need to separate shredded fractions of very mixed composition, our 
recycling technology should be fed with disassembled coated vehicle parts. Alt hough the latter is not 
evident at the moment, there are good foresights that this will be the case in the future. DECOAT will 
help partner MAIER to be prepared for this novel market situation. Furthermore, DECOAT will seek 
synergies with the project Multi Cycle, just approved in the SPIRE10 call, coordinated by IRIS and 
counting several partners in common, where similar challenges will be faced in terms of identifying and 
dismantling specific (in that case composite) parts prior to recycling. For support in this matter, we have 
included car dismantling company GBP in the ASG.  
Furthermore, an ongoing development is the robotic disassembly of cars driven by the need for 
a more thorough car disassembly , especially with the growing share of electrical vehicles 66. In fact, 
the fraction of metal is decreasing in cars, so there is a ne ed to recycle more of the other fractions to 
keep with the increasingly stringent ELV directives. The latter is often only feasible if the (valuable) parts 
are dismantled beforehand. Manual dismantling is not evident, therefore efforts are ongoing for 
robotisation, focus on removing electronics parts. Such logical development in sustainable manufacturing 
and production will support the acceptance of new processes that could be needed for DECOAT 
products’ EoL.   
A special case is formed by HDOR (Heavy Duty a nd Off Road vehicles), which includes busses 
and trucks. There, disassembly and remanufacture is already more installed than for standard (light) 
vehicles. For example, more than 93% of all the materials in a standard DAF truck can now be reused 
and the plastic parts of a DAF truck can easily be separated during dismantling76. DECOAT results 
will help partner MBT who is specialized in bus manufacturing, and via the mother company 
DAIMLER also in trucks, in working further in this direction.  
Europe has a leading position in high quality, engineered items like coated textiles and plastics. 
Next to the actual DECOAT partners, we want to make the wider European textiles, plastics and coating 
and adhesives industry aware of the novel possibilities offered by the triggerable coatings and debonding 
and helping them to make the transition. For easing this transition, DECOAT will develop the eco-design 
tool, which means that the service providing SME partners IRES and ECOMATTERS will get a chance 
to boost their activ ities. Consultancy will also be given by the DECOAT RTD partners (CTB - textiles, 
AIMPLAS –plastics & recycling sector, IVV, CTAG- automotive and NTUA – microcaps, nanomaterials). 
For example, AIMPLAS will be well-placed to offer engineering and consultancy to recycling companies 
wanting to adopt DECOAT technologies, via upgrading their current recycling facilities, or via building 
new ones. We will prepare the EU industry to switch to the next generation of coatings that can debond 
                                                           
66 
http://www.centreforsmart.co.uk/system/publications/attachments/000/000/183/original/Robotic_disassmbly_for_increased_recovery_of_
strategically_important_materials_fro m_electrical_vehicles_04102017.pdf (2017).   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 35 of 124  
on demand and help them to implement this all along the value chain. We will give the European 
textiles, plastics, coatings and recycling sectors an important and lasting competitive advantage 
via triggered debonding solutions.   
We will specifically engage in close collaboration  with other related projects (such as 
MULTICYCLE, see also above and Task 7.5) and look into common publications/events to  raise 
awareness towards relevant target groups on the emerging recycling possibilities for coated 
textiles and plastics.   
2.1.3 Environmental and social impact – policy framework  
Environmental impact of DECOAT  is tapping into the sustainable development policies of the EU, 
which is committed to a ‘high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment’ 
(Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union). As it has been shown in section 2.1.1.4, the suggestions of 
the DECOAT project can facilitate reduction of greenhouse gases emissions and amount of the 
generated waste to be landfilled or incinerated. The potential for waste generation reduction is ca.  
2.1 million tons for automotive parts, ca 200 kilotons for electronic goods, and ca 175 kilotons for 
coated textiles. That refers to including these amounts of the recycled material to the material recovery 
level of the waste management pyramid compared to the lower levels of energy recovery and landfilling. 
This is especially relevant in view of the current EU waste policies and regulations (see 2.1.4, including 
an overall trend for developing circularity and for landfill ing ban in some European countries (such as 
presumed by Austrian and German Landfilling Ordinances). Moreover, the estimated amounts of material 
recovery have a very large GHG emissions reduction potential. Under Article 191 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union, combating climate change is an explicit objective of EU 
environmental policy. Under this goal, EU is pursuing the targets of reducing GHG emissions by 40% by 
2030 and by 80% by 2050 67. This significant contribution to reducing globa l warming potential of 
manufacturing activities in Europe could be also complimented by the reduction of the GHG emissions 
coming from the incineration or landfilling of the coated parts and materials. Such for example, the 
avoided emissions from coated pl astics recycling (assuming PVC reduction potential for all coated 
plastics) could be estimated equal to 175*1.27=222tons CO2eq.  
A recent study conducted by Material Economics68, shows how circular business models, re-circulation 
of materials and greater ma terial efficiency of products are the keys to build a competitive industrial 
economy with zero net emissions in Europe. All these keys are being addressed by DECOAT. To achieve 
this objective, three types of circular strategies  associated to each other hav e been envisaged to 
reduce EU industrial emissions: (i) the reuse of different materials, (ii) the reduction of the amount of 
materials that are discarded in the manufacturing or construction process, (iii) the creation of new 
business models that reinvent the way we provide services and goods. In practice, these broad strategies 
translate into a wide range of measures: changes in product design and materials choice, improved 
technology, modernized value chains, etc. The benefits of circular approaches are strengthened by 
the fact that many of these measures are complementary and that many of these abatement 
opportunities are economically attractive. A more circular economy would have many other benefits 
as well, such as reduced geopolitical risks, local job creation, lower air pollution, and reduced water use.  
Social impact of DECOAT is based on the reduction of waste generation and of the system carbon 
emissions into human health and general well -being improvements. Basic regulations regarding H&S 
issues include arrangements for implementing the health and safety measures, identified by the risk 
assessment, set up emergency procedures, provide clear information and training to employees. 
Moreover, recycling initiatives and businesses based on technical solu tions and business models 
suggested by DECOAT will increase GDPs and create work places (respective to the EU policies in 
employment and labour market) and stimulating local economies (Small business Act). The suggested 
DECOAT recycling schemes have a high potential to tap into the EU Social Economy framework (Social 
Business Initiative, Social Innovation policy making, Single Markets Acts 1 and 2). Additionally, the GHG 
                                                           
67 https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2050_en  
68 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 36 of 124  
emissions reduction due to the implementation of DECOAT solutions has a potential to avoid otherwise 
necessary measures for climate change adaptation, including in local communities and groups with high 
vulnerability.  
DECOAT results will help to achieve several European policies, in waste reduction, climate change 
action and mitigation, and  social impact (see also section 2.1.1). DECOAT also fits in the Circular 
Economy Package consisting of an EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy that establishes a concrete 
and ambitious programme of action, with measures covering the whole cycle: from p roduction and 
consumption to waste management and the market for secondary raw materials. The DECOAT 
developments on automated sorting fit the EU strategy  for digitisation the manufacturing 
industry.  
2.1.4 External conditions influencing the expected impact  
Current low market demand for recycled plastics , which is limited to 6% of plastics demand in 
Europe is discouraging private investments in recycling capacities. In the EU, uptake of recycled 
plastics in new products is low and often remains limited t o low-value or niche applications. One of the 
reasons for the low use of recycled plastics is the misgivings of many product brands and manufacturers, 
who fear that recycled plastics will not meet their needs for a reliable, high -volume supply of materials 
with constant quality specifications. The European Commission will promote the development of 
international standards to boost industry confidence in the quality of recyclable or recycled 
plastics. It will also explore more targeted sectoral interventions in key sectors with high potential 
like packaging, construction and automotive.   
Legislation and regulations on recycling, re -use and waste form important drivers, potentially 
further enhanced by public procurement. There are several European directives on these issues that 
directly affect the production methods and materials choice of electronics consumer goods and cars. For 
the DECOAT sectors, following directives are crucial:   
• Waste Framework Directive (Directive 2008/98/EC) aims for a European recycling society with a high 
level of resource efficiency by increasing re -use and recycling of waste from households to a 
minimum of overall 50 % by weight by 2020.  
• Waste Directive – Electrical and Electronic Equipment  (Directive 2012/19/EU). Waste of electrical 
and electronic equipment (WEEE); eg computers, TV -sets and fridges is a fast growing waste 
streams in the EU, expected to grow to more than 12 million tonnes by 2020. Overall aim is to recycle 
at least 85% of electrical and electronics waste equipment by 2016 in EU.  
• European Directive 2005/64/EC on the type-approval of motor vehicles with regard to their reusability, 
recyclability and recoverability) state that 85 % of the mass of the vehicles included in the M1 and N1 
categories (passenger cars and pickup trucks) must be recyclable/reusable.  
• With respect to heavy duty vehicles, including busses and trucks, there are currently no End-of-life 
regulations that impose mandatory recycling and/or recovery targets76.  
These directives (or the lack of) pose challenges (and opportunities) for the automotive and consumer 
goods sector. The DECOAT developments will help PANASONIC, MBT and MAIER to use 
renewable materials in (parts of) their products, thus working towards the directives.  
The Circular Economy Action Plan 69 aims at improving the uptake of secondary raw materials . 
DECOAT exactly aims for this by overcoming existing barriers for coated plastics material . 
DECOAT goal is to enable recycling and thus re -use of raw ma terials used for making coated parts. 
Thus, DECOAT is in line with the 7th Environment Action Programme 86 and with the recently 
published ‘Roadmap to Resource efficient Europe 70’ which aims at promoting waste recycling and 
re-use. In the context of ongoing and upcoming evaluations of EU rules on construction products and on 
end-of-life vehicles, the EC will look into specific ways of promoting this. In the context of future work on 
                                                           
69 European Commission: Circular economy Action Plan – 
closing the loop 86 European Union: Seventh Environment 
Action Programme   
70 European Commission: Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe.   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 37 of 124  
the Packaging and Packaging Waste Directive, thought will also be given to using economic instruments 
to reward the use of recycled content in the packaging sector. Finally, the Commission will work on 
integrating recycled content in Green Public Procurement criteria (European Commission, 2018).  
Generally, these directives and other (national, regional) legislation can have a strong positive influence 
on market opportunities for use of recycling content. As an example that will be applied to other sectors: 
As a result of the implementation of the Plastic Bags Directive (Directive ( EU) 2015/720) some EU 
Member States have already started to set requirements for the uptake of recycled content in plastic 
carrier bags. For instance, the Spanish Royal Decree 293/2018 establishes that from 1 January 2020 
plastic carrier bags with a foil thickness larger than or equal to 50 µm shall be made from at least 50 % 
recycled plastic.  
This shows that DECOAT will place the participating companies in pole position for when the 
(legislation enforced) need for more use of recycled material becomes even higher.  
Evolving recycling landscape  
However large the need and however impressive the targets, today only 6% of new plastic materials 
used stems from recycling 71. Also within textile industry the use of recycled material is limited: for 
clothing only about 1% is closed loop, ca 12% cascade recycling 3. A great deal of work is underway to 
improve this (also via European projects), focussing on technical, economic and logistics aspects. As a 
result, we assume in the near future well -established networks throughout Europe where waste 
is collected and brought to local recycling facilities.  
Current recycling schemes for plastics from WEEE and ELV treatment rely mainly on post shredder 
treatment approaches since only large scale products are subjected to manua l dismantling due to 
economic reasons. Coated products of concern in the DECOAT project might be too small (e.g. switches) 
or too inaccessible (e.g. dashboards) for manual dismantling. Thus, identification of coated plastics in 
plastic shred by automated detection systems will be key for future access to coated plastics. DECOAT 
will therefore investigate optical identification tools for coated items to be implemented in 
sophisticated WEEE or ELV sorting technologies (WP3). This technology will ensure the fu ture 
access to EoL products containing DECOAT ready-to-recycling coating systems.   
Textiles and especially complex textiles as backpacks are not recovered in specific waste streams and 
currently end up in landfills (if allowed) or incineration plants. How ever, the high durability of such 
products qualifies them for an EoL treatment by re-use or repair companies. Such entities are intended 
to be future sources of complex EoL textile waste such as the ones addressed in the DECOAT framework 
and which will be investigated in detail.   
Reluctance of adopting recycled materials in the industry because of specific processing needs, 
lower performance and/or early negative experiences. Several companies did already first trials with 
recycled materials and experienced difficulties in their processing, e.g. on reproducible quality levels or 
in processing. These first negative experiences, even if not valid anymore with the current materi als, 
often remain and keep people biased towards further trials with recycled materials. The DECOAT 
technology providers are aware of this perception and counteracting on it will be a key part of the 
message brought during dissemination. One way to promote the DECOAT technology and the recycled 
material will be via the public ecodesign tool, see Task 7.5.  
Cost of novel solutions and cost for recycling process/recycled materials  
DECOAT solutions will mean that the coatings will be more expensive at initial production phase (ca 10-
15% as rough estimate). This is often rather small fraction of the total cost of the product, eg the bike 
bags. Further, gain will come because of less w aste, ability to reuse materials. Therefore, rely on the 
emerging new business models and schemes like EPR – Extended Producer Responsibility, increase 
cost for waste disposal, etc.  
General economic situation . The automotive and household appliances secto rs are cyclic sectors, 
implying that they strongly depend on the general economic situation. This can influence the sales 
foresights, especially for MAIER, MBT and PANASONIC. Currently, economic conditions in the US and 
Europe are high but in the future a higher market fragmentation for the industry due to the emerging 
                                                           
71 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/plastics-factsheet-industry_en.pdf   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 38 of 124  
economies is coming into play, making innovations even more important. Companies driven by 
innovation in the area of circular/recycling will beyond doubt benefit and maintain market share. 
Therefore the coated parts recycling solutions offered by DECOAT will help to become more 
resilient against economic fluctuations.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact  
(a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
To ensure successful exploitation of the DECO AT results, dissemination and exploitation activities 
will run in parallel with the project implementation. Integrity and consistency of all dissemination and 
exploitation efforts will be supervised by the Exploitation and Innovation Manager (OSM, see also section 
3.2.1.1b). The strategy for these activities is as follows:  
• Dissemination: all partners will collaborate in dissemination of results among the relevant industry 
sectors;  
• Exploitation: industrial take-up of the materials and related processes developed in DECOAT plays 
a central part: each partner will be involved in defining a preliminary business plan for its key 
exploitable results (KER).  
WP7 includes tasks dedicated to the dissemination and exploitation of the project achievements. 
The Plan for the  
Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (PEDR) will be completed at the start of the project (preliminary 
version of D7.2, see WP7), improve d and evaluated through the duration of the project. It will ensure 
that all project partners have a joint understanding of dissemination and exploitation and which 
knowledge protection measures will have to be taken.   
The draft PEDR  
The draft PEDR prese nted in this section will be further elaborated from the start of DECOAT and 
regularly assessed and adapted to the actual evolution of the project, see the related (incremental 
versions of) deliverables that will be delivered in WP7. We will also follow an d implement as much as 
possible the guidelines as recently published by the EC on social media: ‘ Social media guide for EU 
funded R&I projects’72.  
A. Target audience and message for a complex network of stakeholders.  
Disseminating project results at working groups and strategic committees beyond the consortium will 
take place. We will address the following groups of stakeholders to maximise the impact: 
plastic/textiles/coatings converters, end users, waste managers, recyclers (to generate a push/pull effect 
across the value chain) but also policy makers and the wide public (to promote the EoL products’ 
collection and promote innovative public procurement for DECOAT solutions).  
B. Channels for dissemination: from public online to interpersonal face-to-face 
interaction.  
Dissemination will be based on three major channels: (i) Online dissemination – website and social 
media, webinars, electronic newsletters, and digital press releases; (ii) Offline dissemination - classical 
vehicles of knowledge transfer like project workshops, publications, conferences and trade fairs, printed 
factsheets and flyers; (iii) personal direct dissemination  via the formal and informal (personal) 
networks of DECOAT partners. A list of key dissemination channels specific for each partner has 
been collected (see the partner descriptions in section 4.1).  
C. Preliminary overview of dissemination actions: continuous actions and dedicated 
campaigns.  
To disseminate as efficiently as possible (in terms of re ach and cost), two main pillars are defined: (i) 
continuous dissemination relying on existing events and means and (ii) organising dedicated DECOAT 
dissemination campaigns and events.   
(i) Continuous dissemination.   
                                                           
72 http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/grants_manual/amga/soc-med-guide_en.pdf  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 39 of 124  
Goal: Raise awareness and interest, ensure that ‘external stakeholders’ remain aware of DECOAT, keep 
them committed and ensure they can follow the project progress. Creating opportunities for direct 
interaction with interested stakeholders, regular newsletter for sharing project news and annou ncing 
conferences/events. Continuous activities also include: updating project information on the DECOAT 
website and on social media platforms, distributing leaflets,… Thereby using the materials and channels 
established in DC1 (see below).  
Audience: with  this regular stream we want to reach as wide a public as possible, including key 
stakeholders and also the wider public, depending on the content.   
Key message: broadcast of smaller news items, updates, events, … but also more extended updates on 
the progress of the value chain demonstration that will be implemented in DECOAT.  
Organisation: ISWA as WP7 leader will coordinate. Dissemination material will be collected from ALL 
PARTNERS and a schedule will be set-up to efficiently organise the dissemination, leveraging synergies 
and avoiding any possible overlaps.  
(ii) Dedicated DECOAT Dissemination Campaigns (DC)  
Goal: the Dissemination Campaigns (DC) will give a boost to DECOAT’s dissemination efforts at crucial 
times in the project schedule. The goal is not to depend on external events to be able to promote the 
project but to proactively choose our own stages and adequate timing. This requires the ability to garner 
the attention of and create impact with a significant number of relevant stakeholders, and the consortium 
is confident to be able to create this momentum for its campaigns given the ASG and the associations 
within or closely associated with the consortium and the extensive existing dissemination channels. 
Because the dedicated Dissemination Campaigns (DC) form the key element of the activities, they are 
described separately below.   
DC1 – create awareness. Goal: to create awareness for and stimulate interest in DECOAT based on 
the ambitious goals, innovative nature, commercial and sustainability potential, and the diversity and 
reputation of the consortium members.  Target audience: ASG, materials researchers, potential end -
users, the coating community, the general public, policy makers, in short: very wide and covering all 
actual and potential target audiences.   
Activities: the dissemination activities will start immediately through a press release linked to the kick off 
meeting. Further key activities are performed through the setting up of the DECOAT project website and 
having first dissemination material available (e.g. DECOAT leaflet -digital and print), all following a distinct 
project visual identity. Furthermore, the consortium will make extensive use of consortium partners’ 
dedicated professional social media channels, especially LinkedIn and Twitter.  When: by Month 5 - 
Responsible partner: ISWA and CTB (as coordinator)  
DC2 – call for collaboration. Goal: Call for collaboration to continue and expand on DECOAT results 
that need external partners or licensee to be exploited, i.e. results stemming from WP1-WP4 that can be 
applied outside  the use cases of WP5.  Target audience : ASG, innovators/entrepreneurs, large 
enterprises with own R&D, innovative SMEs, related current and future projects, coating/plastic 
converters, recyclers, waste management bodies, product designers and developers.  
Activities: public events organized by DECOAT, compilation of a white paper on DECOAT coating 
debonding solutions.  When: max 4 months after MS5 (M31 - end of main development work in WP1-4) 
is reached (M35) - Responsible partner: CTB DC3 – promotion of DECOAT results. Goal: Promotion 
of project results (focus on new solutions for recycling of coated parts) to pave the way for their further 
development, exploitation and commercialisation.   
Target audience : materials and coating communi ty, current and future research consortia, 
innovators/entrepreneurs, plastics converters, textile industry, end users, policy makers, standardisation 
bodies and regulators, general public.  
Activities: press releases, publication of peer -reviewed and other  articles with the goal of promoting 
project results with a clear focus on the use cases. Dissemination via selected conferences and own 
DECOAT events. Storytelling as format for presenting the prototype cases, highlighting the promising 
role of the novel DECOAT solutions. By specifically targeting end users, investors and policy makers, 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 40 of 124  
DC3 will pave the way for their adoption, commercialisation, and further development. When: by M46 - 
Responsible partner: ISWA  
An overview of dissemination actions in given in the table further below (pag 32). In section 4, for 
each partner its specific dissemination channels, like conferences, networks,… are listed.  
D. Exploitation activities: identification of results, outline of potential and steps to bring 
to market  
D1 Identification of key results  
The table below (pag. 34) shows the overview of the Key Exploitable Results integrated along 
our partner’s value chain and initial exploitation also in link with previously discussed 
dissemination steps. The results most suited for direct industrial exploitation are further elaborated 
in part D3 – Steps to market and preliminary business plans below.  D2 Outlining of the potential 
market  
Plastic Recycling and recycled plastic market: The global plastic recycling market has been gaining 
a steady momentum over the past few years due to the related directives and growing awareness about 
CO2 emissions and the need to reduce them. This, together with the overflowing state of landfills has 
also triggered an urgent need for recycling plastic instead of producing virgin material. The global plastic 
recycling market, valued at €25 bn in 2015 (of which only €2 Bn in EU73), is expected to reach a figure 
of €45 bn by 2024. During the forecast period of 2016 and 2024, the global market is expected to grow 
at a CAGR of 6.9%. Steady growth is expected in the global market due to ever more stringent laws and 
increasing environmental awareness, especially in EU. In 2012, out of the 25.2Mt of plastics collected 
for recycling, 6.6 Mt were recycled in EU and 8.9 Mt were incinerated. Incineration is massively used, 
with for example 38.8% of plastic packaging waste 74. Currently, according to the Plastic Recyclers 
Europe, 1000 companies are operating with 30.000 employees and a 3Mt installed capacity. Currently, 
the European installed pla stic recycling capacity is practically being fully used and mostly 
focused on packaging, indicating the huge potential for new investments for and adopting new 
(more) efficient technologies, provided they are proved economical viable.  
We calculate that DECOAT solutions address ca 3.5 million tons of coated waste material (see section 
2.1.1.3). For calculating our direct impact, we assume that we reach on longer term 8% of the potential 
market, i.e. ca 280ktons. This means that DECOAT can improve the competitiveness and innovation 
capacity for a market segment of ca €1.7billion  (assuming on average a commercial value of ca 
€6000/ton for these coated materials). For reaching a market share of 8%  we count on the market 
pulling effect of the ‘brand owners’ in DECOAT (Daimler group via MBT, PANASONIC and VAUDE) 
and on the ASG members , especially on the leveraging effect of the industrial associations and 
networks. These will help to motivate companies outside DECOAT to adopt our technology. A natural 
entry to the market will be addressing production waste. Nowadays at industrial level ca. 10-12% of 
the freshly produced coated parts are considered production waste because of the combination of 
complex coating/painting processes and very high -quality standards, especially in automotive, electric 
electronic and transport industry. These parts cannot be reused because they are ‘contaminated’ with 
the coating material. They can be sold at less than €100/ton for very low added value applications or,  
even worse, be discarded of for land-fill or thermal recovery. This is an important loss factor because the 
commercial value of the parts is estimated at ca. €6000/ton. Estimating the actual material value is 
difficult as the coated parts concerns both ex pensive engineered polymers as well as less valuable 
materials. On average, we estimate their value here at €2000/ton. Given the easy material availability 
(see also above) and an estimated recycling cost of ca. €500/ton (for logistics, triggered removal a nd 
recycling using CO2 assisted extrusion, see also section 1.1.1.1), DECOAT can offer a viable solution 
for recuperation of coated production waste delivering cost effective secondary materials.  
                                                           
73 Coltelli M.B., Aglietto M., Riutilizzo dei materiali polimeri, Edizioni Nuova Cultura, 2015   
74 Plastics Europe, association of plastics manufacturers : Plastics, the facts 2017  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 41 of 124  
DECOAT will create a market need for the triggerable additives. Starting again from the 280ktons of 
coated waste material, and assuming that on average a coating or primer layer represents 3% of the 
total part weight and that we need to add 5% of triggerable additives, we calculate a need for 420tons of 
additives per year in Europe. At an average cost of ca. €50/kg, this means a DECOAT triggerable 
additives market of over €20 million annually, or ca. 60 jobs.   
Implementing the DECOAT technology will significantly boost the recycling sector : if we consider 
again the recycling cost of €500/ton, this corresponds to ca €140million extra annual turnover, or ca 
400 jobs, created by enabling the recycling of these (280kton of) coated parts.   
To realise this, recycling lines will need to integrate (or be updated in case of existing ones) with 
the optical detection technology (estimated at ca €150k/unit by IRIS), the MW technology 
(estimated at €70k/unit by CTECH) and/or the Creasolv technology (estimated at ca. €2000k/unit 
by IVV) . Assuming a typical recycling line has a c apacity of 5kton/year, approximately 60 lines are 
required to process the target material of 280kton. All lines will need the optical detection system, leading 
to a market of €9million (60 x 150k€). We assume that 30% will use ‘standard ovens’ (no direct DECOAT 
benefit), but 50% of the lines will install MW or other heating equipment, so a market of €2.1million (30 x 
€70k) and roughly 20% a Creasolv system, leading to €24million (12 x €2000k). All this sums up to a 
one-time market of ca. €35million , which will create a recurrent annual turnover of ca €7million 
(20%) thanks to related services (consulting, maintenance, updating).  
SWOT analysis for DECOAT . Relative competitive strengths and weaknesses for the DECOAT 
applications have been analysed according t o a preliminary SWOT Analysis that will be further 
elaborated and finalised within DECOAT.   
Strengths  
Novel set of triggerable techniques for debonding  
Unique mix of interdisciplinary skills and expertise  
Strong industrial participation, including R&D 
driven SMEs  
Weaknesses  
Cost of coating will increase → need to offset this 
by focussing on total cost (and potentially into new 
business models) for commercialisation  
Opportunities  
Answer the unmet demand for recycling of coated 
parts  
Grab potential of techniques that have proven 
merits for other applicati ons, e.g. microwave 
additives   
Contribution to EC regulations concerning Plastics 
Strategy DECOAT solutions are transferable to 
other applications, e.g. in construction, composites, 
furniture, also for enabling repair  
Threats  
A systemic approach is needed, might be difficult to 
introduce the novel concepts → counterbalanced by 
the strong pressure to recycle plastics, see e.g. the 
EC initiatives  
Low virgin material prices, depending on oil price → 
on longer term continuing low oil prices are highly 
unlikely  
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 42 of 124  
Table: overview of planned dissemination activities and link with key dissemination elements: dissemination campaigns “DCN” 
(DC1, DC2 and DC3), continuous communication (“Cont.”) and Advisory & Support Group (“ASG”).  
Activity  Goal  Concrete action  Lead /  
partners  
Timing  Target 
group  
Expected impact  
Website  Regular updates, 
news section, 
partner info, event 
listing, etc.  
Design and formulate contents, keep up 
to date  
ISWA, 
CTB  
Operationa 
l by M4, 
cont.  
All  
stakehold 
ers  
Central repository of 
project information; 
communication materials 
direct back to here to 
achieve continuous 
engagement.  
Workshop and 
webinars to 
selected 
stakeholder 
groups  
Minimum of 6 
workshops to 3 types 
of audiences in 3 
regions, with 15-30 
participants. At least 
4 webinars with 25 
participants each.   
Identification and acquisition of 
audiences, creation of workshop and 
webinar contents based on the needs of 
different target groups, delivery of 
workshops. Selection of most suitable 
speakers from among the consortium, 
market to relevant potential audiences, 
deliver to as many participants as 
possible; post-event distribution, make 
available on website  
ISWA, all 
but  
primarily  
RTDs &  
industrial  
DC2 & 3  All  
stakehold 
ers  
Boost for exploitation as 
these are very specifically 
targeted to audiences 
known to take a strong 
interest in the project. Also 
feedback for project to 
improve its processes and 
dissemination. Cost-
effective in-depth  
dissemination of project 
results to diverse 
stakeholder groups.  
Final public 
event  
One event, at least 
75 participants  
Organisation of professional high-level 1-
day conference on the novel DECOAT 
debonding solutions and materials  
ISWA,  
NTUA, all 
partners  
DC3  Internatio 
nal 
highlevel 
attendee 
s   
Multiple key contacts and 
avenues for post-project 
exploitation and uptake.  
Dissemination 
of public 
deliverables  
As appropriate, i.e. 
linked to workplan 
deliverables  
Creation of reports or other documents or 
actions as required by the deliverables  
Led by the partner in charge of meeting 
the respective deliverable  
ISWA, 
all 
partners, 
as per 
the 
workplan  
DC1, 2 & 3  Mainly 
research 
/ project  
communi 
ty, ASG  
Engage research 
community and provide 
evidence of the potential 
and opportunity connected 
with  
DECOAT  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 43 of 124  
Flyers, 
brochures, 
factsheets, 
white papers, 
etc. - print 
and digital  
Public dissemination, 
tailored to specific 
groups such as 
scientific, policy 
makers, etc. 2,500 
prints to be 
distributed.  
Creation of visually attractive and 
professionally written documents.  
ISWA, 
CTB, all 
partners  
Flyer by 
M5, others 
based on 
developme 
nts in DC 1  
& 2  
All  
stakehold 
ers, ASG  
Easy-to-grasp general or 
condensed specific 
information to raise 
awareness, stimulate 
interest, and get a general 
audience to engage with 
the project   
Social media,  
e.g. YouTube,  
Twitter,  
LinkedIn,  
ResearchGate  
Regular posts 
(monthly); targeting 
>5,000 followers  
Regular posts via all available channels; 
engagement and interaction with 
followers and readers.  
ISWA, 
CTB, all 
partners  
Cont.  All  
stakehold 
ers  
Initial awareness raising, 
broad but 'superficial' 
network, spreading news 
widely quickly, reinforcing 
all public dissemination 
activities.  
Coverage in 
mainstream 
media  
At least 3; this can 
be newspapers, 
radio shows, 
science-focussed 
TV shows.  
Liaison with media outlets and 
submission of material to them, e.g. in 
the form of articles, interviews, videos 
scripts, in-person appearances  
ISWA, all 
partners  
DC 3  General 
public  
Create awareness among 
the general public and 
stimulate interest in th e 
sustainability potential of 
recycling coated parts.  
Articles in 
peerreviewed 
journals and 
magazines  
minimum of 5  Liaison with the most relevant media. 
Drafting and submission of 
professional, ready -for-submission, 
scientific articles.  
RTDs, 
ISWA  
DC2 & 3  Scientific 
audience  
Disseminate project results 
to potential adopters for 
exploitation in future 
research.  
Press releases  Every 6-12 months. 
Distributed across 
the media channels 
of all partners.  
Write informative and well -edited 
document with links to relevant 
websites; distribute to all accessible 
media networks through the partners 
and via other communication channels, 
e.g. website  
ISWA, 
CTB, all 
partners  
Cont., but 
especially  
DC2 & 3  
All  
stakehold 
ers  
Key for dissemination 
through 'traditional' media 
outlets.  
International 
trade fairs and 
conferences  
At least 1 trade fair 
and 3 conferences 
per year, including 
presentations, 
exhibition, 
sponsorship /media 
partnerships  
Keep track of all relevant events, 
prioritise among them and coordinate 
partners' attendance; arrange for 
exhibitions and/or sponsorships where 
feasible and relevant, and push for 
speaking contributions.  
Coordinate with other initiatives/projects   
ISWA, all 
partners  
DC2 & 3  Scientific, 
business, 
industry 
stakehold 
ers  
Meeting and presenting to 
the most relevant 
exploitation target gro ups 
for a direct innovation and 
knowledge transfer   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 44 of 124  
Outreach to  
local 
communities, 
schools, and 
universities  
At least 3 information 
events or 
opportunities to 
share project 
information, targeting 
100 students, 
citizens, or pupils.  
Connect with relevant organisations 
such as schools, universities, consumer 
or citizen organisations, NGOs, public 
events; provide details about project, 
suggest talks and information that could 
be disseminated to respective 
audiences.  
ISWA, all 
partners  
DC2 & 3  General 
public  
Create awareness 
among the general 
public and stimulate 
interest in the 
sustainability and 
recycling of coatings.  
Leverage 
existing 
channels: 
memberships, 
company 
newsletters, 
etc.  
Several times/year  Assist partners with disseminating 
project information among their 
networks; potentially translation of 
materials into languages other than 
English; identify key networks into which 
to disseminate and organise input of 
project information with the respective 
consortium partner associated to the 
network.  
ISWA, all 
partners  
Cont.  All  
stakehold 
ers  
Mobilising existing 
networks to create visibility 
for DECOAT, disseminate 
to organisations already 
working with our partners 
and likely to have 
matching interests, 
exploitation potential within 
partners’ peer groups.  
  
Table: overview of Key Exploitable Results.  
Description of   
Exploitable  
Result  
Main  
Partner(s)  
Our specific improvement vs 
the current status  
Exploitation: what is the (market) need / 
business opportunity it responds to ?   
Which strategy to follow ?  
Potential users (outside 
consortium) and timing  
Activities to reach 
users – link to 
DECOAT 
dissemination actions  
Triggerable 
debonding 
system for 
removal of 
coatings from 
textile and 
plastic 
substrates  
CTB,  
AIMPLAS,  
DEVAN  
Currently there exist no 
practical technologies for 
removal of coating, only 
limitedly via chemical 
dissolving. Targeted 
release of coating via a 
trigger in an economic and 
environmental way  
No current method to recuperate coated 
textiles For first time enable the recycling 
of coated textiles  
Offer technology via licensing  
(Large) companies specialised 
in coating and coating 
formulation producers (for 
substrates outside scope of 
DEVAN)  
Within 1st year after DECOAT 
ending  
DC2 – find partners 
for licensing  
Present at coating 
fairs and 
conferences  
Recycling 
pilot line for 
the triggered 
removal of 
coatings  
AIMPLAS,  
CTECH,  
IVV  
Selection of components to 
increase the efficiency, 
speed and quality of the 
plastic separation.  
Knowledge on plastic 
Use of MW technology for recycling of 
coated parts  
Generate corresponding technical 
assistance and technological transfer to 
interested parties.   
Recycling companies wanting 
to extend th eir capabilities to 
also  
recycle coated parts  
During DC3 event, a 
visit to the recycling 
line will be planned 
in  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 45 of 124  
recycling & pilot plant 
elements optimization.  
Commercial agreements. Intellectual 
property.  
Technology transfer  
Materials needed for the triggered debonding:     
• Thermo- NTUA,  A variety of core-shell polymer 
responsive  DEVAN  nanoparticles can be 
found in core-shell  literature.   
nanostructure Use in waterborne formulations d co -
polymers for textile industry.  
Function under specific 
stimulus (temperature).  
Novel debonding technologies for the 
removal of coatings over plastics and 
textiles will be developed with the use of 
nanostructured copolymers, functioning 
under thermal triggers. Core-shell co-
polymers will be combined with dyes to 
enable “smart sorting” in the recycling 
industry.   
Expected sales price: €40-50/kg  
Possible Patent is foreseen. 
Licensing or, if strong enough IP,  
potential for start up creation  
Coating (ingredient) producers  
Extended use: Use as drug 
delivery systems (medicine 
sector); Use also in 
environmental clean up  
Market ready ca 5 years after  
DECOAT.  Scientific 
conferences and 
publications  
Presentations at 
coating and paint 
conferences Interact 
with via ASG 
member ‘European  
Coatings’ Journal   
• Super  NTUA  A variety of core-
shell polymer Absorbent 
 nanoparticles can be found in  
 Polymers  literature. Commercial available,  
but no structured. Size of 
micrometers.   
• Use in waterborne formulations (steam 
and  
Novel debonding technologies for the 
removal of coatings over plastics and 
textiles will be developed with the use of 
SAPs, which will operate under heat 
and steam triggers, as well as in 
selective solvents. Recycling industry 
will benefit since new processes with 
smart separation techniques will be 
implemented.  
Coating (ingredient) producers 
Extended use: SAPs can be 
also used in other sectors 
such as agriculture, personal 
intensive care costumer 
goods, waste water treatment, 
medicine for drug-delivery 
systems, sealants.  
 
  selective solvents).  
• Nanostructured  
Low polydispersity index  
Possible Patent is foreseen. Licensing.  Market ready within 2-3 years 
after  
DECOAT  
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 46 of 124  
• MW& Rf 
assisted 
hybrid 
carbonbased 
nanomaterials  
NTUA,  
CTECH  
Heating in the research of 
carbonbased materials has 
been mainly limited to liquid 
solutions. Microwave 
heating of solid state 
carbon-based materials and 
especially CNTs, has 
distinct merits, but they 
have scarcely been 
reported (T. Kim, et al, 
2014).  
Hybrid CNTs will be 
synthesised either grown on 
SiO2 nanoparticles or they 
will be decorated with metal 
oxide nanoparticles to 
enhance the inductive heat 
due to MW irradiation.  
CNTs are very strong mechanically 
and thermally, recycling should not 
affect their properties. Hybrid CNTs will 
have a competitive advantage in 
comparison to current commercial 
ones due to their multifunctionality. 
Possible selling price €50/kg (as hybrid 
materials). Establishment of spin-off 
company for the commercial 
exploitation of the hybrid materials. 
MW equipment: licensing to equipment 
manufacturers, equipment leasing to 
recycling companies. Expected cost 
per system depending on capacity – 
estimated at average of €70k/system.  
Targeted users:   
Hybrid CNTs: the recycling 
industry, also composites 
and coatings se ctor. MW 
equipment: recyclers  
Hybrid CNTs market ready 
within 2-3 years after 
DECOAT  
MW equipment market ready 
by end of the project  
Hybrid CNT: 
scientific 
conferences and 
publications  
MW equipment: 
fairs and industry 
events Present to 
networks 
concerned with 
waste and 
recycling, like 
WRAP in UK.  
Debondable 
adhesives and 
primers  
RESCOLL  Limited commercial 
products. No commercial 
primer available for 
debonding.  
Development of debonding 
primers and adhesives with 
processing and debonding 
capabilities (thermal 
triggering) adapted to the 
use cases.  
New bonding solutions for recycling, 
maintenance and upgrade of bonded 
products. Improvement of disassembly 
and sorting of multimaterial 
assemblies.  
Sales of the adhesives and primers 
formulations  
Automotive sector (OEM and 
TIER1), consumer goods, also 
aerospace and composite 
sector   
Ca 5 years after DECOAT as 
the durability of the 
debondable system must be 
proven before product launch  
Attendance to fairs 
on bonding / 
coatings. Webinars 
on debonding. 
Commercial 
brochures and 
online information 
(webpage/blog 
articles).   
Production for new 
users  
(prospection work)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 47 of 124  
Monitoring 
systems for 
optimal  
DECOAT  
materials 
processing and 
end of life 
sorting and 
recycling  
IRIS  Generic sorting systems 
using a number of 
techniques exist but they 
are not adjusted to 
DECOAT materials which 
are new. Looking at the 
most  
versatile/performant/cost 
effective combination of 
techniques, we will design 
and deliver optical systems 
that allow optimising 
DECOAT handling 
processes  
throughout its life cycle  
Ability to actually identify and recycle 
the new material. Availability of 
secondary raw materials. Green image 
of the value chain. Quality control for 
the debonding / coating recycling.  
Sales of monitoring and sorting 
systems. Cost: will depend from case 
to case. Rough estimate of on average 
150k€ (including the chemometrics 
model)  
Recyclers of waste streams 
When the materials and 
recycling lines are becoming 
available on the market, IRIS 
would need in the range of 1 
year to provide a system for 
a larger plant  
Demonstration 
events at the pilot 
plant of  
AIMPLAS or IVV 
will help as it will be 
a practical 
showcase of the 
systems to engage 
potential new end 
users, eg during 
DC3 event  
Novel  
application of the  
CreaSolv®  
Process  
IVV  Dissolution and recovery of 
thermoplastics from 
composites and plastic 
mixtures. Application to 
coated textiles and special 
equipment in ELV and 
WEEE  
Process might enable recovery of 
pure fibre polymers from post-
consumer textile waste; Process 
might increase the share of target 
polymers of WEEE recyclers 
licence the process  
Chemical engineering 
companies will build 
equipment, recyclers will run 
novel treatment plants  
Market uptake after further 
upscale within 3-4 years  
 
Recyclable 
coated parts: 
textiles for 
outdoor use; 
consumer  
electronics; 
structural 
automotive parts  
VAUDE,  
PANASONI 
C,  
MBT  
Recycling of coated  
textiles/plastic parts is so far 
not possible/ viable.   
First time a workable, cost 
competitive solution.   
Circularity on coated textiles within our 
outdoor textile industry.  
Promote the novel DECOAT solutions  
throughout our supplier chain and 
stimulate/force them to adopt the novel 
technologies (market pull strategy).  
End user clients – target 
group of highly 
environmentally concerned 
people, eg LOHAS75  
End-user suppliers: textile and 
plastic finishing and coating 
companies, worldwide  
Follow up project to bring to 
sufficient high TRL - within 2-3 
yrs after  
DECOAT  
Use of press 
releases at DC1 
and DC3 to 
communicate to 
general public and 
the   
                                                           
75 LOHAS = Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability, see e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LOHAS   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 48 of 124  
Recyclable 
automotive 
aesthetic 
components  
MAIER  A high percent of the 
aesthetic components of 
the vehicles are coated. 
There is no cost effective 
debonding process that 
could bring good quality 
recycled material for 
manufacturing aesthetic 
components, because the 
smallest impurities produce 
surface defects on 
aesthetic parts.   
MAIER will validate a coating that can 
be easily debonded from the substrate. 
This will make decorated components 
easier to recycle so the materials can 
be reused for the very same 
applications, which is currently 
impossible.  Carmakers strive to 
develop circular economy model. 
MAIER will increase its market share by 
offering aesthetical finishes that can be 
recycled.  
Sales of the coated parts.   
Most of the carmakers 
established in Europe are 
clients, so potentially every 
automotive OEM is a 
customer. Sales: As soon as 
the DECOAT technology is 
ready to be industrialized (will 
require high TRL project – eg 
type FTI).  
  
Participation in fair,  
promotion of 
DECOAT  
results during visit 
to clients  
Ecodesign tool  
for opportunities 
identification and 
benefits 
assessment of 
recyclable 
coatings (based 
on LCA, LCC 
and safety 
aspects)  
ECOMAT, 
IRES  
Currently the existing eco-
design tools do not cover 
the applications to be 
considered within the 
project. The DECOAT tool 
will allow to map the main 
impact hot spots of coating 
materials applied to a 
‘product’ (i.e. coating & 
substrate) and will be able 
to identify the opportunities 
and benefits of 
implementing the  
DECOAT debonding 
technology.  
The favourable results of the full 
assessments could be used by 
manufacturers to proceed with green 
marketing and communication 
strategies, as well as relevant 
certification and labelling of their 
products, leading to increased market 
shares due to better environmental 
performance. Release (basic version 
of) the tool in public domain, free to use 
by all but offer (paid) technical 
consultancy to use the (extended) tool 
optimally  
Major manufacturers in 
automotive plastics, coated 
fabrics and coated electronics 
sectors.  
Within 3-5 years after 
DECOAT  
Extend to domains outside 
DECOAT   
Within >5yrs after DECOAT  
Dissemination of the tool use 
among the manufacturers has 
a high potential to facilitate the 
use of the  
DECOAT solutions in their 
practices.  
The open version of 
the tool will be 
available for free 
use on DECOAT 
website. 
Communication of 
the tool will be 
implemented via 
main channels of 
the  
DECOAT partners, 
including 
newsletters, 
publications, fairs 
and conferences.   
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 49 of 124  
D3 Steps to market and preliminary business plans  
  
The DECOAT industrial partners, whose foreground should ultimately lead to 
industrialisation/commercialisation, have carried out preliminary business plan canvassing from 
which a compound brief is outlined below.  This is based on the market creating potent ial (section 
2.1.1.2), the available amounts of coated waste (section 2.1.1.3) and the outline of the market potential 
(part D2 of the PEDR) and taking into account the improved innovation capacity (see section 2.1.2).  
  
DECOAT BUSINESS CANVAS  
Vision  
Provide sustainable solution 
for introducing  coated  parts 
 into circular economy.  
Competitive advantage  
Novel smart polymer material systems for 
debonding of coatings, applicable to the 
main industries - the respective recycling 
method and the related processing.  
Target market  
Coated  materials 
 industries that are 
impossible to recycle up 
to now  
Problem: (multi -layered) 
coated parts not recyclable 
because of permanent 
bonding  
Solution: Create triggered 
debonding systems for 
coated parts, the linked 
recycling process and the 
corresponding circular 
economy roadmap.  
Marketing activities  
Workshops with Industry Engineers and 
Technicians in order to adopt DECOAT 
materials and processes Participation in 
exhibitions and events with booth and 
presentations  
Market pull by ‘big brands’ & technology push 
by innovative R&D (SME) companies  
Mass marketing to the general public to act 
as leverage for industry to adopt DECOAT 
solutions  
Video production, use of social media,  
create public awareness  
Sales channels  
Already established 
partners’ network in their 
countries and  
across EU  
Industrial exhibitions  
Direct  use  from  Industrial  
partners  
Licensing agreements  
Business model  
Materials: Direct use by the  
Industrial partners;   
Processes: licencing 
agreements  
with related industries  
Equipment: direct sales of 
optical monitoring and 
recycling equipment  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 50 of 124  
Budget and funding:  
Financial summary:  
The initial target will be to 
license the DECOAT 
recycling process know -how 
to recyclers and to sell the 
DECOAT recycling 
technology.   
Funding required:   
Further development costs 
need to be covered (eg via 
H2020).   
Further investments:  
Needed to increase the TRL 
of DECOAT technology to 
market readiness, via 
combination of public and 
private funding   
Novel market creation for DECOAT 
outcome   
   
Revenue channels   
(after 7yrs)  
Recycling activities of 
coated parts (€140mio/yr)  
Triggerable additives 
sales: microcaps, carbon-
based nanomaterials,.. 
(€20mio /yr) Recycling 
equipment sales: 
advanced optical 
monitoring and sorting; 
MW oven,  
Creasolv systems  
(€35mio total ) 
Recycling 
Equipment 
servicing: 
maintenance, 
technical 
consultancy  
(€7mio/yr)  
E. Training development  
Audio-visual material will be prepared from the development work and demonstration activities. The 
material will be used to train personnel from the company partners and public material will be put online 
(interactive way) to improve skills and competences of persons working in (mainly) the plastics, textiles 
and recycling industry. Workshops hosted at the pilot plant set ups at AIMPLAS and IVV, among others, 
will be organized to promote DECOAT foreground. The workshops will act as multipliers of dissemination 
efforts.  
F. Standardisation and Regulatory requirements  
Participating in standardisation activities will enable DECOAT to: (i) gain intelligence on standards in 
areas touched by DECOAT, e.g. recycling, sustainability, carbon footprinting, end -of-life and safety; (ii) 
contribute to the development of new standards and ensure that specific needs are taken into account; 
(iii) establish contacts with other stakeholders, experts and regulators at national, European (CEN) and 
worldwide (ISO) levels. See also Task 7.4. G. Evaluation of the PEDR  
The plan will also envisage ways of measuring the dissemination and exploitation efforts and its 
impact on DECOAT partners and the stakeholder community. We will continuously pay attention to 
this but also do explicit ev aluations before starting the DC2 and DC3 action so that the PEDR can still 
be adapted for the final DECOAT part, see WP7 (Task 7.1).  
Management of research data  
Data and Knowledge produced during the DECOAT project will be handled within the tasks of the Data 
Management Plan. DECOAT will also join the Open Data Pilot. A data repository will be created in order 
to store raw data, results, reports and deliverables produced during the project. During the early stages 
of the project, partner IRES will discuss with partners and take a decision about the accessibility of the 
data. A justified decision on which simulated and experimental data will be confidential and which will be 
public will be made. As Data Repository, one of the European Open Access is foreseen.   
Raw data generated by instruments during experiments will be open and shared with the public. 
Confidential and sensitive data related with industrial processes or products will be restricted and shared 
only among the Consortium partners. In matters o f reusability, not sensitive or raw data will be shared 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
Recycling activities 
Triggerable Additives 
Recycling equipment 
Recycling Equipment servicing 
Years after DECOAT end 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 51 of 124  
among the research community through existing web Data Repositories such as the UCI repository 76, 
which is widely used for Materials Data. Access rights and intellectual property will be managed 
according to the grant agreement and the consortium agreement. The kinds of data generated by the 
project are described in the following table.  
Research Data produced    Accessibility  Data Exploitation, Accessibility and 
Reusability  
Experimental Procedures   Public  Reports, publications  
Experimental Data   Consortium  Storage and preservation in data repositories  
Data  for  Economic  
Environmental Impact  
and  Public or Consortium  Storage and preservation in data repositories 
and possibly public or private reports  
Sensitive Industrial Data   Consortium  Storage and preservation in data repository 
(private)  
In terms of Data Exploitation and Reusability, partners working towards publishing their work (articles, 
monographs, conferences etc., preferably in high impact journals) are committed to comply with the 
“Open Access” guideline of the DECOAT project. More specifically, published work should be easy to 
access, online readable, easy to download and print. This can be done by sharing the above mentioned 
publications into online archives and providing open access to them such as Open Access Infrastructure 
for R esearch in Europe (OpenAIRE) and the Directory of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR). 
Knowledge management and IP protection  
Knowledge management to ensure open access. DECOAT project is focused on ‘research & 
innovation’ (this being a RIA) so a fair num ber of scientific articles is expected (see Table pag 32). For 
these publications, publishable results will follow an open-access model in order to optimize the impact 
of publicly funded scientific research, both at European level and at Member State level . For what 
concerns other dissemination activities (Website, Workshops, Conferences and Fairs) DECOAT is fully 
committed to ensure full dissemination and high transparency of the data and results to ensure 
“public access”  to project results. Only limitatio n is that it should be in line with the IPR 
management. We will make for example large parts of the environmental and economic evaluation (from 
WP6) publicly available. The strategy is clearly to provide as much as possible the knowledge generated 
by DECOAT to relevant communities for free, e.g. via partner ISWA and via ASG partners (like EUPC, 
EuMaT, European Coatings) as this will be beneficial for further collaboration and for levering the 
DECOAT impact.  
IPR Management during DECOAT. Management of knowl edge, intellectual property and of other 
innovation related activities involves the recognition of project results/innovations that may have 
commercial value, the protection of novel materials and processes developed in DECOAT and the 
determination of owne rship of technologies and resolution of ownership conflicts. For the success of 
DECOAT all project partners agree on explicit rules concerning IP ownership, access rights to any 
Background and Foreground IP for the execution of the project and the protection of intellectual property 
rights (IPRs) and confidential information before the project starts. Such issues will be addressed in the 
Consortium Agreement that will be developed in line with the Grant Agreement (cf. H2020 General model 
grant agreement).   
Consortium Agreement. The purpose of the Consortium Agreement is to establish a legal framework 
for DECOAT in order to minimize any internal issues during the DECOAT implementation. It will be based 
on the DESCA 2020 Model Consortium Agreement regulating albeit general definitions and purpose 
through descriptions responsibilities of participating parties, project entry, duration and project 
termination, as well as mutual liabilities.   
Ensuring freedom to operate . For the preparation of the DECOAT proposal a patent analysis was 
made, see section 1.4.2. This showed that for implementing DECOAT there is freedom -to-operate. 
During DECOAT implementation, the external IP situation will be monitored as part of the explo itation 
                                                           
76 See: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.html   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 52 of 124  
activities (see Task 7.2). If forced to by the appearance of an external patent, mitigation actions will take 
place leading potentially to an adjustment of the scope of DECOAT.   
Access Rights to Background and Results during the project. To ensure a smooth execution of the 
project, the DECOAT partners agree to grant royalty-free Access to Background and Results IP for the 
project implementation. All project partners will determine any Background IP they are willing to submit 
to DECOAT within the Co nsortium Agreement before the project starts. IP Ownership within the 
consortium. IP on Results shall be owned by the project partner carrying out the work leading to such 
IP. If any IP is created jointly by at least two partners and it is not possible to distinguish between the 
contributions of each of the project partners, such work will be jointly owned by them. Any such joint 
inventions and all related patent applications and patents shall be jointly owned by the contributing 
parties.   
External Non ‐Disclosure Agreement (NDA). Any external party interested in testing materials 
developed within DECOAT during the project must write a LOI (Letter Of Intent) to the consortium, 
indicating the intent and purpose of their contribution. Each LOI has to be approv ed by the consortium 
and the interested party has to sign an NDA.  (b) Communication activities  
The DECOAT consortium will promote the project and its results, by providing targeted information to 
multiple audiences, in a strategic and effective manner and engaging in one - and two-way exchange. 
The communication activities will start at the onset of the project and continue throughout its entire 
duration. The communication strategy has the key objective to show the benefits of DECOAT results 
to the European coating, plastics and recycling communities.  
The communication strategy has been delineated to  ensure a high visibility of the project and to help 
maximize the impact of results. We follow the guidelines from the Lead Market Initiative Ad-hoc Advisory 
Group for Bio-based Products77: “Design and implement a communication strategy involving all partners 
in the value chain and all other stakeholders to achieve coherent messages on bio -based products. 
(COM/9)”. Detailed description:  
• Goal: firstly to reach out to the general public to create positive momentum for recycling of materials 
(especially as the ir collaboration will be needed to collect certain items like EoL textiles) and, 
secondly, make them aware of the impact of EU collaborative projects;  
• Method: using story-telling to make the matter easier accessible and to show the human face of the 
involved people   
• Audience: wider public as coated products are being bought all the time by all the people. As such 
our back pack will be used as an example close to public.  
• Key messages: importance to select recyclable by design products as this will have a life cycle 
impact.  
• Channels: use of press release in combination with popular media is seen as the most effective to 
reach a larger public. This will be backed up by use of social media (YouTube, Twitter,…) and the 
project website and available public material, accessible for an (interested) layman. These outreach 
activities will be carried out at EU, national, regional and local level, under the responsibility of the 
local partners, but coordinated by the dissemination manager.  
Communication activities w ill support the key dissemination moments that are formed by the three 
Dissemination Campaigns (see part C of PEDR) as that should be excellent moments to reach a wider 
audience and to focus on user acceptance in turn generating further demand for recyclable products.   
We will also interact with other European (H2020) projects and relevant European networks, see Task 
7.5.   
3 Implementation  
  
                                                           
77 See: LMI Ad-hoc Advisory Group for Bio-based Products – List of Priority Recommendations 2011, see: 
https://biobs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/generated/files/policy/2011%20Lead%20Market%20Initiative%20LMI%20Biobased%20Products
%20Priority%20Recommendati ons.pdf   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 53 of 124  
‘If you skilfully follow the multidisciplinary path, you will never wish to come back.’   
(Charlie Munger, investor)
3.1 Work plan  
3.1.1 Overall structure of the work plan and graphical representation of components and their 
interrelations  
  
The key development of  
DECOAT is the debonding  WP1: Triggerable materials for coating  
lab-scale. This will be 
realised for  different 
 triggerable materials and 
will lead to a  
portfolio of debonding  S technologies, each will be  U characterised, listing the  P strengths and 
weaknesses for  P the respective application  O domains (WP1). The coating  R and 
debonding process as well  T as a protocol to assess the  
efficiency of the debonding will be developed in close interaction (WP2) . An optical monitoring method 
for sorting and process control of the coating and for the debonding will be developed (WP3). The 
debonding process will then be scaled -up via the design and building of an actual pilot line, and 
performing test runs on gener ic coated textiles and plastic parts for its validation (WP4). The novel 
coating systems will be integrated in the existing (adapted) processes by the manufacturers/end -users 
via use cases. The (small scale) production of products will undergo the recycling process, the recovered 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)6181922 - 
03/12/2018 Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 54 of 124  
materials will be characterised and re-used, which will demonstrate the circular use of the coated parts 
(WP5).   
For the transversal activities, we will perform a detailed assessment of the environmental aspects (full 
LCA), of the costs (LCC) and ensure Safety -by-Design implementation, e.g. for microcapsules (WP6). 
Because of the systemic change targeted by DECOAT, emphasis is put on the implementation of 
innovation management: economic assessment (incl. preliminary business plans), dissemination to raise 
awareness from early on to maximise wide uptake of DECOAT results; communication for interaction 
with wider stakeholders and promote public awareness of circular economy values (WP7).   
All these technical and supporting activities  will be efficiently coordinated (WP8) , which also 
includes reporting, updating the work plan, data and risk management and interaction with the DECOAT 
Advisory and Support Group (ASG).  
For the work plan, we focussed on a more detailed description of the tasks that already can be well -
defined steps in the DECOAT activities, e.g. which materials will be developed, which optical detection 
to be develop, supporting activities. The exact content of most activities later in the project (mainly WP5) 
will depend strongly on choices that need to be made during the project implementation, so these task 
descriptions are deliberately kept more open.   
 
 
 
  

 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B    Page 42 of 124
3.2 Management structure and procedures  
 3.2.1 Organisational structure and the decision-making  
Since the overall consortium is not too large (16 partners) the organisational structures and 
the decision making process are kept as straightforward as possible . Both aspects are 
described in the next sections . It is of high importance not to neglect the necessary 
management elements to avoid conflicts or 
uncertainty about responsibilities and 
obligations.  3.2.1.1 Organisational 
structure   
The sketch shows the structure of the 
project organisation with the arrows 
indicating the lines of communication. The 
coordinator will report directly to the EC 
Project Officer. The Project Steering 
Committee or PSC will interact with the coordinator who maintains an overview of the project. 
The workpackage leaders will oversee the workpackages and report progress to coordinator and 
PSC.   
The main goals of the project coordination are: (i) organize the information flow in timely manner 
and accurately inside the consortium to meet project objectives; (ii) take the appropriate 
decisions to reach the project objectives; (iii) provide the EU wi th reports and organize reviews 
for the suitable tracking of the project progress. a. The Coordinator   
The project will be coordinated by CTB which has a large experience with European projects. Dr 
Guy Buyle will act as project coordinator (CV in section 4), a role he also fulfilled already in FP7 
projects (DECOCOAT, S(P)EEDKITS) and in H2020 (BIO4SELF). CTB, as coordinator, has the 
overall responsibility of DECOAT’s project management as well as all the EU Commissions 
liaisons required for the proper operation of the project. Both CTB and members of PSC have a 
wide experience to handle any conflicts and other challenges that may occur during the lifetime 
of the project. The coordinator will rely on the WP leaders for monitoring the technical 
implementation of the project. He can take urgent low level decisions, if necessary and after 
discussion with the WP leaders. He can propose to the partners solutions and contingency plans 
in case of delay, discrepancies or when a technical choice has to be made. b. The Project 
Steering Committee (PSC)  
A Project Steering Committee will be installed as a supervisory body supporting the project’s 
normal operation. The PSC will supervise crucial decisions related both with all relevant 
administrative management and scienti fic technical matters and will be responsible of the 
operation of the technical work programmes. More specifically, PSC has a double role:  
• It is the governing body that prepares the decision for the General Assembly. It is responsible 
for proposing redistributions of funds if needed and for the management of the joint funds. 
Other tasks include approving the continuously updating and assuring agreement on the 
PEDR (see Task 7.1), as well as settling potential conflicts among partners.  
• It will assess the w ork within the WPs and ensure alignment of the individual WPs with the 
general DECOAT objectives. This means that the PSC is responsible for the overall 
management of the project. It will meet at least every six months. Its members can vary as 
the project needs, but the PSC will at least consist of the coordinator and the following 
managers:  
Quality Manager (QM) – IRES – Dr. Elias P. Koumoulos (CV in Part 4)  
The quality manager will be in charge of disseminating the quality procedures, stimulating their 
use and monitoring, with appropriate metrics, the implementation. This role will also include 
contributing to the DECOAT required reporting, prvoding templates for reporting and setting up 
a review process, in collaboration with the Coordinator, to ensure proper quality of the DECOAT 

 
 
deliverables. Dr. Elias P. Koumoulos with wide experience in the field of QM will guarantee high 
level project deliverables. He will establish quality assurance into the DECOAT project through 
the development of a Quality Manual.   
Exploitation and Innovation Manager (EIM) – OSM - Dr. Emmanuel Sofianopoulos (CV in Part 
4)  
The Project Exploitation and Innovation Manager will be responsible for ensuring the value of 
the project outcomes towards commercialisation and sustainability  of the project foreground. 
This role is appointed to Mr Emmanuel Sofianopoulos from partner OSM who is a Materials 
Engineer but has extensive professional engagement in supporting organisations towards 
exploiting their research results. He will use adequate processes and tools in order to collect the 
appropriate data for planning & executing the business plan of the project. He will also be 
responsible to monitor the project to guarantee consistency between technical and market 
choices. In brief he will ov ersee all activities related to IPR, supervise the compliance of all 
partners with the provisions regarding intellectual property rights, use and dissemination laid 
down in the Consortium Agreement.   
Research & Technology Manager (RDM) – NTUA – Prof. Costas A. Charitidis (CV in Part 4)  
The Research & Technology Manager (RTM) will have an advisory role on the R&D decisions 
within DECOAT and will ensure that the project milestones and goals are achieved. The 
responsibilities of RTM will include: determining, implementing and monitoring research and 
development strategies, policies and plans. This role is appointed to Prof. Costas Charitidis 
(NTUA), who has extensive R&D experience both as coordinator (in 5 EU projects) and partner 
in other European and National initiatives, dealing with high impact technological advancements. 
Prof. Costas Charitidis has served as Official External Reviewer and Project Technical Advisor 
of the European Commission (2010-2016). His research topics include among others Materials 
Science & Nanotechnology, Nanomaterials Processing and Carbon-based Materials.   
Demonstration Manager (DM) – DEVAN – Mr Roberto Teixeira (CV in part 4).  
The Demonstration Manager will be the member of the PSC who reports on the demons tration 
activities. For this goal, the DM and the WP leader of WP5 -Demonstration will work closely 
together. The goal of the DM is to ensure that DECOAT will remain focussed on the 
demonstration of circular use of coated parts by using the novel coating debonding systems that 
we will develop. Mr Teixeira is ideally place for that. He is the R&D Manager of DEVAN, leading 
the R&D department towards the development and implementation of innovative products for the 
worldwide textile market. As such he is famili ar with taking novel developments a stage further 
to their successful demonstration in collaboration with clients for the final end -users. Moreover 
is his technical background in coatings and microcapsules. c. Work Package leaders  
The work package leaders , identified in Table 3.1b, are responsible for the day -to-day 
coordination and management of the individual WPs. This task involves:  
• Keep up to date with the technical state of the art and passing on this information to the 
partners where necessary  
• Provide guidelines to the different partners regarding their specific tasks and timing  
• Ensure work is carried out according to planning, m inor deviations can be settled within a 
WP or among the concerned WP leaders and partners, larger deviations need to be reported 
to the PSC and coordinator  
• Collect the data for the review reports to be sent to the coordinator and all relevant partners  
• Prepare the progress reports in due time for the PSC and especially to the coordinator who 
edits and submits to the EC •  Report any other important issues to the coordinator  
d. The General Assembly (GA)   
The General Assembly consists of one representative  from each partner , the first person 
mentioned in the partner description (section 4). A second, proxy representative, will be 
designated from each organization in the case of absence of the first representative. The 
General Assembly will represent the hig hest level of decision making within the project  
and will decide the overall project strategy, including contractual matters and exploitation 
matters. Critical DECOAT decisions will be taken by the GA. In summary, the mission of the GA 
 
 
is: assessment of the work done; decisions about the strategy of the project; major decisions on 
technical issues; analysing technical conflicts between partners and proposing agreements; 
defaulting party management; studying the evaluation reports on all activities of all pa rtners; 
deciding by confidential vote about allocation of finances, adding new members to the 
consortium, reviewing or amending the EU contract, change or exchange of WPs. Moreover, the 
GA will also take responsibility for the exploitation and disseminatio n plan from the project. 
Meetings of the General Assembly may also be held by teleconference or other 
telecommunication means. The GA will meet 10 times:  roughly every 6 months but with 
higher frequency at the beginning of DECOAT (see also Gantt Chart – section 3.1.2). e. The 
Collaborative Work Platform (CWP)   
A dedicated internet based Collaborative Work Platform will be set up. It will provide the 
partners with all the necessary information on the project (reports, results, technical choices, 
publications, conferences). The Coordinator will be responsible for updating and dissemination 
of the information. The CWP dedicated to the project will have a public part serving the 
dissemination activities (see description of WP7) but will also have a protected part restricted to 
consortium members. The platform will contain for example the following functions: document 
centre, partners information, administrative documents. The CWP will also use the custom 
software from OSM that allows parallel processing of databases and files. Informs automatically 
on task evolution and deliverables and creates a virtual working space for exchanging ideas and 
brainstorming. f. Advisory and Support Group (ASG)  
In order to ensure quality and industrial relevance beyond the consortium, DECOAT established 
the Advisory and Support  
Group (ASG). It consists of external expert(s) who will participate as non-funded partners giving 
advice for technical developments, innovation and exploitation (in other value chains) and to 
evaluate the D ECOAT work concerning the main goal of developing triggerable debonding 
coating systems and prepare their wider take up. Therefore, the ASG will also act as a bridge 
between the DECOAT (funded) project and the next phases of the development, via continuation 
projects and industrial take up. The ASG will interact with the consortium on a six-monthly basis 
and, where and when relevant, selected members of it can be asked to participate in the GA 
meetings. Travel costs for the ASG will be covered by the travel budget of the coordinator. The 
role of the ASG members will be to: (i) judge the efficiency and effectiveness of work undertaken; 
(ii) ensure that the consortium is exposed to a divergent alternative view; (iii) introduce industrial 
requirements from othe r sectors; (iv) bring intelligence on already existing in the boarder 
scientific and technical communities.  
The ASG consists of 17 (!) members . DECOAT wants to realise a systemic innovation in 
the coating and recycling world, therefore large external support and advice from a wide 
range of stakeholders is considered a necessity. The ASG is put together with this philosophy 
in mind. It contains European associations and networks (incl. EUPC), 2 European  
Technology Platforms (Textile ETP, EuMaT), recycling and coating companies (incl. REMONDIS 
and DE BOER RECYCLING GROUP), a public body dealing with waste management (OVAM) 
and 3 standardisation bodies (incl. CEN-CENELEC). Also European Coatings, the publisher 
of the leading journal on coatings and adhesives, is included to guarantee DECOAT results 
will reach the sector. If needed, and with the approval of all DECOAT partners, the ASG can be 
further extended.  
3.2.1.2 Decision making   
The basis for all decision -making within the consortium is the Consortium Agreement (CA). As 
model for the CA, the DESCA model for companies is selected 78, which was specifically 
developed to fit H2020 and which is recommended by the EC. It describes in detail all procedures 
related to project management, dissemination and IPR. It will be tailored to the specific DECOAT 
needs once the project is approved.   
                                                           
78 Source: http://www.desca-2020.eu/   
 
 
a. The General Assembly (GA) – top level   
During the General Assembly the representatives of the part ners decide on important project 
management issues (see also 3.2.1.1). Before each GA meeting, partners will have to prepare 
a short report to be uploaded on the collaborative work platform. These reports should include 
the main results achieved by the partners, the main difficulties encountered and the publications 
and/or conference participations during the reporting period. These points will be discussed 
during the GA. Financial issues will be discussed as needed. The GA will also decide on IPR 
and exploitation routes. b. Technical Meetings – day-to-day decision within a WP/task  
Besides the GA there will also be interim meetings attended by a limited number of partners to 
address particular WPs, as deemed necessary. Additionally, contact among partners will be 
maintained by email or telephone, with regular written progress reports circulated to all 
partners. Technical (telco) meetings with a reduced number of partners will be strongly 
encouraged to promote technical exchange and multidisciplinary cross training among 
partners. This will allow decision making at practical day-to-day level. Depending on the scope, 
they will be shared by the task leader or WP leader. c. Conflict management   
The coordinator, assisted by the PSC, will propose corrective action s if necessary, following 
consultation with GA members. If, for any reason, the coordinator and PSC cannot resolve the 
conflict, the GA will conclude on the conflict by majority vote (in case of draw, the coordinator 
has the decisive vote). For serious and urgent matters, an extraordinary GA can be called.  
  
 3.2.2 Motivation for the proposed structure and decision-making process  
The WP leaders will take the lead in their respective WP and closely work together with the WP 
partners. In addition, they wil l not only be the contact point for the WP partners, but also for 
partners active in the other WPs. Regular contacts in between the WP leaders will therefore be 
organised to assure good flow of materials and project information.   
Besides the obvious roles for the coordinator and the WP leaders, a PSC with different managers 
with extensive expertise in scientific management, has been established for the DECOAT 
project, which will allow a close follow -up of all crucial steps needed for a successful H2020 
project. The people selected for the PSC are experienced and well placed to take up their role 
and will closely cooperate within the PSC. They will also be the main sparring partner for the 
ASG.   
The well-structured decision making process as described above  (see section 3.2.1.2) will aid 
and stimulate the project progress as scheduled and avoid delays. The coordinator, in 
consultation with the respective WP leader, can take low level decisions with no or a minor impact 
on the other WPs and overall project pr ogress. The project steering committee (see section 
3.2.1.1b), completed with the required WP leaders, can take medium level decisions with the 
agreement of General Assembly. The General Assembly itself is responsible for all important 
management issues an d thus takes the high level decisions.  This overall decision -making 
structure is supported by well -defined deliverables and clear milestones, which will be closely 
tracked during the proposal and serve as the basis for decision points.   
 
 
 3.2.3 Innovation management  
The innovation management that involves the process of 
managing an organization's innovation procedure, 
starting at the initial stage of ideation, to its final stage of 
successful implementation, will  ensure that there is an 
open culture for and focus on innovation in the project. 
We wi ll ensure that ALL PARTNERS in the consortium 
understand both market and technical problems , and 
allow partners to respond to external or internal opportunities, 
and use its creative efforts to introduce new ideas and 
processes. This will also include promoting to use innovation 
management tools, encourage team members to undertake 
small-scale innovations that support the achievement of 
project objectives, ensure a continuous flow of new 
opportunities, ideas, and concepts that are aligned with the 
strategic project objectives, and identify new and disruptive 
innovation opportunities. As systematised complementary 
innovation management tools, we will monitor on the one hand side the novelty of our results 
(via technology watch and patent reviews) as well as track the evolution of the TRL of our results 
periodically to assess that they will reach the planned maturity in their path towards the market 
deployment.  
The process of innovation management has already started with the identification of the 
market oppor tunity that exists for recycling of coated parts, the translation of this 
knowledge into the DECOAT concept and the preliminary market analysis performed  for 
those market sectors (see part ‘D2’ of the PEDR in section 2.2.2(a)) that are represented by the 
consortium partners (i.e. outdoor gear, electronics consumer goods and automotive). During the 
more explorative R&D work (in WP1, WP2 and WP3) of DECOAT, the most promising results 
and technologies will be selected according to both their technical performances (basis are the 
target requirements defined in Task 1.1), their transferability in industrial scenarios (raw materials 
accessibility, productivity, processing requirements) and their final cost for industrial take-up and 
exploitation (investment costs, operational costs). The project management approach proposed 
provides mechanisms to identify and resolve potential risks. Accordingly, the risk mitigation 
measures reported in section 3.2.4 have been and will be selected according to their impact on 
the future and potential for the exploitation of the DECOAT results.  
Two specific aspects of the innovation management we want to highlight: (i) introducing 
a system innovation; (ii) following a market pull and technology push.   
Within the project INNOQUALITY  (coordinated by CTB), success factors were determined for 
several types of innovation (eg incremental, process, product or systemic innovation). The 
project showed that introducing a systemic innovation is the most difficult because it involves all 
the stakeholders along the value chain. Within DECOAT, we will build on the experience and 
insights gained from INNOQUALITY for optimal innovation management. Further, we want to 
apply a combination of technology push (ie promoting our results) and market pull. The latter 
means that one addresses the end users.   
Having recognized that continuous and effective innovation management throughout and beyond 
the duration of DECOAT will be crucial for the successful deployment of the novel DECOAT 
technologies and for t heir introduction to the market, the consortium has (i) engaged partner 
OSM with specific expertise in innovation services; (ii) included several activities dedicated to 
‘Innovation Management’ (see Tasks 7.2-exploitation, 7.4-standardisation & policy and Task 7.5 
- external liaison) and (iii) appointed an Exploitation & Innovation Manager as a member of the 
PSC (see Section 3.2.1.1b).