1.4 Ambition 
DECOAT aims at overcoming obstacles from current recycling technologies by designing coating formulations with 
smart additives, which allow adequate sorting, separation and recycling. Developments of separation and recycling 
technologies will be investigated and new separation technologies utilising novel mechanical and chemical recycling procedures 
will be validated, to meet the EU's circular economy and environmental targets. 
1.4.1 Progress beyond state-of-the-art 
Building further on the available knowledge, 
expertise and patented IP within the DECOAT 
consortium, we will research and develop a 
debonding system based on triggerable 
additives, mechanical recycling, chemical 
recycling (Creasolv process) and latest coating 
(monitoring) technology. We will investigate 
two debonding systems: (i) a single layer with 
the trigger inside and (ii) a two-layer system 
consisting of a standard coating and a ‘primer’ layer (see 
sketches). Note that ‘primer’ is used here as common name 
for tie layer or primer or base layer. For selected combinations 
of the coating-substrate materials, we will research several 
triggers and several options for the actual removal of the 
coating (process conditions, 1-step versus 2-step). The output 
will be a portfolio of debonding strategies, mentioning for each 
of the solutions the pros and cons. This novel information will 
form the basis for our DECOAT demonstration of circular use 
of coated parts but also be made available to the wider 
stakeholder community for further use.  
In the next paragraphs we describe the concrete progress beyond the state-of-the-art that DECOAT ambitions for (i) 
triggerable materials, (ii) optical monitoring for process optimisation and sorting of the coated waste, (iii) actual 
recycling and (iv) eco-design aspects. 
(i) Triggerable materials and related debonding systems – mainly related to WP1 & WP2 work 
Coatings that debond on demand lose their adhesive function when an external trigger is applied. Partner CTB researched a 
novel separation layer for textiles by embedding thermally expandable syntactic microspheres (in FP7 project 
ECOMETEX). Separation concept was shown on lab scale in boiling water, which is not an efficient process as it needs extensive 
energy (heating, drying). Partner RESCOLL developed an innovative, patented (see section 1.4.2) interfacial debonding 
adhesive technology (INDAR™ Inside) permitting the dismantling of structural aerospace assemblies without damage and was 
used for selective thermal stripping of aircraft paints. Partner NTUA has developed a variety of ‘smart’ nano- and microcapsules 
based on various materials (ceramics, metals, polymers), that react on external stimuli (water, mechanical stresses, 
 
10 Source: http://www.vaude.com/angebote/nachhaltigkeitsbericht/2013_Nachhaltigkeitsbericht_screen_ENGL.pdf  
11 Londa Schiebinger (2008). Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 9 of 127 
microorganisms, etc), in projects LORCENCIS and BYEFOULING (see also project table above). Partner CTECH developed 
additives for interaction with microwaves. Based on that, a unique patented (polyester) yarn was developed, which 
disintegrates during microwaving12. This yarn enables easy and inexpensive removal of e.g. zippers (disassembly step). 
DECOAT novelty: Using the available IP and expertise, we will develop triggerable additives for water-based coating 
formulations with a lowered debonding temperature as compared to existing procedures, although exceeding the processing 
and working temperature required/set by industrial demo cases. A sufficient difference between the manufacturing, maximal 
service and the debonding temperature will be ensured and will be realised by improving the heat direction towards the additives, 
e.g. by heat focussing layers or thermal conductive paints. Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers, Super 
Absorbent Polymers (SAP) and novel hybrid microwave susceptible materials (based on metal nanoparticles, silicon carbides 
and multiwall carbon nanotubes MWCNTs) will be investigated. Separation will be done by heat sources (like steam, microwaves 
and IR) that are available at industrial level to avoid the need for additional, or only very limited, drying. To reach a clean surface 
after debonding, we focus on controlled interfacial decohesion. For detection purposes, fluorescent molecules will be added on 
the “smart” additives (dyes). 
The table below gives an overview of the materials to be developed and the polymer coating matrices to which they can 
be added. Already a first matching between the trigger mechanism and the polymer matrix is made, based on the chemistry 
of the particles and what is available in literature. As mentioned this is a first matching, further investigation within the DECOAT 
project is needed. Below the table, each of the triggerable materials is discussed, giving more info on their synthesis and the 
challenges for their use in an actual debonding system. 
Triggerable materials Coating Polymer 
matrix 
Triggers 
Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers 
Core: e.g. poly(propyl methacrylate) or poly(butyl methacrylate)  
Shell: e.g. poly(4-vinylpyridine-co-methacrylic acid), ethylene-glycol-bismethacrylate,  
Functionalised with: organic dye (I), iron oxides (supermagnetic nanoparticles) 
Acrylic, PU13 
PVC14 
Heat / Steam 
(Temperature) 
Super Absorbent Polymers  
Core: Cross-linked poly(methacrylate-co-ethylene glycol dimethacrylate) 
Functionalised with: organic dye (II), iron oxides (supermagnetic nanoparticles) 
Acrylic 
Epoxies15 
Selective 
Solvents (H20 or 
organic solvents) 
Microwave assisted materials 
MWCNTs (decorated with metal nanoparticles or grown on SiO2 nanoparticles) 
Susceptors: Metaloxide nanoparticles (e.g. ferroelectric oxide particles), BaTiO3, 
siliconcarbide, ZnO, silica or alumina 
Blended with high dielectric polymer 
PU16 
PVC17 
Epoxies18 
MW irradiation 
Blowing agents (INDAR) 
Blowing agents: azodicarbonamide and polycarboxylic acid 
Blended into formulations for primers, combination with other triggers 
Epoxies, PU19  Heat / Steam 
(Temperature) 
Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers 
Partner NTUA has vast experience in synthesis and development of tailored microcapsules and nanoadditives with functional 
properties (currently at TRL3)20,21,22. Partner DEVAN has built over the years a strong IP portfolio of microcapsules for various 
applications23. 
DECOAT novelty: we will make progress on the following topics to realise this triggerable material: 
 
12 Patent WO2013/189956A1, see also www.wear2.com  
13 M.Hirose, et al.,The structure and properties of core-shell type acrylic-polyurethane hybrid aqueous emulsions, Progress in Organic Coatings, 31, (1–2) 1997, 157-169 
14 A. Gharieh, et al., Preparation of core–shell impact modifier particles for PVC with nanometric shell thickness through seeded emulsion polymerization, Iranian Polymer 
Journal 23(1), 2013 
15 I.A. Kartsonakis, et al., Multifunctional epoxy coatings combining a mixture of traps and inhibitor loaded nanocontainers for corrosion protection of AA2024-T3, Corrosion 
Science, 85, 2014, 147-159. 
16 E. Orgiles-Calpena, et al., Effect of Amount of Carbon Nanotubes in Polyurethane Dispersions, Macromolecular Symposia, 2012. 
17 K. Trommer, et al., Processing and Properties of Carbon Nanotube PVC Composites, L. Appl. Chem., 2014, 10 
18 J. Zhang, et al., Functional interphases with multi-walled carbon nanotubes in glass fibre/epoxy composites, Carbon, 48, 8,  2010, 2273-2281 
19 EP2265681 (B1), EP2519596 (B1), EP2519565 (A1), EP1611217 (B1), EP1814935 (B1) 
20 A.C. Balaskas, T. Hashimoto, M. Curioni, G.E. Thomson, Nanoscale 2017 9:5499-5508. 
21 A.C. Balaskas, I.A. Kartsonakis, L.-A. Tziveleka, G.C. Kordas, Progress in Organic Coatings 2012 74:418-426. 
22 I.A. Kartsonakis, A.C. Balaskas, E.P. Koumoulos, C.A. Charitidis, G.C. Kordas, Corrosion Science 2012 57: 30-41. 
23 Patents EP1658131 (B1), US2008193761 (A1), US2016009596 (A1) 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 10 of 127 
Microcapsule core: selection of polymers with thermo-responsive properties or inclusion of active ingredients that help 
delamination of textile layers (eg. poly(propyl methacrylate) or poly(butyl methacrylate). 
Microcapsule shell: selection of suitable shell components to enclose the core material. In thermo-responsive core-shell 
nanostructured co-polymers, a protective thermoplastic shell with tunable glass transition temperature (Tg) and melting 
temperature (Tm), will be tailored to have a higher Tg than the core’s polymer. The Tg is highly related to segmental polymer 
chain motion. As polymers warm up, the shell with the high Tg will act as a protective coating for the polymeric core, which will be 
in melting conditions at elevated temperature. When the ambient temperature surpasses the Tg of the shell, the inner core 
(material) will have a high chain mobility enabling detaching of the surfaces. At this defined moment the core material is released 
from the capsule, triggering debonding. On the one hand, the shells should not react with the core material and on the other hand 
they should have a good chemical compatibility with the surrounding matrices. Examples of possible materials are: melamine 
resins, polyurea/polyurethanes, polyacrylates. In addition, the shells should provide a good storage for the active ingredients 
during the entire lifetime of the products, and only rupture/or release the active ingredient when triggered (end of the product life). 
Functionalization of the protective thermoplastic shell to increase its compatibility with a wide range of ‘coating’ 
formulations, also for INDAR technology (see below). The main materials: PU, PVC, acrylic, epoxies. Of potential further interest: 
amino, cyanates, isocyanides, hydroxyls, sulphonamides, and phthalates. DECOAT consortium is aware that some forms of these 
substances have restrictions, so REACH compliance will be checked (see also Task 6.1). 
The use of the microcapsules in the debonding system: The microcapsule concentration (ca. 5% or less) and cross-linking 
density of the adhesive will be tailored and optimized, for strong adhesion during product use but also for ease of debonding at 
end-of-life. The latter will be achieved by exposure to heat as this will melt the shell, and thus activate the core. Homogeneous 
heat dissipation and activation of the microcapsules will be obtained by adding superparamagnetic nanoparticles (Fe3O4). 
Application of irradiation will locally (=near the microcapsules) raise the temperature24,25. The aim is to develop materials that 
will be able to create ‘soft flexible points’ inside the crosslinked adhesive network in the presence of the external stimuli, 
thus improving detachment. 
Summarizing, the trigger mechanism for the thermo-responsive core-shell 
nanostructured co-polymers relies on the different physical properties (Tg) 
between the core and the shell materials that construct the primer layer. The 
induction of heat onto the core-shell materials above the Tg of the organic shell, 
results in the different polymer chain mobility enhancement between the core 
and the shell. The outcome is the reduction of the attachment between the 
primer layer and both the top coating and substrate, enabling the detachment 
of the top coating from the corresponding substrate.  
Super Absorbent Polymers (SAPs)  
SAPs can absorb and retain extremely large amounts of a liquid relative to their own mass. Water-absorbing polymers, which are 
classified as hydrogels when cross-linked26, absorb aqueous solutions through hydrogen bonding with water molecules. In 
deionized and distilled water, a SAP may absorb 300 times its weight (from 30 to 60 times its own volume) and can become up 
to 99.9% liquid. 
DECOAT Novelty: The SAP materials will exhibit a spherical shape with a two-layered structure: the polymeric core will be a 
lightly crosslinked hydrogel and the outer surface will be a highly crosslinked layer. The water absorption capacity of the SAPs is 
influenced by the nature and relative amounts of monomers used in the synthesis27. In this sense, the regulation of the crosslinker 
amount (both in the core and shell material) will be the key-property to achieve the desired degree of water absorbency for the 
debonding effect as well as the required protection of the hydrophilic core for obtaining a stable waterborne formulation28. 
Clearly, the amount of crosslinker is a decisive parameter for the swelling behaviour of hydrogels and the aim is to achieve a 
compromise between the crosslinking level and a stable gel structure29,30. 
 
24Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, Volume 435, 2014, 99-104. 
25Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Volume 302, Issue 1, 2006, Pages 267-271. 
26 Kabiri, K. (2003). "Synthesis of fast-swelling superabsorbent hydrogels: effect of crosslinker type and concentration on porosity and absorption rate". European Polymer 
Journal. 39 (7): 1341–1348 
27Kabiri, K., et al., Superabsorbent hydrogel composites and nanocomposites: A review. Polymer Composites, 2011. 32(2): p. 277-289. 
28Chang, S., et al., Multi-scale characterization of surface-crosslinked superabsorbent polymer hydrogel spheres. Polymer, 2018. 145: p. 174-183. 
29Goncalves, A.A.L., et al., Synthesis and characterization of high performance superabsorbent hydrogelsusingbis[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl] phosphate as crosslinker. Express 
Polymer Letters, 2016. 10(3): p. 248-258. 
30Cipriano, B.H., et al., Superabsorbent Hydrogels That Are Robust and Highly Stretchable. Macromolecules, 2014. 47(13): p. 4445-4452. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 11 of 127 
The effect of the pH on the water absorbency of the SAP 
spheres will be also investigated. The dispersion of the core-
shell SAP materials will be investigated in an aqueous solvent 
where swelling equilibrium experiments will be performed to 
study water absorption at different pH. When the pH favours 
the repulsive forces between the polymeric chains, the water 
absorbency is increased. On the other hand, when a 
screening effect of the polar groups of the polymer chains 
takes place, the repulsive forces between the charged 
polymer chains are minimized and the water absorbency in 
greatly decreased. Based on this phenomenon27, the pH value of the waterborne formulations developed will be selected based 
on the value where the minimum water absorbency is observed. In this way, the SAP materials will be in a not swollen state 
during their incorporation in the coatings and they will be activated only upon the trigger. The trigger mechanism for the 
core-shell hydrophilic SAPs relies on the different ability of the core and the shell materials to be swollen under variation of pH. 
Therefore, under the influence of water with specific pH value, the SAPs can enhance their shape due to the water absorption 
resulting in the reduction of the attachment between the primer layer and both the top coating and substrate, enabling the 
detachment of the top coating from the corresponding substrate. 
To apply the MW trigger, these structures will be also functionalized with thermally-responsive magnetic nanoparticles 
(eg Mn-Zn ferrites or Ni or iron oxide) which will be selected based on the Curie temperature that matches the crosslinked layer’s 
melting point31. This functionalization will make the shell more susceptible to heating so that the shell can be selectively molten, 
as described also for the case of the thermo-responsive core-shell co-polymers, allowing the lightly crosslinked hydrophilic core 
to absorb a large amount of water, causing the swelling and activating the debonding. 
To apply the Creasolv process, lipophilic super-absorbent polymers32 for the absorption of the desirable organic 
solvents will be prepared by selecting the appropriate compounds both for the polymer chains that control the compatibility with 
the media and the ionic groups that are dissociable in polymer gels (e.g. alkylammonium salts). Candidate materials include 
acrylate monomers copolymerized with methacrylates as crosslinkers to yield lipophilic polyelectrolyte gels. The nature of the 
organic solvent and specifically its polarity (dielectric constant) will influence the swelling behaviour of the SAP materials 
produced. For this reason, the ionic group content will be adjusted to avoid the formation of physical interactions which will 
negatively influence the swelling behaviour of the lipophilic SAP. The trigger mechanism for the core-shell hydrophylic SAPs relies 
on the different ability of the core and the shell materials to be swollen under the presence of an organic solvent. Thus, under the 
influence of an organic solvent that has enhanced chemical affinity with the shell material, the SAPs can enhance their shape due 
to the organic solvent absorbtion water resulting in the reduction of the attachment between the primer layer and both the top 
coating and substrate, enabling the detachment of the top coating from the corresponding substrate. 
Hybrid materials reacting to MW triggers 
Two forms of dielectric heating are commonly used industrially differing in wavelength of the applied electromagnetic 
radiation. These are Rf heating using wavelengths at 27 and 40MHz and MW heating using 2.45Ghz and 896MHz. 
Depending upon the material to be processed, there are advantages and disadvantages of using the different forms of radiation, 
but the main advantage is the direct heating of the material by the application of the radiation with no external heat transfer or hot 
surface required. Using Mw and Rf can be done either as a batch system or a semi batch system. In the latter case the materials 
are placed into a screened cavity and then heated by the application of the desired power for a defined time. This gives some 
advantages in the design because the system can be enclosed ensuring no leakage of radiation. Materials can be introduced in 
containers, treated and then removed to be processed further. Continuous processes are also possible for both Rf and MW 
systems for example conveyers can be used to introduce and remove the materials into the applicator zone.   
The main microwave absorption mechanism of a polymer is reorientation of the dipoles when submitted to an electric field, 
the presence of these groups in the molecule is necessary. Some polymers contain groups with large dipoles, such as epoxies, 
amino, cyanate, isocyanides, hydroxyls, sulphonamides and phthalates. The materials with the best dipole mobility exhibit high 
absorption efficiency and the efficiency of the coupling depends on the strength of the dipole, its mobility and mass, as well as its 
dipole matrix state. The choice of the polymers and the formulation will therefore need to be investigated for an optimal heating 
effect. By applying electromagnetic radiation to a material, movement of the molecules via dipole interactions with the oscillating 
electric field is induced, resulting in molecular friction. This leads to dielectric heating of materials. 
 
 
31A. S. Ahmed y R. V. Ramanujan, Curie temperature controlled self-healing magnet–polymer composites, J. Mater. Res., 2015. 30 (07): p. 946-958. 
32Ono, T., et al., Lipophilic polyelectrolyte gels as super-absorbent polymers for nonpolar organic solvents. Nat Mater, 2007. 6(6): p. 429-33. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 12 of 127 
Comparison of Rf and MW heating key properties 
Parameter Rf MW 
Applied heating efficiency order of 60% order of 65% 
Uniformity of heating Good  Can be less uniform  
Impedance matching Can be difficult for certain applications Easily applied  
Energy delivery Accurate and fast  Less controlled  
Remote power sources Ok Ok with waveguide transfer to the applicator 
Screening to comply with EMC 
requirements 
Easy  More difficult  
Tailor heating to materials Easy  (More) difficult   
Common characteristics 
Volumetric heating –no external 
heat transfer 
Dielectric heating does not require physical 
contact with the product 
Low shear transport (conveyorised possible) 
Typical susceptors that are used nowadays for MW heating are metaloxide nanoparticles (e.g. ferroelectric oxide particles 
e.g. BaTiO3, siliconcarbide, ZnO, silica or alumina). To date, use of microwave heating in carbon-based materials research 
of is limited, mainly focused on liquid solutions. However, more rapid and efficient heating is possible in electron-rich solid 
materials, because the target materials absorb energy of microwaves effectively and exclusively. Carbon-based solid materials 
are suitable for microwave-heating. Specifically, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have excellent electrical properties resulting from sp2 
networks of carbon atoms. The number of free electrons which can migrate freely over the whole of the layer is about one per 
each carbon atom. The free electrons enable CNTs to absorb microwave energy considerably and to be heated effectively by 
microwaves33.The tuning feasibility of the permittivity value by changing MWCNTs concentration (1-5%) has been also proven34. 
Other applications like annealing, regeneration and detection based on microwave heating of CNTs have been reported. 
DECOAT novelty: 
The main idea is the possibility to include susceptors in a primer layer to provide a heating effect to separate the substrate 
and the top coating. The susceptor may also be part of the actual coating in case of a single layer. The bulk polymer would need 
to be a low dielectric material to avoid MW heating of the bulk. The aim is to provide selective heating in the area of the susceptor, 
to either melt (and remove) the primer and thus also the coating on top, or to melt the entire coating itself and remove the coating 
layer. 
For the heating, we will start with MW heating as most likely option. Also Rf will be tested and the possibility to add (as extra) 
some radiant heating component. In DECOAT, it will be investigated which would be the best energy source, or combination, to 
use in order to achieve the effect.  
To tune the heating and to make it more uniform, we will optimise the % and type of additive. We will also investigate the 
addition of MW transparent material such as silica or alumina to disperse the particles and moderate the heating effect. Indeed, 
heating needs to be limited to prevent thermal runaway causing melting or charring of the bulk polymer. Issues might occur if the 
component contains e.g. metal parts (e.g. fixings/brackets) which could cause arcing or materials fillers that heat strongly in a 
MW/Rf field. This potential variability of feed would need to be considered, even though we will try to limit the variability via the 
previous disassembly step and the monitoring and sorting of the waste.  
 
33T. Kim, et al., Microwave heating of carbon-based solid materials, Carbon letters Vol. 15, No. 1, 15-24, 2014. 
34M. Giorcelli, et al., Microwave absorption properties in epoxy resin Multi Walled Carbon Nanotubes composites, 2013 International Conference on Electromagnetics in 
Advanced Applications (ICEAA), Italy, 9-13 Sept. 2013 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 13 of 127 
We will start making formulations with common susceptors such as small metal particles (nano particles), ferroelectric oxide 
particles e.g. BaTiO3, silicon carbide or blends with high dielectric polymer. The primer layer or the coating will need a lower 
melting point compared to the bulk material.  
A novelty for targeted MW heating will be the exploration of carbon-based particles, like carbon 
powder, MWCNT and CNT/MO (Metal Oxide) nanocomposites (see picture on the side35). The latter are 
a new generation with interesting properties that not only combine the properties of CNTs and MO but 
also hold new properties caused by the interaction between them. Additionally, use of these materials in 
a polymer coating formulation can overcome some common disadvantages. For example, metal oxide 
nanoparticles tend to agglomerate because of their dangling bonds. In CNT/MO composites, depositing 
nanoparticles on the surface of the nanotube prevents their agglomeration. The aggregation of nanotubes 
in aqueous media is solved by functionalization. As a result, these nanocomposites are attractive for a 
wide range of applications compared to the isolated nanoparticles because CNTs act as a carrier to stabilize the nanoparticles, 
maintaining their integrity. This will help the induction of the heat through MW and Rf inside the coating, since CNTs will work 
as a thermal conductive network inside the polymer matrix, which should be very beneficial for the debonding 
functionality. The result will be the reduction of the attachment between the primer layer and both the top coating and substrate, 
enabling the detachment of the top coating from the corresponding substrate. 
(ii) Automated Sorting technology based on DECOAT triggerable additives – mainly related to WP3 & WP4 work 
For the actual recycling of DECOAT products to be implemented in a future waste management configuration, an efficient and 
automated sorting is required based on the material composition for defining the respective recycling route and for 
separating them from non-recyclable parts (e.g. standard coated parts not including triggers). Due to the lack of recycling 
options, textiles are often not separately collected or sorted and automotive non-metallic parts shredded as a mixture that is 
energetically valorised at best, plastics (especially packaging, WEEE) are industrially sorted via spectroscopic identification 
systems (e.g. NIR, X-ray, colour, laser and combinations)36 or even hand sorting. The latter is unreliable and not suitable for the 
DECOAT materials as the smart additives cannot be seen by human workers. Partner IRIS has experience in developing tailored 
fast online VIS/NIR spectroscopic tools for plastic processing monitoring to identify precisely their composition and to detect traces 
of unwanted substances37,38.  
NIR absorbance spectroscopy is well established as a technique for inline sorting of a wide range of materials, including 
agricultural products such as food products; minerals39 and plastic waste40. In particular, Steinert GmbH41 provides a wide range 
of sorting machines with NIR imaging, handling plastic waste, household waste, compost, building waste, and minerals produced 
by mining. Waste plastics are especially suited for NIR absorbance characterisation, as they exhibit strong spectral features in 
the near infra-red. Conversely, most plastics have similar appearance and shapes in the visible wavelength range, so using 
conventional machine vision for sorting is not effective. Allied with this, a large proportion of waste plastic materials will be 
presented as macroscale objects of a single material type, which means they are easily imaged using the spatial resolution 
available with common hyperspectral cameras.  
Challenges remain in sorting plastics, including distinguishing materials that have multiple component materials, such as 
coatings, colouring agents and fillers, or separating objects that are dark coloured, or which have been used for containing different 
materials, including hazardous ones.  
Recently, the addition of fluorescent markers has been developed as a way to add specificity to objects that are difficult 
to sort based on NIR spectroscopy of their basic material type. Such organic dyes absorb light of a particular wavelength and 
emit light with a longer wavelength. This property, called fluorescence, can be detected with extremely high sensitivity and 
therefore, only a very small concentration of a fluorescent dye is sufficient. Coatings with a thickness of ~ 1 μm require a dye 
concentration in the order of some parts per billion, to enable the detection of the fluorescence. Such a small concentration in a 
thin layer is not visible to the eye and does not affect physical properties like mechanical strength. 
In terms of process control of transparent organic coatings, such a system has been recently developed, with the 
involvement of partner IVV, by the Fraunhofer Polymer Surfaces Alliance POLO®42. For the excitation of the dye molecules a 
(monochromatic) light source (LED, laser) is required, and a digital camera can be used to detect the fluorescence light. 
 
35Vinod K. GuptaandTawfik A. Saleh, Synthesis of Carbon Nanotube-Metal  Oxides Composites; Adsorption  and Photo-degradation 
36 Plastic handbook chapter 8: PLASTICS RECYCLING AND BIODEGRADABLE PLASTICS, Susan E. Selke: 
37 OPTIJECT project (Grant Agreement no. 262623), www.optiject.eu 
38 B2B contracts for the detection of good batches of recyclates as well as for HSI-based monitoring solution for plastic identification in recycling line 
39 Steinert KSS Optical Sorting Machine, Steinert GmbH, Widdersdorfer Str. 329 – 331, D-50933 Cologne, Germany. https://steinertglobal.com/mining/industrial-minerals/ 
40 PICVISA Ecopack, PICVISA Optical Sorting, C/Isaac Newton, 2, 08280 Calaf (Barcelona) España, http://picvisa.com/en/p/productos/ecopack-plastic-sorting-21-18 
41 https://steinertglobal.com/magnets-sensor-sorting-units/sensor-sorting/nir-sorting-systems/ 
42 https://www.polo.fraunhofer.de/de/Aktuelles/downloads.html 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 14 of 127 
Depending on the dye’s optical properties additional components such as filters might be necessary. These properties can be 
used to tag materials and coatings43 and for example determine coating thickness. In addition, some dyes show a fluorescence 
effect, whose intensity and wavelength is influenced by the surrounding molecules, the pH, the ionic strength of the medium, or 
by the viscosity of the matrix, showing a stronger fluorescence depending on the cross-linking degree of the resin. 
In terms of sorting, fluorescent markers are already well established as a means of sorting cells or other biological species44. A 
prototype system has been developed to sort small flakes of plastic, by the addition of fluorophores45, which reduces the minimum 
size of an object that can be sorted, and handles more complex polymer blends. A commercial fluorescent marker and sorting 
system for polymers is offered by Polysecure46. This system requires the addition of fluorophores to the polymer itself, and in 
sufficient quantities for detection, and so the amount of fluorescent material required is a limiting factor to the general use of this 
technology. A new product under development by Nextek Ltd., called PRISM47, is based on the addition of fluorescent inks to the 
labels of plastic containers, which strongly reduces the amount of fluorophore required, but presents challenges if the labels have 
been partially removed or degraded in handling. 
Fluorescent markers are typically produced in the form of molecular dyes/ nanoparticles. Dyes are the most cost-effective 
fluorophore, which makes them attractive for waste sorting. However, where nanoparticles are already deployed as functional 
additives, such as paramagnetic oscillators, it should be possible to add the functionality of fluorescence to existing particles, or 
microspheres. Such dual-use particles have been developed for combined cancer-cell imaging and destruction48. Commercial 
fluorescent paramagnetic microspheres are available49, while customised particles will be investigated that are suitable for 
material properties of debonding adhesives under development. While carbon nanotubes-based nanocomposites are expected 
to require fluorescence dyes, other standard metallic nanoparticles (eg iron oxide) can be identified using standard X-ray 
fluorescence spectroscopy without dye addition. Dispersion of nanoparticles in thin films can be characterised by diffractometric 
techniques50. 
DECOAT novelty: In terms of process control, fluorescent dyes, applied in ppm (parts per million) concentrations in core and shell 
of the triggering materials, and resulting in a specific fluorescence will be used in the design the microcapsules. The detection 
system records the fluorescence intensity distribution, which finally will be converted into volume distribution of the core and shell 
within the coating. Moreover, the curing states of the core and shell can be imaged by using special dyes. The advantage of such 
a system is to measure and control all thickness/curing state relevant parameters at the same time during production. In terms of 
sorting, these fluorescent markers in the core-shell will be unique to the microcapsule and its triggering mechanism, and therefore 
allow sorting each part to the appropriate channel and process for debonding and separation. The amounts of fluorophore are 
limited, and localised to the region of the part containing the adhesive layers, so that in the case where more than one additive is 
present, they can be identified separately, and a multiple stage recycling route can be implemented. All in all, we will research 
and optimise the hardware based on tailored photonic techniques and software using advanced chemometrics analysis and 
combining several technologies as required for identifying each relevant material. They will be adjusted to sort bonded and 
coated materials. Similar techniques will be used to control proper removal and quantify residues as needed to ensure quality of 
reprocessed substrate material and for the tracking important parameters of the core shell synthesis, nano/micro composites 
dispersion and coating thickness as determinants of trigger efficiency. 
(iii) Upgraded mechanical and chemical recycling process – mainly related to WP4 work 
Trigger assisted mechanical recycling. Mechanical recycling is often most preferred from economic viewpoint. However, it is 
often limited in capabilities, e.g. for removal of contaminants. A well-known method is using a continuous high speed centrifuge 
to remove water and other impurities during plastic recycling. To our knowledge, combination with a trigger is not known at pilot 
or industrial level. 
DECOAT novelty: develop a continuous recycling pilot line to separate the coating from the coated plastics and textiles 
part by using a high speed industrial centrifuge (mechanical separation) that integrates the trigger mechanisms and that 
can be combined with the novel sorting technology. The idea is to start with grinding in medium size parts (3 x 3 cm), to have 
the material pass through an activation step (e.g. microwave, IR or steam oven tunnel or chemical bath), to trigger the debonding 
 
43 Holländer et al., (2015). "Process control for thin organic coatings using fluorescence dyes." Progress in Organic Coatings 88: 71-74. 
44 David W. Galbraith, Flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell sorting in plants: the past, present, and future, Biomédica 2010;30(Supl):65-70 
45 S. Brunner, P. Fomin, Ch. Kargel, Automated sorting of polymer flakes: Fluorescence labeling and development of a measurement system prototype, Waste Management 
38 (2015) 49–60 
46 Polysecure GmbH, Engesserstrasse 4a, 79108 Freiburg / Germany, http://www.polysecure.eu/en/product-marker-solution/product-marker-solution/ 
47 Nextek Ltd., Level 2, 1 Kensington Gore, London SW7 2AR, United Kingdom. http://nextek.org/portfolio/sorting-with-markers/ 
48 Shang-Hsiu Hu and Xiaohu Gao, Nanocomposites with Spatially Separated Functionalities for Combined Imaging and Magnetolytic Therapy, J. AM. CHEM. SOC. 2010, 
132, 7234–7237 
49 Spherotech Fluorescent Magnetic Particles, Spherotech, Inc. 27845 Irma Lee Circle, Unit 101, Lake Forest, IL 60045, USA 
50 http://optinanopro.eu/optinanopro01/files/2018/06/ApplicationNote-Texture.pdf 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 15 of 127 
and to start the separation process. The centrifuge movement will permit that the coating, even if its weight is comparable to the 
weight of the substrate material, will go out of the system fairly easy. Finally, the ‘decoated’ polymer (plastic parts, textile fibres) 
will be extruded and pelletized to be used again for melt extrusion. CO2 will be introduced during the melt extrusion process 
to remove residual amounts of coating and VOCs. 
Chemical recycling via CREASOLV process: This is a solvent based selective extraction process developed by partner IVV 
that allows pure plastics at the molecular level to be recovered due to their specific solubility. It has no by-product (solvents can 
be used in closed loop endlessly with only few ppm lost in each cycle) and a very low environmental impact demonstrated by 
peer-reviewed LCAs51,52. Unlike general chemical recycling that generate monomers requiring a new polymerization step, 
Creasolv® generates polymers. One further advantage is that via successive steps with tailored solvents, even mixed input 
materials can be recycled. Furthermore, due to the mild processing conditions (no supercritical conditions), the polymer maintains 
its properties as opposed to mechanical recycling. So far, CreaSolv® has been applied to standard thermoplastics like PS, PE, 
PVC, PA, etc. It has also already been successfully tested on lab-scale for recycling of PVC/PET composites53. 
DECOAT novelty: the process will be adapted for typical textile and plastics coatings enabling the recovery of selected 
coating materials. In combination with DECOAT core/shell microcapsules and lipophilic SAPs, the CreaSolv® treatment will be 
researched as a potential method of triggering, e.g. by triggering the swelling of SAP’s and also as a method to remove remaining 
contaminants after the application of a previous (mechanical) debonding process. 
(iv) Demonstration of circular use and related eco-design– mainly related to WP5 work 
Circular use of raw materials of coated parts. DECOAT emphasises on the removal step, i.e. the separation of the coating 
from the substrate. However, we also want to show that it is possible to recycle the materials, coating and substrate afterwards.  
DECOAT novelty: DECOAT ambitions to show this circular use and wants to demonstrate it for one generic coated textile and for 
one generic coated plastics case. We want to select two such generic systems and will show circularity of the material use. For 
the actual debonding, we will apply the most suitable technology developed within DECOAT. For the recycling of the coating and 
of the substrate material, we will rely on the best available technologies at that moment.  
Difficult to predict already now but some good candidates: PVC coated PES fabric and ABS coated PUR. The actual recycling of 
the thermoset PUR is outside the scope of DECOAT but several efforts (eg H2020 projects URBANREC, see also section 2.1.2) 
are ongoing. DECOAT will rely on these efforts for showing the circular use. 
Further, we want to also make prototypes of actual parts for the use cases presented by the end-users, see also next section. 
These prototypes will be based on eco-design of the coatings, implementing the DECOAT findings. The outcome will be strategies 
to design single and multilayer coating solutions for textile and plastic substrates using our DECOAT developments. 
A public tool will be released that helps to integrate DECOAT technology in the eco-design of coated parts. 
 
1.4.2 Innovation potential 
The innovation potential of DECOAT is rooted in the current need for improved high tech material solutions for 
implementation of cost efficient solutions for recycling of coated textile and plastic parts. A significant contribution can 
be delivered to the emerging remanufacturing industry in Europe by helping it to extend to plastic parts. 
Recycling of coated plastic parts. The current technology for recycling painted parts is based on chemical 
bath, which is expensive, prone to contamination, and difficult to implement on small scale (so for SMEs 
that need to recycle the scrap). The technology is only available in some large recycling companies and OEMs. 
This chemical bath has a removal efficiency of ca 95-98,5%. The current 1,5% of coating that remains 
causes a dramatic loss of properties in the recycled material. Taking all this into account, the innovation 
potential targeted by DECOAT is to (i) find alternatives for the current chemical baths for a more 
environmental-friendly process that is easier and cheaper to implement at small scale/companies; (ii) achieve 
a removal efficiency of >99% in a single step, leading to higher quality recycled material at market affordable price.  
 
51 https://polystyreneloop.org/content/8-downloads/presentations/10-lca-of-etics-eol-treatment-of-eps.pdf   
52 Freegard, K.; Tan, G.; Morton, R. 3rd interim report on WRAP Project PLA-037. The Waste & Resources Action Programme, Banbury (UK), 2006. 
53 U.Knauf et al. Recycling of PVC/PET composites - Production of pure and homogeneous recyclates, and process monitoring – Kunststoffe / Plast Europe Vol 90 (2) 24-26, 
2000 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 16 of 127 
Market size coated plastics: European plastic parts production was almost € 37billion euro (Eurostat – 2016 data). Assuming 
that ca 20% is coated, we find a European market value for coated plastic parts of more than €7 billion. For the coating 
materials themselves (acrylates, polyurethanes,…), the worldwide market on plastics was valued at ca. € 5 billion (2015). The 
global demand for automotive coatings is ca. 3 million tonnes, with the European share over 20% (2016)54.  
Recycling of coated textiles. In the past recycling of PVC coated PET fabrics and pilot scale recycling has 
been tried, using chemical recycling, e.g. TexyLoop55. Further, textile recycling mainly focusses on shredding 
of uncoated textile fabrics (typically production waste, also some post-consumer) into short fibres that are 
reused for non-woven production. And although coated textiles are often used, no economically viable solutions 
targeting a reasonable value after recycling exist today. The innovation potential targeted by DECOAT is to 
present coating solutions made with recycling in mind, both from the design and materials side. Moreover, the 
corresponding techniques will be developed. This innovation potential is on medium-term as DECOAT will offer a novel option, 
in-between the existing pure mechanical and chemical recycling, for dealing with coated textiles and plastics. 
Market size coated textiles: The global coated fabrics market is projected to reach almost €25 billion by 2021, at a CAGR 
of more than 4% in terms of value, during the forecast period, 2016 to 202156. The European textile coatings market is 
projected to witness growth over 4% up to 2024. Rising industrial, transportation, and building & construction are driving the 
market for textile coatings. Along with these, increasing quality and performance standards in textile coating based fabrics are 
also driving the market. Recent market potential of microencapsulated products/ additives is estimated at ca. €5 billion, 
growth ca 5-7%/y57 and ca. €1 billion within the technical textile and clothing industry58, focusing on applications like medical, 
sportswear and leisure. 
The global textile coating binders market is dominated by thermoplastics (2015 data): PVC-Polyvinyl Chloride (ca 40%), 
Polyurethane (ca. 20%) and Acrylics (ca. 7%). PVC is the most used coating for various applications due to its low cost, easy 
weldability, and easy coloration and printability. PU benefits from being an eco-friendly textile coating, and is widely accepted and 
preferred by manufacturers in North America and Europe. Applications for coated textiles are very diverse, but main areas 
are: transportation, building and construction and (technical) clothing, e.g. for outdoor, workwear, protective clothing59.  
Although currently limited, there is a strong driver for using coated textiles for daily clothing as it has been shown that the 
coating is reducing microfibre losses during washing by up to 50%60. But, having to deal with coatings would hamper and 
delay the current emerging recycling of textiles even more. This is a potentially very large opportunity DECOAT technology can 
tap into. 
Recycling of automotive plastics. During the process of recycling ELV (End-of-Life Vehicles), most of the metal is recovered 
from cars, and the rest of materials and parts are shredded to obtain what is called ASR (automotive shredder residue)61. This 
ASR represents 20-25% of the original car weight, it contains typically 20 to almost 50% 
plastics and most of it is currently landfilled or burned. The EU directive (2000/53/EC), 
demands that only 5% of total ELV is landfilled. The plastic separation in the ASR is complex 
and the purity that is currently feasibly is not enough to have productive mechanical properties 
in the recycled plastic. It is stated that “The recovery [of plastic material] has remained 
marginal; yet it should develop rapidly now, given the EU requirements regarding material 
recycling. Manual dismantling allows cleaner recovery, yet it is severely limited by productivity 
…. Conversely, it seems illusory to recover really clean materials, such as PUR, after passing 
them through a shredder, even though washing procedures have been tested”61. Therefore, 
rather than focussing on small incremental improvements, DECOAT proposes a radical 
novel approach. 
The global automotive industry is set to reach 114 million cars in worldwide sales 
annually by 2024, with an expected growth on average of 2.8%62. Within the EC report 
’GEAR 2030‘63 (2017), the opportunity for building novel or extending existing value chains 
 
54 https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/news/global-plastic-coating-market and http://www.european-coatings.com/Markets-companies/Coatings-market  
55 Recycling of flexible composite materials – see: www.texyloop.com  
56 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/coated-fabric.asp and https://globenewswire.com/news-release/2016/11/23/892449/0/en/Global-Coated-Fabrics-
Market-2016-2021-Market-is-estimated-to-reach-USD-20-41-billion-in-2016-and-is-projected-to-reach-USD-24-91-billion-by-2021.html  
57 Source: Gerald Rafler, Head of the Fraunhofer Institut Applied Polymer Science, Potsdam (2016) 
58 Estimate based on European Textile Association statistical data on technical textiles and clothing segments 
59 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/textile-coatings.asp (2016) 
60 A New Textiles Economy (2017), see: https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/a-new-textiles-economy-redesigning-fashions-future  
61 A. Buekens, X. Zhou, Recycling plastics from automotive shredder residues: a review, J Mater Cycles Waste Manag (2014) 16:398–414 
62 https://www.consultancy.uk/news/13900/global-car-market-to-break-through-100-million-in-sales-by-2020 
63 https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/26081/attachments/1/translations/en/renditions/native 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 17 of 127 
for a circular automotive sector is highlighted, as well the possibility for novel business models, eg for the recycling or re-use of 
(spare) parts. DECOAT feeds directly into this opportunity, by providing novel technological solutions for both disassembly and 
recycling. The high-end premium car segment which uses a lot of aesthetics coatings (ca. 13% of MAIER’s turnover) is 
‘booming’: it increased with more than 50% from 2010 to 201664.  
Of special interest for the automotive sector is the increased use of composite parts, especially in electric vehicles. This 
currently hampers the EoL processing as recycling of composite parts is much more difficult as (coated) metal parts. Therefore 
vehicles are designed that are easier to recycle, eg by making them easier to (partially) disassemble, even in a robotised manner. 
This offers a huge opportunity for the recycling industry and linked activities. DECOAT technology for recycling parts fits perfectly 
in this scheme. 
Opportunities exist also for trucks and busses, the latter are covered by partner MBT. Although less common then cars, there 
are roughly 1 million so-called HDOR (Heavy duty and off-road vehicles) discarded every year. Disassembly is much more 
common and far advanced with some brands for metal parts (iron, steel, aluminium, up to ca 75-85% of the total weight). 
Remaining challenge is dealing with complex multi-material parts (with electronics). DECOAT technology could contribute.  
Emerging market: recycling of smart textiles and plastics with integrated electronics. The market for smart textiles and 
wearables is expected to enter an exponential growth phase from an expected total world market of nearly 1.5 bn US$ by 
202165 to almost 3 bn US$ for the EU market alone in 202466. Eg DECOAT partners MBT, MAIER and CTAG are working on 
integrating electronics into various (interior) car elements. Next to the actual manufacturing, a missing solution to recycle the 
smart plastics hampers the market introduction. Therefore, we will also look into this emerging automotive application.  
Remanufacturing is the process of returning a used product to its original performance specifications (from the customers’ view). 
It is a strategy to reduce manufacturing's environmental impacts while boosting profitability. If considered during the early stages 
of a product's design, the concept of ‘active disassembly’ can be applied enabling the rapid and non-destructive disassembly of 
products with minimal component damage, which facilitates remanufacturing. DECOAT technology can aid to implement active 
disassembly, easing the actual disassembly (DECOAT – 1st level) and for making it easier to upgrade used parts by removing the 
coating so that it can be recoated. Remanufacturing is especially of interest for the automotive market. The worldwide 
automotive parts remanufacturing market (focus on metal parts) was valued at US$ 33.16 Billion in 2016 and is estimated to 
grow at a CAGR of 6.6% from 2017 to 202567. DECOAT technology could help to extend it also to plastics parts. Note that this 
is much stronger than the actual automotive market (worldwide 2.8%, in EU only 1.7%). Economic benefits for both 
remanufacturing companies as well as the customers are considered as the biggest driver for the overall automotive parts 
remanufacturing market. Remanufacturing aids in reducing cost pertaining to major parameters such as material, machining, 
production time, energy, fuel and labour costs, among other. In addition, present-day automobiles are made flexible so that they 
can easily incorporate remanufactured parts without affecting the performance of the vehicle. 
Remanufacturing goes wider than the automotive sector: the EU Remanufacturing Network estimates the current size of the 
EU remanufacturing industry to be almost €30bn, employing around 190,000 people. Their market study shows that the 
industry could triple to €90bn by 2030 and employ as many as 255,000 people68. As DECOAT technology will also be able 
to apply on large full parts, it can contribute to and benefit from the remanufacturing opportunity. The ERN study69 
identified the top barriers for remanufacturing becoming more widespread, i.e. volume/availability of a ‘core’ (used part intended 
to become a remanufactured product) and quality of the core. For coated parts, DECOAT technology answers to those barriers. 
The aerospace sector was shown as the sector where remanufacturing is currently being used most. On 2nd and 3rd place are 
automotive and EEE (Electrical and Electronic Equipment). The INDAR technology of partner RESCOLL is indeed already 
emerging in the aerospace sector. Our goal is to make it also enter other sectors, like automotive and EEE. This shows that 
DECOAT will also be useful for further development for disassembly of parts for these sectors (and debonding of coatings). 
The global adhesives market was valued at ca. €35billion in 2015 and is projected to reach ca. €50billion by 202170. The share 
of debondable adhesives is nowadays only ca. 0.5% of the general adhesives market. The water-borne adhesives 
(= DECOAT scope) account for ca 50% of the global market. If DECOAT results reach 1% of this market, we can address a global 
market of ca. €170-250million. 
The above motivates the selection of the DECOAT use cases: watertight backpack for outdoor gear (VAUDE), power 
switches and sockets for household electronics (PANASONICS) and automotive parts (with integrated electronics) (MBT, 
 
64 Statistica Charts: https://www.statista.com/chart/9309/super-luxury-car-sales-are-booming/  
65 Kamitis – Smart Textiles Study 2016-2021 
66 Grand View Research - Smart Textiles Market, Smart Fabrics Industry Report (2017) 
67 https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/9b2rfv/global_automotive?w=4  (2017) 
68https://www.circle-economy.com/european-remanufacturing-industry-estimated-at-e30bn-with-potential-to-triple-by-2030/#.Wy-ubExuJZU  (2016) 
69 Remanufacturing Market Study by ERN, Oakdene Hollins (2015) 
70 Global Adhesives and Sealants Market– Trends and Forecasts (2016 - 2021), edited in October 2016 by MORDOR INTELLIGENCE 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 18 of 127 
MAIER) as applications and sectors where recycling of coated materials is needed but no economically viable solutions 
are available yet. 
FREEDOM TO OPERATE. The consortium carried out a patent survey to specify possible opportunities not only to achieve 
knowledge advancements, but also to proceed in technological advancements in terms of patenting. The survey was conducted 
in the spirit of investigating and detecting unexplored areas and approaches of the field and to avoid possible overlapping with 
existed protected intellectual knowledge. The consortium decided that although a number of patents exist in similar fields, 
DECOAT project offers a huge opportunity to achieve technological advancements beyond the state of the art. 
 
Patent No – Title  Short Description  DECOAT’s Innovation potential 
CN105710044A: 
Intelligent 
classification system 
for recoverable 
garbage  
Intelligent classification for recoverable garbage: infrared 
(IR) sensor, metal detector, core control classification 
module and voice prompt module (IR sensor and metal 
detector used for detecting type of garbage. 
DECOAT will develop an automated 
sorting technology based on 
triggerable additives. 
CN100386453C: 
Method for decoating 
on waste plastic 
metal  
The present invention relates to a method of recycling scrap 
metal, in particular a plastic waste containing metal plating 
layer simultaneously recycling waste plastic and metal 
plating method faded. 
DECOAT will develop a method for 
decoating a paint layer from a plastic 
substrate in order to recycle both the 
coating and the substrate 
US20140287299A1: 
Heat-Debonding 
Adhesives 
A debonding tool provides current to conductive contacts on 
the conductive layer for generating heat in the heat-
generating layer when it is desired to debond the structures 
that are attached together in electronic devices, using the 
adhesive member. 
DECOAT will develop triggerable 
primers for interfacial debonding for 
electronic devices, automotive parts 
and textiles 
US5100494A: 
Structural bonding 
and debonding 
system 
The pieces are debonded or separated by passing a 
relatively high electrical power through the heating element, 
to soften or melt the adhesive. 
DECOAT will use triggers such as 
microwave, Rf irradiation, heat and 
steam together with smart nano-
materials, for softening/melting 
adhesives. 
US7901532B2: 
Method and 
apparatus for 
bonding and 
debonding adhesive 
interface surfaces 
Invention utilises thermoexpanadable microspheres and 
thermal energy to debond interfaces in an adhesive system 
or as vehicle carriers. It discloses a method of curing the 
adhesive system prior to the debonding step so that the 
same adhesive system may be used for both phases. It is 
especially useful in the automotive industry for end of vehicle 
life dismantling. 
DECOAT will use super absorbent 
polymers as microspheres which will 
react to moisture and heat. The 
applications are not only limited to 
automotive industry, but also to 
electronics and textiles 
US20150202858A1: 
Laser film debonding 
method  
A laser-based coating removal method debonds a film from 
a substrate rather than ablating the film. Laser light is 
transmitted through a transparent film to an underlying 
bonding layer for bonding the film to one or more additional 
films and/or a substrate. The laser light is absorbed at the 
bonding layer and the transparent film is released. In some 
embodiments, after the transparent film is released it is able 
to be physically removed. 
DECOAT will use microwave and Rf 
irradiation instead of laser light. 
Automated optical sorting will be also 
implemented. 
US6288158B1: 
Modified 
superabsorbent 
polymer based on 
polyacrylonitrile 
emulsions 
The surface of a polymer containing hydrolyzed 
polyacrylonitrile in the form of particulates, is modified by 
crosslinking in a water/alcohol reaction mixture and in the 
presence of silica. The resulting product features improved 
absorbency under load and lesser degree of gel blocking 
DECOAT will synthesize a new 
generation of SAP’s functionalising 
their surface with thermo-responsive 
coatings and decorating them with 
metal oxide nanoparticles. 
US6537341B2: 
Process for recycling 
fiber composite 
materials 
A process for recycling composite materials that comprise 
fibers and a matrix includes exposing the composite material 
to electromagnetic waves in the form of microwaves. The 
electromagnetic waves induce an introduction of energy into 
DECOAT will develop a recycling route 
based on microwaves and Rf irradiation 
for coated plastics and textiles. In 
combination with the above, the 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 19 of 127 
the composite material, leading to a separation of fibers and 
matrix. The separation operation can be assisted by a 
suitable solvent. 
Creasolv process will be act 
synergistically. 
 
In spite of the existing prior art (described in section 1.4.1), according to the knowledge of the partners, no patents exist that block 
the envisioned developments and innovations. Quite on the contrary, several DECOAT partners own key patents related to 
the developments. An overview of the most important ones: 
 
DECOAT scope DECOAT partner – relevant patents 
Debonding 
adhesives 
RESCOLL: proprietary INDAR technology via patents EP2519596 (B1), EP2519565 (A1), EP2265681 
(B1), EP1814935 (B1), EP1611217 (B1) 
Microcapsule 
production & 
application 
DEVAN: has an extensive know-how, through the PCT/IB2006/050605 patent, for the grafting of a 
covalent bond between the microcapsules’ shells and the textile fibres. The incorporation of these 
microcapsules into fabric substrates creates new functionalities for the treated materials. 
Microwaveable 
trigger (for yarns) 
CTECH: ‘Article assembly disassembly system’ - Patent WO2013/189956A1 
Nano- and 
microcapsules 
NTUA: "Multifunctional Coatings including Nanocontainers with Self-Healing, Antibacterial and 
Photocatalytic Properties" - Patent no 1007721; ‘Hybrid Coatings including Nanocontainers with 
Antifouling Properties" - Patent no 1007729; "Functional Multi-stimuli responsive polymeric 
nanocontainers-microcontainers as drug delivery systems" - Patent no 1007882. 
Creasolv®  IVV: “Process for recycling soluble polymers or polymer blends from plastic containing materials” - 
Patent No EP0894818B1; “Method for increasing the concentration of at least one polymer from a 
polymer containing waste material, and polymer recyclate” - DE102013212813A1; “Method for recycling 
plastics and use of thereof” - EP1888677B1. 
 
The DECOAT consortium is convinced that the triggered debonding approach presented here is still largely uncharted 
and that opportunities are multiple to patent IP, including options to extend and elaborate some of the existing patents 
of DECOAT partners. 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 20 of 127 
2 Impact 
‘Do not go where the path may lead, go instead where there is no path and leave a trail’  
(Ralph Waldo Emerson, writer)