2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
(a) Dissemination and exploitation of results 
To ensure successful exploitation of the DECOAT results, dissemination and exploitation activities will run in parallel with 
the project implementation. Integrity and consistency of all dissemination and exploitation efforts will be supervised by the 
Exploitation and Innovation Manager (OSM, see also section 3.2.1.1b). The strategy for these activities is as follows: 
 Dissemination: all partners will collaborate in dissemination of results among the relevant industry sectors; 
 Exploitation: industrial take-up of the materials and related processes developed in DECOAT plays a central part: each 
partner will be involved in defining a preliminary business plan for its key exploitable results (KER). 
WP7 includes tasks dedicated to the dissemination and exploitation of the project achievements. The Plan for the 
Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (PEDR) will be completed at the start of the project (preliminary version of D7.2, see 
WP7), improved and evaluated through the duration of the project. It will ensure that all project partners have a joint 
understanding of dissemination and exploitation and which knowledge protection measures will have to be taken.  
The draft PEDR 
The draft PEDR presented in this section will be further elaborated from the start of DECOAT and regularly assessed and adapted 
to the actual evolution of the project, see the related (incremental versions of) deliverables that will be delivered in WP7. We will 
also follow and implement as much as possible the guidelines as recently published by the EC on social media: ‘Social media 
guide for EU funded R&I projects’89. 
A. Target audience and message for a complex network of stakeholders. 
Disseminating project results at working groups and strategic committees beyond the consortium will take place. We will address 
the following groups of stakeholders to maximise the impact: plastic/textiles/coatings converters, end users, waste managers, 
recyclers (to generate a push/pull effect across the value chain) but also policy makers and the wide public (to promote the EoL 
products’ collection and promote innovative public procurement for DECOAT solutions). 
B. Channels for dissemination: from public online to interpersonal face-to-face interaction. 
Dissemination will be based on three major channels: (i) Online dissemination – website and social media, webinars, electronic 
newsletters, and digital press releases; (ii) Offline dissemination - classical vehicles of knowledge transfer like project 
workshops, publications, conferences and trade fairs, printed factsheets and flyers; (iii) personal direct dissemination via the 
formal and informal (personal) networks of DECOAT partners. A list of key dissemination channels specific for each partner 
has been collected (see the partner descriptions in section 4.1). 
C. Preliminary overview of dissemination actions: continuous actions and dedicated campaigns. 
To disseminate as efficiently as possible (in terms of reach and cost), two main pillars are defined: (i) continuous dissemination 
relying on existing events and means and (ii) organising dedicated DECOAT dissemination campaigns and events.  
(i) Continuous dissemination.  
Goal: Raise awareness and interest, ensure that ‘external stakeholders’ remain aware of DECOAT, keep them committed and 
ensure they can follow the project progress. Creating opportunities for direct interaction with interested stakeholders, regular 
newsletter for sharing project news and announcing conferences/events. Continuous activities also include: updating project 
information on the DECOAT website and on social media platforms, distributing leaflets,… Thereby using the materials and 
channels established in DC1 (see below). 
Audience: with this regular stream we want to reach as wide a public as possible, including key stakeholders and also the wider 
public, depending on the content.  
Key message: broadcast of smaller news items, updates, events, … but also more extended updates on the progress of the value 
chain demonstration that will be implemented in DECOAT. 
 
89 http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/grants_manual/amga/soc-med-guide_en.pdf 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 31 of 127 
Organisation: ISWA (NL) as WP7 leader will coordinate. Dissemination material will be collected from ALL PARTNERS and a 
schedule will be set-up to efficiently organise the dissemination, leveraging synergies and avoiding any possible overlaps. 
(ii) Dedicated DECOAT Dissemination Campaigns (DC) 
Goal: the Dissemination Campaigns (DC) will give a boost to DECOAT’s dissemination efforts at crucial times in the project 
schedule. The goal is not to depend on external events to be able to promote the project but to proactively choose our own stages 
and adequate timing. This requires the ability to garner the attention of and create impact with a significant number of relevant 
stakeholders, and the consortium is confident to be able to create this momentum for its campaigns given the ASG and the 
associations within or closely associated with the consortium and the extensive existing dissemination channels. Because the 
dedicated Dissemination Campaigns (DC) form the key element of the activities, they are described separately below.  
DC1 – create awareness. Goal: to create awareness for and stimulate interest in DECOAT based on the ambitious goals, 
innovative nature, commercial and sustainability potential, and the diversity and reputation of the consortium members.  
Target audience: ASG, materials researchers, potential end-users, the coating community, the general public, policy makers, in 
short: very wide and covering all actual and potential target audiences.  
Activities: the dissemination activities will start immediately through a press release linked to the kick off meeting. Further key 
activities are performed through the setting up of the DECOAT project website and having first dissemination material available 
(e.g. DECOAT leaflet -digital and print), all following a distinct project visual identity. Furthermore, the consortium will make 
extensive use of consortium partners’ dedicated professional social media channels, especially LinkedIn and Twitter.  
When: by Month 5 - Responsible partner: ISWA (NL) and CTB (as coordinator) 
DC2 – call for collaboration. Goal: Call for collaboration to continue and expand on DECOAT results that need external partners 
or licensee to be exploited, i.e. results stemming from WP1-WP4 that can be applied outside the use cases of WP5.  
Target audience: ASG, innovators/entrepreneurs, large enterprises with own R&D, innovative SMEs, related current and future 
projects, coating/plastic converters, recyclers, waste management bodies, product designers and developers. 
Activities: public events organized by DECOAT, compilation of a white paper on DECOAT coating debonding solutions.  
When: max 4 months after MS5 (M31 - end of main development work in WP1-4) is reached (M35) - Responsible partner: CTB 
DC3 – promotion of DECOAT results. Goal: Promotion of project results (focus on new solutions for recycling of coated parts) 
to pave the way for their further development, exploitation and commercialisation.  
Target audience: materials and coating community, current and future research consortia, innovators/entrepreneurs, plastics 
converters, textile industry, end users, policy makers, standardisation bodies and regulators, general public. 
Activities: press releases, publication of peer-reviewed and other articles with the goal of promoting project results with a clear 
focus on the use cases. Dissemination via selected conferences and own DECOAT events. Storytelling as format for presenting 
the prototype cases, highlighting the promising role of the novel DECOAT solutions. By specifically targeting end users, investors 
and policy makers, DC3 will pave the way for their adoption, commercialisation, and further development. 
When: by M46 - Responsible partner: ISWA (NL) 
An overview of dissemination actions in given in the table further below (pag 32). In section 4, for each partner its specific 
dissemination channels, like conferences, networks,… are listed. 
D. Exploitation activities: identification of results, outline of potential and steps to bring to market 
D1 Identification of key results 
The table below (pag. 34) shows the overview of the Key Exploitable Results integrated along our partner’s value 
chain and initial exploitation also in link with previously discussed dissemination steps. The results most suited for 
direct industrial exploitation are further elaborated in part D3 – Steps to market and preliminary business plans below.  
D2 Outlining of the potential market 
Plastic Recycling and recycled plastic market: The global plastic recycling market has been gaining a steady momentum over 
the past few years due to the related directives and growing awareness about CO2 emissions and the need to reduce them. This, 
together with the overflowing state of landfills has also triggered an urgent need for recycling plastic instead of producing virgin 
material. The global plastic recycling market, valued at €25 bn in 2015 (of which only €2 Bn in EU90), is expected to reach a figure 
of €45 bn by 2024. During the forecast period of 2016 and 2024, the global market is expected to grow at a CAGR of 6.9%. 
Steady growth is expected in the global market due to ever more stringent laws and increasing environmental awareness, 
especially in EU. In 2012, out of the 25.2Mt of plastics collected for recycling, 6.6 Mt were recycled in EU and 8.9 Mt were 
incinerated. Incineration is massively used, with for example 38.8% of plastic packaging waste91. Currently, according to the 
 
90 Coltelli M.B., Aglietto M., Riutilizzo dei materiali polimeri, Edizioni Nuova Cultura, 2015  91 Plastics Europe, association of plastics manufacturers : Plastics, the facts 2017 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 32 of 127 
Plastic Recyclers Europe, 1000 companies are operating with 30.000 employees and a 3Mt installed capacity. Currently, the 
European installed plastic recycling capacity is practically being fully used and mostly focused on packaging, indicating 
the huge potential for new investments for and adopting new (more) efficient technologies, provided they are proved 
economical viable. 
We calculate that DECOAT solutions address ca 3.5 million tons of coated waste material (see section 2.1.1.3). For calculating 
our direct impact, we assume that we reach on longer term 8% of the potential market, i.e. ca 280ktons. This means that 
DECOAT can improve the competitiveness and innovation capacity for a market segment of ca €1.7billion (assuming on 
average a commercial value of ca €6000/ton for these coated materials). For reaching a market share of 8% we count on the 
market pulling effect of the ‘brand owners’ in DECOAT (Daimler group via MBT, PANASONIC and VAUDE) and on the ASG 
members, especially on the leveraging effect of the industrial associations and networks. These will help to motivate companies 
outside DECOAT to adopt our technology. A natural entry to the market will be addressing production waste. Nowadays at 
industrial level ca. 10-12% of the freshly produced coated parts are considered production waste because of the 
combination of complex coating/painting processes and very high-quality standards, especially in automotive, electric electronic 
and transport industry. These parts cannot be reused because they are ‘contaminated’ with the coating material. They can be 
sold at less than €100/ton for very low added value applications or, even worse, be discarded of for land-fill or thermal recovery. 
This is an important loss factor because the commercial value of the parts is estimated at ca. €6000/ton. Estimating the actual 
material value is difficult as the coated parts concerns both expensive engineered polymers as well as less valuable materials. 
On average, we estimate their value here at €2000/ton. Given the easy material availability (see also above) and an estimated 
recycling cost of ca. €500/ton (for logistics, triggered removal and recycling using CO2 assisted extrusion, see also section 
1.1.1.1), DECOAT can offer a viable solution for recuperation of coated production waste delivering cost effective 
secondary materials. 
DECOAT will create a market need for the triggerable additives. Starting again from the 280ktons of coated waste material, 
and assuming that on average a coating or primer layer represents 3% of the total part weight and that we need to add 5% of 
triggerable additives, we calculate a need for 420tons of additives per year in Europe. At an average cost of ca. €50/kg, this 
means a DECOAT triggerable additives market of over €20 million annually, or ca. 60 jobs.  
Implementing the DECOAT technology will significantly boost the recycling sector: if we consider again the recycling cost 
of €500/ton, this corresponds to ca €140million extra annual turnover, or ca 400 jobs, created by enabling the recycling of 
these (280kton of) coated parts.  
To realise this, recycling lines will need to integrate (or be updated in case of existing ones) with the optical detection 
technology (estimated at ca €150k/unit by IRIS), the MW technology (estimated at €70k/unit by CTECH) and/or the 
Creasolv technology (estimated at ca. €2000k/unit by IVV). Assuming a typical recycling line has a capacity of 5kton/year, 
approximately 60 lines are required to process the target material of 280kton. All lines will need the optical detection system, 
leading to a market of €9million (60 x 150k€). We assume that 30% will use ‘standard ovens’ (no direct DECOAT benefit), but 
50% of the lines will install MW or other heating equipment, so a market of €2.1million (30 x €70k) and roughly 20% a Creasolv 
system, leading to €24million (12 x €2000k). All this sums up to a one-time market of ca. €35million, which will create a 
recurrent annual turnover of ca €7million (20%) thanks to related services (consulting, maintenance, updating). 
SWOT analysis for DECOAT. Relative competitive strengths and weaknesses for the DECOAT applications have been 
analysed according to a preliminary SWOT Analysis that will be further elaborated and finalised within DECOAT.  
Strengths 
Novel set of triggerable techniques for debonding 
Unique mix of interdisciplinary skills and expertise 
Strong industrial participation, including R&D driven SMEs 
Weaknesses 
Cost of coating will increase  need to offset this by focussing 
on total cost (and potentially into new business models) for 
commercialisation 
Opportunities 
Answer the unmet demand for recycling of coated parts 
Grab potential of techniques that have proven merits for other 
applications, e.g. microwave additives  
Contribution to EC regulations concerning Plastics Strategy 
DECOAT solutions are transferable to other applications, e.g. in 
construction, composites, furniture, also for enabling repair 
Threats 
A systemic approach is needed, might be difficult to introduce 
the novel concepts  counterbalanced by the strong pressure 
to recycle plastics, see e.g. the EC initiatives 
Low virgin material prices, depending on oil price  on longer 
term continuing low oil prices are highly unlikely 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 33 of 127 
Table: overview of planned dissemination activities and link with key dissemination elements: dissemination campaigns “DCN” (DC1, DC2 and DC3), continuous 
communication (“Cont.”) and Advisory & Support Group (“ASG”). 
Activity Goal Concrete action Lead /  
partners 
Timing Target 
group 
Expected impact 
Website Regular updates, news 
section, partner info, 
event listing, etc. 
Design and formulate contents, keep up to date ISWA 
(NL), 
CTB 
Operationa
l by M4, 
cont. 
All 
stakehold
ers 
Central repository of project 
information; communication 
materials direct back to here to 
achieve continuous engagement. 
Workshop and 
webinars to 
selected 
stakeholder 
groups 
Minimum of 6 workshops 
to 3 types of audiences in 
3 regions, with 15-30 
participants. At least 4 
webinars with 25 
participants each.  
Identification and acquisition of audiences, creation 
of workshop and webinar contents based on the 
needs of different target groups, delivery of 
workshops. Selection of most suitable speakers 
from among the consortium, market to relevant 
potential audiences, deliver to as many participants 
as possible; post-event distribution, make available 
on website 
ISWA 
(NL), all 
but 
primarily 
RTDs & 
industrial 
DC2 & 3 All 
stakehold
ers 
Boost for exploitation as these are 
very specifically targeted to 
audiences known to take a strong 
interest in the project. Also 
feedback for project to improve its 
processes and dissemination. 
Cost-effective in-depth 
dissemination of project results to 
diverse stakeholder groups. 
Final public 
event 
One event, at least 75 
participants 
Organisation of professional high-level 1-day 
conference on the novel DECOAT debonding 
solutions and materials 
ISWA 
(NL), 
NTUA, all 
partners 
DC3 Internatio
nal high-
level 
attendee
s  
Multiple key contacts and avenues 
for post-project exploitation and 
uptake. 
Dissemination 
of public 
deliverables 
As appropriate, i.e. linked 
to workplan deliverables 
Creation of reports or other documents or actions as 
required by the deliverables 
Led by the partner in charge of meeting the 
respective deliverable 
ISWA 
(NL), all 
partners, 
as per 
the 
workplan 
DC1, 2 & 3 Mainly 
research 
/ project 
communi
ty, ASG 
Engage research community and 
provide evidence of the potential 
and opportunity connected with 
DECOAT 
Flyers, 
brochures, 
factsheets, 
white papers, 
etc. - print and 
digital 
Public dissemination, 
tailored to specific groups 
such as scientific, policy 
makers, etc. 2,500 prints 
to be distributed. 
Creation of visually attractive and professionally 
written documents. 
ISWA 
(NL), 
CTB, all 
partners 
Flyer by 
M5, others 
based on 
developme
nts in DC 1 
& 2 
All 
stakehold
ers, ASG 
Easy-to-grasp general or 
condensed specific information to 
raise awareness, stimulate 
interest, and get a general 
audience to engage with the 
project  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 34 of 127 
Social media, 
e.g. YouTube, 
Twitter, 
LinkedIn, 
ResearchGate 
Regular posts (monthly); 
targeting >5,000 
followers 
Regular posts via all available channels; 
engagement and interaction with followers and 
readers. 
ISWA 
(NL), 
CTB, all 
partners 
Cont. All 
stakehold
ers 
Initial awareness raising, broad 
but 'superficial' network, spreading 
news widely quickly, reinforcing all 
public dissemination activities. 
Coverage in 
mainstream 
media 
At least 3; this can be 
newspapers, radio 
shows, science-focussed 
TV shows. 
Liaison with media outlets and submission of 
material to them, e.g. in the form of articles, 
interviews, videos scripts, in-person appearances 
ISWA 
(NL), all 
partners 
DC 3 General 
public 
Create awareness among the 
general public and stimulate 
interest in the sustainability 
potential of recycling coated parts. 
Articles in peer-
reviewed 
journals and 
magazines 
minimum of 5 Liaison with the most relevant media. Drafting and 
submission of professional, ready-for-submission, 
scientific articles. 
RTDs, 
ISWA 
(NL) 
DC2 & 3 Scientific 
audience 
Disseminate project results to 
potential adopters for exploitation 
in future research. 
Press releases Every 6-12 months. 
Distributed across the 
media channels of all 
partners. 
Write informative and well-edited document with 
links to relevant websites; distribute to all accessible 
media networks through the partners and via other 
communication channels, e.g. website 
ISWA 
(NL), 
CTB, all 
partners 
Cont., but 
especially 
DC2 & 3 
All 
stakehold
ers 
Key for dissemination through 
'traditional' media outlets. 
International 
trade fairs and 
conferences 
At least 1 trade fair and 3 
conferences per year, 
including presentations, 
exhibition, sponsorship 
/media partnerships 
Keep track of all relevant events, prioritise among 
them and coordinate partners' attendance; arrange 
for exhibitions and/or sponsorships where feasible 
and relevant, and push for speaking contributions. 
Coordinate with other initiatives/projects  
ISWA 
(NL), all 
partners 
DC2 & 3 Scientific,
business, 
industry 
stakehold
ers 
Meeting and presenting to the 
most relevant exploitation target 
groups for a direct innovation and 
knowledge transfer  
Outreach to 
local 
communities, 
schools, and 
universities 
At least 3 information 
events or opportunities to 
share project information, 
targeting 100 students, 
citizens, or pupils. 
Connect with relevant organisations such as 
schools, universities, consumer or citizen 
organisations, NGOs, public events; provide details 
about project, suggest talks and information that 
could be disseminated to respective audiences. 
ISWA 
(NL), all 
partners 
DC2 & 3 General 
public 
Create awareness among the 
general public and stimulate 
interest in the sustainability and 
recycling of coatings. 
Leverage 
existing 
channels: 
memberships, 
company 
newsletters, etc. 
Several times/year Assist partners with disseminating project 
information among their networks; potentially 
translation of materials into languages other than 
English; identify key networks into which to 
disseminate and organise input of project 
information with the respective consortium partner 
associated to the network. 
ISWA 
(NL), all 
partners 
Cont. All 
stakehold
ers 
Mobilising existing networks to 
create visibility for DECOAT, 
disseminate to organisations 
already working with our partners 
and likely to have matching 
interests, exploitation potential 
within partners’ peer groups. 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 35 of 127 
Table: overview of Key Exploitable Results. 
Description of  
Exploitable 
Result 
Main 
Partner(s) 
Our specific improvement vs the 
current status 
Exploitation: what is the (market) need / business 
opportunity it responds to ?  
Which strategy to follow ? 
Potential users (outside consortium) 
and timing 
Activities to reach users – 
link to DECOAT 
dissemination actions 
Triggerable 
debonding 
system for 
removal of 
coatings from 
textile and 
plastic 
substrates 
CTB, 
AIMPLAS, 
DEVAN 
Currently there exist no practical 
technologies for removal of 
coating, only limitedly via 
chemical dissolving. Targeted 
release of coating via a trigger in 
an economic and environmental 
way 
No current method to recuperate coated textiles 
For first time enable the recycling of coated 
textiles 
Offer technology via licensing 
(Large) companies specialised in 
coating and coating formulation 
producers (for substrates outside 
scope of DEVAN) 
Within 1st year after DECOAT ending 
DC2 – find partners for 
licensing 
Present at coating fairs 
and conferences 
Recycling pilot 
line for the 
triggered 
removal of 
coatings 
AIMPLAS, 
CTECH, 
IVV 
Selection of components to 
increase the efficiency, speed and 
quality of the plastic separation.  
Knowledge on plastic recycling & 
pilot plant elements optimization. 
Use of MW technology for recycling of coated 
parts 
Generate corresponding technical assistance 
and technological transfer to interested parties.  
Commercial agreements. Intellectual property. 
Technology transfer 
Recycling companies wanting to 
extend their capabilities to also 
recycle coated parts 
During DC3 event, a visit 
to the recycling line will 
be planned in 
Materials needed for the triggered debonding: 
 Thermo-
responsive 
core-shell 
nanostructure
d co-polymers 
NTUA, 
DEVAN 
A variety of core-shell polymer 
nanoparticles can be found in 
literature.  
Use in waterborne formulations 
for textile industry. 
Function under specific stimulus 
(temperature). 
Novel debonding technologies for the removal of 
coatings over plastics and textiles will be 
developed with the use of nanostructured co-
polymers, functioning under thermal triggers. 
Core-shell co-polymers will be combined with 
dyes to enable “smart sorting” in the recycling 
industry.  
Expected sales price: €40-50/kg 
Possible Patent is foreseen. Licensing or, if 
strong enough IP, potential for start up 
creation 
Coating (ingredient) producers 
Extended use: Use as drug delivery 
systems (medicine sector); Use 
also in environmental clean up 
Market ready ca 5 years after 
DECOAT. Scientific conferences 
and publications 
Presentations at coating 
and paint conferences 
Interact with via ASG 
member ‘European 
Coatings’ Journal   Super 
Absorbent 
Polymers 
NTUA A variety of core-shell polymer 
nanoparticles can be found in 
literature. Commercial available, 
but no structured. Size of 
micrometers.  
 Use in waterborne 
formulations (steam and 
Novel debonding technologies for the removal of 
coatings over plastics and textiles will be 
developed with the use of SAPs, which will 
operate under heat and steam triggers, as well 
as in selective solvents. Recycling industry will 
benefit since new processes with smart 
separation techniques will be implemented. 
Coating (ingredient) producers 
Extended use: SAPs can be also 
used in other sectors such as 
agriculture, personal intensive care 
costumer goods, waste water 
treatment, medicine for drug-delivery 
systems, sealants. 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 36 of 127 
selective solvents). 
 Nanostructured 
Low polydispersity index 
Possible Patent is foreseen. Licensing. Market ready within 2-3 years after 
DECOAT 
 MW& Rf 
assisted 
hybrid carbon-
based 
nanomaterials 
NTUA, 
CTECH 
Heating in the research of carbon-
based materials has been mainly 
limited to liquid solutions. 
Microwave heating of solid state 
carbon-based materials and 
especially CNTs, has distinct 
merits, but they have scarcely 
been reported (T. Kim, et al, 
2014). 
Hybrid CNTs will be synthesised 
either grown on SiO2 
nanoparticles or they will be 
decorated with metal oxide 
nanoparticles to enhance the 
inductive heat due to MW 
irradiation. 
CNTs are very strong mechanically and 
thermally, recycling should not affect their 
properties. Hybrid CNTs will have a competitive 
advantage in comparison to current commercial 
ones due to their multifunctionality. Possible 
selling price €50/kg (as hybrid materials). 
Establishment of spin-off company for the 
commercial exploitation of the hybrid materials. 
MW equipment: licensing to equipment 
manufacturers, equipment leasing to recycling 
companies. Expected cost per system depending 
on capacity – estimated at average of 
€70k/system. 
Targeted users:  
Hybrid CNTs: the recycling industry, 
also composites and coatings sector. 
MW equipment: recyclers 
Hybrid CNTs market ready within 2-3 
years after DECOAT 
MW equipment market ready by end 
of the project 
Hybrid CNT: scientific 
conferences and 
publications 
MW equipment: fairs 
and industry events 
Present to networks 
concerned with waste 
and recycling, like 
WRAP in UK. 
Debondable 
adhesives and 
primers 
RESCOLL Limited commercial products. No 
commercial primer available for 
debonding. 
Development of debonding 
primers and adhesives with 
processing and debonding 
capabilities (thermal triggering) 
adapted to the use cases. 
New bonding solutions for recycling, 
maintenance and upgrade of bonded products. 
Improvement of disassembly and sorting of 
multimaterial assemblies. 
Sales of the adhesives and primers formulations 
Automotive sector (OEM and TIER1), 
consumer goods, also aerospace and 
composite sector  
Ca 5 years after DECOAT as the 
durability of the debondable system 
must be proven before product launch 
Attendance to fairs on 
bonding / coatings. 
Webinars on debonding. 
Commercial brochures 
and online information 
(webpage/blog articles).  
Production for new users 
(prospection work) 
Monitoring 
systems for 
optimal 
DECOAT 
materials 
processing and 
end of life 
sorting and 
recycling 
IRIS Generic sorting systems using a 
number of techniques exist but 
they are not adjusted to DECOAT 
materials which are new. 
Looking at the most 
versatile/performant/cost effective 
combination of techniques, we will 
design and deliver optical 
systems that allow optimising 
DECOAT handling processes 
throughout its life cycle 
Ability to actually identify and recycle the new 
material. Availability of secondary raw materials. 
Green image of the value chain. Quality control 
for the debonding / coating recycling. 
Sales of monitoring and sorting systems. Cost: 
will depend from case to case. Rough estimate 
of on average 150k€ (including the 
chemometrics model) 
Recyclers of waste streams 
When the materials and recycling 
lines are becoming available on the 
market, IRIS would need in the range 
of 1 year to provide a system for a 
larger plant 
Demonstration events at 
the pilot plant of 
AIMPLAS or IVV will 
help as it will be a 
practical showcase of 
the systems to engage 
potential new end users, 
eg during DC3 event 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 37 of 127 
Novel 
application of the 
CreaSolv® 
Process 
IVV Dissolution and recovery of 
thermoplastics from composites 
and plastic mixtures. Application 
to coated textiles and special 
equipment in ELV and WEEE 
Process might enable recovery of pure fibre 
polymers from post-consumer textile waste; 
Process might increase the share of target 
polymers of WEEE recyclers 
licence the process 
Chemical engineering companies will 
build equipment, recyclers will run 
novel treatment plants 
Market uptake after further upscale 
within 3-4 years 
Recyclable 
coated parts: 
textiles for 
outdoor use; 
consumer 
electronics; 
structural 
automotive parts 
VAUDE, 
PANASONI
C, 
MBT 
Recycling of coated 
textiles/plastic parts is so far not 
possible/ viable.  
First time a workable, cost 
competitive solution.  
Circularity on coated textiles within our outdoor 
textile industry. 
Promote the novel DECOAT solutions 
throughout our supplier chain and stimulate/force 
them to adopt the novel technologies (market 
pull strategy). 
End user clients – target group of 
highly environmentally concerned 
people, eg LOHAS92 
End-user suppliers: textile and plastic 
finishing and coating companies, 
worldwide 
Follow up project to bring to sufficient 
high TRL - within 2-3 yrs after 
DECOAT 
Use of press releases at 
DC1 and DC3 to 
communicate to general 
public and the  
Recyclable 
automotive 
aesthetic 
components 
MAIER A high percent of the aesthetic 
components of the vehicles are 
coated. There is no cost effective 
debonding process that could 
bring good quality recycled 
material for manufacturing 
aesthetic components, because 
the smallest impurities produce 
surface defects on aesthetic 
parts.  
MAIER will validate a coating that can be easily 
debonded from the substrate. This will make 
decorated components easier to recycle so the 
materials can be reused for the very same 
applications, which is currently impossible.  
Carmakers strive to develop circular economy 
model. MAIER will increase its market share by 
offering aesthetical finishes that can be recycled. 
Sales of the coated parts.  
Most of the carmakers established in 
Europe are clients, so potentially 
every automotive OEM is a customer. 
Sales: As soon as the DECOAT 
technology is ready to be 
industrialized (will require high TRL 
project – eg type FTI). 
 
Participation in fair, 
promotion of DECOAT 
results during visit to 
clients 
Ecodesign tool  
for opportunities 
identification and 
benefits 
assessment of 
recyclable 
coatings (based 
on LCA, LCC 
and safety 
aspects) 
ECOMAT, 
IRES 
Currently the existing eco-design 
tools do not cover the applications 
to be considered within the 
project. The DECOAT tool will 
allow to map the main impact hot 
spots of coating materials applied 
to a ‘product’ (i.e. coating & 
substrate) and will be able to 
identify the opportunities and 
benefits of implementing the 
DECOAT debonding technology. 
The favourable results of the full assessments 
could be used by manufacturers to proceed with 
green marketing and communication strategies, 
as well as relevant certification and labelling of 
their products, leading to increased market 
shares due to better environmental performance. 
Release (basic version of) the tool in public 
domain, free to use by all but offer (paid) 
technical consultancy to use the (extended) tool 
optimally 
Major manufacturers in automotive 
plastics, coated fabrics and coated 
electronics sectors. 
Within 3-5 years after DECOAT 
Extend to domains outside DECOAT  
Within >5yrs after DECOAT 
Dissemination of the tool use among 
the manufacturers has a high 
potential to facilitate the use of the 
DECOAT solutions in their practices. 
The open version of the 
tool will be available for 
free use on DECOAT 
website. Communication 
of the tool will be 
implemented via main 
channels of the 
DECOAT partners, 
including newsletters, 
publications, fairs and 
conferences.  
 
 
92 LOHAS = Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability, see e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LOHAS  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 38 of 127 
D3 Steps to market and preliminary business plans 
 
The DECOAT industrial partners, whose foreground should ultimately lead to industrialisation/commercialisation, have 
carried out preliminary business plan canvassing from which a compound brief is outlined below. This is based on the 
market creating potential (section 2.1.1.2), the available amounts of coated waste (section 2.1.1.3) and the outline of the market 
potential (part D2 of the PEDR) and taking into account the improved innovation capacity (see section 2.1.2). 
 
DECOAT BUSINESS CANVAS 
Vision 
Provide sustainable solution for 
introducing coated parts into circular 
economy. 
Competitive advantage 
Novel smart polymer material systems for debonding 
of coatings, applicable to the main industries - the 
respective recycling method and the related 
processing. 
Target market 
Coated materials industries 
that are impossible to recycle 
up to now 
Problem: (multi-layered) coated 
parts not recyclable because of 
permanent bonding 
Solution: Create triggered 
debonding systems for coated parts, 
the linked recycling process and the 
corresponding circular economy 
roadmap. 
Marketing activities 
Workshops with Industry Engineers and Technicians 
in order to adopt DECOAT materials and processes 
Participation in exhibitions and events with booth and 
presentations 
Market pull by ‘big brands’ & technology push by 
innovative R&D (SME) companies 
Mass marketing to the general public to act as 
leverage for industry to adopt DECOAT solutions 
Video production, use of social media,  
create public awareness 
Sales channels 
Already established partners’ 
network in their countries and 
across EU 
Industrial exhibitions 
Direct use from Industrial 
partners 
Licensing agreements Business model 
Materials: Direct use by the 
Industrial partners;  
Processes: licencing agreements 
with related industries 
Equipment: direct sales of optical 
monitoring and recycling equipment 
Budget and funding: 
Financial summary: 
The initial target will be to license the 
DECOAT recycling process know-
how to recyclers and to sell the 
DECOAT recycling technology.  
Funding required:  
Further development costs need to 
be covered (eg via H2020).  
Further investments: 
Needed to increase the TRL of 
DECOAT technology to market 
readiness, via combination of public 
and private funding  
Novel market creation for DECOAT outcome  
 
Revenue channels  
(after 7yrs) 
Recycling activities of coated 
parts (€140mio/yr) 
Triggerable additives sales: 
microcaps, carbon-based 
nanomaterials,.. (€20mio /yr) 
Recycling equipment sales: 
advanced optical monitoring 
and sorting; MW oven, 
Creasolv systems  
(€35mio total) 
Recycling Equipment 
servicing: maintenance, 
technical consultancy 
(€7mio/yr) 
0204060801001201401600 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Recycling activitiesTriggerable AdditivesRecycling equipmentRecycling Equipment servicingYears after DECOAT endYearly turnover (Million €)
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 39 of 127 
E. Training development 
Audio-visual material will be prepared from the development work and demonstration activities. The material will be used to train 
personnel from the company partners and public material will be put online (interactive way) to improve skills and competences 
of persons working in (mainly) the plastics, textiles and recycling industry. Workshops hosted at the pilot plant set ups at AIMPLAS 
and IVV, among others, will be organized to promote DECOAT foreground. The workshops will act as multipliers of dissemination 
efforts. 
F. Standardisation and Regulatory requirements 
Participating in standardisation activities will enable DECOAT to: (i) gain intelligence on standards in areas touched by DECOAT, 
e.g. recycling, sustainability, carbon footprinting, end-of-life and safety; (ii) contribute to the development of new standards and 
ensure that specific needs are taken into account; (iii) establish contacts with other stakeholders, experts and regulators at 
national, European (CEN) and worldwide (ISO) levels. See also Task 7.4. 
G. Evaluation of the PEDR 
The plan will also envisage ways of measuring the dissemination and exploitation efforts and its impact on DECOAT 
partners and the stakeholder community. We will continuously pay attention to this but also do explicit evaluations before 
starting the DC2 and DC3 action so that the PEDR can still be adapted for the final DECOAT part, see WP7 (Task 7.1). 
Management of research data 
Data and Knowledge produced during the DECOAT project will be handled within the tasks of the Data Management Plan. 
DECOAT will also join the Open Data Pilot. A data repository will be created in order to store raw data, results, reports and 
deliverables produced during the project. During the early stages of the project, partner IRES will discuss with partners and take 
a decision about the accessibility of the data. A justified decision on which simulated and experimental data will be confidential 
and which will be public will be made. As Data Repository, one of the European Open Access is foreseen.  
Raw data generated by instruments during experiments will be open and shared with the public. Confidential and sensitive data 
related with industrial processes or products will be restricted and shared only among the Consortium partners. In matters of 
reusability, not sensitive or raw data will be shared among the research community through existing web Data Repositories such 
as the UCI repository93, which is widely used for Materials Data. Access rights and intellectual property will be managed according 
to the grant agreement and the consortium agreement. The kinds of data generated by the project are described in the following 
table. 
Research Data produced  Accessibility Data Exploitation, Accessibility and Reusability 
Experimental Procedures Public Reports, publications 
Experimental Data Consortium Storage and preservation in data repositories 
Data for Economic and 
Environmental Impact 
Public or Consortium Storage and preservation in data repositories and 
possibly public or private reports 
Sensitive Industrial Data Consortium Storage and preservation in data repository (private) 
In terms of Data Exploitation and Reusability, partners working towards publishing their work (articles, monographs, conferences 
etc., preferably in high impact journals) are committed to comply with the “Open Access” guideline of the DECOAT project. More 
specifically, published work should be easy to access, online readable, easy to download and print. This can be done by sharing 
the above mentioned publications into online archives and providing open access to them such as Open Access Infrastructure 
for Research in Europe (OpenAIRE) and the Directory of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR). 
Knowledge management and IP protection 
Knowledge management to ensure open access. DECOAT project is focused on ‘research & innovation’ (this being a RIA) so 
a fair number of scientific articles is expected (see Table pag 32). For these publications, publishable results will follow an open-
access model in order to optimize the impact of publicly funded scientific research, both at European level and at Member State 
level. For what concerns other dissemination activities (Website, Workshops, Conferences and Fairs) DECOAT is fully 
committed to ensure full dissemination and high transparency of the data and results to ensure “public access” to project 
results. Only limitation is that it should be in line with the IPR management. We will make for example large parts of the 
environmental and economic evaluation (from WP6) publicly available. The strategy is clearly to provide as much as possible the 
knowledge generated by DECOAT to relevant communities for free, e.g. via partner ISWA (NL) and via ASG partners (like EUPC, 
EuMaT, European Coatings) as this will be beneficial for further collaboration and for levering the DECOAT impact. 
 
93 See: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.html  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 40 of 127 
IPR Management during DECOAT. Management of knowledge, intellectual property and of other innovation related activities 
involves the recognition of project results/innovations that may have commercial value, the protection of novel materials and 
processes developed in DECOAT and the determination of ownership of technologies and resolution of ownership conflicts. For 
the success of DECOAT all project partners agree on explicit rules concerning IP ownership, access rights to any Background 
and Foreground IP for the execution of the project and the protection of intellectual property rights (IPRs) and confidential 
information before the project starts. Such issues will be addressed in the Consortium Agreement that will be developed in line 
with the Grant Agreement (cf. H2020 General model grant agreement).  
Consortium Agreement. The purpose of the Consortium Agreement is to establish a legal framework for DECOAT in order to 
minimize any internal issues during the DECOAT implementation. It will be based on the DESCA 2020 Model Consortium 
Agreement regulating albeit general definitions and purpose through descriptions responsibilities of participating parties, project 
entry, duration and project termination, as well as mutual liabilities.  
Ensuring freedom to operate. For the preparation of the DECOAT proposal a patent analysis was made, see section 1.4.2. This 
showed that for implementing DECOAT there is freedom-to-operate. During DECOAT implementation, the external IP situation 
will be monitored as part of the exploitation activities (see Task 7.2). If forced to by the appearance of an external patent, mitigation 
actions will take place leading potentially to an adjustment of the scope of DECOAT.  
Access Rights to Background and Results during the project. To ensure a smooth execution of the project, the DECOAT 
partners agree to grant royalty-free Access to Background and Results IP for the project implementation. All project partners will 
determine any Background IP they are willing to submit to DECOAT within the Consortium Agreement before the project starts. 
IP Ownership within the consortium. IP on Results shall be owned by the project partner carrying out the work leading to such 
IP. If any IP is created jointly by at least two partners and it is not possible to distinguish between the contributions of each of the 
project partners, such work will be jointly owned by them. Any such joint inventions and all related patent applications and patents 
shall be jointly owned by the contributing parties.  
External Non‐Disclosure Agreement (NDA). Any external party interested in testing materials developed within DECOAT during 
the project must write a LOI (Letter Of Intent) to the consortium, indicating the intent and purpose of their contribution. Each LOI 
has to be approved by the consortium and the interested party has to sign an NDA.  
(b) Communication activities 
The DECOAT consortium will promote the project and its results, by providing targeted information to multiple audiences, in a 
strategic and effective manner and engaging in one- and two-way exchange. The communication activities will start at the onset 
of the project and continue throughout its entire duration. The communication strategy has the key objective to show the 
benefits of DECOAT results to the European coating, plastics and recycling communities. 
The communication strategy has been delineated to ensure a high visibility of the project and to help maximize the impact of 
results. We follow the guidelines from the Lead Market Initiative Ad-hoc Advisory Group for Bio-based Products94: “Design and 
implement a communication strategy involving all partners in the value chain and all other stakeholders to achieve coherent 
messages on bio-based products. (COM/9)”. Detailed description: 
 Goal: firstly to reach out to the general public to create positive momentum for recycling of materials (especially as their 
collaboration will be needed to collect certain items like EoL textiles) and, secondly, make them aware of the impact of EU 
collaborative projects; 
 Method: using story-telling to make the matter easier accessible and to show the human face of the involved people  
 Audience: wider public as coated products are being bought all the time by all the people. As such our back pack will be used 
as an example close to public. 
 Key messages: importance to select recyclable by design products as this will have a life cycle impact. 
 Channels: use of press release in combination with popular media is seen as the most effective to reach a larger public. This 
will be backed up by use of social media (YouTube, Twitter,…) and the project website and available public material, 
accessible for an (interested) layman. These outreach activities will be carried out at EU, national, regional and local level, 
under the responsibility of the local partners, but coordinated by the dissemination manager. 
Communication activities will support the key dissemination moments that are formed by the three Dissemination Campaigns 
(see part C of PEDR) as that should be excellent moments to reach a wider audience and to focus on user acceptance in turn 
generating further demand for recyclable products.  
We will also interact with other European (H2020) projects and relevant European networks, see Task 7.5.  
 
94 See: LMI Ad-hoc Advisory Group for Bio-based Products – List of Priority Recommendations 2011, see: 
https://biobs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/generated/files/policy/2011%20Lead%20Market%20Initiative%20LMI%20Biobased%20Products%20Priority%20Recommendati
ons.pdf