3.1 Work plan 
3.1.1 Overall structure of the work plan and graphical representation of components and their interrelations 
 
The key development of 
DECOAT is the debonding 
technology. The work plan is 
basically centred around this 
novel technology, both for 
the technical R&D work and 
for the supporting activities.  
On technical level, we first 
need to develop the necessary 
materials and processes on 
lab-scale. This will be realised 
for different triggerable 
materials and will lead to a 
portfolio of debonding 
technologies, each will be 
characterised, listing the 
strengths and weaknesses for 
the respective application 
domains (WP1). The coating 
and debonding process as well 
as a protocol to assess the 
efficiency of the debonding will be developed in close interaction (WP2). An optical monitoring method for sorting and process 
control of the coating and for the debonding will be developed (WP3). The debonding process will then be scaled-up via the 
design and building of an actual pilot line, and performing test runs on generic coated textiles and plastic parts for its validation 
(WP4). The novel coating systems will be integrated in the existing (adapted) processes by the manufacturers/end-users via use 
cases. The (small scale) production of products will undergo the recycling process, the recovered materials will be characterised 
and re-used, which will demonstrate the circular use of the coated parts (WP5).  
For the transversal activities, we will perform a detailed assessment of the environmental aspects (full LCA), of the costs (LCC) 
and ensure Safety-by-Design implementation, e.g. for microcapsules (WP6). Because of the systemic change targeted by 
DECOAT, emphasis is put on the implementation of innovation management: economic assessment (incl. preliminary business 
plans), dissemination to raise awareness from early on to maximise wide uptake of DECOAT results; communication for 
interaction with wider stakeholders and promote public awareness of circular economy values (WP7).  
All these technical and supporting activities will be efficiently coordinated (WP8), which also includes reporting, updating 
the work plan, data and risk management and interaction with the DECOAT Advisory and Support Group (ASG). 
For the work plan, we focussed on a more detailed description of the tasks that already can be well-defined steps in the DECOAT 
activities, e.g. which materials will be developed, which optical detection to be develop, supporting activities. The exact content 
of most activities later in the project (mainly WP5) will depend strongly on choices that need to be made during the project 
implementation, so these task descriptions are deliberately kept more open.  
WP1: Triggerable materials for coatingWP2: Triggerable debondingWP3: Automated sortingWP4: Continuous pilot lineWP5: Demo - circular useWP6: Environment & SafetyWP7: Exploitation, Dissemination & CommunicationWP8: CoordinationSUPPORT
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 42 of 127 
3.1.2 Timing of the Work Packages and main tasks - Gantt Chart 
 
 
Legend:low activityintense activityTask1369121518212427303336394245485154551 - Triggerable materials for coatings - NTUATask 1.1 – Specifications and requirements for end-use cases Task 1.2 – Synthesis of microcapsules and nanoparticles with triggerable response to heat and steam Task 1.3 –  Triggerable primers for interfacial debondingTask 1.4 – Selection and up-scaling Task 1.5 – Characterization of developed triggerable materials2 - Development of the debonding systems - CTBTask 2.1 - Coating formulations, basic coating tests and characterisationTask 2.2 - Development of DECOAT protocol for assessment of debondingTask 2.3 - Optimisation of the coating debonding system and assessment of the separation capacityTask 2.4 - Broadening the application field of separable coatings Task 2.5 -  Tailoring of most promised debonding systems for further processing 3 - Monitoring of Recyclable-by-design materials - IRISTask 3.1 - Process monitoringTask 3.2 - Selection of identification techniquesTask 3.3 - Sorting prototype concept and prototypingTask 3.4 - Guidelines for use of optical techniques for monitoring and quality control 4 - Pilot line - AIMPLASTask 4.1 - Implementation of the pilot lineTask 4.2 - Activation system dependent process optimizationTask 4.3 - Validation of the recycling pilot line Task 4.4 - Maximising the application potential of the recycled plastics5 - Demonstration circular use - MAIERTask 5.1 - Ecodesign of use case products in view of project technological developments Task 5.2 - Manufacturing of prototypes Task 5.3 - Implementation of circular use cases Task 5.4 - Evaluation & Guidelines for further industrial take-up 6- Environment & safety - IRESTask 6.1 - Risk assessment & Safe-by-Design principlesTask 6.2 - Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)Task 6.3 - Life Cycle Costing (LCC)Task 6.4 - Toxicity, Release and Exposure assessmentTask 6.5 - Ecodesign tool 7 - Innovation, dissemination & communication - ISWATask 7.1 - Update and evaluation of outreach strategy Task 7.2 - Exploitation and technology transferTask 7.3 - Dissemination & communicationTask 7.4 - Policy input and standardisationTask 7.5 - Liaison with the EU Clusters, EU projects and external bodies8 - Coordination - CTBTask 8.1 - Efficient management at the administrative levelTask 8.2 - Day-to-day coordinationTask 8.3 - Detailed activity reporting and updating the planningTask 8.4 - Data management planMilestonesM1 Requirements defined (WP1)M2 First selection of triggerable materials M3 First selection of debonding systems & Survey on SbD principles per partnerM4 Selection of most promising materials for application in subsequent industrial testsM5 Prototype system available for the monitoring of DECOAT recyclable-by-design materialsM6 Pilot line validatedM7 Demonstration of ‘circular use’M6M1M4M3M2GAGAGAGAGAGAGAGAM5M7DC2DC3DC1GAGAGAGAGA
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 53 of 127 
 
4 Members of the Consortium
4.1 Participants 
The DECOAT consortium consists of 17 partners and further a group of 17 partners who expressed their support to the 
consortium via a Letter of Support. The latter group forms the Advisory and Support Group or ASG. Both groups are 
described below; the Letters of Support are included behind the actual DECOAT partners.  
Participant 
no. 
Short name Participant organisation name Country Organisation 
Type 
1 
coordinator 
CTB Centexbel BE RTD 
2 AIMPLAS Asociacion De Investigacion De Materiales Plasticos Y 
Conexas 
ES RTD 
3 IVV Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Angewandten 
Forschung e. V. – IVV 
DE RTD 
4 CTAG Centro Tecnológico de Automoción de Galicia ES RTD 
5 NTUA National Technical University of Athens EL UNI 
6 VAUDE Vaude DE IND 
7 PANASONIC Panasonic Eco Solutions Elektrik San. Ve Tic. A.Ş. TK IND 
8 MBT Mercedes-Benz Turk A.S. TK IND 
9 MAIER Maier S. Coop. ES IND 
10 RESCOLL Rescoll FR SME 
11 CTECH C-Tech Innovation UK SME 
12 DEVAN Devan Micropolis PT SME 
13 IRIS Innovacio i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible S.L. ES SME 
14 ECOMAT Ecomatters NL SME 
15 IRES Innovation in Research & Engineering Solutions BE SME 
16 OSM Open Source Management Ltd. UK SME 
17 ISWA - 
TERMINATED 
International Solid Waste Association AU Assoc 
18 ISWA NL International Solid Waste Association NL NL Assoc 
  Advisory and Support Group (ASG)   
 EUPC European Plastics Converters EU Assoc. 
 GO4CIRCLE Circular economy industry BE Assoc. 
 TECPART German association of manufacturers of technical plastic 
products 
DE Assoc 
 ZWE Zero Waste Europe EU Assoc. 
 Coating Cluster Cluster of coating companies  BE Cluster 
 Recycling Network Recycling Netwerk Benelux NL Cluster 
 Textile ETP European Apparel and Textile Confederation EU Eu Technology 
Platform 
 EuMaT European Technology Platform for Advanced Engineering 
Materials and Technologies 
EU Eu.Technolog
y Platform 
 REMONDIS Recycling company DE IND 
 DEBOER Textile Recycling company NL IND 
 GBP Recycler – Car disassembly company ES IND 
 FCC Fomento De Construcciones Y Contratas Sa ES IND 
 COVERPAINTS Coatings Industry EL SME 
 European 
Coatings 
Europe’s leading monthly journal for the coatings industry DE Publisher 
 OVAM Public Waste Agency of Flanders BE Public body 
 ELOT Hellenic Organization for Standardization  EL Public body 
 UNE Spanish Organization for Standardization ES Public body 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 54 of 127 
 CEN-CENELEC European Organization for Standardization EU Public body 
 
DECOAT CONSORTIUM PARTICIPANTS 
 
Partner 1 – CTB – Centexbel 
 
Country BE 
Core Competence: coating and finishing of textiles, formulating, application on lab and semi-
industrial scale and testing 
Brief description of legal entity:  
Centexbel (CTB) is the Belgian scientific and technical centre for the textile and plastic converting industry, with strong links to 
the majority of these companies. CTB offers a complete range of standardized testing, it is a notified body and can deliver CE 
marking and testing. CTB is also involved in standardization committees and offers technological advice and training to 
companies in Belgium and abroad. 
The research focus of CTB is on applied research, funded by private contract as well as national and international agencies (e.g. 
H2020, Eranet, Interreg). Some well selected subjects for strategic research are: (i) finishing and coating technology; (ii) 
implementation of nanotechnology; (iii) intelligent textiles; (iv) 3D textile structures via braiding and knitting; (v) extrusion 
processes and related polymer formulation (incl. biopolymers). 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
 Project coordinator; leader of WP8 (coordination) 
 Leader of WP2: development of debondable coatings on textiles and their characterisation 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
Centexbel has much experience in the coating and lamination of textile. In most cases these coatings are functionalised to obtain 
specific properties, e.g. recyclability.  
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Dr Ine De Vilder, Research scientist. Gender: F. After finishing her studies as industrial chemical engineer, Ine obtained a 
PhD in chemistry. Since her start at CTB more than 7 years ago, she has conducted research in the field of textile functionalization 
and surface modification. She has been involved in multiple private, regional and European research projects with a broad range 
of topics like flame retardancy, protective clothing, architectural textile, bedding, hotmelt applications etc. She has specific 
expertise in the development of coated or laminated textiles enabling recycling (e.g. coated/laminated textiles in which all 
components consist of the same material, specific design of textiles enabling separation of the different layers). 
Dr. Myriam Vanneste, R&D manager. Gender: F. Myriam has a PhD in polymer chemistry. She has been involved in the 
management of national and international research projects for more than 10 years. She is the head of the R&D group working 
on finishing and coating of textiles and, as such, has extensive knowledge on the latest innovations in this area. One of the recent 
focusses of the research is the recyclability of coated and laminated materials and use of recycled materials as coating material.  
Dr. Guy Buyle, Manager EU research of CTB. Gender: M. Guy holds a Masters of Engineering degree and obtained his PhD 
in Physics on the subject of plasma treatment of surfaces. Since his start at CTB he has mainly been working on European 
projects, under FP6, FP7 and H2020, being strongly involved in activities like dissemination, exploitation and coordination. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
Developments for better recycling; Myriam Vanneste, Ine De Vilder, Jo Wynendaele, Pieter Heyse, Isabel De Schrijver; 
presentation; International Carpet Conference; 28-29/05/2015 
Coding system for recycling textiles; Tobias Schlüter, Thomas Gries, Myriam Vanneste, Mike De Vrieze, Isabel De Schrijver, 
Stijn Corneillie; Future Textiles (2017), 6, 38-39. 
Making Textile from Waste - The technical textile solution to industrial waste; Ine De Vilder, Health and Safety International, 
April 2017, p. 41-49 
Recycling carpets with the help of markers; Mike De Vrieze; Unitex, (2017) 3; 24-26 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 55 of 127 
RECYCOAT – Recycling of coated materials (National collective research project, HBC.2017.0686, 2018-2020) 
URBANREC New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products (H2020, GA 
N° 690103) 
ECOMETEX – Ecodesign methodology for recyclable textile coverings used in the EU construction & transport industry” (FP7, 
NMP-2011-small5-280751, 2012-2015) 
MARKERS - Markers for recycling (Cornet, HBC.2016.0293, 2017-2018) 
CarPVB – Coating applications for recycled PVB (Cornet, HBC.2017.0245, 2018-2019) 
KARMA2020– Industrial feather waste valorisation for sustainable keratin based materials (H2020, GA N°723268) 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
  
 CTB has knowledge and equipment to 
incorporate additives into coating 
formulations. 
  
 Fabric coating and finishing equipment, 
both lab scale (A4-size) and pilot scale 
(roll-to-roll, 0.5m width). Available 
techniques are knife coating (direct and 
transfer coating), yarn coating, hotmelt, 
padding,… UV and IR technology, corona 
technology,… 
  
 Further, CTB has extensive testing 
equipment and expertise for evaluating the 
properties of coated textiles, eg 
mechanical behaviour, abrasion durability, 
laundry resistance, comfort issues, 
chemical composition,… 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Fairs and congresses 
 Techtextil fair 2021, 2023 
 Dornbirn conference 
 International coating and laminating conference, Belgium 
 Newsletter CTB – reaches virtually all textile companies in BE 
 CTB workshops and conferences – CTB organizes on a monthly basis workshops for its members, mainly textile, plastic 
and composite related companies from BE, FR, NL. Further, CTB organizes yearly a major European conference. In the 
past, such conferences were already organized on themes like functional coated textiles or recycling. In the frame of 
DECOAT again such a conference will be organized. Every year an INFO happening is organised for informing companies 
about the latest coating developments at CTB.  
 Cluster “Innovative Coatings”, with over 70 company members. Centexbel is one of the steering partners and responsible 
for organisation of workshops and matchmaking between companies.  
Networks: 
 EURATEX: CTB is active member, taking part in the lead of the Textile Flagships for Europe Initiative 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 56 of 127 
 TEXTRANET: European Network of Textile Research Organisations 
 ECP4: European Composites, Plastics and Polymer Processing Platform. It is an industry-driven collaboration that unites 
the top-level European research institutions, regional plastic clusters and EU-level industrial organizations of plastics and 
composites converters. 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 57 of 127 
Partner 2 – AIMPLAS - ASOCIACION DE INVESTIGACION DE MATERIALES PLASTICOS Y CONEXAS  
 
Country Spain 
Core Competence: polymer materials, their transformation processes and 
recycling. 
Brief description of legal entity:  
AIMPLAS, Technological Institute of Plastics located in Valencia, is a private, non-profit Association with more than 500 
associated companies created in 1990. AIMPLAS is formed by +120 highly skilled professional, more than 65% with a Masters, 
Engineering or equivalent degree in Chemistry, polymer engineering, materials engineering or equivalent, including 15 PhD.  
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and thermosetting plastic 
materials & products, its transformation processes and their recyclability and sustainability. AIMPLAS generates new knowledge 
and technologies that can be transferred to companies in order to help them to increase their effectiveness and competitiveness. 
AIMPLAS has a broad expertise in the fields of recycling, compatibilization, reactive extrusion, biopolymers and renewable 
source materials, special assisted processing technologies and nanocomposites, gained during the last years in the frame of EU 
and national projects. Nowadays, AIMPLAS is involved in more than 25 European projects and has participated in 77 projects in 
FP5, FP6, FP7, LIFE+, CIP-EcoInnovation EU Programmes, among others, coordinating 27 of them. At National and Regional 
levels AIMPLAS participates in around 100 projects yearly.  
AIMPLAS, as RTD is focused to help companies in the plastic sector to develop new products and increase their competitiveness 
through innovation, has more than 20 pilot plants representing the most relevant polymer/plastics/composites production 
technologies present in the industry nowadays and has state-of-the art test facilities for chemical, optical, morphological, 
mechanical and physical characterisation. These pilot lines and laboratories are used by many customer’s every year allowing 
them to test new materials, optimize production processes and launch new products to the market, supported by AIMPLAS 
technical staff, resulting in more than 5000 assays, 170 technical assessments and 120 skills training actions to more than 1500 
clients per year. AIMPLAS has state-of-the-art 8500 m2 facilities, including thermoplastics and thermoset pilot plants, analysis 
and testing laboratories (physical-mechanical, chemical, packaging, automotive and construction) and training areas 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
Selection of the components of the pilot recycling line.  
Set up and evaluation of the pilot line to recycle coated textiles and coated plastic parts for outdoor gear, household electronics, 
buses and automotive applications.  
Quality analysis of the recycled materials and evaluation of their potential use.  
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on plastic materials and products, their 
transformation processes and their recyclability and sustainability. AIMPLAS has pilot plants and testing laboratories that enable 
the full characterisation of both waste and recycled materials, including chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical 
properties. It also has wide experience in selective separation of complex wastes, decontamination of recycled plastics for the 
elimination of hazardous substances and/or odour, improvement of recycled properties of plastics through additivation and 
compounding, recycling of thermoplastics and elastomers, optimization of recycling processes and the properties of recycled 
plastics. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Dr. Enrique Moliner (male), holds a PhD in Industrial Engineering by the Universitat Jaume I of Castellon (Spain). He has over 
9 years of experience in national and international R&D projects in the field of environment and technological innovation. He has 
been working as a researcher at the Department of Sustainability and Industrial Recovery of AIMPLAS since 2014. His expertise 
is focused on environmental assessment of materials, technologies, processes and products associated with plastic industry, 
using environmental impact assessment tools such as life cycle assessment or carbon footprint. He also has experience in 
technical and legal advice on environmental issues to be considered for the development or improvement of products 
(ecodesign). Speaker at seminars and conferences, author of technical articles for scientific journals and magazines, and 
professor in training courses on ecodesign, life cycle assessment, carbon footprint and environmental labelling. 
Mrs. Eva Verdejo (female), holds a Bachelor Degree in Chemistry from the University of Valencia. She joined the Institute in 
1993, being the current Head of Department of Sustainability and Industrial Valorization of AIMPLAS. Her expertise is focused 
on sustainable development, materials from natural resources, biodegradable plastics and recycling. She holds large experience 
in proposal writing and participation/coordination in relevant national and international R+D projects related to her expertise 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 58 of 127 
(BIOSTRUCT, RECYTUBE, ECO-RUBBER, POLYMIX, BREAD4PLA, etc.). Speaker at numerous seminars and conferences, 
author of technical articles for scientific journals and magazines, and professor in different sustainability and recovery-related 
courses. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 Garrain D, Vidal R, Martinez P, Franco V. Environmental Impact of Plastic Moulding in Spanish Industries Using Life Cycle 
Assessment Methodology. Ingenieria Quimica 2009, 29-35. 
 Vidal R, Martinez P, Mulet E, Gonzalez R, Lopez-Mesa B, Fowler P, Fang JM. Environmental Assessment of Biodegradable 
Multilayer Film Derived From Carbohydrate Polymers. Journal of Polymers and the Environment 2007, 15:159-168. 
 Martí-Ferrer F, Vilaplana F, Ribes-Greus A, Benedito-Borrás A, Sanz-Box C. Flour rice husk as filler in block copolymer 
polypropylene: Effect of different coupling agents. Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2006, 99:1823-1831. 
 Vidal R, Moliner E, Martínez G, Rubio MC. Life cycle assessment of hot mix asphalt and zeolite-based warm mix asphalt 
with reclaimed asphalt pavement. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 2013, 74:101-114. 
 Moliner E, Muñoz C, Garraín D, Franco V, Vidal R. The ecological footprint of transporting waste in the province of Castellon. 
Selected Proceedings from the 15th International Congress on Project Engineering 2012, 103-115. ISBN: 978-84-615-7674-
6 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
URBANREC New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products (H2020, GA 
N° 690103) 
ECOBULK: Circular Process for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts (H2020 GA N° 730456) 
C-SERVEES-Activating Circular Services in the Electric and Electronic Sector (H2020 GA N° 77614) 
LIFE EXTRUCLEAN: Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances during the recycling process of 
polyethylene hazardous waste packages, employing supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2) (LIFE13 ENV/ES/000067) 
KARMA2020– Industrial feather waste valorisation for sustainable keratin-based materials (H2020, GA N°723268) 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
 Equipment for mechanical, thermal, electrical, rheological and physical tests. 
 Rheometer, optical and electronic microscopy, DMA, DSC, Thermogravimetry, Raman Spectrometer.  
 Recycling pilot plant: Grinding facilities, washing equipment with sorting capacity, horizontal centrifuge equipment 
 -Pilot plant: Sc-CO2 cleaning & VOC removal 
 -Extrusion equipment 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 59 of 127 
 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Magazines & journals: Waste Management & Research; Journal of Cleaner Production; Journal of Industrial Ecology; The 
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment; Waste Management; Resources, Conservation and Recycling; Journal of 
Environmental Management; Journal of Polymers and the Environment; and broader audience journals (Science, Nature). 
Events: Ecofira (Spain); Circular Materials Conference (Sweden); K-Fair (Germany); PRSE Plastic Recycling Show Europe (The 
Netherlands); Sustainable Plastics (Germany); Conama (Spain); International Conference on Sustainable Waste Management 
(Turkey); European Circular Economy Conference (Belgium);  
Stakeholders will be involved through demo workshops to promote market acceptability and encourage sustainable production 
and consumption. 
Networks: 
ECP4 (European Composites, Plastics and Polymer Processing Platform), CICLOPLAST (Spanish Plastics Recycling and 
Recovery Organization), EuPC (European plastic converters association), ANARPLA (Spanish association of plastic recyclers).  
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 60 of 127 
Partner 3 – IVV - Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Angewandten Forschung e. V. 
 
Country Germany  
Core Competence: Recycling Plastics 
Brief description of legal entity:  
Fraunhofer is the leading organisation for applied research in Europe, undertaking contract research on behalf of industry, the 
service sector and government. At present, Fraunhofer has about eighty research units, including seventy-two research institutes, 
at over forty locations in Germany. An annual turnover of about €2300 million is generated by contract research by a staff of 
about twenty-five thousand employees. Fraunhofer’s institute für Verfahrenstechnik und Verpackung (Fraunhofer-IVV) will 
participate in this project: 
Fraunhofer’s Institute for Process Engineering and Packaging (Fraunhofer-IVV) has two hundred and twenty-one employees 
and an annual turnover of €18 million. The Fraunhofer-IVV develops and optimizes products and processes primarily in the area 
of food ingredients, functional films, product safety, food quality, biogenic raw materials as well as plastics recycling. The 
department ‘Recycling polymers’ at Fraunhofer-IVV has been founded in 2005 and deals with the separation of pure polymers 
from plastic containing waste by means of mechanical pre-treatment and solvent based technologies (CreaSolv® Process). 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
Fraunhofer will mainly be involved in WPs 2-5. In WP2 Fraunhofer will closely interact with developers of triggerable debonding 
with respect to applied polymers and will identify suitable solvent formulations and conditions for coating materials. In WP3 
Fraunhofer will assist automated sorting by implementation of dyes which allow in-line measuring of coating thickness. 
Fraunhofer’s contributions to WP 4 and 5 will include implementation of CreaSolv® Technology in the DECOAT pilot line and its 
use in the course of demonstration.   
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
Fraunhofer-IVV has 20 years of experience in solvent based separation of plastic mixtures. Starting with laboratory scale 
experiments in 1996, the CreaSolv® process can now separate most thermoplastic materials from complex waste streams and 
produce recycled polymers with defined virgin-like properties, whereas the applied solvent is recycled completely within the 
process. Thus, the recycling process encourages the circular economy approach, as most recent project results (e.g. 
PolystyreneLoop) have shown that product qualities of recycled polymers comply with specifications of virgin plastics, enabling 
a use of recycled plastics in initial applications. Having such a technical recycling concept validated, Fraunhofer-IVV provides 
expertise in defining and building structures for a circular economy of plastics and composites. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Dr. Martin SCHLUMMER (male) – Senior Scientist in the Dept. Recycled Plastics department, holds a Ph.D. in Chemistry from 
University of Erlangen. He has been with Fraunhofer-IVV as a research fellow since 1999. As a responsible scientist for process 
development and analytical process evaluation he participated in and co-ordinated more than 20 national and international 
research projects and (co-)authored more than 45 publications in peer reviewed scientific journals.  
Dr. Andreas MÄURER (male) – Head of Dept. Recycled Plastics department at Fraunhofer, holds a Ph.D. in Chemistry from 
University of Erlangen. After a two-year experience of industrial research in the paper business, he has been working for FhG-
IVV, since 1994: first as a Dep. Head of the Dept. Process Engineering, then as head of Dept. Product Safety and Analysis and 
since 2005 as head of Dept. Recycled plastics. Mäurer co-ordinated more than 30 national and international research projects 
and (co-)authored more than 30 publications.  
Dr. Esra KUCUKPINAR. (female) – received her B.Sc. in Chemical Eng. from Boğaziçi University, İstanbul, in 1995 and her 
M.Eng. in Chemical Eng. from the Stevens Institute of Tech., New Jersey, in 1997, with a focus on polymer processing. She was 
employed at the Highly-filled Materials Institute, New Jersey, as a research engineer. She joined the RTD Centre of Arçelik in 
1997, as a research specialist. In 2003 she received her Ph.D. in Chemical Eng. from Boğaziçi University. Since 2003, she has 
been employed at Fraunhofer-IVV as a senior scientist and project leader mostly for international projects funded by the 
European Commission, from FP5 onwards. She has co-authored more than 30 publications in peer reviewed scientific journals 
and presented her research work in various international conferences.  
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
Fabian Knappich, Ferdinand Hartl, Martin Schlummer, Andreas Mäurer: Complete Recycling of Composite Material Comprising 
Polybutylene Terephthalate and Copper. Recycling (2017), 2, 9 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 61 of 127 
Ueberschaar, Maximilian; Schlummer, Martin; Jalalpoor, Daniel; Kaup, Nora; Rotter, Vera Susanne: Potential and recycling 
strategies for LCD panels from WEEE. Recycling 2 (2017), No.1, Art. 7, 19 pp. ISSN: 2313-4321. DOI: 10.3390/recycling2010007 
Katharina Kaiser, Markus Schmid, Martin Schlummer, Andreas Mäurer. Recycling of Polymer-Based Multilayer Packaging: A 
Review. Recycling 2018, 3(1), 1; doi:10.3390/recycling3010001 
Fabian Knappich, Martin Schlummer, Andreas Mäurer, Harald Prestel: A New Approach to Metal- and Polymer-Recovery from 
Metallized Plastic Waste Using Mechanical Treatment and Subcritical Solvents. Journal of Material Cycles and Waste 
Management (in print). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10163-018-0717-6 
Sandra Kiese, Esra Kucukpinar, Esra Kucukpinar, Matthias Reinelt, Horst-Christian Langowski. A systematic approach for the 
accurate and rapid measurement of water vapor transmission through ultra-high barrier films. Review of Scientific Instruments 
(2017), 88(2):025108 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
INNOVIP - “Innovative multi-functional Vacuum-Insulation-Panels for use in the building sector”, EU H2020, Grant No 723441, 
Coord.: C. Sprengard, Germany: Fraunhofer -IVV is a partner (2016-2019): Fraunhofer-IVV works on the development of high 
barrier multi-layered structures for vacuum insulation panels and contribute to the INNOVIP project by practical demonstration 
trials on the separation and material recovery from finished INNOVIP insulations. 
CLOSEWEEE - “Integrated solutions for pre-processing electronic equipment, closing the loop of post-consumer high-grade 
plastics, and advanced recovery of critical raw materials antimony and graphite”, EU H2020, Grant No 641747, Coord.: K. 
Schischke, Germany. Fraunhofer-IVV works on the application of the CreaSolv® Process for the recovery of high-grade ABS 
and PC/ABS as well as the recovery of antimony trioxide. 
DISPLAY - “Upscale of Material Recovery from Display Applications and Printed Circuit Boards”, EIT raw materials, Project No 
16270, Coord.: M. Schlummer, S. Grieger, Germany: Fraunhofer is coordinating (2017-2021): Fraunhofer-IVV works on the 
development of recycling options for plastics in post-consumer display appliances by using the CreaSolv® process.  
PSLoop – “Polystyrene Loop”, EU LIFE, Grant No 16ENV/NL/000271, Coord.: J. Noordegraaf, The Netherlands: Fraunhofer–
IVV is a key partner (2017-2021): Fraunhofer has developed the CreaSolv® Process, which is upscaled in this project for the 
purpose of recovering POP free recycled polystyrene from PS foams containing HBCD. 
FORCYCLE – “Recovery of metals from composite from metal-polymer-composites” Grant No. BAF01SoF0-65342. Coord. M. 
Schlummer, Germany. Fraunhofer-IVV was coordinating (2014-2017): Fraunhofer-IVV developed recycling processes for the 
recovery of polymers from polymer-metal-composites including metal plated plastics and carbon fibre reinforced plastics. The 
processes reached a TRL of 5. 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
CreaSolv® pilot plant: Fraunhofer IVV runs a flexible CreaSolv® pilot line consisting of some 100-250 L vessels for different 
unit operations like dissolution, mechanical cleaning, extractive cleaning, product drying and solvent recovery. In the past it was 
used to produce 5-100 kg samples of – amongst others - ABS, PS, PC/ABS, PP, PE, PET and PA. This line has a capacity of 5-
10 kg/day and will be the base of design studies deducing optimized process parameters for a 25 kg/h plant.  
 
CreaSolv® Pilot line  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 62 of 127 
The output of this pilot line are intermediate polymer pellets that are offline transferred to a vacuum extrusion line which is used 
to parametrize a final drying of intermediate products. 
 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Fairs and conferences: 
 Electronic goes Green 2020,  
 IFAT 2021 
 Organisation of in-house Workshops / Conferences 
Magazines: 
 Fraunhofer IVV Newsletter  
Networks: 
 Fraunhofer IVV is present on LinkedIN, XING 
 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 63 of 127 
Partner 4 – CTAG – Centro Tecnológico de Automoción de Galicia 
 
Country Spain 
Core Competence: development and validation of products for the transport sector. 
Comprehensive testing facilities. 
Brief description of legal entity:  
CTAG is a Spanish, private, non-profit R&D technology centre devoted to support the automotive industry in its research, 
development and innovation needs. CTAG was created in 2002 thanks to a joint initiative of automotive enterprises within the 
region. 
With a team of more than 700 professionals having more than 60% of international activity, CTAG is an ideal partner for 
developing new innovative products for the automotive sector using CAD product design and CAE simulations tools.  
CTAG is present in all the stages of product development, from initial advanced research to product life. The key fields of 
competence where CTAG concentrates its activities are: new materials, novel manufacturing processes, mathematical 
calculation and simulation, component testing and analysis of performances, environment, electronics, ergonomics, comfort and 
innovation management.  
For further information on CTAG capacities and main activities, please visit our website (www.ctag.com) and check our 
corporative video (https://vimeo.com/120029828). 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
WP1: Support on the definition and requirements of end-user cases on materials 
Input for WP2: Evaluation of the maximum amount of impurities allowed in the recycled material, according to the aimed 
mechanical properties, by testing different compounds with increasing amount of coating residue.  
WP5: Design of specifications for the material/prototype validation according to the standards and protocols, development of 
new testing procedures if needed (depending on the functionality of the part selected as prototype demonstrator), 
characterization and validation through climate, vibration, acoustics, impact, fatigue, etc. testing. 
CTAG also will contribute in the supporting work packages (WP6, WP7 and WP8). 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
From 2004, CTAG has a research team focused on exploring novel applications for new materials in the transport sector as well 
as enhancing the efficiency of plastic transformation processes.  
On validations side, CTAG has three buildings equipped with the ultimate testing laboratories: climatic, vibration & acoustics, 
fatigue, materials, engine, electronics and ergonomics, fitted with the cutting-edge technology and equipment such as two triaxial 
shakers integrated in acoustic and climatic chambers, several climatic chambers including a complete car sunlight radiation and 
weather resistance chamber, etc. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Eng. Raquel Ledo (Female). She is MSc in Telecommunication Engineering by the University of Vigo, with a postgraduate 
Master in Automobile Enterprises Management and a Degree of Research Proficiency and Advanced Studies. From 2003 to 
2006, she worked in the automotive industry (Development Manager in Prevent, Controller Body-in-White in PSA Peugeot 
Citroën). Since 2007, she is project manager in CTAG and Head of the Materials Innovation area from 2016. Besides her 
extensive experience in the automotive business (both in automotive suppliers and in OEMs), she was directly involved in more 
than 10 EU projects, 3 of them within 7FP and 3 of them in H2020. She was the coordinator of FORTAPE project (H2020-FoF-
2014) and Expert Evaluator in several H2020 programmes. She holds several publications in the field of automotive engineering 
and 4 national patents. LinkedIn profile: https://es.linkedin.com/in/raquelledobanobre 
Dr. Alberto Tielas Macía (Male): MSc in Mechanical Engineering by the University of Vigo (2003) with a PhD in Manufacturing 
Process Engineering (2015). From 2002, working in CTAG within the Engineering and Development Department. From 2006, 
as Head of Materials and Interior Systems Department in CTAG. From 2010, as invited professor at the University of Vigo within 
the “Master in Technologies and Processes for the Automobile Industry”, at the Corporative University of CEAGA (the Galician 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 64 of 127 
Cluster of Automotive Industry) and at the public educational system of professional training. Involved in more than 15 national 
and European R&D projects, coordinating 3 of them: CarbonInspired (Interreg IVB SUDOE), GreenMotion (Interreg POCTEP) 
and SMARTCOVER (national). He holds 8 publications in the field of materials engineering for the automotive sector and 3 
national patents. He is a regular speaker in national and regional congresses related to the field of materials for vehicles: 
Workshop on Joint Technologies: adhesives for the automotive industry (2014), CarbonInspired 2.0 International Workshop: 
Nanomaterials for Industry (2012 & 2014), H2020 Green Vehicles Workshop Spain 2014, 12th International Workshop on Plastics 
for the Automotive Industry (2012), etc. Top experienced in automotive engineering, injection moulding, process simulation and 
3D design. LinkedIn profile: https://es.linkedin.com/in/alberto-tielas-48a48136 
Eng. Vanessa Ventosinos Louzao (Female): BSc in Technical Engineering in Industrial Chemistry by the University of Santiago 
de Compostela (2005). With two post-degree master courses in “Innovation Management” by INGAFOR (2010) & “Innovation 
and Quality Management” by the National Distance Education University (2012). From 2007, project manager and product 
developer within the Materials Innovation Area in CTAG. Involved in more than 10 research projects, in the last 6 as the project 
technical manager: Naturplas II, Greenmotion, Naturtruck, Carboprec, Fortape and Ecofunel. She holds 3 publications related to 
the field of materials engineering in the automotive sector and 13 patents (Spanish and French). She lectured in 3 international 
congresses and 4 national/regional workshops. Top experienced in new materials for automotive applications. LinkedIn profile: 
https://es.linkedin.com/in/vanessa-ventosinos-louzao-b5bb8a24/en   DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
Publications: 
 Tielas A., Ledo R., Ventosinos V., García D.: “Manufacturing of complex parts based on unidirectional tapes. Technology 
transfer from automotive towards aeronautic industry” Magazine of the Spanish Association for Composite Materials. June 
2017. 
 Costas M., Díaz J., Romera L. E., Hernández S. & Ledo R.: Influence of welded joints on the crashworthiness response of 
hybrid structural elements. SAE International. 2013-01-0755. 2013. 
Patents:  
Manufacturing process of a heating coating. ES2402034 
Programmable pulse generator to carry out pneumatic and electric fatigue tests: ES2553272 
Equipment for the acoustic and vibrational characterization ES2362834 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
FORTAPE – Research on efficient integrated systems for the manufacturing of complex parts based on unidirectional tapes for 
the automotive and aeronautical industry. H2020-FoF2-2014 (GA nº636860) www.fortape-project.eu NATURTRUCK – 
Development of a new Bio-Composite from renewable resources with improved thermal and fire resistance for manufacturing a 
truck internal part with high quality surface finishing. FP7-SME-2013-1 (GA nº 605658)  ww.naturtruck.eu  CARBOPREC – 
Developing new precursors, functionalization and processing routes for carbon fibre. FP7-NMP-2013-LARGE-7 (GA nº 604215) 
www.carboprec.eu ECOPLAST – Research in new biomass-based composites from renewable resources with improved 
properties for vehicle parts moulding. FP7-NMP-2009-SME-3 (GA nº 246176) www.ecoplastproject.com  
Technical equipment: (Please include also some photographies of your relevant equipment). 
For the proposed work in this project, CTAG will make available the following equipment and labs, located in our facilities in 
Spain: 
 
Product design:  
3D CAD tools, including modal and failure analysis, selection assessment for new 
materials, quality track, ECO-design, reverse engineering and mould/tool design 
(using CATIA V5 software). 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 65 of 127 
 
Injection moulding lab:  
Injection moulding machine Engel Victory 2550/350 without columns and adapted to 
a D60 screw, high temperature attemperators, control of up to 8 sequential nozzles 
and 16 in-mould heating zones, injection-compression module, set of 4 different screw 
geometries (amorphous, semicrystalline, double fleet, mixer), static mixers, cavity 
pressure sensors, grinding mill, dehumidifier, IR heating lamps, MFI indexer, humidity 
indexer, thermographic camera, power supply equipment, microwave oven and a 
electroplating lab. 
 
Climatic laboratory:  
+20 climate chambers with a wide range of sizes, several are combined with other 
testing equipment to combine ageing with other mechanical validation (e.g. climatic + 
vibration testing). Several include the possibility of high-speed recording to analyse 
the failure mode (e.g. for airbag deployment). Just to mention a few: complete-car 
climatic chamber for solar radiation (200000L of capacity), thermal shock chamber, 
ozone resistance chamber, weather-o-meter, salt spray chamber, light and weather 
resistance chambers, etc. 
 
Vibro-acoustic:  
2 multi-axial electrohydraulic shakers able to reproduce any signal (one of them inside 
a climatic chamber and the other inside a semi-anechoic chamber), bi-directional 
electro-dynamic shaker, unidirectional shaker in a semi-anechoic chamber, pulse 
equipment for modal analysis of complex structures, kundt’s tube for acoustic 
measuring of porous material, intensity sensors, signal loggers. 
 
Durability:  
Fatigue test rig, robot for the reproduction of complicated trajectories (e.g. ingress-
egress simulation for car seats), several test benches. 
 
Material:  
Low intensity signal generator, universal test machine for traction-compression, test 
bed for traction, shore durometer, spectrocolorimeter and reflectometer, volatile 
measurement, cold impact, abrasion meter, etc. 
 
Metrology:  
Several 3D coordinated-measuring machines (by contact, by sensing heads, by 
vision) and portable equipment for 3D measurement. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 66 of 127 
 
Instrumentation and automatisms:  
Support for testing according to standards or customer requirements (programmable 
automatic equipment, robot arm, data loggers, sensors, power and tension supplies). 
 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Trade fairs: 
Expo Testing (Stuttgart) 
Automotive Interiors EXPO (Stuttgart) 
JEC Composites (Paris) 
Journals: 
JEC Composites, Bioplastics Magazine, Automotive Engineering International 
Networks: 
STA – Association of Automotive technical experts.  
ERTICO : public-private partnership of 120 companies and organisations representing service providers, suppliers, traffic and 
transport industry, research, public authorities, user organisations, mobile network operators, and vehicle manufacture 
SERNAUTO – Spanish association of automotive suppliers 
CEAGA (Cluster of Automotive Industry in Galicia) 
 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 67 of 127 
Partner 5 – NTUA – National Technical University of Athens 
 
Country Greece 
Core Competence: NTUA is the leader of WP1 “Triggerable materials for 
coatings” and one of the key partners in synthesis, characterisation and processing 
of proposed materials. NTUA will develop novel smart nano- and micro-materials 
that will be used in the proposed debonding technologies. 
Brief description of legal entity:  
National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) is the oldest and most prestigious educational institution of Greece in the field 
of technology, and has contributed unceasingly to the country's scientific, technical and economic development since its 
foundation in 1836. The NTUA team comprises chemical, mechanical, metallurgical engineers, physicists, chemists and 
technicians, specialized in the fields of materials research and development, possessing a very experienced staff (including 
several professors, research scientists and PhD students) as well as extensive facilities for materials processing and 
characterization. R-NanoLab (http://nanolab.chemeng.ntua.gr) has all the necessary infrastructures for the synthesis of nano- 
and micro- materials. Additionally, there is the suitable equipment for the investigation of chemical and nanomechanical 
properties, as well as the surface properties and topographical characteristics of materials through atomic force microscopy. 
DECOAT role and main tasks: 
 Synthesis of nano-/microcapsules and smart carbonaceous hybrid nanomaterials(WP1). 
 Characterization of developed triggerable materials (WP1), coating formulations (WP2) and preliminary testing of 
specimens (WP2). 
 Support in WP3 on definition of a range of dyes to be used in the shell of the microparticles. 
 Toxicity, release and exposure assessment of nanomaterials (WP6). 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
R-NanoLab (NTUA) has vast experience on the synthesis of novel stimuli-responsive nanocontainers with encapsulated organic 
substances, as well as on the synthesis and characterization of hybrid organic-inorganic containers for coating formulations. 
Moreover, R-NanoLab is involved in synthesis and characterization of carbonaceous nanomaterials, dealing with advanced 
applications, such as antifouling/anticorrosive coatings, composite materials and smart applications, investigating also the toxicity 
and consequences of the nanoparticles. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Prof. Costas A. Charitidis (Male) is Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering of NTUA, with extensive R&D experience 
through collaborations with international research centres. He is a referee in International scientific journals, evaluator & scientific 
advisor of R&D projects, participant in European and National funded R&D projects. His research activity is complemented by 
about 110 papers in International Journals, a large number of lectures as an invited speaker and over 1800 citations by other 
researchers. 
Dr. Ioannis Kartsonakis (Male) is a Chemist, with an MSc in Polymer Science and its Applications and a PhD in Chemistry on 
the subject of synthesis and characterization of hybrid organic-inorganic coatings as well as nanocontainers. He has 3 patents, 
49 publications in peer-reviewed international journals, 2 publications in international books, more than 60 contributions to 
conference proceedings and workshops. His interests includes: synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials, coatings 
(polymeric, inorganic, hybrid organic-inorganic) and study of corrosion processes on materials. 
Dr. Tatjana Kosanovic Milickovic (Female) is a Chemist with a PhD in Chemical Sciences. She has been involved in the 
technical/scientific development, implementation and project management of >20 European and National research projects. Her 
research topics are in the fields of materials science, electrochemistry and nanotechnology with >50 scientific and technical 
papers published in Journals and Conferences. Dr. Kosanovic's scientific interests include: development and characterization of 
nanomaterials, nanostructures and nanocomposites and environmental chemistry. 
Aikaterini-Flora Trompeta (Female) is a Chemical Engineer (NTUA), with an MSc in Material Science and Technology. Her 
work experience is devoted in European and National Research Projects, dealing with nanomaterials for advanced application. 
Her research interest focuses on nanomaterials production processes (Chemical Vapour Deposition, wet chemical techniques). 
Part of her research work has been presented on national and international conferences and several related publications in peer 
reviewed journals have been published. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 68 of 127 
1. Investigation of nanomechanical properties of multilayered hybrid nanocomposites, G.C. Papanicolaou, C.A. Charitidis, D.V. 
Portan, D.K. Perivoliotis, M.A. Koklioti, Meccanica 2014 49 (11):2645-2655. 
2. Towards a holistic environmental impact assessment of carbon nanotube growth through chemical vapour deposition, A.F. 
Trompeta, M.A. Koklioti, D.K. Perivoliotis, I. Lynch, C.A. Charitidis, Journal of Cleaner Production 2016 129:384-394. 
3. Two-Shell Structured PMAA@CeO2 Nanocontainers Loaded with 2-Mercaptobenzothiazole for Corrosion Protection of 
Damaged Epoxy Coated AA 2024-T3, A.C. Balaskas, T. Hashimoto, M. Curioni, G.E. Thomson, Nanoscale 2017 9:5499-
5508. 
4. Improvement of anti-corrosive properties of epoxy-coated AA 2024-T3 with TiO2nanocontainers loaded with 8-
hydroxyquinoline, A.C. Balaskas, I.A. Kartsonakis, L.-A. Tziveleka, G.C. Kordas, Progress in Organic Coatings 2012 74:418-
426. 
5. Incorporation of ceramic nanocontainers into epoxy coatings for the corrosion protection of hot dip galvanized steel, I.A. 
Kartsonakis, A.C. Balaskas, E.P. Koumoulos, C.A. Charitidis, G.C. Kordas, Corrosion Science 2012 57: 30-41. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
1. SMARTFAN: "Smart by Design and Intelligent by Architecture for turbine blade fan and structural components systems" 
(H2020 - NMBP-04-2017 "Architectured /Advanced material concepts for intelligent bulk material structures"), Budget: € 7 
989 601.25, Coordinator: Prof. Costas A. Charitidis. (Development of smart composites with self-healing capsules and carbon 
nanomaterials/smart recycling activities). 
2. LORCENIS: “Long Lasting Reinforced Concrete for Energy Infrastructure under Severe Operating Conditions” (H2020 - NMP-
1-2015 “Materials for severe operating conditions, including added-values functionalities”), Budget: € 7 970 130, Coordinator: 
C. Simon (SINTEF) (Synthesis of carbonaceous nanomaterials and super absorbent polymers). 
3. MODCOMP: “Modified cost effective fibre based structures with improved multi-functionality and performance” (H2020 - Call 
topic: NMP-22-2015 “Fibre-based materials for non-clothing applications”), Budget: € 7 980 036, 25, Coordinator: Prof. 
Costas A. Charitidis. (Functionalisation and surface modification of carbon fibres). 
4. BYEFOULING: "Low-toxic cost-efficient environment-friendly antifouling materials" (FP7, Collaborative project (Large), 
THEME [FP7- OCEAN 2013.3 Innovative antifouling materials for maritime applications]), Budget: 7.447.584,00 (EC funded), 
Coordinator: C. Simon (SINTEF) (Synthesis of carbon nanotubes and nano-/micro capsules for coating applications). 
5. ARISTEIA II, SHELL: "Self-Healing Nanomaterials for Protection of Metal Alloys", SHELL (Code no: 3456), Ministry of 
Education, Lifelong Learning and Religious Affairs in the context of the Operational Program "Education and Lifelong 
Learning", Budget: € 195800, Coordinator: Prof. Costas A. Charitidis. (Synthesis of self-healing nanomaterials for coating 
applications). 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
The NTUA team has all the necessary infrastructures for the synthesis of carbon-based (CVD reactors) and nano-/micro- 
copolymer materials. Additionally, they have the suitable equipment for the investigation of mechanical and nanomechanical 
properties, as well as of the surface properties and topographical characteristics of materials through microscopes in all scales 
(Optical Microscopy-OM, Scanning Electron Microscopy-SEM, Scanning Probe Microscopy-SPM and Atomic Force Microscopy-
AFM, Micro Computed Tomography-µCT). 
 
 CVD Reactor (Lab Scale)                   CVD Reactor (Pilot Scale)                         Vertical CVD Reactor 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 69 of 127 
 
Dip coater                   Wettability testing         Nanoindentation                Atomic Force Microscope 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Fairs and conferences: 
 Industrial Technologies (https://www.indtech2018.eu/ ) 
 JEC World (http://www.jeccomposites.com/about-jec/jec-history-management ) 
 EUROCORR (https://eurocorr.org/ ) 
 EuroNanoForum (http://euronanoforum2017.eu/ ) 
 European Technical Coatings Congress (https://etcc2018.org/ ) 
 Athens Science Festival (http://www.athens-science-festival.gr/en/festival-2018/ ) 
 Researcher’s Night (http://www.renathens.gr/ ) 
 Panhellenic Conference on Chemical Engineering (http://www.11pesxm.gr/ ) 
 Innovation Day (https://sec2sv.com/european-innovation-day/ ) 
 Industry Day (https://ec.europa.eu/info/events/eu-industry-day_en ) 
Networks: 
 European Network for Pilot Production Facilities And Innovation Hubs (https://www.eppnetwork.com/ ) 
 European Materials Characterisation Council (EMCC) (http://www.characterisation.eu/) 
 Carbon Fibres & Advanced High Performance Composites Cluster (CFPC) (http://www.technologycluster.eu/ ) 
 European Nano Safety Cluster (https://www.nanosafetycluster.eu/)  
 The European Materials Modelling Council (https://emmc.info/ ) 
 Nano Carbon Enhanced Materials (NCEM) Consortium (http://www.cfbi.com/nanocarbon.htm ) 
 Greek Chemists Association (GCA) - Paints-Varnishes-Inks Division (PVID) (https://www.greekpaints.com/en/)  
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 70 of 127 
Partner 6 – VAUDE – Vaude 
 
Country GER 
Core Competence: Outdour gear, Mountain & Bike Sports Equipment 
Brief description of legal entity:  
VAUDE ranks among Europe's leading mountain sports brand names. The company has achieved continuous growth in all 
sectors. VAUDE products are sold worldwide. 
As a sustainable innovative outdoor outfitter, VAUDE is contributing to make the world a better place so that the people of 
tomorrow can enjoy nature with a clean conscience. In doing so, the family-owned company sets ecological and social standards 
worldwide. With the publication of a GRI (Global Reporting Initiative) Sustainability Report, VAUDE has successfully created an 
objective and measurable foundation for this goal. Social responsibility is a strong focus at VAUDE as well. Numerous awards 
strengthen the company in its focus on sustainability. In 2015 VAUDE was honoured as “Deutschlands nachhaltigster Marke” 
(Germany’s Most Sustainable Brand) by the German Sustainability Award Foundation. For years, VAUDE has experienced 
successful growth showing that maintaining a balance between ecological and social factors makes economic sense. 
VAUDE is committed to sustainability and working intensively to substitute fossil-based raw material with bio-based materials. 
Within its broad product portfolio, VAUDE has identified several products that are made from coated textiles. Substrates are 
typically polyester and polyamide, the coatings thermoplastic polyurethanes. Unfortunately, there are currently no suitable 
recycling methods for these fabrics. Thus VAUDE has a high interest in recycling such coated materials. 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
Lead end use case for outdoor gear, provider of a concrete use case: waterproof bike bags. Contribute with design and product 
development departments. As such, mainly involved in WP1 for the requirements and WP5 – use cases demonstration. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
 Broad industrial knowledge 
 Technical background of textiles, the related coating processes and the manufacturing 
 Knowledge about application of coatings in the textile and engineering plastics business 
 Testing competences with internal test laboratory and external professional testing services 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
René Bethmann: Innovation Manager (Male): Graduated Dipl.-Ing. of textile and clothing technologies. Work experience of 
>10 years within the sports industry with strong focus on material development. Worked in several leading sports brands in 
Switzerland and Norway. Before transferring to the Innovation Division he held the position as “Head of Materials” and leading 
the material development business unit. He will be the main contact person for this project. 
Kai Vogt: Head of Innovation & Hardware Equipment (Male): Graduated Dipl. Ing. of industrial engineering. Work experience 
of >15 years within the sports industry. Leading the innovation division and the tents/sleeping systems/accessories division.  
Julia Unmuth: Innovation Product Technician (Female): Graduated fashion dress maker. Work experience of >8 years. 
Works within the innovation division as a product technician for new products and manufacturing techniques plus as a test 
laboratory technician to perform physical material tests. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 René Bethmann: Lecture regarding sustainable and bio-based materials at Man-Made-Fibre Congress Dornbirn (09/2017) 
and at the International Textile Conference Stuttgart (11/2017) 
 VAUDE signs the Greenpeace Detox Commitment agreeing to eliminate all harmful substances from the entire supply chain 
and manufacture its entire collection completely PFC-free (without fluorocarbons) by 2020 at the latest (2016) 
 Environmental Stewardship in the Supply Chain project is launched to ensure high environmental and social standards for 
suppliers as well. The goal is to make the global supply chain ecological, social and transparent (2015) 
 The VAUDE Environmental Report, in accordance with international GRI standards (Global Reporting Initiative), is published 
for the first time. VAUDE’s economic, ecological and social performance figures are clearly and transparently presented 
based on comparable indicators at the new website: http://www.vaude-nachhaltigkeitsbericht.com (2014) 
 Launch of the Green Shape label, with which VAUDE offers functional, eco-friendly products made from sustainable 
materials under fair working conditions. The strict evaluation criteria are under constant review and cover the entire lifecycle 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 71 of 127 
of the product – from design, through production, care and maintenance, to repair and (recycling at) the product’s end of life 
(2010) 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 Already several successful applications of recycled materials in VAUDE products that are on the market 
 Large efforts to become more sustainable in materials use, e.g. via use of bio-based polymers 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure or equipment:  
 VAUDE Testing Laboratory equipped with several testing machines for physical and thermal testing 
 VAUDE Innovation Park equipped with whole setup to manufacture in-house textile prototypes 
 Cooperation with Intertek Testing Services 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
 Sport trade shows (ISPO, Outdoor Show etc.) 
 Textile conferences (International Textile Conference Aachen/Dresden/Denkendorf/Hohenstein etc.) 
 Textile and sport related magazines  
Networks: 
 VAUDE has a wide network within the entire sports textile sector 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 72 of 127 
Partner 7 – PANASONIC – Panasonic Eco Solutions 
 
Country Turkey 
Core Competence: Electrical Installation Sector (Low Voltage Area). 
Brief description of legal entity:  
Panasonic was established in 1918, has 469 subsidiaries and has 254,084 employees including subsidiaries. Panasonic, the 
75th most recognized brand in the world in 2017, is managed with 4 different divisions classified by product groups. 
Panasonic Eco Solutions Türkiye was established in 1980 in Istanbul, the company operates in the Electrical Installation Sector 
(Low Voltage Area). It has a production capacity of 100 million switches and sockets per year in the facilities that have 
implemented Industrial 4.0 applications with the technological infrastructure. Exports to more than 70 countries are realized and 
the export rate is 35%. Domestic sales are 65%. 
All work from the design to the production of new products can be carried out in Panasonic Eco Solutions Turkiye. Company has 
an R&D Center with 60 employees. New products are being developed that offer innovative solutions. There are 11 funded 
projects completed (National Funds). Within the scope of EU projects, it is aimed to carry out innovative studies by using our 
company's design and production competencies. 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
Lead end use case for electronics consumer goods, provider of a concrete use case: coated light switches. Contribute with 
design and product development departments. Main involvement in WP1 - materials and requirements specification and WP5 - 
use cases demonstration. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
Every year we process 4.200 tons of plastic raw materials ABS, PC-ABS, PC. 10% of the raw materials we use is recycled. 
Panasonic Eco Solutions will act as end user in Turkey for the DECOAT project. Applications for the Electrical Installation Sector 
(Low Voltage Area) of the techniques to be developed will be carried out and evaluated. 
All the processes from design to production of our products in our product range are performed in our company. The production 
is performed mostly with plastic injection technology. 
Plastic Injection: There are 56 plastic injection machines and the annual production capacity of switches /sockets is 100 million.  
Automation: Plastic products taken with robots without being touched by human hands in advanced technology production lines 
are placed in separators and transferred to automatic assembly lines. The products with fewer production amounts are mounted 
on manual assembly lines and the products with higher production are mounted by assembly automation lines.  
Plastic Injection Molds: The plastic injection molds required for the products are produced in the molding room which is located 
in the company, and there is annual production capacity of 500 mold cavity.  
Laboratory: All the tests required for the certification process of final products are carried out by the competent crew in our 
laboratory which is located in our company and equipped with high technology. 
 
Laboratory 
Metal Cutting Department: In the Metal Cutting Department, which reaches to 24 employees in a year, there are 9 metal cutting 
lines which are sensitive and fast presses in range of 40-125 tons. With 180 metal molds, 220 different kinds of products are 
produced and approximately 28 million pieces are produced per month. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 73 of 127 
         
Metal Cutting 
The measurements of the parts produced in the metal cutting section are carried out by the metal cutting quality control measuring 
unit which is also created. 
 
Metal Cutting Quality Control Measurement Section  
SMD Installation Department: SMD line with a capacity of 42.000 component sets per hour has been installed and the 
manufacturability of 150 different products has been ensured. In this section, after the completion of the electronic layout process, 
the product is combined with other parts and tested. 23 employees have been employed in this department. 
     
 
SMD  
Design of Automation Lines:  
                                                                                                                             
 A line design has been realized for TV - data sockets to be mounted on the 
same assembly automation line of 42 kinds of products. 
 Mounting automation systems are provided for module and mechanism 
assemblies for C1 socket mechanisms  
 
                                           
                                                                                                                                                          
Automation line                                                                                                                                     
 Key staff members undertaking the work:   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 74 of 127 
Çiğdem Yürür (Female): She is the project leader of DECOAT project for Panasonic Eco Solutions. She is a mechanical 
engineer and she has worked many years as the head of mechanical R&D processes of Panasonic Eco Solutions Türkiye. She 
has experience in mechanical design, mould design, materials, injection processes. 
Esin Akdeniz (Female): She is responsible of preparing all the reports, IP rights for the DECOAT project. She is a chemical 
engineer and has experience about funded project proposals and IP rights. 
Selin Keskin (Female): She is material engineer and responsible for all new material applications and evaluations within the 
DECOAT project. She has experience about materials and applications. 
Savaş Kalaça (Male): He is mechanical engineer and responsible for all material applications and test processes. He has 
experience in mechanical design, materials, injection processes. 
Eda Arıoğlu (Female): She is responsible for product tests. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
The production and testing of new materials and products can be carried out within the company. 
If the project work is successful, the innovations will also be available in a wide range of Panasonic industries. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 Already using ca. 10% of recycled materials of the 4200 tons plastic raw materials that are yearly used 
 Extensive experience with national R&D projects in Turkey, for example for the development of new moulds, automatization 
and robotisation 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
 Product test equipment for all the tests that are needed for product standards 
 56 injection lines 
 9 metal cutting lines 
 Automation lines 
 R&D center 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Fairs: 
Many fairs are attended, both in Turkey and overseas. Main ones:  
 Light + Building – 2-yearly (for DECOAT 2022 could be of main interest), Frankfurt.  
 ICSG - Istanbul Smart Grids and Cities Congress and Fair 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 75 of 127 
Partner 8 - MBT - Mercedes Benz Türk A.Ş. 
 
Country Turkey 
Core Competence: Providing design, calculation, simulation and final 
validation of the truck/bus parts obtained 
Brief description of legal entity:  
Mercedes-Benz Türk (MBT), which was established in Istanbul in 1967, is one of the biggest foreign direct 
investments in Turkey with a total investment volume of € 1 billion and employs around 6.000 people. 80% of MBT 
employees are postgraduates. Furthermore 4.000 people are employed in its nationwide dealer and customer 
service network. Daimler AG currently holds 67% shares in MBT.  
Mercedes-Benz Türk produces city-buses and coaches at the Hoşdere Bus Plant in Istanbul and light, medium and 
heavy duty trucks at the Aksaray Truck Plant. These facilities are an important part of Daimler AG’s development 
and production network. 
MBT R&D Center (Bus & Truck), which is located in the Hoşdere Bus Plant, has over 400 employees, more than 
85% with a mechanical, electrical, computer engineering or equivalent, including 165 MSc and 4 PhD. The strategy 
of MBT R&D Center is to service engineering facilities to the global development network for specific contents all 
around the world (Center of Competence), to produce and export technology, to supply the needs of both Turkish 
and world market, to present industrialised products manufactured in Turkey, to play an active role in the R&D 
ecosystem by innovation, innovative technologies and university-industry collaborations. The R&D Department of 
MBT is specialized in all steps of the development process, from vehicle concept to construction, from simulation 
calculation to testing. By centralising research in the Center of Competence (shift of work load from Germany to 
Turkey) the employee number is increasing. MBT is designing its future on six main topics: connectivity, autonomous 
driving, mobility, electrifications, safety and efficiency (reducing the cost and emissions, increasing efficient use of 
energy and resources). Web page: www.mercedes-benz.com.tr 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
Main role of MBT is supporting the project (as one of the end users) by its huge experience of plastics and multi-
layered bus components. MBT is going to develop its own test methodology for validating the related processes and 
predicting the debonding quality of future components. New products with novel recyclability property and novel 
CAE methodology will be the main tasks for MBT. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
MBT has a global responsibility for various scopes in Daimler Buses. MBT is the competence centre for cockpit 
scope. A cockpit structure consists of very different parts, especially multilayer parts. MBT research and 
development centre takes responsibility for these parts from design to development/ modelling/ production method 
and surface properties and has a lead role in the production of the parts. Therefore, MBT has an elaborated technical 
background of multilayer parts. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
PhD Candidate Okan Otuz (M) holds a bachelor degree in mechanical engineering. Later on he obtained his master 
degree at Istanbul Technical University (İTÜ), studying composite& hybrid engineering. He is currently doing his 
PhD study in the Faculty of Aeronautics and Astronautics at İTÜ. In 2012, he started working for Mercedes-Benz 
Turkey in the field of structural durability and fatigue calculations. Since 2013, he is also responsible for plastics, 
fibre-reinforced plastics and hybrid structures. 
Bsc. Nadin Özkuyumcuyan (F) holds a bachelor degree in chemical engineering from Istanbul Technical 
University. Her thesis subject was “Increasing Flame Resistance of Polypropylene”. In 2015, after her studies, she 
started working as R&D Incentives & Innovation Responsible in truck development at Mercedes-Benz Türk. She is 
coordinating the local and international incentive projects and patent applications.  
PhD Candidate Akın Özkan (M) Design engineer in MBT Bus interior trim. He received his master in mechanical 
engineering - construction program (2015) in Istanbul Technical University. Has 7 years development experience 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 76 of 127 
and he is now studying his PhD in Istanbul University on composite materials. He has participated in several projects. 
Previous industry experience: MBtech, design engineer. 
Bsc. Thomas T. Braunmiller (M) He received his bachelor degree as mechanical engineering in University of 
Augsburg. He is currently working as a design engineer Interior Cockpit in EvoBus/MBT for 10 years. Before, he 
worked as an external employee (euro engineering) in Interior Cockpit (EvoBus) for 9 years. 
PhD Candidate Deniz Sönmez (M) Senior Test Engineer in MBT Testing Interior/Elektrik BUS. He gained his 
master in mechanical engineering - manufacturing program (2009) with a thesis on Creep Behaviour of shape 
Memory Alloys Near Equiatomic Nickel-Titanium Wires. He is working on his PhD on Polymers and Injection/ 
Compression Molding. He has participated in several projects.  
Technician Mehmet Atalay (M) Test Technician in MBT Testing Bus &Truck. He graduated from Alibeyköy 
Industrial vocational high school – electric department. He has more than 10 years test experience. His areas of 
expertise are automation, strain-gauge applications and auto electricity topics. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
CAE methodology on bonded glass-fibre reinforced plastics and steel parts was developed under a joint study with 
Dortmund Technical University. The name of the Thesis: Development of intrinsic connection elements to join 
composite and metal components for automotive applications, Adalı, Can, Otuz, Okan, Akyol, Onur, Pohl, Markus, 
Stommel, Markus.  
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
Several successful applications and new ongoing projects were obtained in the scope of multilayer parts in MBT 
buses that are pioneering the market regards to design and production.  
Well-experienced in performing R&D projects at national level (Tübitak projects) 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
As Mercedes- Benz Türk A.Ş. R&D Center, we will be participated in DECOAT project with CAE, Testing and Design 
departments. Existing Computerized Simulation capabilities are Bus & Truck Entire Vehicle Strength Analysis, 
Components/Subsystem Strength Analysis, Multi Body Simulation, Fatigue Life Analysis etc. In MBT test labs, there 
are 4 main operations; 1) Function and vehicle tests, 2) Road testing, 3) Prototyping and 4) Endurance test and field 
quality. R&D Center product design engineers are capable of designing and developing complex 3D bus/truck parts 
using engineering tools (NX & Catia).  
  Bus assembly testing facilities at MBT. 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Fairs: 
IFAT 2021 World’s Leading Trade Fair for Water, Sewage, Waste and Raw Materials Management (yearly, 
conference) 
Plast Eurasia International Fair (yearly, fair) 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 77 of 127 
Networks: 
Daimler Corporate Information & Resources platform - in house platform covering the whole Daimler group 
 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 78 of 127 
Partner 9 – MAIER – Maier S. Coop. 
 
Country SPAIN 
Core Competence: AUTOMOTIVE TIER 1 
Brief description of legal entity:  
MAIER is one of the first plastic component suppliers with up to 2,300 employees in 9 countries with global sales above 361 M€, 
being part of the biggest co-operative group in the world (global sales above 13,200 M€ and a workforce above 82,000 employees). 
MAIER is a leading company in functional and aesthetical components for the automotive industry. In Europe, Maier heads, in 
particular, the development and manufacture of body colour painted front grilles, chromed caps, wheel-trims, wheelcaps and petrol 
cap lids, as well as the production of a wide array of other automotive components and body modules (mudguards, consoles, air 
vents, fascia, door trims, handles...). MAIER owns plants in Spain, the United Kingdom, Italy, Czech Republic, China and Mexico, 
joint ventures in Turkey and Japan, and offices in France, Germany, USA and Japan, being supplier of plastic components for the 
most important automotive OEMs (PSA Groupe, TOYOTA, AUDI, RENAULT, JAGUAR-Land Rover, GM, BMW, NISSAN, etc.). 
Besides, its technical centre with more than 100 employees offers support to OEMs and Equippers. 
MAIER is an experienced company in design and development of components (injection, finishing/decoration and assembly); 
designing and manufacturing of prototype and production moulds; analysis and implementation of industrial facilities; and 
research, development and innovation. MAIER’s innovation procedure is always based on quality and accuracy methodologies 
which have led to more than 20 patents, from 1993 onwards, in automotive components and related processes.  
In order to achieve the objectives planned in the project, MAIER will work along with its research centre called MAIER 
TECHNOLOGY CENTRE (MTC), in which MAIER has a participation of 84.62%. MTC will participate as a linked third party of 
MAIER in the achievement of some tasks in the project. MTC is an R&D NON PROFIT organization dedicated to the research 
and development in the field of thermoplastic injection moulding, decorative and assembly technologies and analysis and 
implementation of production facilities for automotive. The technological capacity of the centre is based on its team, currently 
formed of more than 100 people, mostly with technical skills (Higher Engineering with a strong vocation for research, development 
and innovation). 
For MAIER, as the End-user for automotive applications, the targets of this project coincide very well with its own target to specialize 
in the production of thermoplastic components and subunits with decorative finishes that could be recycled for automotive 
applications  
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
WP leader of WP5, strong involvement in WP2 and support in WP1 and WP4 with the following tasks: 
 Definition of the specifications and requirements that the automotive demonstrator component must fulfil. 
 Production of the automotive coated demonstrator for recycling  
 Production of the automotive aesthetic demonstrator with recycled material  
 Validation of the demonstrator components according to the specifications. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
MAIER is an expert in understanding the needs of the automotive OEMs and we are in close contact with their engineering 
departments. MAIER also has a deep and complete knowledge of parts that have highly aesthetic functionalities (as coated parts 
proposed on this project). MAIER designs these parts and produces the moulds, injects the parts and is also able to validate their 
performance. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Mikel Larrakoetxea (Male): He is the responsible for the development of industrial projects. He is a mechanical engineer, with 
more than 10 years of experience at MAIER. He has a wide experience in R&D projects regarding scale-up to industrial level.  
Irati Apraiz Garteiz (Female): Quality technician. Industrial Technical Engineer with more than 10 years of experience at MAIER. 
She has a wide experience in the characterization and validation of automotive components for the principal OEMs. She has been 
involved in several R&D projects at national and regional level. 
Ana Isabel Zaldibar Arteche (Female): Cost Analyst, Industrial Engineer with more than 12 years of experience at MAIER. She 
has a wide experience in the component cost analysis for the exploitation and business plans. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5)  
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 79 of 127 
 
MAIER is an experienced company in 
designing and development of components 
(injection, finishing/decoration and assembly); 
designing and manufacturing of prototype and 
production moulds; analysis and 
implementation of industrial facilities; and 
research, development and innovation. MAIER 
innovation procedure is always based on 
quality and accuracy methodologies which 
have led to more than 20 patents, from 1993, 
in automotive components and related 
processes. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 MAIER is already involved in 3 EU projects concerning recycling: 
 ECOBULK: enabling circular product options for re-use, upgrading, refurbishment, recovery and recycling 
https://www.ecobulk.eu/  
 FIBEREUSE: Large scale demonstration of new circular economy value-chains based on the reuse of end-of-life fiber 
reinforced composites http://fibereuse.eu/  
 TRASH2CASHPROJECT: Designed high-value products from zero-value waste textiles and fibres via design driven 
technologies http://trash2cashproject.eu/  
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
 
  
 MAIER will offer the following services 
and expertise: 
 Style definition  
 Design, engineering & manufacturing 
of injection tools. 
 Injection moulding of up-scaled 
components. 
 Final component characterisation 
according to OEMs’ specifications 
and market requirements. 
Technical and economical assessment 
for further industrialisation. 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Main focus will be on commercial visits to the main automotive customers, i.e. the key OEMs (like PSA, Toyota, Renault, GM…) 
during the final part of the project and beyond 
 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 80 of 127 
Partner 10 - RESCOLL – RESCOLL SARL 
 
Country FR 
Core Competence: Adhesive bonding, composite materials, testing 
Brief description of legal entity:  
RESCOLL is an innovative SME, best defined as a research company for materials, specialized in composites and polymers. 
RESCOLL’s activities are industrial research and development of innovative products and processes. RESCOLL is conducting 
innovation research in the field of industrial applications of polymers (composites, resins, adhesives, varnish, coatings, etc.) and 
related fields: bonded assemblies, materials for fire behavior and environmentally friendly surface treatments. 
RESCOLL currently has 100 employees, including PhDs, engineers and technicians with sales of 10.2 M€ in 2017. RESCOLL 
does more than 45% of its sales in the aerospace industry. RESCOLL has been at the origin of more than 40 patents in the field 
of polymers and composites. RESCOLL has ISO 17025 and NADCAP accredited laboratories and is specialized in the fields of 
polymer formulation, vibroacoustic testing, mechanical characterization, non-destructive control, fire testing, thermo mechanical 
analysis, spectrometry and chromatography and surface analysis and accelerated ageing.  
RESCOLL also participates in several European projects including projects within the scope of FP6, FP7, and Horizon 2020. In 
addition, RESCOLL has participated in several Clean Sky 2 and CORAC projects.  
RESCOLL has worked extensively on the development of advanced surface coating and bonding technologies, and has 
equipped a laboratory specifically for studies related to surface characterization and analysis. Thanks to projects supported on 
both the national and European level, RESCOLL has a team who has a great deal of experience in the development of 
debondable adhesion coatings.  RESCOLL’s INDAR INSIDE debondable adhesives have already seen application in numerous 
applications, including the automotive sector. 
Its technical skills, quality system and the scope of its material means (i.e. technologically advanced equipment) make RESCOLL 
one of the state-of-the-art laboratories in the field of materials testing on the European level. 
DECOAT role and main tasks: -  
Debonding on demand via adaptation of the debonding adhesives for use on textiles and plastics (activation type, type of trigger) 
– mainly in WP1 and WP2 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
RESCOLL has worked extensively on the development of innovative adhesive systems over the years, including surface 
treatments such as primers for promoting adhesion between layers in dissimilar materials. In addition, RESCOLL is fully equipped 
to perform surface pretreatment and analysis, coupled with comprehensive testing and validation of the bonded materials. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Dr. Dipl. Eng. Maxime OLIVE (male) is an R&D Engineer with more than 10 years’ experience in the adhesive industry, 
especially formulation issues and debonding strategies. From 2010 to 2015 Maxime has worked as Team Manager of the 
Sustainable Chemistry Department in RESCOLL, with activities ranging from adhesive dismantling strategies to adhesive 
formulation (including substitutions of substances and REACH impact studies) or Life Cycle Assessment. In 2015 Maxime took 
a position as IP and Internal Research Manager in RESCOLL with activities devoted to the development of RESCOLL’s home 
technologies in smart adhesives and coatings. 
Wilfrid Sourbé (male). Ing. Wilfrid Sourbé is Expert in bonding process development. He has more than 10 years’ experience 
in adhesive technology, process and metal/composites assemblies. He obtained the EWF Bonding Adhesive diploma in 2011 
and is a now a training leader at RESCOLL. Wilfrid has wide experience in the management of B2B missions and collaborative 
projects dedicated to adhesion and process auditing, more specifically in relation to the aeronautics, medical devices, transport, 
or energy sectors. 
Dr. Dipl. Eng. Isabelle Coco (female), Head of the department of analysis and characterization, will support the consortium in 
mechanical, thermomechanical, chromatographic, spectrometric, physic-chemical, surface analysis and characterization. Dr 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 81 of 127 
Coco’s team has 16 persons and manages 7 laboratories accredited by ISO 17025, NADCAP, AIRBUS and SAFRAN GROUP 
among other certifications. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 Physico-chemical characterization: RESCOLL's analytical testing laboratory is certified by both NADCAP and AIRBUS 
for characterization activities. RESCOLL works regularly with major actors in the aerospace industry, providing analytical 
testing services for a variety of needs. 
 Aging, mechanical, and fatigue studies: RESCOLL has a large laboratory dedicated to aging and fatigue studies 
 Surface characterization and analysis: RESCOLL's surface analysis laboratories are one of the leading laboratories in 
France of its type. Designed around the characterization and development of advanced surface treatment technologies, 
the surface analysis labs are equipped with cutting-edge analytical techniques designed to perform analyses more rapidly 
and accurately. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 LAY2FORM: Efficient Material Hybridization by Unconventional Layup and Forming of Metals and Composites for 
Fabrication of Multifunctional Structures,2017 (H2020) 
 DOSECATH: Balloon catheter for prevention of bladder infections (adhesive bonding of soft substrates with porous 
ones),2016 (EUROSTARS) 
 URBANREC: New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled products,2015 
(H2020) 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
 
 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Every year, RESCOLL hosts its annual “Journée Collage”, an event dedicated to coatings and adhesives which attracts major 
industry representatives from across the industrial spectrum. This will also be used to disseminate project activities. 
Fairs: RESCOLL regularly attends a wide variety of conferences, such as SURFAIR, JEC, and others, where it will also 
disseminate project information. 
Networks: RESCOLL is a member of the European Welding Federation (EWF), and is certified to deliver diplomas in adhesive 
bonding through its training activities (EWF 515, 516, 517). As a result, this will serve as one significant channel of 
communication. In addition, RESCOLL is a member of several clusters, such as Aerospace Valley and ASTECH, which have 
very close ties to industry. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 82 of 127 
Partner 11 – CTECH – C-Tech Innovation 
 
Country United Kingdom 
Core Competence: general technology driven innovation, especially relevant for 
DECOAT is the experience with microwaveable additives and microwave 
equipment 
Brief description of legal entity:  
C-Tech Innovation is a leading independent innovation management and technology development SME based in the UK. The 
company is a leading centre for the development of novel technological processes, which are used to replace or enhance 
conventional process routes. C-Tech has extensive experience in a number of technology areas stretching back over 40 years. 
C-Tech has taken part in European Commission funded research projects over many years, and our experience will be applied 
during this project. We have a highly qualified, skilled and diverse workforce of over 60 as well as our own laboratories and 
workshops. This unique combination enables us to provide a flexible, tailored service, taking projects from concept, through 
design, to construction and commercialisation, all in-house. Our services include innovation management; process, product and 
service improvement; due diligence; contract research and development; and intellectual property exploitation. Our worldwide 
clientele ranges from small start-up companies to large multinationals. The company applies chemistry, physics and biological 
science in innovative applications in a variety of fields, including sensors, nanotechnology, thermal process engineering, 
environmental technologies, electrochemistry etc. Over 1,500 patents have been taken out since 1966 by C-Tech, covering a 
very broad spectrum of technologies. Our list of clients include: 
 
Our work has seen us achieving an average annual turnover of €5.25M and registering a 35% growth per annum over the past 
5 years.  
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
C-Tech will use its extensive expertise in process design for recycling (WP2) to assist in pilot line design and build (WP4). The 
electrothermal technology selection will be key to the whole process and this coupled with the ‘additives for activation’ selection 
(WP1) is central to the DECOAT project. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
Process Plant Design and Build - With over 40 years’ experience of helping our customers design and build innovative process 
equipment, C-Tech have the breadth of knowledge to complete custom made projects in diverse industry sectors. Using bespoke 
development process equipment constructed by C-Tech, new technologies achieve market faster with reduced risk. C-Tech has 
in-depth knowledge of the design and build of RF/MW heated process and will use this to design and build a unit in DECOAT. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Mr Edward Jones (Male) - Edd is C-Tech Innovation’s Research & Development Group Leader. In addition he is involved in a 
number of innovative heating based research projects in the recycling sector. Edd has a degree in Chemistry from University of 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 83 of 127 
Durham and has worked as a project manager at C-Tech for 7 years. As a registered Prince 2 practitioner he co-ordinates C-
Tech’s offer of external project management to large industrial customers. 
Dr Bob Crawford (Male) - Bob is CTECH’s Innovation Manager. In addition, he runs projects with energy and materials recovery 
themes and carries out Life Cycle Analysis studies. Bob has a DPhil in physical chemistry from Oxford University, a Post 
Graduate Certificate in Sustainable Business from Cambridge University Programme for Industry and is a Fellow of the Royal 
Society of Chemistry. He worked in consumer goods R&D for 22 years and is expert in all aspects of collaborative R&D. 
Dr Domenico Cupertino (Male) – is an experienced chemist and materials scientist with 30+ years’ experience. He has 
extensive R&D experience in industrial chemistry and catalysis and has a broad background in technology development. He has 
experience with nanoparticle systems, MW and RF heating of polymers and composite materials.  
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
WEAR2 – this concept was developed in a joint venture with NIRI and has since been taken up exclusively in the Netherlands 
in the work wear sector. The wear2 process incorporates a unique yarn in selected seams during garment manufacture. 
Microwave energy is used to activate the seam separation at disassembly, by degrading the yarn’s tensile properties. wear2 
allows discrete components such as buttons, zips, labels and decorative pockets to be removed with minimal force. The rest of 
the garment remains undamaged and complete, ready for re-use. Alternatively, the entire garment can be engineered to literally 
come apart at the seams into its constituent components. This theme will be carried into the DECOAT project to design processes 
for new applications.  
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
SUSCORP: Development of reversible adhesive systems incorporating microwave-activated expanding microspheres for the 
complete removal of logos and emblems from corporate wear post first user life (InnovateUK project 100698) . 
RADIACAM: Automated disassembly technology and process development using MW activated materials to assist the 
automotive industry and mattress producers reduce their environmental impact by recycling/reusing components (InnovateUK 
project 101246).  
RELIGHT: MW separation of glass lighting components including removal of mercury contamination to enable reuse and 
recycling (FP7 project 314872). 
ILLUMINATE: Disassembly and sorting of CFL and LED lamps and their components (FP7 project 603667) 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
Our primary key resources are our personnel that include recognised experts in MW/RF heating, electrochemistry, physics, 
design, engineering, sales and the financial and administrative knowledge needed to complete the tasks in DECOAT.   
Furthermore, CTECH has its own laboratories and workshops that will be necessary for technology development and 
demonstration, and has expertise in the modern computer technologies, computer aided design software and devices required 
for project success.  
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Fairs, journals, magazines: 
 Web-based channels, technology flyers 
Networks: 
 Waste recyclers and through National Bodies concerned with Waste and Resource, such as WRAP (UK) 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 84 of 127 
Partner 12 – DEVAN – Devan Micropolis S.A. 
 
Country Portugal 
Core Competence: Provides high-tech finishing chemicals to the worldwide textile 
markets 
Brief description of legal entity:  
Devan is a technology company that develops and commercializes new chemical treatments for textiles. These treatments add 
functionality to textile fabrics making them more comfortable, safer and cleaner. The company operates through its four 
operational entities, together with a wide network of agents and distributors a global coverage is ensured. The company has 
been successful in introducing new concepts to the market. Devan’s product range and expertise are very wide. It operates in 
many textile segments such as home textiles (e.g. carpets, bedding textiles), apparel (e.g. sports clothing) and technical textiles 
(e.g. workwear). Part of Devan’s expertise is related to microencapsulation, main focus of the Portuguese site (Devan – 
Micropolis S. A. - Devan Portugal), which have a vast knowledge on microencapsulation and chemical functionalization of 
microcapsules and their incorporation in different polymeric matrices and fibres.  
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
In the DECOAT project, Devan´s main activities are related with the development of innovative thermo-responsive core-shell 
nanostructured co-polymers and their industrial upscale. Devan will closely collaborate with partner NTUA (National Technical 
University of Athens) on the synthesis of the nanostructured materials and the subsequent upscaling of the processes.  
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
Devan has a vast knowledge on the development and commercialization of microcapsules for the worldwide textile market. 
Devan´s product portfolio contains several products based on microcapsules containing several active ingredients depending on 
the final aim, such as: fragrances, well-being oils, probiotics and phase change materials for thermoregulation purposes.  
 
An example of one of Devan´s commercial products. Electron microscopic photographs of 
eSCENTialTM applied to textile fibres. The microcapsules are homogeneously applied and linked to 
the fibres, providing an even distribution and durable attachment of the product.[21] 
In addition, Devan has been involved in the development of microcapsules containing very reactive ingredients, such as self-
healing compounds. The high reactivity of the self-healing compounds is an extra challenge for the microcapsules synthesis, 
and the gained knowledge will be very useful in the DECOAT project. 
Finally, the grafting and functionalization of the nanostructured materials/microcapsules onto the surrounding matrices is very 
important, allowing a good adhesion and chemical compatibility. Devan is proprietary (See reference below) of a patent related 
to the covalent linkage of microcapsules onto textile fibres for a permanent adhesion. This know-how will be of great use to 
compatibilise the nanostructured materials to the textile fabrics.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 85 of 127 
  
Devan Chemicals NV’s proprietary IP main features meant to increase textile functionalization by 
singular adhesion and release mechanism of microcapsules on textile fibres. 
REF: Patent WO / 2006/117702. MICROCAPSULES WITH FUNCTIONAL REACTIVE GROUPS FOR BINDING TO FIBERS 
AND PROCESS OF APPLICATION AND FIXATION 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Roberto F. A. Teixeira (male) obtained his Ph.D at Warwick University (UK) working on the fabrication of hybrid nanocomposite 
waterborne materials. In the fall of 2011, he started to work at the University of Ghent (Belgium) as a research fellow focusing 
on the microencapsulation of novel chemistries developed for self-healing applications. In 2014 he joined Devan Chemicals as 
a project manager and was responsible for the microencapsulation related projects. In May 2015, he became the R&D Manager 
of Devan Chemicals, leading the R&D department towards the development and implementation of innovative products for the 
worldwide textile market. 
Ana Carreira (female) obtained her Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at Coimbra University (Portugal) working on the production 
of acrylic based microcapsules for textile applications, a project resulting from a collaboration with Devan Chemical. In the 
beginning of 2016, she started to work as strategic R&D researcher at Devan (Portugal), being involved in microencapsulation 
projects and addition of new properties/functionalities to textile substrates. Her research interests include the synthesis, 
modification and characterization of polymers, microencapsulation procedures and smart polymers for substrates 
functionalization.  
Ivo Pais (male) is an MSc in Chemical Engineering by the Faculty of Engineering from Porto University. As soon as he finished 
his degree (2011), he started working in Devan, focusing his work on self-healing projects, with special attention to the 
encapsulation of reactive compounds. Know-how was built around polyurea and polyurethane shells with application in the same 
type of substrates. Further topics of interest include the development of smart membranes to increase the comfort of fabrics’ 
users, specifically by developing solutions sensitive to temperature/pH and water variations. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 WO/2006/117702 Microcapsules with functional reactive groups for binding to fibres and process of application and 
fixation. 
 WO/2014/044547 Textile treatment compounds and compositions. 
 Teixeira R. F. A. et al., Microencapsulation of Active Ingredients Using PDMS as Shell Material. Macromolecules, 47: 
8231-8237 (2014). 
 WO2014131913. Microcapsules and concrete containing the same. 
 Carreira A.S. et al., Preparation of acrylic based microcapsules using different reaction conditions for thermo-regulating 
textiles production, European Polymer Journal 93 (2017) 33–43. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
SHREC - Self-HEaling and REpairing Coatings. Devan worked on the development of microcapsules containing self-healing 
actives. Challenges were: 1) Very small size of microcapsules in coatings, 2) Compatibility with a wide variety of coating systems 
and substrates 
PUrePAIR - "polyurethane foams and elastomers with autonomic repair functions”. Following objectives were envisaged:  
 Development of new microcapsules to incorporate various chemistries and development of a continuous production process 
for the capsules 
 Development of a new route for the self-healing concept 
 Evaluation on processing of incorporating self-healing microcapsules in PU foams and elastomers 
 Proof-of-concept of self-healing in a PU matrix 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 86 of 127 
Healcon - Sealf-healing concrete to create durable structures (www.healcon.eu). 
Skincaps - “SKin Healthcare by Innovative NanoCAPsuleS” is a research project aiming to develop customised and safe 
nanocapsules to deliver novel products for skin healthcare applications, with increased efficiency and cost benefits, leading to 
ground-breaking innovations on the actual products. (www.Skhincaps.eu) 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
Devan´s research labs are equipped with Batch reactors, including an automated Atlas system from Syrris to perform the 
microencapsulation experiments. In our labs different reactor sizes are available, starting from 0.5 L up to 5L. Devan also has 
automated temperature, pH monitoring and overhead stirring speed controlling systems. 
For the industrial upscaling, Devan has recently invested in a new reactor platform, including several reactor types of different 
sizes (from a few hundred Kg to several Tons scale). 
In terms of skills, Devan has a specialized team of 6 people focusing their activities on the development of microcapsules, from 
the research and development point until the commercialization. We include in the point above, some of the key people for this 
project. 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Conferences and Fairs: 
 DORNBIRN Conference- Man-made fibre congres  
 Techtextil - Technical textiles  
 Performance Days – Functional fabric for sports, corporate and work wear 
 Domotex – Interior textiles  
 INTERZUM - Home textiles and furniture  
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 87 of 127 
Partner 13 – IRIS - Innovacio i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible S.L. 
 
Country Spain 
Core Competence: Advanced engineering 
IRIS Technology solutions, SL. (www.iris-eng.com) is an advanced engineering company that was established in Barcelona in 
2007 and specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality 
monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted at the food, 
pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state-of-the-art IR analysers for at-
line and in-line process monitoring.  
On the one hand our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics-in the fields of MEMs Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. We leverage ICTs, whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence 
and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as well as for decision support systems. In addition to photonics-
based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning 
industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an Innovation Unit 
for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying out various joint private projects with industry partners, 
our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and 
partners), and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 
60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, 
optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-
ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of 
technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and 
SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and organisations that 
specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
IRIS will lead WP3 where they will design and deliver different photonic-based systems for the monitoring of the process involved 
in the production of the DECOAT materials as well as for their end of life identification to ensure they can appropriately be sorted 
and that the coating removal process performs correctly. They will also have a role in WP1 to suggest fluorescent dies to be 
added in DECOAT core-shells, in WP4 for the integration of the monitoring systems prototypes, in WP5 for their validation in 
industrial case studies. Finally they will contribute to the project dissemination and plan an outmost exploitation of their results. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
The optical engineering and smart systems teams at IRIS have specialized expertise in sensor integration, optical engineering, 
chemometrics, data analytics, cloud infrastructures and data management systems. IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary 
knowledge groups. The Groups that will be involved in this project have expertise in optical systems (development of 
spectroscopic system for inline monitoring in the industry), production processes (scale up and the industrial integration of novel 
technologies for process optimisation/intensification), and performing scientific research (use of chemometrics to determine 
material composition and coating processing and optimisation). 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Dr. Ing. ELODIE BUGNICOURT (female). Project manager and Leader of the innovation unit in IRIS since 2009. Masters in 
Material Science & Engineering (2002), PhD in Polymers and Composite Materials (2005), both from National Institute of Applied 
Science (INSA), Lyon, France. Coordinated several European projects in the fields of bio-based packaging materials 
development, process monitoring, surface treatment. Previous industry experience: Arkema; Wacker Chemie, Ashland. 
Dr. IDOIA MARTÍ ALUJA (female) is a Senior Scientist at IRIS specialised in chemometric analysis. She received her PhD in 
Chemistry at the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Spain) and then worked in the Spectroscopic and Kinetics Unit (SKU) at the Institut 
Català d'Investigació en Química (ICIQ, Spain) and at the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO, Spain), and at Zobele Spain. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 88 of 127 
Dr. LAURA RODRÍGUEZ TURIENZO (female). B.S in Food Science & Technology (2008) Masters in Innovation in Safety & 
Food Technologies (2010), PhD in Biological Sciences (2011), all from University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain. 
Leads the Science and Engineering department at IRIS. Has been involved in a number of EU projects. 
Dr. MARIANO PERÁLVAREZ (male): PhD in Physics from the University of Barcelona (2009). Currently Project Technical 
Responsible and Optical Engineer at IRIS, Mariano is specialised in the fields of LED technology, Lighting, Optoelectronics and 
Photonics. Mariano also participated in 18 R&D projects, funded through both public competitive calls (at National and EU level) 
and private institutions.  
ALEJANDRO ROSALES (male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His background comprises 
theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, colorimetry, UV-VIS-
NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has extensive practical experience in 
programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as well as R&D methodology and management. Currently, he is the 
Science & Technology Manager in IRIS. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 Relevant product lines: Monitoring devices for real-time quality control: 
o VisumPALM: NIR technology for incoming material quality control and detection of adulteration.  
o VisumNIR: In-Line NIR monitoring for product standardization and increase of production efficiency.  
o Hypera: Hyperspectral imaging solutions for the industry e.g. system for inline composition monitoring on a belt – see 
below 
 
  
 Recent Prospects in the Inline Monitoring of Nanocomposites and Nanocoatings by Optical Technologies, E. Bugnicourt, T. 
Kehoe , M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Nanomaterials 2016, Review, 6(8), 150; 
doi:10.3390/nano6080150 
 Recyclability of PET/WPI/PE Multilayer Films by Removal of Whey Protein Isolate-Based Coatings with Enzymatic 
Detergents, Patrizia Cinelli, Markus Schmid, Elodie Bugnicourt, Andrea Lazzeri, Materials 9(6):473·June 2016, DOI: 
10.3390/ma9060473 
 Related services: Chemiometrics model development and training 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 OptiNanoPro: Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel processing lines, 
H2020- NMP-PILOTS, 2015-2018 
 OPTIJECT: A novel spectroscopic instrument for in-line monitoring during injection moulding; Grant agreement; FP7 
R4SMEs, 2010-2012 
 Hypera: Affordable hyperspectral Imaging System for on-line foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis, 
H2020- SMEInst, 2016-2017 
 B2B contracts in the field of multilayer plastic films sorting 
 B2B contracts in the field of fluorescence monitoring 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several instruments, namely, a FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV-VIS (PerkinElmer and 
Ocean Optics), an Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and a NIR (Mightex) spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 89 of 127 
imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff is properly trained and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial 
suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes). 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming microcontrollers, CNC-
milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others.  
IRIS’ optical engineers work with ZEEMAX software for optimally designing of optical systems and to setup the designs by means 
of advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“opticalware”). 
Food and wet chemistry lab equipped with a DSC, a Surface Energy analyser, an HPLC, a Cobb tester, microbiological 
equipments, microscope and microtome for structural analysis, migration cells, colourimeter (for colour and opacity 
measurement), Ford cup viscometers, water vapour permeation cells, turbidimeter, climatic chambers, manual and automatic 
coaters, electrospray, different drying technologies, plasma surface activation, etc. 
 
 
Figure 1: Coating thickness and distribution inline monitoring system adapted to a  
plastic film's roll to roll coating application line 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Fairs:  
 K-mess (trade fair),  
 Europact (fair and conference) 
Journals and Magazines:  
 Journal of Near Infrared spectroscopy,  
 Bioplastics magazine,  
 Recycling today newsletter 
Networks: 
 SecPhO, SPIE, CLP: networks related to photonics and optical technologies 
 ISPE, SPIRE: partnerships related to sustainable production respectively in pharma and other processing industries 
(chemicals, plastics, etc.) 
Bridge with other H2020 projects: In the frame of the H2020 SPIRE10-2018 project MultiCycle, coordinated by IRIS, a Circular 
Plastics Helix will be set up and will be proposed as dissemination channel to all projects of related thematics, including (if 
approved) DECOAT 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 90 of 127 
Partner 14 – ECOMATTERS – Ecomatters 
 
Country the Netherlands 
Core Competence: Life cycle assessment (ISO 14040/44), 
Environmental and Carbon Footprinting, Environmental Product 
Declaration (EPD), PEF/OEF, Management of sustainability data 
and Footprint Tools development. 
Brief description of legal entity:  
Ecomatters is a consultancy specialised in sustainability and chemical safety. Our multidisciplinary team brings together diverse 
talents and expertise in the fields of life cycle management, product legislation, toxicology, finance, economics, tool development, 
IT and data management. Ecomatters is skilled in developing user-friendly and interactive calculation models and tools, 
customised to our customers’ purpose and needs.  
We offer services based on life cycle thinking (LCT) and focus on sustainability throughout the value chain. We support 
organisations in developing their sustainability strategy and setting concrete sustainability goals. Furthermore, we perform 
quantitative analyses evaluating the social, economic and/or environmental aspects of services and products and assist in the 
preparation of product claims, (eco) labels and environmental product sheets. Among our clients are large industrial companies, 
SME’s, trade associations and research organizations. 
DECOAT role and main tasks: -  
Perform full LCA studies in order to evaluate the environmental impacts of the products incorporating the newly developed 
coatings and the respective recycling processes, determine the environmental performance improvements of the suggested 
processes compared to the current end-of-life scenarios (landfilling or energy recovery), analyze the total cost of ownership, and 
assist in the development of new circular business models.  
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
Ecomatters has extensive experience developing tools that focus on the full life cycle as well as working with value chains for 
the chemical, paint, and coating industries, industry associations, and governing bodies. Ecomatters usually works with industry 
and industry associations and has participated in several research and innovation projects with universities and research 
institutes. Therefore we have a good understanding of what it takes to transfer knowledge from the research stage to the 
implementation and exploitation stage. 
We have over a decade of experience performing Life Cycle Assessment studies for multinational chemical and coating 
companies. We have completed Environmental Product Declarations, executed screening studies for downstream applications, 
and were key actors on the PEF screening study for Decorative Paints. We have a long lasting relationship with the coatings 
European Association (CEPE), for whom we have developed studies, tools and LCI datasets. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Max Sonnen, Managing Director (Male). Max has a degree in Systems Engineering, Policy Analysis & Management at Delft 
University of Technology, and master degrees in Economy and Industrial Ecology from Erasmus University Rotterdam, and Delft 
University of Technology/Leiden University respectively. In 2008 he founded Ecomatters, with AkzoNobel Sustainability as a first 
client. Within Ecomatters, Max is involved in the development of tools and implementation of sustainability projects in the field of 
(product) life cycle management. Max’ focus mainly lies on the implications for strategy, economics and IT aspects. 
Pau Huguet Ferran, Sustainability Lead Spain (Male). Pau has a degree Industrial Engineering from Universitat Politecnica 
de Catalunya, and a master’s degree in Industrial Ecology at Delft University of Technology and Leiden University. In the 
sustainability field, he studied methods integrating economic and environmental indicators of systems. Since 2012 Pau has 
worked as a consultant at Ecomatters, where he performs LCA and Eco-efficiency Analysis, and develops models and analytical 
tools for sustainability assessment.  
Natalia Chebaeva, Sustainability Consultant (Female). Natalia obtained her Diploma and a Post-Graduate Degree in 
Environmental Economics and Management at Saint-Petersburg State Mining University, and a master degree in Industrial 
Ecology at Delft University of Technology and Leiden University. Natalia worked as a research assistant on international research 
projects in climate change policies, and devoted her master thesis to sustainability performance of technologies in research 
stages. Natalia joined Ecomatters in 2018 as a sustainability consultant. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 91 of 127 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
Publication of PEFCR (LCA category rules) for Decorative Coatings within the PEF (Product Environmental Footprint) pilot phase 
Review of 40 Environmental Footprint supporting studies for the European Commission within the PEF (Product Environmental 
Footprint) pilot phase 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 Product Environmental Footprint Pilot: Ecomatters has been involved in the Product Environmental Footprint Pilot, a part 
of the Single Market for Green Products Initiative from the European Commission. Product and Organisation Environmental 
Footprint methods are developed based on LCA and tested as a common way of measuring environmental performance. 
Ecomatters participated in different roles in the pilot phase, from executing the necessary studies and developing rules and 
methodologies for product groups, to participating in the Steering Committee, Technical Advisory Board and Technical 
Secretariat.  
 Coatings Eco footprint tool: As part of the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) project for the European Council of Paint, Printing 
Ink and Artist’s Colours Industry (CEPE), Ecomatters developed a tool that calculates eco footprints for a can of paint 
according to recipe using industry-aligned LCI datasets. This tool generates an extensive overview of the most important 
environmental impacts and is freely available to approximately 85% of all coatings companies in Europe. 
 Teijin Aramid Customer Benefit Model: Ecomatters created a methodology to develop new business models and value 
propositions for Teijin Aramid, a multinational producer of man-made fibers. The system guides the practitioners (Eco-
Efficiency Services of the company) though the process of value creation to identify solutions that unlock sustainable and 
financial advantage. In a step-wise process, the user develops the model from an initial idea to a complete solution, involving 
partners in the value chain and external stakeholders. The solutions are evaluated using Life Cycle Assessment and Eco-
Efficiency methodologies, which guarantee the solid sustainable performance of the system. Among the solutions tested, 
Ecomatters performed an screening LCA for smart textiles.  
 23 EN15804-compliant Environmental Product Declarations for Dulux Trade: Ecomatters developed 23 LCA 
ISO14040/44 based Environmental Declarations for Decorative Coatings, including more than 100 product and colour 
formulations. The studies were third-party reviewed and Certified by MRPI and Eco-platform, and align with existing 
corporate reporting methods and models.  
 AkzoNobel Sustainability support: Development of the Resource Efficiency Index (REI), Multiple EPD, LCAs and Eco-
Efficiency studies. General support in the execution of LCA and life cycle based activities to support corporate sustainability 
services and individual business units at chemical multinational AkzoNobel.  
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
We are an international team with diverse engineering and academic backgrounds in: Business economics and management, 
Environmental sciences, Industrial Ecology. Chemistry, Renewable Energy, Conservational biology. Paint, coating, and fibers 
have a special focus in the experience and expertise of the company. The company utilizes internationally recognized software 
for Life Cycle Assessment in R&D, Product development and design, Operations, and Supply Chains, as well as the access to 
internationally recognized impact databases. 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Ecomatters newsletter is a quarterly publication sent to approximately 500 subscribers with representatives of industries, 
authorities and NGO among them.  
Ecomatters is also an organizer of industry meetings and stakeholder dialogues, such as the first PEF/OEF meeting in 
Dutch context in the end of 2014. The company regularly participates in international conferences and fairs with presentations 
and reports about their main projects, activities and results. 
Networks: 
Partner organization of Climate KIC, Natural Capital Coalition, MVO Nederland, and the Fundacion Empresa & Clima. In 
addition, we are connected to a large number of sustainability and circularity-related networks in the Netherlands, Spain and 
Europe.  
A core partner in the EIT Climate KIC eCircular Flagship, a programme that accelerates the circularity of plastic-based 
material systems and dematerialisation of plastic demand, with the vision of reaching a carbon-neutral raw material system by 
2050. The Flagship strives to identify, develop, and bring to scale radical digital innovations for waste prevention. 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 92 of 127 
Partner 15 – IRES – Innovation in Research & Engineering Solutions 
 
Country Belgium 
Core Competence: IRES is an independent Belgian project 
management firm (SME) administering all peripheral aspects of 
research projects, providing specialized services in the fields of 
innovation management, technology transfer and international 
research projects. IRES’s interdisciplinary team is capable to 
address a variety of tasks pertinent and supportive to research 
projects, crucial for their market applicability and sustainability. The 
company employs a team involving scientists from the financial and 
economic discipline, management science, engineering and 
statistics, while is co-operating with faculty members of European 
Universities and Research Institutes employing ad hoc experts to be 
involved in particular projects. 
Brief description of legal entity: The company's activities are focused on surveys and statistical analysis, applications of 
management, science methods and Impact assessment, supporting research organizations and private companies to evaluate 
and to exploit their innovations at international level; also, through its international network, IRES supports the development of 
innovative technologies and the optimization of products. Indicatively the company professionals have expertise in Project Risk, 
Ethics and Knowledge management, market trend analysis, feasibility studies, Impact assessment and Technology Transfer, 
Research in Materials Science, Development of tailored materials, Nanomaterials, Processing and Upscaling, Design and setup 
of prototypes, demonstrators, Ethics and integrity in research, Exploitation and Dissemination towards high technology readiness 
level. 
DECOAT role and main tasks: 
IRES will contribute to the integration of the environmental and health issues using Life Cycle Assessment and Safe-by-Design 
approaches, supporting ECOMATTERS. The impacts and the cost benefits will be evaluated at each step of the project in order 
to result in a new, low-cost (competitive) and green technology reflected by development of DECOAT tool. A risk assessment of 
possible market drawbacks related to the developed technologies and products will be conducted, to guarantee the 
competiveness of the final outcomes. Finally, a data management methodology will be established by handling the produced 
data of the characterization, the testing and the design activities and by their incorporation in an access database, which will be 
developed by IRES. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
IRES has ongoing EU funded projects on environmental and health issues using Life Cycle Assessment and Safe-by-Design 
approaches, performing also risk assessment. As IRES team comprises scientist and engineers, the background of setting up a 
proper risk assessment methodology and data management already exists.  
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Dr. Elias Koumoulos (Male), MSc Chemical Engineer, is author of 67 published papers in ISI journals, 5 book chapters, 94 
participations in national/international conferences, and has been thrice awarded for published research work in national and 
international level. He holds a BSc in Chemical Engineering, followed by MSc in Materials Science and Technology; having 
occupied in EC and national funded projects, his interests include nanomaterials, nanomechanical properties of materials 
(metals, alloys, polymers, ceramics, functionally graded materials for brakes, thruster and valve applications, thin films, 
elastomers, packaging polymers), polymers (processing of plastics, forming, casting, films, biopolymers, petroleum products, 
environmental friendly processes), R&D, quality control, production process and design. 
Dr Foteini Petrakli (Female) holds a BSc in Environmental Engineering (University of Ioannina); during her MSc studies in the 
field of Materials Science and Technology (NTUA), she dealt with environmental aspects. During her PhD studies in NTUA, she 
specialized in the development, synthesis (through wet chemical routes) & characterization, of advanced composite ceramic 
nano-materials for specialized applications in extreme environments. Since today, Foteini has the authorship of 5 published 
papers in ISI journals, a book chapter, 14 participations in national & international conferences and was twice awarded for 
published research work on national level. Having occupied in several EC and national funded projects, her research interests 
include: nanomaterials, ceramic nanomaterials, mechanical properties, materials testing, ceramic processing, functional 
ceramics, materials synthesis (sol-gel, slip-casting, biomimetic, precipitation), polymers, surface chemistry, SEM analysis, 
particle size analysis (TEM), XRD analysis, sintering, Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS), high temperature materials, pin on disc 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 93 of 127 
wear test, heavy metals adsorption, biomaterials, R&D, production process, risk management, data management, life cycle 
analysis and design. 
Dr. Nikos Romanos (Male) holds a Diploma and a Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering from the National Technical University 
of Athens (N.T.U.A.). His research focused on computer simulations and the study of the crystallization of polymers. During his 
doctoral degree he was responsible for the design, assembly and system administration of 3 multi-processor Beowulf clusters. 
His working experience expands as a high-school faculty in the department of science. He has publications and presentations 
in the fields of chemical engineering, computer modelling, thermodynamics, materials science. 
Kalogerini Maritini (Female) received her BSc in Physics from University of Crete, followed by a MSc in Microsystems and 
Nanodevices from National Technical University of Athens, School of Applied Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Her diploma 
thesis was carried out in Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas (FORTH) and dealt with Femtosecond Laser 
Temporal Pulse Shaping, focusing on bio-microfluidics applications. Her master thesis was carried out in School of Chemical 
Engineering (R-NANO research team) and dealt with the development, characterization and study of 3D Printing properties of 
biodegradable nanostructures, in the field of controlled release drug delivery.  
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 T. Syed, E.P. Koumoulos, L. O’ Donoghue, C.A. Charitidis. Surface Additive Manufacturing: Scientific and Technological 
Challenges, Market Uptake and Opportunities, Materials Today, submitted (2017). 
 E.P. Koumoulos, C.A. Charitidis. Surface analysis and mechanical behaviour mapping of vertically aligned CNT forest array 
through nanoindentation, Appl. Surf. Sci. 2017; 396:681–687. 
 E.P. Koumoulos, M. Giorcelli, P. Jagadale, A. Tagliaferro C.A. Charitidis. Carbon nanotube/ polymer nanocomposites: a 
study on mechanical integrity through nanoindentation, Polymer Composites 2015; 36(8):1432–1446. 
 M. Arkas, I. Kitsou & F. Petrakli. Mimicking the behaviour of rigid rod molecules. Smectic H liquid crystals from amphiphilic 
quaternary ammonium salts, Liquid Crystals 2017, 45:1, 70-83 
 Petrakli F, Arkas M, Tsetsekou A. α‐Alumina nanospheres from nano‐dispersed boehmite synthesized by a wet chemical 
route. J Am Ceram Soc. 2018; 101:3508–3519. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 MODCOMP “Modified cost-effective fibre-based structures with improved multi-functionality and performance”, (H2020 
NMP-22-2015 “Fibre-based materials for non-clothing applications”) 4/2016-3/2020 
 EQUINOX "A novel process for manufacturing complex shaped Fe-Al intermetallic parts resistant to extreme environments", 
(H2020 SC5-12b-2015 “Materials under extreme conditions”) 1/2016-12/2018 
 MEDLOC "Additive Manufacturing of 3D Microfluidic MEMS for Lab-on-a-Chip applications", (H2020 “PILOTS-04-2017 - 
Pilot Lines for 3D printed and/or injection moulded polymeric or ceramic microfluidic MEMS”) 01/2018-12/2021 
 SMARTFAN "Smart by Design and Intelligent by Architecture for turbine blade fan and structural components systems", 
(H2020 NMBP-04-2017 “Architectured /Advanced material concepts for intelligent bulk material structures”) 01/2018-
12/2021 
 OYSTER "Open characterisation and modelling environment to drive innovation in advanced nano-architectured and bio-
inspired hard/soft interfaces", (H2020 NMBP-07-2017 “Systems of materials characterisation for model, product and process 
optimisation”) 12/2017-11/2021 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
N/A 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
Networks - IRES is member of: 
EMMC (https://emmc.info/),  
EMCC (http://characterisation.eu/ ),  
CFPC (http://www.technologycluster.eu/) 
Innovation Day (https://sec2sv.com/european-innovation-day/  ) 
Industry Day (https://ec.europa.eu/info/events/eu-industry-day_en  ) 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 94 of 127 
Partner 16 – OSM - Open Source Management Ltd.  
 
Country UK 
Core Competence: Project, Risk, Ethics and Knowledge management, Dissemination and 
Exploitation, Business Planning and fund raising for start ups, Customised software for research 
projects on Data management, project follow up and risk assessment. The company has set up a team 
to specifically promote EU projects on social media. 
Brief description of legal entity:  
OSM, is an independent firm (SME) administering peripheral aspects of research projects. Its interdisciplinary team is capable 
to address a variety of tasks pertinent and supportive to research projects, crucial for their market applicability and sustainability 
The company produces customised software and promotional material like video and organises training workshops. The 
company experts carry surveys and statistical analysis, apply management science methods, organise exploitation activities and 
Impact assessment. The company professionals have expertise in project, risk, ethics and knowledge management, market 
trend analysis, feasibility studies, impact assessment and Technology Transfer. OSM’s interdisciplinary team is capable to 
address a variety of tasks pertinent and supportive to research projects, crucial for their market applicability and sustainability. 
The company employs a team involving scientists from the financial and economic discipline, management science, engineering 
and statistics, while it is co-operating with faculty members of European Universities and Research Institutes employing ad hoc 
experts to be involved in particular projects. 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
Main involvement in WP7, OSM will participate in the Exploitation, Technology Transfer and Dissemination Activities, Business 
Planning and promotion of DECOAT to social media. 
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
Participation in numerous advanced materials projects in many roles and especially as the Technology Transfer and exploitation 
partner. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Emmanuel Sofianopoulos (Male), Managing Director, Exploitation expert. BEng in Materials Technology, Mphil in Advanced 
Ceramics, PMP®; is a certified PM participating as researcher or managing EU projects on advanced materials since 1998. He 
has expertise in Technology transfer being the head of the Materials Thematic Group in the IRC network participating in many 
TT success stories. He is also an Exploitation Expert in the ESIC2 group. 
Dr Giovanni D’Orio (Male), head of economic studies. MSc, PhD in macroeconomics; as an expert in sustainable 
development international projects will head the formation of the feasibility studies and the exploitation plan. Expert in Financial 
planning for SMEs and funding leveraging. 
Karolina Koszalka (Female), head of dissemination activities. Experienced in EU projects related to professional education 
and coaching, in coordination and conducting multicultural events (trainings, conferences, workshops, study visits, staff 
exchange, exhibition, etc). She delivers trainings about conflict management, communication and intercultural awareness 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
Organisation of 2 European project workshops, creation of a business plan that got funded and proceeded as a start-up, 
participation in patent applications. Multimedia Production of promotional material for research projects. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 BIO4SELF – Development of self-reinforced composites based on PLA (H2020-NMBP). Leader of WP on exploitation and 
technology transfer.  
 TheBarCode: Development of multifunctional thermal barrier coatings and modelling tools for high temperature power 
generation with improved efficiency. (FP7, NMP). Role: Life Cycle Assessment, technology assessment, technology transfer, 
dissemination, feasibility studies and exploitation. 
 FIBRASPEC. (FP7, NMP). Role: project technology assessment, standardisation, dissemination, feasibility studies and 
exploitation. The project had to do with production of low cost Carbon Fibres for innovative applications. 
 ESIC2. Project on Supporting EU projects on their exploitation strategy and impact. (FP7, NMP1-SC-2011-ES2000). 
Role: Assignments for providing Exploitation Strategy Seminars to projects. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 95 of 127 
 SCAFFOLD: Innovative strategies, methods and tools for occupational risks management of manufactured nanomaterials 
(MNMs) in the construction industry. (FP7, NMP) 
 EFEVE: Development of a new high performance material associated to a new technological Energetic, Flexible, 
Economical, Versatile and Ecological process to make super strong and lightweight components (FP7, NMP) 
 FASHIONABLE: Development of new technologies for the flexible and eco-efficient production of customized healthy 
clothing, footwear and orthotics for consumers with highly individualised needs. (FP7, NMP) 
 SUSTAINVALUE: Sustainable value creation in manufacturing networks. (FP7, NMP) 
 3D-HiPMAS: Pilot Factory for 3D High Precision MID Assemblies. (FP7, FoF) 
 HEAT4U: Gas Absorption Heat Pump solution for existing residential buildings". (FP7-2011-NMP-ENV-ENERGY-ICT-EeB) 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure or equipment:  
Not applicable. 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
 OSM has experience with dissemination via connecting to ‘Enterprise Europe Network’ for technology transfer. 
 OSM is a member of TII (European Association for the Transfer of Technologies, Innovation and Industrial 
Information) and ISPIM (International Society for Professional Innovation Management) facilitating Technology 
Transfer, exploitation activities and Risk Management. 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 96 of 127 
Partner 17 – ISWA – International Solid Waste Association – PARTICIPATION TERMINATED 
 
Country Austria 
Core Competence: Global expert network 
Brief description of legal entity:  
The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) is a non-profit association consisting of international waste management 
experts and relevant stakeholders. ISWA works to protect human health and the environment as well as to ensure sustainable 
resource and waste management. Alongside technical competencies of the global expert network part of ISWA’s major 
competencies lie in organizing and participating in international networking events (annual World Congress, IFAT, ECOMONDO, 
COPs, and UN-Habitat), conducting educational trainings and workshops on various aspects of waste management (70+ 
trainings and events organized in 2017), drafting of technical reports and documents, engaging in developing economies to 
establish sustainable waste management practices, and the sharing of knowledge and experience in sustainable waste 
management and climate change mitigation. ISWA has multiple partnerships and MOUs with various international organizations 
including CCAC, R20, UNFCCC, UNEP, UNIDO, WHO, World Bank, and more. ISWA has an academic journal (Waste 
Management and Research), a magazine (Waste Management World), a bi-monthly newsletter, and 10 Technical Working 
Groups that can be used as tools to present, support, and disseminate the activities and results of the project. 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
The main tasks foreseen for ISWA in this project are in communicating and disseminating the project outputs to a wider 
stakeholder network through ISWA’s channels (WP7.2). ISWA has an extensive global network to reach waste management 
professionals and organizations within its own membership, but also maintains several working relationships with other 
international organizations through projects and MOU’s which allow ISWA to also reach a wide audience of stakeholders and 
interested parties within the field of sustainability research and action. ISWA will also be responsible for helping with policy input 
and standardization (WP7.3). Through its waste management expertise, access to recyclers and data on waste streams ISWA 
will help conduct a Life Cycle Costing (LCC) which is an assessment of all costs related to a product or service, over the entire 
life cycle, from production over use until disposal. Thus, the economic analysis which will take place in the DECOAT project 
refers not only to the cost of materials and manufacturing but will also include the wider implications of technology selection on 
project’s performance.   
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
ISWA has an international network of members, stakeholders and contacts globally. Its membership consists of waste 
management professionals from every continent, as well as waste management companies, and also other national waste 
management associations. They are joined together in 10 thematic working groups as well as numerous events (including our 
own yearly World Congress with 1000+ attendees). ISWA has two publications, the Waste Management World magazine and 
the peer reviewed Waste Management & Research journal, which target respectively the professional waste management 
community and the global research community.  
ISWA has participated in H2020 projects before, and is currently also the Communications & Disseminations leader for the 
projects EcoBulk and D-Noses and also contributes in a similar capacity for the project Multicycle. ISWA acknowledges that 
plastic recycling has a key role to play in waste management in order to prevent marine litter and make good use of resources. 
ISWA also maintains a busy calendar of events (70+ events organized in 2017) which include conferences, trainings, study tours 
and working groups on 10 different sustainability themes. Also, ISWA’s involvement with other EU projects as well as other 
international agencies allows for a broad view on possible project clustering and synergy opportunities 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Aditi Ramola (Female) is Technical Director at the ISWA General Secretariat. She graduated with distinction from the 
Environmental Technology & International Affairs MSc joint programme offered by the Technical University of Vienna and the 
Diplomatic Academy of Vienna. She received the ‘Best Study Award’ from ARA Altstoff Recycling Austria AG for her exemplary 
academic performance. She has several years of experience in the private sector and international organizations such as 
Caterpillar Inc. and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization where she worked at the Climate Policy and 
Networks unit of the Department of Energy. Most recently she was involved in the successful completion of the European 
Commission funded project on Developing an EU Standardised Approach to Vocational Qualifications in Healthcare Waste where 
she was the lead of the Work Package on Implementation planning and network growth and development. She is currently 
involved in other EU projects such as D-Noses and Multicycle. 
Arne Ragossnig (Male) ISWA Managing Director has completed his PhD-studies in Environmental Engineering – focus: 
Thermal Utilization of Waste – at the University of Leoben in 2001. After several years being responsible for Sales Controlling 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 97 of 127 
and Sales Coordination at the international Austrian plant engineering company VA TECH he became head of the study 
programme Energy and Environmental Management (MSc.) in 2004 and in addition to that head of the study programme 
Sustainable Energy Systems (MSc.) in 2006 at University of Applied Science FH Burgenland. As managing director and head of 
R&D he was responsible for building up research activities at FH Burgenland. In 2012 he became Vice-Rector of FH Burgenland. 
In 2013 he became self-employed as is managing partner of the engineering company Ecoconsultants. As of 2018 he also is 
involved in the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) as managing director. Arne is lecturer at various universities and 
associate editor of the scientific ISWA journal Waste Management & Research. Additionally, he is a member of the steering 
committees of several international conferences such as Recy & DepoTech taking place every second year at University of 
Leoben. 
ISWA is a network of experts that is structured in a core group of people at the General Secretariat that are directly employed at 
ISWA, complemented by a vast number of experts that are employed elsewhere and volunteer their time for ISWA activities. 
ISWA will tap upon these experts that work on a free-lance basis for ISWA and will be appointed as in-house consultants to 
deliver specific tasks for the project. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 AcuComm db Waste Business Monitor for ISWA Members (analysis of all key players and investments in global wastes 
reported on a monthly basis).  
 Waste Management Outlooks: here and here. 
 EWIT Knowledge Base - http://ewit.site/knowledge-base/    
 ISWA Task Force on Resource Management (6 reports) - http://www.iswa.org/iswa/iswa-groups/task-forces/     
 ISWA Task Force on Marine Litter - http://marinelitter.iswa.org/ and report 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 Addressing Barriers to Sustainable Resource Management 
 Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Sao Paulo 
 Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Dar es Salaam 
 Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) project in Cali, Colombia 
 EWIT Project (H2020 - completed) 
 ECOBULK (H2020 - ongoing) a project that is rethinking and demonstrating circular applications for the furniture, automotive 
and construction industries 
 MULTICYCLE (H2020 – ongoing) on advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based 
multi-materials 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
 ISWA Knowledge Base - http://www.iswa.org/media/publications/knowledge-base  
 Waste Management and Research (ISWA-run Academic Journal)-Dissemination tool 
 Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine)-Dissemination tool 
 ISWA World Congresses 
 Beacon Conference on Recycling and Waste Minimization 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
ISWA is the world’s largest waste management network consisting of organizational members, individuals, researchers and other 
relevant stakeholders. Alongside the work of ISWA’s Scientific and Technical Committee (STC) through its 10 Working Groups, 
part of ISWA’s major competencies lie in organizing and participating in international networking events (annual World Congress, 
IFAT, ECOMONDO, COPs, and UN-Habitat), conducting educational trainings and workshops on various aspects of waste 
management (70+ trainings and events organized in 2017), drafting of technical reports and documents, engaging in developing 
economies to establish sustainable waste management practices, and the sharing of knowledge and experience in sustainable 
waste management and climate change mitigation. ISWA has multiple partnerships and MOUs with various international 
organizations including CCAC, R20, UNFCCC, UNEP, UNIDO, WHO, World Bank, and more. ISWA has an academic journal 
(Waste Management and Research), a magazine (Waste Management World), a bi-monthly newsletter, and 10 Technical 
Working Groups that can be used as tools to present, support, and disseminate the activities and results of the project. 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 98 of 127 
Furthermore, the work and results of the DECOAT project could be disseminated through events and activities of ISWA’s various 
member organizations and their newsletters. ISWA also has 3 Regional Development Networks, that aim to promote sustainable 
waste management by carrying out activities and developing programmes that focus on their regions special needs and 
challenges. They are in 3 regions, Asia and Pacific, Southeast Europe, Middle East and Mediterranean, and Latin America. 
These RDNs could also serve as a great platform to promote the activities and results of the DECOAT project worldwide. 
 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 99 of 127 
Partner 18 – ISWA NL – International Solid Waste Association NL 
 
Country The Netherlands 
Core Competence: Global expert network 
Brief description of legal entity:  
The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) is a non-profit association consisting of international waste management 
experts and relevant stakeholders. ISWA works to protect human health and the environment as well as to ensure sustainable 
resource and waste management. Alongside technical competencies of the global expert network part of ISWA’s major 
competencies lie in organizing and participating in international networking events (annual World Congress, IFAT, ECOMONDO, 
COPs, and UN-Habitat), conducting educational trainings and workshops on various aspects of waste management (70+ 
trainings and events organized in 2017), drafting of technical reports and documents, engaging in developing economies to 
establish sustainable waste management practices, and the sharing of knowledge and experience in sustainable waste 
management and climate change mitigation. ISWA has multiple partnerships and MOUs with various international organizations 
including CCAC, R20, UNFCCC, UNEP, UNIDO, WHO, World Bank, and more. ISWA has an academic journal (Waste 
Management and Research), a magazine (Waste Management World), a bi-monthly newsletter, and 10 Technical Working 
Groups that can be used as tools to present, support, and disseminate the activities and results of the project. 
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
The main tasks foreseen for ISWA in this project are in communicating and disseminating the project outputs to a wider 
stakeholder network through ISWA’s channels (WP7.2). ISWA has an extensive global network to reach waste management 
professionals and organizations within its own membership, but also maintains several working relationships with other 
international organizations through projects and MOU’s which allow ISWA to also reach a wide audience of stakeholders and 
interested parties within the field of sustainability research and action. ISWA will also be responsible for helping with policy input 
and standardization (WP7.3). Through its waste management expertise, access to recyclers and data on waste streams ISWA 
will help conduct a Life Cycle Costing (LCC) which is an assessment of all costs related to a product or service, over the entire 
life cycle, from production over use until disposal. Thus, the economic analysis which will take place in the DECOAT project 
refers not only to the cost of materials and manufacturing but will also include the wider implications of technology selection on 
project’s performance.  
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:  
ISWA has an international network of members, stakeholders and contacts globally. Its membership consists of waste 
management professionals from every continent, as well as waste management companies, and also other national waste 
management associations. They are joined together in 10 thematic working groups as well as numerous events (including our 
own yearly World Congress with 1000+ attendees). ISWA has two publications, the Waste Management World magazine and 
the peer reviewed Waste Management & Research journal, which target respectively the professional waste management 
community and the global research community.  
ISWA has participated in H2020 projects before, and is currently also the Communications & Disseminations leader for the 
projects EcoBulk and D-Noses and also contributes in a similar capacity for the project Multicycle. ISWA acknowledges that 
plastic recycling has a key role to play in waste management in order to prevent marine litter and make good use of resources. 
ISWA also maintains a busy calendar of events (70+ events organized in 2017) which include conferences, trainings, study tours 
and working groups on 10 different sustainability themes. Also, ISWA’s involvement with other EU projects as well as other 
international agencies allows for a broad view on possible project clustering and synergy opportunities. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:   
Dienke Dijksterhuis (Female) is a Technical Assistant at the ISWA General Secretariat. She has an MSc in Political Science, 
specializing in International Relations, from the University of Amsterdam. She has several years of experience working in 
international relations, working in the development aid sector at boutique consulting firm and supporting the International Anti-
Corruption Academy (IACA). 
Aditi Ramola (Female) is Technical Director at the ISWA General Secretariat. She graduated with distinction from the 
Environmental Technology & International Affairs MSc joint programme offered by the Technical University of Vienna and the 
Diplomatic Academy of Vienna. She received the ‘Best Study Award’ from ARA Altstoff Recycling Austria AG for her exemplary 
academic performance. She has several years of experience in the private sector and international organizations such as 
Caterpillar Inc. and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization where she worked at the Climate Policy and 
Networks unit of the Department of Energy. Most recently she was involved in the successful completion of the European 
Commission funded project on Developing an EU Standardised Approach to Vocational Qualifications in Healthcare Waste where 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 100 of 127 
she was the lead of the Work Package on Implementation planning and network growth and development. She is currently 
involved in other EU projects such as D-Noses and Multicycle. 
Marianne Grant (Female) is a Technical Project Coordinator at the ISWA General Secretariat. She has an MA in International 
Relations from Webster University Vienna and won an award for Best Graduate Thesis in 2018 for her analysis of the effect of 
interdependent trading relationships on international conflicts. She has a number of years' experience working at the international 
level with private and international organisations organising international trainings and events. At ISWA she coordinates multiple 
internal and external projects, working on trainings, dissemination events, international meetings and technical sessions, 
including for two EU projects, D-Noses and Multicycle. 
Daniel Purchase (Male) is responsible for membership and communications at the ISWA General Secretariat. He has a BA and 
MA in history and economics, focussing on 19th/20th century economic theory and trends, political thought, civil society and the 
historic relationships between governments and public (governmentality). He has been working with ISWA since January 2014 
and is very familiar with the waste and resource management sector having collaborated with stakeholders from across the 
industry and world. He also coordinates some of ISWA’s Technical Working Groups and is responsible for ISWA's Industry 
Magazine, Waste Management World. 
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
 AcuComm db Waste Business Monitor for ISWA Members (analysis of all key players and investments in global wastes 
reported on a monthly basis).  
 Waste Management Outlooks: here and here. 
 EWIT Knowledge Base - http://ewit.site/knowledge-base/    
 ISWA Task Force on Resource Management (6 reports) - http://www.iswa.org/iswa/iswa-groups/task-forces/     
 ISWA Task Force on Marine Litter - http://marinelitter.iswa.org/ and report 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:  
 Addressing Barriers to Sustainable Resource Management 
 Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Sao Paulo 
 Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC)-City Assessment & Action Plan: Dar es Salaam 
 Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) project in Cali, Colombia 
 EWIT Project (H2020 - completed) 
 ECOBULK (H2020 - ongoing) a project that is rethinking and demonstrating circular applications for the furniture, automotive 
and construction industries 
 MULTICYCLE (H2020 – ongoing) on advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based 
multi-materials 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:  
 ISWA Knowledge Base - http://www.iswa.org/media/publications/knowledge-base  
 Waste Management and Research (ISWA-run Academic Journal)-Dissemination tool 
 Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine)-Dissemination tool 
 ISWA World Congresses 
 Beacon Conference on Recycling and Waste Minimization 
Participant’s dissemination channels:   
ISWA is the world’s largest waste management network consisting of organizational members, individuals, researchers and other 
relevant stakeholders. Alongside the work of ISWA’s Scientific and Technical Committee (STC) through its 10 Working Groups, 
part of ISWA’s major competencies lie in organizing and participating in international networking events (annual World Congress, 
IFAT, ECOMONDO, COPs, and UN-Habitat), conducting educational trainings and workshops on various aspects of waste 
management (70+ trainings and events organized in 2017), drafting of technical reports and documents, engaging in developing 
economies to establish sustainable waste management practices, and the sharing of knowledge and experience in sustainable 
waste management and climate change mitigation. ISWA has multiple partnerships and MOUs with various international 
organizations including CCAC, R20, UNFCCC, UNEP, UNIDO, WHO, World Bank, and more. ISWA has an academic journal 
(Waste Management and Research), a magazine (Waste Management World), a bi-monthly newsletter, and 10 Technical 
Working Groups that can be used as tools to present, support, and disseminate the activities and results of the project. 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 101 of 127 
Furthermore, the work and results of the DECOAT project could be disseminated through events and activities of ISWA’s various 
member organizations and their newsletters. ISWA also has 3 Regional Development Networks, that aim to promote sustainable 
waste management by carrying out activities and developing programmes that focus on their regions special needs and 
challenges. They are in 3 regions, Asia and Pacific, Southeast Europe, Middle East and Mediterranean, and Latin America. 
These RDNs could also serve as a great platform to promote the activities and results of the DECOAT project worldwide. 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 102 of 127 
DECOAT ADVISORY and SUPPORT GROUP 
 
EUPC 
EuPC is the professional representative body of plastics converters in Europe, whose activity embraces all sectors of the plastics 
converting industry, including recycling. EuPC welcomes and supports the transition to a stronger and more circular economy 
where all resources are used in a sustainable way 
 
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 103 of 127 
GO4Circle 
Go4Circle is the umbrella association for private companies who put the circular economy at the heart of their operations. It 
represents 220 companies who are helping enterprises across all sectors to fundamentally change their production processes, 
making the transition towards the circular economy, and also including manufacturing companies who use circular economy 
principles. 
GO4Circle has an interest in getting to know additional processes and technologies that might help our companies to make the 
transition toward circular economy, also for coated products.  
 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 104 of 127 
TecPart 
The GKV/TecPart - Verband Technische Kunststoff-Produkte e.V. (German Association of Plastics Converters - TECPART) 
is representing the interest of the plastics converting Industry and plastics materials against the public, politics and administration 
in Germany. GKV/TecPart is a member association of the German Association of the Plastic Manufacturing Industry GKV. Besides 
this, GKV/TecPart association is part of the organisation of the Germany Industry Association BDI. One of its fields of interest is 
strengthening technological development and innovation in the plastics converting industry.  
As member of the DECOAT Advisory and Support Group GKV/TecPart will 
 Support the project partners in the definition of the dissemination strategy of the project in order to adequately address our 
sector needs and particularities. 
 Actively participate in the communication and dissemination activities using our existing communication channels and 
networks 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 105 of 127 
ZWE – Zero Waste Europe 
Zero Waste Europe is leading a fast-growing movement of communities, local leaders, businesses, experts, influencers and other 
“change agents” working towards the same vision: eliminating waste in our society. 
Zero Waste Europe will support DECOAT by supplying information and disseminating the results.  
 
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 106 of 127 
Cluster “Innovatieve Coatings” 
The cluster ‘Innovatieve coatings’ (in English: ‘Innovative Coatings’) aims to increase competitiveness and to create economic 
added value by promoting creativity and innovation in terms of products, processes and applications. The members of the cluster 
are companies or organizations of the entire value chain of the coating sector: Raw material suppliers, Companies that develop 
and produce coating formulations, Companies applying coatings (toll manufacturers for coatings, integrated companies), End 
users of coatings, Companies that make machinery and machine accessories for the coating industry, Study agencies, 
government, …. 
As coating cluster the results of DECOAT are very interesting as we think that having a solution for separating coating and textiles 
or plastics substrate can give a boost to the recycling activities in the sector. The cluster is happy to participate in the Advisory & 
Support Board and we will support the cluster by disseminating the results to our +70 members.  
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 107 of 127 
Recycling Netwerk Benelux 
Recycling Netwerk is an independent environmental organization which connect different environmental organization dealing with 
the topic of raw materials and their impact. Their goal is to constrain environmental caused by raw materials production up to 
waste management. A focus is more and better recycling. 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 108 of 127 
Textile ETP 
The European Technology Platform for the Future of Textiles and Clothing (Textile ETP) is the largest European expert network 
of professionals involved in textile and clothing research and innovation. It has more than 200 member organisations and close 
to 700 members from industry. 
 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 109 of 127 
EuMaT 
EuMaT – The European Technology Platform for Advanced Engineering Materials and Technologies has been launched in order 
to assure optimal involvement of industry and other important stakeholders in the process of establishing of R&D priorities in the 
area of advanced engineering materials and technologies. EuMaT should improve coherence in existing and forthcoming EU 
projects, in the field of materials R&D. EuMaT covers all elements of the life cycle of an industrial product, regardless if it is a 
component, a system or a final good. 
 
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 110 of 127 
Remondis 
REMONDIS is one of the world's largest recycling, service and water companies (30,000 employees, ca. 800 business locations 
on 4 continents) serving more than 30 million people and many thousands of companies. Remondis can offer a full range of 
services along the whole of the supply chain, e.g. manufacturing businesses can use REMONDIS' industrial services to optimise 
their business processes and cut their costs. 
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 111 of 127 
BGRS – Boer Group Recycling Solutions 
Boer Group is an international textile recycling organization with collection and sorting companies for used textiles and shoes. 
Our companies sort the collected textiles in about 350 types divided into 3-5 different qualities. After this extensive sorting process 
every piece of textile finds its way to resellers and recycling companies worldwide. The Boer Group offices are located in the 
Netherlands, Belgium and Germany: 
As recycling association we are very interested in the possibility to be able to debond coating and textiles in coated products.  
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 112 of 127 
GBP Metal Group 
GBP Metal Group is a company dedicated to the recycling of scrap and all types of metals. Our recycling process is based on 
innovation, research into new forms of valorisation, development and implementation. Therefore we are very interested in the 
outcome of the DECOAT project.  
 
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 113 of 127 
FOMENTO DE CONSTRUCCIONES Y CONTRATAS SA 
The FCC Group is a leading international company in the areas of environmental, integral water management and infrastructure 
services. FCC invests in R&D&I projects in which the methodologies, techniques, systems, equipment and processes used are 
designed to be environmentally sustainable. This makes it possible to minimise negative environmental impacts while at all times 
maintaining the quality of the service provided. The strategic lines of the R&D&I projects are focused on sustainable urban 
development. This involves designing new products, valorising waste, optimising processes and implementing technologies for 
efficient waste management. 
For that reason FCC in interested in DECOAT since it will enable to valorize more waste stream, i.e. the coated products by 
designing products that debond on demand and by developing a process to sort and debond the coated products 
.  
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 114 of 127 
Coverpaints 
Coverpaints is a Greek SME with business in Paints & Varnishes for Industrial, Construction and Marine Coatings with high 
interest in circular economy. For that reason the concept of trigerable debonding is of strong interest for them and their customers 
since it avoids using harsh and harmful paint removers.  
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 115 of 127 
European Coatings 
European Coatings brings the coatings community and the related industries together. They operate the foremost surface 
technology network, helping companies in the market for organic coatings to secure their future. They provide cutting edge 
technical expertise and business information thus giving companies in the coatings community greater decision-making capability. 
They network the commercial and technological potential of major industry players world-wide thus providing our customers with 
the impetus to master challenges, increase productivity and achieve market success. This ensures the future of their companies.  
European Coatings will support DECOAT in the dissemination of the results by means of their magazines and conferences.  
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 116 of 127 
OVAM 
The Public Waste Agency of Flanders is the principal authority in the Belgian region of Flanders for sustainable management of 
waste, materials and soils. OVAM uses its expertise on waste, materials and soils worldwide to help shape international policy. 
OVAM works to achieve six well-defined objectives: reducing the waste mountain, re-using and recycling waste materials, 
processing waste materials in an environmentally-friendly manner, initiating the transition to a circular economy – an economy 
where goods are produced and re-used in a sustainable manner, remediating contaminated soils and preventing new soil 
contamination 
 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 117 of 127 
ELOT 
In Greece, ELOT is the sole national body responsible for the elaboration, approval, publication and distribution of Hellenic 
Standards. In this framework, ELOT operates more than 190 Technical Committees and Working Groups, members of which are 
more than 1100 distinguished Greek scientists. ELOT’s is member of and is actively participating in the European and international 
Standardization activities and the Organizations that administer them (ISO & IEC for the International Standardization, CEN, 
CENELEC, ETSI, EOTA for the European Standardization).  
The interest of ELOT lies in the possibility to set-up suitable standards for measuring the debonding characteristics of these newly 
developed products.  
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 118 of 127 
UNE 
UNE is the body legally responsible for the development of standards in Spain. It is a private non-profit organization with some 
600 members (the main industry associations, leading companies, research centres and professional bodies). UNE is the Spanish 
representative in talks with international standardization bodies (ISO and IEC), European standardization bodies (CEN, 
CENELEC) and the Pan-American Standards Commission (COPANT). It is also the Spanish standardization body in ETSI 
(European Telecommunications Standards Institute). UNE serves as the voice of Spanish experts in global forums at which 
important standards for businesses and fields of activity are discussed. 
UNE is particularly interested in DECOAR to promote the integration of standards for the new products developed and the 
dissemination of the results to our members.  
 
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 119 of 127 
CEN-CENELEC 
CEN and CENELEC are European Committees for Standardization. CEN and CENELEC ensure the protection of consumers, 
facilitate cross-border trade, ensure the interoperability of products, encourage innovation and technological development, include 
environmental protection and enable businesses to grow.  
Below the letter of CEN-CENELEC Innovation and on the next page the support expressed by the convenor of the CEN 
Work group CEN TC248 WG4 ‘Textiles – coated fabrics’ which is the CEN work group working on (recycling of) coated 
textiles.  
 
 
  
 
 
 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 120 of 127 
 
 
 
 
  
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 121 of 127
4.2 Third parties involved in the project 
 
Partner 1 –CTB 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
NO 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? 
In order to achieve the objectives planned in the project, partner CTB will work along with CTB-
Services. 
Yes 
 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe 
and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
CTB-Services will support partner CTB for the DECOAT implementation with specific tasks for 
WP2 – expected budget €28.900 corresponding to 6 personmonths of a coating operator. 
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement). 
NO 
 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
 
 
 
 
Partner 2 – AIMPLAS 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 3 – IVV 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 4 – CTAG 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 5 – NTUA 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 6 – VAUDE 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 7 - PANASONIC  
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 8 – MBT 
No third parties involved 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 122 of 127 
Partner 9 – MAIER 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project 
should not be sub-contracted) 
NO 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? 
In order to achieve the objectives planned in the project, the industrial partner MAIER (profit 
organization) will work along with its research centre called MTC (MAIER TECHNOLOGY 
CENTRE), in which MAIER has a participation of 84.62%. MTC will participate as a linked third 
party of MAIER in the achievement of some tasks in the project. MTC is an R&D and NON 
PROFIT organization dedicated to the research and development in the field of thermoplastic 
injection moulding, decorative and assembly technologies and analysis and implementation of 
production facilities for automotive. The technological capacity of the centre is based on its team, 
currently formed of more than 100 people, mostly with technical skills (Higher Engineering with 
a strong vocation for research, development and innovation). 
 
 
Yes 
 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe 
and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
 
MTC will support the partner MAIER in the development of the project, MTC contribution and 
knowledge will be crucial to obtain the pursued results throughout the project. 
 
WP1:  
 Task 1.1 Specifications and requirements for end-use cases - Definition 
of testing procedures 
 Due to its expertise in the development and validation of automotive 
components for the exterior and the interior of the car, MTC will help MAIER to 
define new tests that will push the new coating to its technical limitations. This 
knowledge will be crucial for the future exploitation of the Project.  
 
WP2:  
 Task 2.2. Demonstration of optimized recycled materials in a pilot line 
(simulated operational environment)  
 Task 2.3: Optimisation of the coating debonding system and assessment 
of the separation capacity 
 Task 2.4: Broadening the application field of the coating debonding 
system 
  
 Due to its technological approach to different coating technologies (Deep-
coating, Spray, others) for car exterior applications Three layers coating: 
Primer+Colour+Clearcoat , and for the car interior applications One layer 
coating: Colour; MTC will set and define a Design of Experiments (DoE) and 
will also work together with MAIER on the interpretation of these results. As a 
result, at this pilot scale MAIER together with the assistance of MTC will be able 
to define the coating application process window of the new coating 
formulations to be tested that will serve as a basis for the up-scaling of the 
technology. 
 Furthermore, MTC will help MAIER to carry out the new tests defined in the 
WP1 that will push the new coating to their technical limitations. 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 123 of 127 
 
WP4: 
 Task 4.3 Validation of the recycling pilot line performance using well-
defined waste streams made with flat test-specimens  
 Task 4.4 Maximising the application potential of the recycled materials  
  
 Due to its expertise in the development of aesthetic components, MTC will 
assess MAIER in the evaluation of the potential use of the recycled material for 
Automotive aesthetic components because the smallest impurities produces 
surface defects on aesthetical parts. 
 
WP5:  
Task 5.1: Eco-design of use case products in view of project 
technological developments   
Task 5.2: Manufacturing of prototypes -  
Task 5.3 Implementation of circular use cases  
Task 5.4 Evaluation & Guidelines for further industrial take-up  
 Due to its technological approach to injection moulding, MTC will set and define 
a Design of Experiments (DoE) and will also work together with MAIER on the 
interpretation of these results. As a result, at this pilot scale MAIER together 
with the assistance of MTC will be able to define the processing windows of the 
ABS recycled formulations to be tested that will serve as a basis for the up-
scaling of the technology. 
 During the up-scaling process and due to the knowledge acquired on WP2 too, 
MTC will assist MAIER on the up-scaling trials that will be carried out on the 
industrial facility for the manufacturing of the ABS coated prototypes, proving 
its know-how. 
 Furthermore, MTC will help MAIER to carry out the new tests defined in the 
WP1 that will push the new coating to their technical limitations. 
 
WP6: MTC together with MAIER will contribute to the LCA with all the information and support 
requested by the WP Leader. 
 
WP7: MTC will work on the analysis of market potentials, applications perspectives, risk and 
opportunities for the implementation together with the Marketing department of MAIER. 
 
For this, partner MTC is allocated the following amount of personmonths: WP1 – 2pm; WP2 – 
5pm; WP4 – 2pm; WP5 – 11pm; WP6 – 1pm; WP7 – 1pm. This corresponds to a personnel 
cost of €112.200. Also €5000 travel costs are allocated to MTC. 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 
11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement). 
NO 
 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
- 
 
 
 
Partner 10 – RESCOLL 
No third parties involved 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 124 of 127 
 
Partner 11 – CTECH 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 12 – DEVAN 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted) 
 
NO 
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? 
In order to achieve the objectives planned in the project, partner DEVAN will work along with 
Devan Belgium, a third party of Devan. 
 
Yes 
 
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, anddescribe 
and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party 
Devan Belgium will perform the exploitation activities of DEVAN, so the activities for Task 7.2 – 
Exploitation and Technology Transfer, given their expertise in this matter. The budget foreseen 
is ca. €25.000, for 3pm in WP7.  
 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement). 
NO 
 
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions 
- 
 
 
 
Partner 13 – IRIS 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 14 – ECOMAT 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 15 – IRES 
No third parties involved 
 
Partner 16 –OSM 
No third parties involved 
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 125 of 127 
 
Partner 17 – ISWA – PARTICIPATION TERMINATED 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should 
not be sub-contracted) 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties? Yes 
 
The third party will be ISWA GmbH. The link of ISWA GmbH with the main party ISWA association is 
that ISWA GmbH is fully owned by the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA).  
Profile of third party: 
ISWA GmbH is a limited company established in Austria. The main purpose of ISWA GmbH is to 
organize and implement dissemination activities such as study tours, summer schools and other events 
as well as the publication of the magazine waste management world. 
Main tasks attributed in the project relate to the WP7 activities. 
 Using its vast network of experts ISWA GmbH will help ISWA develop workshops and webinars 
to selected stakeholder groups. It will help with the identification and acquisition of audiences, 
creation of workshop and webinar contents based on the needs of different target groups, and 
the delivery of workshops.  
 As the project progresses, ISWA GmbH will assist ISWA in the dissemination of public 
deliverables and also help produce flyers, brochures, factsheets, white papers – print and digital. 
Public dissemination of information will be tailored to specific groups such as scientific, policy 
makers, etc. Furthermore, ISWA GmbH will help with the creation of visually attractive and 
professionally written documents. 
 Through its international network, ISWA GmbH will piggyback on important international trade 
fairs and conferences to reach out to industry stakeholders. At the events, meetings will be set 
up to present the project to the most relevant exploitation target groups for a direct innovation 
and knowledge transfer. 
 ISWA GmbH will also assist in outreach to local communities, schools, and universities and will 
help organize at least 3 information events or opportunities to share project information, 
targeting 100 students, citizens, or pupils. Furthermore, it will help connect with relevant 
organisations, such as schools, universities, consumer or citizen organisations, and NGOs. 
Public events will be organized to provide details about projects and relay information that could 
be disseminated to respective audiences. ISWA GmbH will help in creating awareness among 
the general public and stimulate interest in the sustainability and recycling of coatings. It will 
leverage existing channels such as its memberships, ISWA newsletters, etc.  
 Finally, ISWA GmbH will assist ISWA to organize the final public event with at least 75 
participants. The final event will be a professional high-level 1-day conference on the novel 
DECOAT debonding solutions and materials. 
 
Based on her expertise Mrs. Jennifer MacDonald, employee of the ISWA GmbH will be involved in the 
project activities.  
Jennifer MacDonald (Female) is a Technical Project Manager at the ISWA General Secretariat. She 
has an MSc with Distinction in Environmental Technology and International Affairs from the Technical 
University of Vienna and the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna where she specialized in waste to energy 
of biomass residues. She is also the Editorial Office Manager for Waste Management and Research, 
ISWA’s Academic Journal, the Working Group Secretary for the Working Group on Collection and 
Transportation Technologies, Working Group on Healthcare Waste, Working Group on Landfill, and 
Working Group on Recycling and Waste Minimisation. 
 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 126 of 127 
Relevant publications: 
 ISWA GmbH owns the Waste Management World Magazine 
Relevant Patents: 
 No patents  
Relevant Projects: 
 Addressing Barriers to Sustainable Resource Management 
Significant Infrastructure and Equipment (description of any significant infrastructure and/or 
any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work): 
 Waste Management and Research (ISWA-run Academic Journal)-Dissemination tool 
 Waste Management World (ISWA Magazine)-Dissemination tool 
 ISWA World Congresses 
 Beacon Conference on Recycling and Waste Minimization 
 
Budget:  
Approximately 1/3 of ISWA’s budget, i.e. €45.000, corresponding to 6pm for WP7, is allocated to ISWA 
GmbH. Also €6000 travel costs are allocated to ISWA GmbH. 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement). 
NO 
 
Partner 18 – ISWA NL 
No third parties involved. 
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 127 of 127 
5 Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
No ethics issues.
5.2 Security 
 
The DECOAT project does not involve any activities or results raising security issues. 
The DECOAT project does not involve “EU-classified information” as background or results.