1.3 Concept and approach 
(a) Overall concept underpinning DECOAT 
The playing field. Increasing recycling is crucial, especially for plastics and textiles, as illustrated by the recently published 
European strategy on plastics6 or the voluntary engagement of the plastics industry to recycle 50% by 20407. However 
large the need and however impressive the targets, today only 6% of new plastic materials used stems from recycling8. Also 
within the textile industry the use of recycled material is limited: for clothing only about 1% is closed loop, ca 12% cascade 
recycling3. A great deal of work is underway to improve this (also via European projects), focussing on technical, economic and 
logistical aspects. As a result, we assume in the near future well-established networks throughout Europe where waste is 
collected and brought to local recycling facilities. At first, this network will deal with the current generation of products and 
materials that are not made for recycling. Consequently, only a small fraction of all materials is being recycled because the cost 
to the yield and quality ratio is too high compared with the one of virgin materials. Therefore, the next steps are products 
designed for recycling and made of intrinsically recyclable materials. This concept is being developed, e.g. for high added 
value applications like aerospace. However, for vast application areas this principle is not very advanced yet.  
The identified need. DECOAT will implement a solution for a specific class of hard to recycle items: textiles and plastics 
parts with (multilayer) ‘coatings’. For plastics, these can be found eg in automotive, construction and electronics consumer 
goods. For textiles, typical uses are for technical textiles (outdoor gear, protective clothing, automotive applications and 
construction) and interior textiles (e.g. upholstery, mattress covers or curtains). The coating can be added for performance or 
aesthetics reasons. Coating, paints or adhesives have to possess excellent adhesion because of the durability of the coated 
product, and as such cannot easily be removed. Consequently, full objects are discarded, even though the coating often 
only comprises some % of the total weight. With DECOAT we will reduce the amount of waste material to the specific adhesive. 
This holds for end-of-life products but it is also one of the types of production scraps that are not efficiently recycled yet. Within 
this larger topic of debonding an emerging specific challenge is how to deal with scrap and end-of-life parts containing 
integrated electronics (from smart textiles, smart plastics and 
wearables).  
DECOAT proposed solution: enable the recycling of coated 
parts, which refers to a two-level approach: (i) ‘disassembly’ 
is separating the connections among the different physical parts; 
(ii) ‘debonding’ or ‘removal’ refers to the removal of coatings or 
tie layers from the fabric or plastics object. This 2-step approach is 
illustrated in the figures for a backpack. These two steps can be 
performed separately (or simultaneously in some cases) during the 
recycling process. DECOAT triggerable separations mechanisms 
will be suited for both steps and fill the missing gap for circular use 
of coated parts (see sketch in section 1.1). Within DECOAT, we 
will focus mostly on the 2nd level, i.e. the removal of coatings. But, 
the same principle of triggered debonding enables the disassembly 
step. So, DECOAT developments are relevant for both steps and 
we will refer to the processes as ‘debonding’.  
Interdisciplinary aspects: DECOAT combines expertise and knowledge from several disciplines: polymer chemistry, physics, 
coatings and paints, textiles and plastics processing, recycling, design, and environmental science. This is needed and 
allows tackling the interdisciplinary issues required for reaching circularity. One such key issue is to tune the existing knowledge 
on triggerable materials to industrial requirements for coated textiles and plastics.  
Stakeholder involvement: interaction with the stakeholders is deemed crucial, especially with the waste actors. 
Therefore, ISWA (NL) has been added as partner, a worldwide association of solid waste actors that promote sustainable 
waste management and perform dissemination and policy work. For further strong interaction with a wide group of stakeholders, 
the DECOAT Advisory and Support Group (ASG) has been established, containing 17 members from coating and recycling 
companies, industry associations, a public authority, standardisation bodies and a publisher, see also section 3.2.1.1f and section 
4 for a detailed description. 
 
6 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/plastics-strategy.pdf  
7 https://www.plasticsconverters.eu/single-post/2018/01/16/European-Plastics-Industry-works-towards-50-plastics-waste-recycling-by-2040   
8 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/plastics-factsheet-industry_en.pdf  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 6 of 127 
Societal engagement: DECOAT results will create a new market of recycling coated textiles and plastics, which will lead to 
job creation. Of special interest is (partial) disassembly which enables repair, e.g. in small local workshops.  
Positioning of DECOAT: Main technology elements, starting and targeted TRL are summarized in the table below: 
Technology element – assessment of status Start Target 
Microwaveable (MW) additives exist but manufacturing and design methodologies need to be 
developed for integration in coatings and paints for the DECOAT applications. Rely on triggering of 
MW additives for fast curing thermoset resins and polyester annealing, which is well-established. 
3 5 
Microcapsules for debonding coatings: concepts based on heat, steam, microwaves are shown at lab 
scale (CTB and NTUA). R&D needed to validate debonding in relevant environments. 
3 5 
Bonding/debonding adhesives: industrially available (e.g. INDAR) for applications with metals and 
ceramics but needs to be transferred to polymeric/textile materials 
4 5-6 
CreaSolv® process was developed for recycling of soluble thermoplastics. It will be applied to 
dissolve polymeric coatings from textiles and polymer surfaces. After separation, the coating 
polymer can be recovered from the solvent. Suitable solvents need to be developed for specific 
coating chemistry. 
3 5 
Trigger assisted mechanical recycling: mechanical recycling as established in paper industry will be 
modified to treat plastic parts and textiles that contain coatings and/or paints by incorporating 
additional elements (debonding system & sorting technology) and redesign other ones (grinding & 
drying system) 
4 5-6 
Automatic sorting technology: is used in the plastic recycling sector, based on a number of monitoring 
technologies. The right technology is to be selected and calibrated for novel DECOAT triggerable 
materials. 
3 5 
Summarized: we start from technologies with TRL 3 (-4) and target TRL5 (-6) by the end of DECOAT. As much as possible 
conventional processing technologies will be used, which eases scaling up. We will continuously monitor the performance of 
the technologies along the project to ensure reaching TRL 5, as first steps towards future commercialization. 
Linked (inter)national research and innovation actions. 
Project Acronym (type of project) - Link with DECOAT Partner 
(C=Coord) 
EcoMeTex (FP7) - Separation layer for carpets based on expandable microspheres, will be further developed 
as one of the separation technologies 
CTB 
RADIACAM (UK) - Microwaveable yarn for disassembly of mattresses and car seats CTECH 
MARKERS (BE) – Markers for better sorting towards recycling CTB (C) 
RECYCOAT (BE) – recycling of coated materials, eg separation by means of steam or infrared using additives CTB (C) 
FiberEUse (H2020) – Large scale demonstration of new circular economy value-chains based on the reuse of 
end-of-life fibre reinforced composites 
MAIER 
SMARTFAN (H2020) - Development of smart composites with self-healing capsules and carbon 
nanomaterials/ smart recycling activities 
NTUA 
BYEFOULING (FP7) - Synthesis, functionalization and up-scaling of nanoparticles for marine coating 
applications. Encapsulation based on Layer Double Hydroxides (LDH), Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) and 
Polyoligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) for controlled release of antifouling compounds 
NTUA 
LORCENIS (H2020) - Synthesis of carbonaceous nanomaterials and super absorbent polymers9 NTUA 
SHELL (GR) - Synthesis of carbon nanotubes and nano-/micro capsules for coating applications NTUA 
INNOVIP (H2020) – Solvent based separation of composite films applied in vacuum isolation panels (VIP) in 
order to recycle film components during End of life treatment.  
IVV 
FORCYCLE (DE) – CreaSolv® process has been used to separate polymer/polymer and polymer/metal 
composites by dissolving one polymeric component of the composite  
IVV (C) 
FOURMI (FR): Development of thermo-strippable paints for the selective paint removal of aircrafts RESCOLL  
 
9 Kanellopoulou I.A., Karaxi E.K., Karatza A., Kartsonakis I.A.., Charitidis C.A, Hybrid superabsorbent polymer networks based on crosslinked poly (methacrylic acid) 
encapsulated with Si02 for novel applications, 5th International Conference of Engineering Against Failure, 20 - 22 June 2018 - Chios Island, Greece 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 7 of 127 
Wear2™ (UK) – The innovative Wear2 technology provides the capability to easily disassemble garments with 
the application of a simple end-of-life treatment using MW technology. 
CTECH 
REBIOFOAM (FP7) – The development of a flexible and energy-efficient pressurised microwave heating 
process to produce 3D-shaped renewable bio-polymer foams for a novel generation of transportation packaging.  
CTECH 
LIBRE (H2020): Novel precursor fibre materials from blends of modified lignin and biopolymers for carbon fibre. 
Includes use of dielectric susceptors to enhance the heating efficiency using MW or Rf energy.  
CTECH, CTB 
ECODISM (FP7) - development of debondable glazing adhesives for ELVs RESCOLL 
ECOBULK (H2020) – Circularity in automotive sector (among others) IRIS 
URBANREC (H2020) New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value 
RECycled products  AIMPLAS(C)
CTB 
EXTRUCLEAN (LIFE+): Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances during the recycling 
process of polyethylene hazardous waste packages, employing supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2)  
AIMPLAS(C) 
eCircular - The EIT Climate KIC eCircular Flagship programme will accelerate the circularity of plastic-based 
material systems and dematerialisation of plastic demand, with the vision of a reaching a carbon-neutral material 
system by 2050. The Flagship thrives for digital innovations for waste prevention and their up-scaling. 
ECOMAT 
 
(b) Overall Methodology:  
For describing the general DECOAT methodology, we group the DECOAT activities according to lab-scale, pilot scale and 
demonstration. The supporting activities are mentioned separately. 
Materials and material structures R&D at lab scale  
‘Triggerable materials’: R&D on the microcapsules, nano-additives, their integration in coatings, characterisation of their effects 
when triggered. We will develop a portfolio of techniques, each will be characterised, listing the strengths and weaknesses for the 
respective application domains. Integration in a coating system, directly in the coating or via a primer.  
Triggerable debonding coating solutions both for the ‘disassembly’ of parts (‘1st level) and for the ‘removal’ of the coating from 
the substrate (2nd level).  
Process development at pilot scale:  
Sorting technology: Research on 
sorting to discriminate post-consumer 
and post production waste based on 
type of debonding trigger to ensure the 
materials can be identified & guided to 
the fitting recycling technique. 
Piloting of a recycling line for 
coated parts: conception, design and 
building of an actual pilot line, 
performing test runs on generic coated 
textiles and plastic parts, validation via 
the recycling of the use cases 
prototypes. 
Demonstration of circularity via use 
cases (see sketch): The novel 
coatings will be applied in the existing 
processes by the manufacturers/ end-
users via three use cases. The (small 
scale) production of products will 
undergo the recycling process, the 
recovered materials will be 
characterised and re-used. Evaluation 
of the reprocessed products. 
 
Transversal activities: 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 8 of 127 
Environmental & safety assessment: detailed assessment of environmental (full LCA) aspects and development of an 
ecodesign tool. Ensure Safety-by-Design implementation via use of non-hazardous substances, e.g. for microcapsules or solvents 
(EC Regulation No. 1272/2008). Apply proper recycling and waste treatment (Directive 2008/98/EC).  
Innovation management: Economic assessment (full cost of ownership, business plans); dissemination: raise awareness from 
early on to maximise wide uptake of DECOAT results; communication to promote public awareness of circular economy values; 
focus on interaction with wider stakeholders and with the ASG.  
Coordination: efficient project implementation, project risk management. 
Gender analysis. We will follow gender driven innovation and develop gender neutral demonstrators. DECOAT partners 
have a strong focus on women’s employment (e.g. at VAUDE 65% women, including the CEO and 33% of executive positions)10. 
Further, our innovation activities will consider the gender dimension and consider the needs, motivations and differences of 
females where applicable, inspired by how taking gender into account has yielded new research results and sparked creativity11. 
DECOAT will consider the relevance of the gender dimension in communication & training.