2.1 Expected impacts  
DECOAT fits extremely well in the European Circular Economy strategy as it aims for a systemic innovation for the 
recycling of coated textile and plastic materials. The materials solutions will build further on latest (carbon) 
nanotechnology, microencapsulation and polymer developments and lead to several scientific and technological 
breakthroughs. DECOAT results will create new markets for triggerable additives, optical material detection systems 
and for recycling equipment and processes. Together this amounts to over 150 million annual turnover, i.e. the potential 
to directly create ca. 500 jobs. Moreover, DECOAT materials and process innovations will give a competitive edge to a 
relevant share of the European companies active along the coated textiles and plastics value chains that could generate 
a total turnover of ca. €1.7 billion, implying that DECOAT would further help to secure ca 5.000 jobs. 
2.1.1 Expected impacts set out in the work programme 
In the subsections below, we list how DECOAT will respond to each of the expected impacts of the call. We focus on the impact 
within and beyond DECOAT and try to illustrate both aspects. 
2.1.1.1 Meeting the EU's circular economy and environmental targets while demonstrating a clear benefit, i.e. more efficient 
or economic than the state of the art in order to enable market uptake in the short to medium term 
Efficiency aspect: The current disposal methods for coated textiles and plastics are landfilling, incineration or (very 
limitedly) chemical bath recycling, that all have severe disadvantages. Incineration71 conventionally leads to the release of 
significant greenhouse gas CO2, pollutants like NOx, SO2, and particulate matter. Additionally, heavy metals and dioxins are 
emitted. Given the high energy content, much of the heat is recovered as energy source. However, the residual product consists 
of bottom ash, fly ash, and air pollution control residue, which is currently also landfilled. The incineration process involves a flue 
gas cleaning process, which may give rise to externalities to wastewater. For landfill71 disposal, the main emissions are CO2 and 
CH4. Moreover, leachate is released to the surrounding soil and water. In addition to environmental impact, both incineration and 
landfill processes require facilities with serious disadvantages, e.g. for the people living in the vicinity. Chemical baths are 
currently used to remove coatings and to recycle the left-over fraction but they are very limited and cumbersome from 
environmental side (see section 1.4.2). These dramatic impacts will be avoided by the DECOAT innovations, as instead of 
being disposed of, the majority of the original material can get a secondary life-cycle. This saves on the production of virgin 
material, thus contributing to significantly reducing emissions throughout the value chain.  
DECOAT offers a solution to coated plastics and textiles recycling via the development of triggered debonding of coatings via 
improved mechanical or chemical recycling, resulting in a highly promising, efficient alternative to current recycling and 
material design standards. 
Economic aspect: for doing the extra sorting and activation of the trigger, an additional cost during recycling of ca €80-100/ton 
is estimated (including OPEX and CAPEX), largely depending on the stimulation mechanism (e.g. infrared vs microwave). This 
is an economic attractive proposition as the current process of non-coated plastics recycling, including extrusion and pre-treatment 
(grinding, washing, drying) costs ca. €300-400/ton. So, coated parts recycling can be enabled by ca. 20% extra cost 
compared to non-coated parts, which is close to but below the only current solution (solvolysis ~ €500/ton).  
Contribution to EU’s circular economy and environmental targets, which specifically recommends accounting for the 
entire plastics value chain6. The primary focus of the EU circular economy for plastic use and production is to promote the 
reuse, repair, and recycling needs of plastic value chains through enhanced sustainable design. DECOAT directly addresses 
these challenges by developing a smarter initial design to plastic and textile coating that can be removed upon end-of-life status, 
allowing a high percentage of the original material to go on to a second life-cycle. This directly supports the EU’s goals to achieve 
a “modern, low-carbon, resource and energy-efficient economy” while making “a tangible contribution to reaching the 2030 
Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement”. 
2.1.1.2 Create new technologies and business opportunities for the recycling industry across Europe, especially in the area of 
composites and plastics where the challenge is high 
Key DECOAT result: novel technologies for triggerable coatings (KO1, KO2) 
 
71 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/econ_eva_landfill_report.pdf 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 21 of 127 
For: (i) R&D driven SMEs in area of chemistry, formulation, paint, adhesives, … (ii) product designers & developers 
Impact: For group (i): a novel market will be created of (additives for) coatings, paints and adhesives that are fulfilling the 
recycling need. The global adhesives market was valued at ca. €44billion in 2016, and is expected to register a CAGR of 5% 
during the forecast period (2018-2023)72. This sector contributes more than €13 billion to the EU economy and employs 
more than 41,000 people. The share of debondable adhesives is nowadays only ca. 0.5% or ca. €65 million of the general 
adhesives market. Our results will contribute to increase this market share as we expect to generate a market of DECOAT 
triggerable additives of ca. €20 million (see part D2 of the PEDR). The DECOAT partners will be ideally positioned to capitalise 
on this growing market: RESCOLL expects the project to lay the basis for a new product line of debondable adhesives and 
primers for textiles and plastics products. RESCOLL has the capacity to scale-up to production via its subsidiary company STILZ 
Chimie to which it wants to transfer the developed technology (royalty based agreement), and which is currently capable of 
producing up to 20 tons/year. DEVAN will be able to continue to fuel the growth of their turnover in microcapsules products based 
on DECOAT results. CTECH is using already microwaveable additives but so far only in yarns via the extrusion process. DECOAT 
will allow different market sectors to be entered, notably for coatings for textile and plastics. 
For group (ii): the DECOAT concepts will be useful for designers and product developers as they can use these new concepts for 
making ‘recyclable-by-design’ products. Further, DECOAT will boost repair services as DECOAT results can also be used 
for developing products that allow easy repair by enabling easy exchange of parts (via another use of the disassembly concept 
of DECOAT). This is relevant for local workshops that want to offer repair services but also for a large brand like VAUDE who 
already offers repair services. Finally, DECOAT triggerable material solutions will also be useful for other application 
areas where it is needed to separate materials for recycling. This is for example the case for coated plastic parts in construction 
or for the composites sector, fueling also additional sectors like aeronautics and marine etc. For the latter, DECOAT solutions 
could be used to weaken the interface matrix-reinforcing fibres so that recycling becomes easier. Further, as mentioned before 
DECOAT solutions are also an opportunity to recycle the emerging smart textiles and plastics and wearables. ALL DECOAT 
partners will benefit from this exploitation beyond the initial DECOAT scope but it will be especially interesting for the research 
partners in the project (CTB, AIMPLAS, IVV, CTAG and NTUA) for whom this offers a way to exploit results beyond DECOAT. 
Key DECOAT result: novel recycling processes based on combination of mechanical and chemical recycling with a triggerable 
material (KO4) and the linked automated sorting (KO3).  
For: (SME) players in the recycling industry, that are more and more emerging; established recyclers of plastics and companies 
that design and build turn-key recycling lines 
Impact: typically for common coated materials, only mechanical recycling is now economically feasible as full chemical recycling 
is not cost efficient. DECOAT (via partners IRIS and AIMPLAS) offers a way to upgrade existing mechanical processes by 
adding tools that requires limited investment, for activating the trigger and for automated sorting. Once DECOAT triggerable 
materials come on the market existing recycling lines will have to be upgraded for the sorting. 
Key DECOAT result: demonstration of circular use of the demo cases products (KO5).  
For: (i) DECOAT end-users PANASONIC, MBT and VAUDE; (ii) manufacturers, and their suppliers, of coated textile and plastics 
based consumer goods, eg TIER 1 for automotive, textile manufacturing sector, coatings and paints industry, … 
Impact: For group (i) DECOAT will create direct business opportunities. Partner MAIER employs ca. 2400 people with a 300M€ 
turnover, and owns plants in Spain, Italy, the UK and Czech Republic. It is supplier of plastic components for the most 
important automotive OEMs (e.g. PSA Group, TOYOTA, AUDI, RENAULT, JAGUAR-Land Rover, GM, BMW, NISSAN, etc.). 
Being the first on the automotive market to offer DECOAT triggerable coating solutions is expected to give an important 
competitive edge that could relevantly boost ca. 20-25% of the product portfolio. Partner PANASONIC is part of one of the largest 
brands all over the world and the Panasonic Eco Solutions Türkiye plant is one of the largest companies that produce on this 
scale in one place in Europe (100.000.000 pcs/year). PANASONIC employs more than 250.000 people all over the world. 
Panasonic Eco Solutions Türkiye focusses on the products that are mainly targeted in DECOAT, e.g. Power Switches and 
Sockets, Group‐Sockets, Fuse Boxes, Low‐Voltage Switchgear Products, Meters, Automated Meter Reading Systems, Building 
Automation Systems. DECOAT results are relevant for 15% of the product portfolio. Partner VAUDE ranks among Europe's 
leading outdoor brand names and employs over 500 people in Germany. Its product portfolio comprises full range of outdoor 
gear: backpacks, shoes, tents, garments. The use of more sustainable and recyclable materials opens up commercial 
opportunities as being at the forefront there is a winning marketing argument. Goal is to integrate the technology as a start in a 
‘coated backpack’ line, comprising ca 10.000 backpacks per year (average weight ca 1.5kg). This would be ideal to reach the 
larger public. Partner MBT, ca. 6000 employees, is one of the largest manufacturing companies in Turkey. Mercedes-Benz Türk 
is the country’s leading bus and truck exporter. Today 80 % of the buses produced by Mercedes-Benz Türk are exported to more 
 
72 Innovations in Multi-material Joining Technologies, Frost & Sullivan 2013 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 22 of 127 
than 70 countries, especially to Western Europe. DECOAT will bring MBT the important competitive and commercial advantage 
of recycling know-how and possibility for procurement of cheaper (secondary) raw materials. MBT has turnover of ca. €3.3 billion, 
the share of the busses in it is ca. €520million, the share of the trucks is ca. €870million. 
For group (ii), the wider European community of manufacturers and users of coated plastics and textiles, DECOAT will 
offer concrete examples that can be adopted to vastly extend the share of products (parts) that can be recycled in their 
own product portfolio. This will leverage the DECOAT impact as this wider community is large in EU: total plastics industry: ca 
€350 billion turnover (data from EUPC); textile & clothing sector: ca €170 billion turnover (data from EURATEX).  
Key DECOAT result: environmental, safety & economic assessment of triggerable material solutions (KO6, KO7).  
For: manufacturers faced with need to separate complex products 
Impact: ECOMAT, IRES and OSM will be able to use the gained expertise for offering consultancy services. Using the DECOAT 
tool (see Task 6.5), industrial partners will be able to channel the impact assessment of the products to their life cycle scenario 
and respective business models. 
DECOAT business opportunities and market creation potential will lead to job creation: DECOAT results are relevant for 
ca. 3.5 million tons of waste worldwide (see section 2.1.1.3). As argued in part D2 of the PEDR, DECOAT is well-geared to reach 
ca. 280kton (8% share, which will bring important opportunities all along the value chain. For calculating the opportunities we 
refer to part D2 and we assume that 1 full time job corresponds to €350k. This leads to the opportunity of installing the DECOAT 
recycling equipment (optical detection, MW equipment, Creasolv system), which is estimated in total at €35million. Although this 
is a one-time opportunity, the related post-installation services, maintenance and upgrades are expected at 20% of the initial 
installation cost, leading to a continuing turnover of ca €7million annually or ca 20 jobs. Further we have the market of triggerable 
additives: €20 million per year or ca. 60 jobs; the recycling of the coated parts: €140million per year or ca. 400 jobs. In total this 
means DECOAT has the potential to directly create ca. 500 direct jobs.  
DECOAT developments will contribute to the competitiveness of the European manufacturing industry, which is an important 
employer, for example: automotive sector: ca. 3 million manufacturing jobs (EC data); textile & clothing sector: 1.7 million jobs 
(EURATEX data). It is calculated in part D2 of the PEDR that DECOAT materials and process innovations will give a 
competitive edge to European companies active all along the coated textiles and plastics value chains that is relevant 
to a total turnover of ca. €1.7 billion, implying that DECOAT will help to secure ca 5.000 jobs.  
2.1.1.3 Demonstrate a potential reduction in landfill waste volume by > 50% 
DECOAT will lead to a decrease in landfilling by an estimated 75% as the largest fraction of coated parts (the bulk) will 
be re-used. Indeed, the coating itself does (in most applications) not relevantly participate to the volume. Nevertheless, to account 
for potential damage at the coating interface, we assume a 5% loss of the bulk volume. Depending on the type of recycling used 
in combination with the trigger, it might be possible to recycle the coating material. However, here we assume the coating itself is 
not recuperated, so 5% volume remains landfilled. One further element to take into account is that the recycling process of the 
bulk itself will not be perfect. A fair estimate is to assume 80% efficiency. So, ca. 75% of the volume of the initial coated waste 
can be recycled, see also the concrete case study in section 2.1.4. 
This reduction is relevant for in total almost 3.5 million tons of coated plastic from cars, electrical and electronic 
equipment and coated textiles. This number is calculated based on the following data and estimates73: 
 Automotive parts: ca. 2.1 million tons of coated plastic come from end-of-life vehicles (ELV) per year. Motivation: 27 
million cars are discarded every year74, at 225 kg plastic per car (15% of average total car weight75) leads to ca. 6 million tons 
plastics ELV from cars of which ca. 35% is coated/ painted. As these coated plastics are part of the ASR of EoL vehicles, 
this fraction is mainly landfilled (see also section 1.4.2).  
 Heavy vehicles parts: ca. 800 ktons of coated plastics. Motivation: ca. 1 million heavy duty vehicles reach yearly the EoL 
stage in Europe76. Taking the average weight per vehicle (15 ton77) and 15% of plastics we have ca. 2250ktons plastic waste. 
We assume again that ca. 35% of these parts is coated/ painted.  
 Electronic goods: ca 200 ktons of painted plastic come from electronic goods ( (W)EEE = (waste) electrical and 
electronic equipment) per year. Motivation: ca. 3.45 million ton of WEEE is yearly collected (Eurostat 2015). On average, 
ca 20% is plastics78. Further, we assume that ca. 30% is coated/painted, which leads to ca 200ktons. 
 Coated textiles: ca 350 ktons are wasted per year that could be recycled using DECOAT solutions. Motivation: the total 
 
73 The estimate of the ‘coated’ fraction for the various sources is based on the best available knowledge of the (end-user) partners of the DECOAT consortium 
74 Automotive Recycling. Devalued is now revalued’ Plastic Market watch. SPI (2016) 
75 ‘Automotive The world moves with plastics". Plastic Europe (2013) 
76 M. Saidani et al. ‘Heavy vehicles on the road towards the circular economy: Analysis and comparison with the automotive industry’ Vol 135 108-122 (2018).  
77 ‘Research on the Weight of Buses and Touring Coaches’, see: https://www.iru.org/sites/default/files/2016-01/en-nea-bus-2007.pdf  
78 Seyring et al. (2015). Study on WEEE recovery targets, preparation for re-use targets and method for calculation of the recovery targets 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 23 of 127 
market for coated textiles is ca. 1 million ton / year79. The combined share of PU, acrylic and PVC (=DECOAT scope) is ca 
70%. Furthermore, due to improved collection practices, we estimate that ca 50% of the products will be available for recycling 
(currently only 25%80 but increasing trend), which leads to ca. 350 ktons.  
2.1.1.4 Reduction of the carbon footprint of the corresponding products by > 30% (based on a full Life Cycle Assessment). 
The actual carbon footprint, and other relevant environmental parameters, will be calculated during DECOAT via a Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA). The study will include all life cycle stages as represented in the figure below, impacts of each of them shall 
be considered during the assessment. At this moment, we estimate the potential of the proposed technologies for carbon footprint 
reduction. To do so, we consider the first use of virgin materials in an open loop product system, where no changes occur 
in the inherent properties of the recycled material. Here, the “business as usual” baseline scenario comprises the 
assumed current End-of-Life (EoL) treatment (landfill and incineration), and the DECOAT scenario comprises recycling 
of the bulk material from the products in their EoL. This recycling would allow to receive the “emission credits” due to avoided 
emissions during the virgin bulk material production that the recycled material is intended to replace (avoided burden approach). 
These credits are deducted from the total impact of the product as a part of the EoL stage. In exchange, the impacts of the 
triggerable debonding process and the average composition of the coated parts to be recycled are also allocated to the product 
system.  
 
  
The emissions from logistics, use, andfill disposal and incineration are assumed to be equal for both EoL scenarios, and thus not 
included in the inventory for the current calculations. This and all other methodological choices will be further analysed and 
evaluated in dedicated sensitivity analyses during the execution of the full LCA. 
Thus, the total impact can be expressed as follows: 
TOTAL = Bm + Cm + Bpr + Cpr + EoL, where 
EoLavoidedburden = Erecycling – Credits 
However, the credits shall be calculated based on the impact of the primary production of bulk material and recycling efficiency. 
The formula was used to derive the generalized calculations on the potential of DECOAT to reduce environmental 
impacts of product systems, as well as a case study of a coated PVC product was made to validate the general approach 
and make it tangible. Tables below show the results, including further assumptions for the generalized calculations. 
Baseline scenario: 
Intermediate Calculation Generalised: CO2eq Example PVC 
waste CO2eq 
calculation assumptions value unit value unit 
Virgin bulk material Bm Bm = 0.8*B Bm comprises 80% of the 
material impact 
0,95 kg/kg 1,9 kgCO2/kg 
Material processing Bpr Bpr = 0.2*B Bpr comprises 20% of the 
material impact 
0 kg/kg 0,38 kgCO2/kg 
Coating material Cm Cm = 0.5*C Cm comprises 50% of the 
coating impact 
0,05 kg/kg 0,2 kgCO2/kg 
Coating processing Cpr Cpr = 0.5*C Cpr comprises 50% of the 
coating impact 
0 kg/kg 0,25 kgCO2/kg 
Total Baseline T = Bm+Bpr+Cm+Cpr T=B+C  1 kg/kg 2,73 kgCO2/kg 
 
79 MarketsAndMarkets report (2017) 
80 http://www.foeeurope.org  
Raw materials acquisition and processing for bulk material (Bm) and coating material (Cm) 
Manufacturing of the product (processing of the bulk material and the coating Bpr+Cpr)  
Logistics 
EoL treatment including disposal and/or recycling (Erecycling) with Credits acquisition) 
Use 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 24 of 127 
DECOAT scenario: 
Intermediate Calculation Generalised: CO2eq Example PVC 
waste CO2eq 
calculation assumptions value unit value unit 
Virgin bulk material Bm Bm = 0.8*B  0,95 kg/kg 1,9 kgCO2/kg 
Material processing Bpr Bpr = 0.2*B  0 kg/kg 0,38 kgCO2/kg 
Coating material Cm Cm = 0.5*C  0,05 kg/kg 0,2 kgCO2/kg 
Coating processing Cpr Cpr = 0.5*C  0 kg/kg 0,25 kgCO2/kg 
DECOAT debonding 
(Erecycling) 
R R = Cpr = 0.5*C  0 kg/kg 0,25 kgCO2/kg 
Bulk material 
recovering efficiency 
EffBm EffBm   80 % 80 % 
Coating material 
recovering efficiency 
EffCm EffCm = 0 Pessimistic assumption, no 
coating material recovery 
0 % 0 % 
Recovering bulk 
material (Credits) 
Bmrec =  
Bm*EffBm 
Bmrec =  
0.8*B*EffBm 
  0,76 kg/kg 1,52 kgCO2/kg 
Recovering coating 
material (Credits) 
Cmrec =  
Cm*EffCm 
Cmrec = 0   0 kg/kg 0 kgCO2/kg 
Total DECOAT Trec = 
Bm+Bpr+Cm+Cpr + R – 
Bmrec - Cmrec 
Trec = B+1.5*C - 
EffBm*0,8*B  
  0,24 kg/kg 1,46 kgCO2/kg 
Environmental impact reduction in two scenarios: 
Intermediate Calculation Generalised: CO2eq Example PVC 
waste CO2eq 
calculation assumption value unit value unit 
Total Baseline T T=B+C  1 kg/kg 2,73 kgCO2/kg 
Total DECOAT Trec Trec = B+1.5*C - EffBm*0,8*B    0,24 kg/kg 1,46 kgCO2/kg 
Footprint reduction 
(ΔEOL) 
Tred = Trec – T Tred = 0.5*C - 0.8*B*EffBm  -0,76 kg/kg -1,27 kgCO2/kg 
DECOAT impact  
(relative reduction) 
Trel=-Tred/T Trel=EffB*80%(B/T) – 50%(1-
B/T) 
 76,0 % 46,5 % 
 
On the generalized level, the relative reduction of environmental impacts 
due to DECOAT introduction can be expressed as a function of the bulk 
material recovery efficiency (recycling rate), and a contribution of bulk 
material to the total product’s environmental impact. The distribution of 
relative reduction values dependent on the two parameters is presented in 
the graph on the right. 
With the assumptions made about the contribution of the bulk material into 
the total environmental impact of the product (80%) it is necessary then to 
keep the recycling rate (efficiency of recycling) above 62.5%. However, for 
the target applications, the B/T ratio if not expected to in the lower ranges, 
and the recycling rate is expected to be designed above 95%. Thus, the 
products’ performance will realistically always be in area on right upper 
side of dashed line, i.e. we will comply with and even outperform this 
expected impact. Additional benefits that were not included would further 
reduce the environmental impact during waste handling i.e. the reduced 
emissions that result from not incinerating or landfilling the materials, and possible recycling of the coating material. 
Under current circumstances, the production of 1kg of coated PVC results in 2.73 kgCO2/kg virgin material. The DECOAT 
process would cut the carbon emission by 46% (1.46 kgCO2/kg virgin material), assuming that the DECOAT process has a 
material recovery efficiency EffB of 80% (this reflects a 20% loss due to processing energy and lost base material during 
processing). This also means the DECOAT process would result in a 76% reduction in waste generation (80% efficiency 
results in 0.76 kg virgin material recovered per kg virgin material input into the system). These initial outcomes of the case 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 25 of 127 
study show that DECOAT expected impacts exceed the desired 30% reduction in carbon footprint and also the 50% 
reduction of landfilling (see section 2.1.3).  
 
2.1.2 Improving innovation capacity and market creating potential 
Innovation capacity comprises the internal ability to respond to external opportunities with an innovative solution that 
leads to profitable business. DECOAT claims to significantly increase the innovation capacity in the coatings, adhesives 
and paintings sector and the related value chain (material suppliers, end users) by combining two external opportunities: 
(i) the global need for recyclable coated parts (= market pull) and (ii) the large(r) scale and low(er) cost availability of 
smart multifunctional additives such as nano- and microparticles (carbon-based among others) (= technology push). 
DECOAT developments and results aim at capitalising these challenges, both from pure technical standpoint as from supporting 
activities (standardisation, LCA, benchmarking) as described below.  
DECOAT will boost the innovation capacity of the debonding technology providing partners (RESCOLL, DEVAN, CTECH, 
IRIS, MAIER) by demonstrating the advantages of their materials and processes for different use cases for VAUDE, 
PANASONIC, MBT and MAIER. A direct advantage for the end-users will be the reduced cost for sourcing material as the cost 
of recycled material (at ca. €500/ton, see section 2.1.1.1) will be lower as virgin ones.  
An important aspect for the improved innovation capacity for these technology providers, mainly SMEs, is that the DECOAT 
partners with high visibility and brand ownership (VAUDE, PANASONIC and MBT) will support these technology 
providers in getting the DECOAT solutions into the market. Such flagship early adopters are important to realise the innovation 
potential (e.g. for market pull effect and ‘enforcing’ their suppliers to use DECOAT technology, guarantee for re-use of recycled 
materials, marketing efforts) from which DECOAT will form the basis. The end use cases are summarised in the table below. 
The goal is that by the end of DECOAT exploitation agreements will be signed among DECOAT partners for the further 
development of the results. Given the expectation that full market readiness of the DECOAT developments will still take some 
extra investments, this will be important to set the follow-up actions to get to a higher TRL level towards a successful market 
deployment of DECOAT results on medium to long term. 
DECOAT use cases 
 Use case Recycling drive & 
challenge 
Estimated impact 
VAUDE 
Water-tight bike bag 
 
Fabric material: PES, TPU coating 
Ca 28%-72% substrate-coating(!) 
Weight fabric: ca 700g/m2 
Currently no solution to recycle 
these coated fabrics, also not of 
the production waste (bag 
produced in Germany). 
Case relevant for all PU coated 
fabrics (of VAUDE) 
Typical outdoor gear 
consumer is very 
environmentally minded. 
VAUDE wants recyclable 
products as a world first 
for its clients.  
VAUDE already has a 
strict policy on corporate 
social responsibility and 
also has its internal 
‘Green Shape 
Standard’81 
Quantities of a typical product 
line are ca. 10.000 
pieces/year, resulting in 
approximately 30t/year. 
DECOAT technology relevant 
for several product lines: bike 
bag, several backpacks, rain 
coats,… 
VAUDE manufactured in total 
over 2.5 million products in 
2016, total turnover ca. 
€ 100 mio. DECOAT relevant 
on mid-term for ca 35% of 
turnover. 
PANASONIC -  
Switches & sockets 
 
PC, ABS and PC-ABS as 
substrate materials. Three types 
of ‘coatings’: (i) Foil Print with alu 
foil (ca 50µm); (ii) Chrome coating 
via dipping (primer of copper, 
chrome top layer); (iii) Painted 
layer, based on styrene-acrylic 
emulsion (ca 15µm) 
PANASONIC wants to 
produce a ‘green line’ of 
products that are fully 
environ-mentally friendly 
without compromising on 
the aesthetics. 
PANASONIC produces ca 60 
tons of coated plastic 
switches, sockets and other 
coated electronics parts. 
DECOAT approach 
expected to be integrated in 
ca 80% of them within 5 years 
after project end 
 
81 http://csr-report.vaude.com/gri-en/product/greenshape-concept.php  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 26 of 127 
MBT - Cockpit part Substrate material is a 
polyurethane (PUR) foam. 
Coating is an ABS foil. 
ABS foil mechanical recycling and  
PUR chemical recycling 
Both parts are currently 
not recyclable.  
Up to now, no regulation 
for ELV in case of buses 
and trucks. MBT wants to 
be pro-active and engage 
in increased recycling 
MBT manufactures yearly ca 
4000 busses. Plastic parts 
make up ca 15% of the 
weight. Expectation is to have 
at least 50% of coated parts 
using DECOAT solutions.  
MAIER – exterior 
automotive part: Rear door 
garnish 
 
Material: ABS 
Minimum-Maximum process 
temperature: 210-250ºC 
Size: 900mmx200mmx50mm 
Total weight: 400 gr (2% coating) 
Coating thickness: ca. 50 µm vs 
thickness of the plastic 2 mm 
Coating: PUR (acrylate), 
primer+Colour+Clearcoat 
MAIER wants to validate 
a coating for automotive 
sector that can be easily 
debonded from the 
plastic substrate. This will 
make decorated 
components easier to 
recycle so the materials 
can be reused for the 
very same applications, 
which is currently 
impossible because even 
the smallest amount of 
impurities produce 
surface defects on 
aesthetical parts. 
For each part, expected sales 
are typically ca. 200.000 
pieces.  
Expectation: 3-4 parts can 
integrate DECOAT technology 
within 5 years after the 
project, corresponding 
turnover in the range of € 
5mio.  
Turnover of MAIER is 
expected to reach €385mio in 
2018, a strong growth up from 
€296mio in 2016. On longer 
term, DECOAT results are 
relevant for up to 20% of 
MAIER turnover, 
corresponding to roughly €90-
100mio, taking into account 
the expected continued 
growth. 
MAIER – interior automotive 
part: Fascia 
Material: ABS/PC 
Min. and max. process 
temperature: 210-250ºC 
Size: 230x280x80 mm 
Total weight: 200 gr (1,5% 
coating) 
Coating thickness: ca 30 µm vs 
thickness of plastic 2 mm 
Coating materials: thermoset PU 
(acrylates). One layer. Colour. 
 
The market creating potential of DECOAT stems from the systemic innovation of making coated textile and plastic parts 
recyclable. This means novel markets for triggerable additives (for partners RESCOLL and DEVAN), for optical 
monitoring systems (IRIS) and for the recycling systems (CTECH). This implies that on medium to long term a new novel 
value chain will be created for recycling of coated parts, building on initial DECOAT developments. 
For realising the DECOAT impact, a crucial 
part is that waste streams with triggerable 
coatings have to be made available in 
suitable form and in sufficient amounts. 
There are two main inputs: production waste 
and EoL post-consumer waste. We have 3 
streams to consider: coated textiles, consumer 
electronics components and automotive (see 
table with overview).  
For production waste, there should be no 
issues: triggerable coated items should be 
collected separately, which is no problem as 
manufacturing companies have now already 
several separate waste types they collect. 
Logically, it will take some years before 
sufficient products with DECOAT-based 
technology reaches the EoL stage. The real 
strength of the DECOAT technologies is 
exactly that it is also suited for EoL because the triggerable coated waste can be detected and thus processed separately.  
Waste 
stream 
Production waste EoL waste 
Coated 
textiles 
(roles of) fabrics , scraps 
→ Directly processable 
Textile-based products,  
→ Need removal of 
accessories  
(buttons, zippers,…)  
Crucial: collection logistics 
Consumer 
electronics 
individual parts / half-
finished products at OEM 
→Directly processable / 
some disassembly 
Full products 
→ Need shredding/ 
disassembly  
Already commonly collected 
Automotive 
parts 
individual parts at Tier 1 
→Directly processable 
Car parts & ASR 
→ Need disassembly 
Crucial: improve logistics for 
high(er) degree of disassembly 
of target valuable parts 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 27 of 127 
We illustrate the case of coated outdoor textile products. On short term, partner VAUDE will offer its clients the option to 
send back its EoL products that include DECOAT technology. That way, items will be grouped together and can be recycled. 
On medium term, collectors of EoL textile (like group De Boer Recycling Group – ASG member) will have to install the optical 
detection equipment for triggerable coatings and thus separate this waste stream. Then, they can send it to recyclers (transitional 
phase) or recycle it themselves (longer term). This will require them to extend their current recycling equipment with equipment 
based on the DECOAT recycling plant.  
Also for the recycling of coated electronics parts, an extension of the current waste processing equipment to separate 
triggerable coatings and to channel that fraction to DECOAT recycling lines. This will be implemented by players like 
REMONDIS (member of DECOAT ASG). Full recyclability of its products will be a competitive advantage for PANASONIC.  
For the automotive parts, the situation is more complex and DECOAT has to rely on supporting developments in vehicle 
disassembly. Indeed, currently only a small fraction of the vehicles is dismantled, only hazardous components or very valuable 
ones. The rest is all together shredded and separated. Focus in that process is on the recycling of metals, the rest is called the 
ASR or automotive shredder residue (see also 1.4.2) and is a highly mixed stream, containing also (some) shredded coated 
scrap. To avoid low yield and need to separate shredded fractions of very mixed composition, our recycling technology should be 
fed with disassembled coated vehicle parts. Although the latter is not evident at the moment, there are good foresights that this 
will be the case in the future. DECOAT will help partner MAIER to be prepared for this novel market situation. Furthermore, 
DECOAT will seek synergies with the project MultiCycle, just approved in the SPIRE10 call, coordinated by IRIS and counting 
several partners in common, where similar challenges will be faced in terms of identifying and dismantling specific (in that case 
composite) parts prior to recycling. For support in this matter, we have included car dismantling company GBP in the ASG. 
Furthermore, an ongoing development is the robotic disassembly of cars driven by the need for a more thorough car 
disassembly, especially with the growing share of electrical vehicles82. In fact, the fraction of metal is decreasing in cars, so there 
is a need to recycle more of the other fractions to keep with the increasingly stringent ELV directives. The latter is often only 
feasible if the (valuable) parts are dismantled beforehand. Manual dismantling is not evident, therefore efforts are ongoing for 
robotisation, focus on removing electronics parts. Such logical development in sustainable manufacturing and production will 
support the acceptance of new processes that could be needed for DECOAT products’ EoL.  
A special case is formed by HDOR (Heavy Duty and Off Road vehicles), which includes busses and trucks. There, 
disassembly and remanufacture is already more installed than for standard (light) vehicles. For example, more than 93% of all 
the materials in a standard DAF truck can now be reused and the plastic parts of a DAF truck can easily be separated during 
dismantling76. DECOAT results will help partner MBT who is specialized in bus manufacturing, and via the mother 
company DAIMLER also in trucks, in working further in this direction. 
Europe has a leading position in high quality, engineered items like coated textiles and plastics. Next to the actual 
DECOAT partners, we want to make the wider European textiles, plastics and coating and adhesives industry aware of the novel 
possibilities offered by the triggerable coatings and debonding and helping them to make the transition. For easing this transition, 
DECOAT will develop the eco-design tool, which means that the service providing SME partners IRES and ECOMATTERS will 
get a chance to boost their activities. Consultancy will also be given by the DECOAT RTD partners (CTB - textiles, AIMPLAS –
plastics & recycling sector, IVV, CTAG- automotive and NTUA – microcaps, nanomaterials). For example, AIMPLAS will be well-
placed to offer engineering and consultancy to recycling companies wanting to adopt DECOAT technologies, via upgrading their 
current recycling facilities, or via building new ones. We will prepare the EU industry to switch to the next generation of coatings 
that can debond on demand and help them to implement this all along the value chain. We will give the European textiles, 
plastics, coatings and recycling sectors an important and lasting competitive advantage via triggered debonding 
solutions.  
We will specifically engage in close collaboration with other related projects (such as MULTICYCLE, see also above and 
Task 7.5) and look into common publications/events to raise awareness towards relevant target groups on the emerging 
recycling possibilities for coated textiles and plastics.  
2.1.3 Environmental and social impact – policy framework 
Environmental impact of DECOAT is tapping into the sustainable development policies of the EU, which is committed to a ‘high 
level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment’ (Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union). As it has been 
shown in section 2.1.1.4, the suggestions of the DECOAT project can facilitate reduction of greenhouse gases emissions and 
amount of the generated waste to be landfilled or incinerated. The potential for waste generation reduction is ca. 2.1 million tons 
for automotive parts, ca 200 kilotons for electronic goods, and ca 175 kilotons for coated textiles. That refers to including 
 
82http://www.centreforsmart.co.uk/system/publications/attachments/000/000/183/original/Robotic_disassmbly_for_increased_recovery_of_strategically_important_materials_fro
m_electrical_vehicles_04102017.pdf (2017).  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 28 of 127 
these amounts of the recycled material to the material recovery level of the waste management pyramid compared to the lower 
levels of energy recovery and landfilling. This is especially relevant in view of the current EU waste policies and regulations (see 
2.1.4, including an overall trend for developing circularity and for landfilling ban in some European countries (such as presumed 
by Austrian and German Landfilling Ordinances). Moreover, the estimated amounts of material recovery have a very large GHG 
emissions reduction potential. Under Article 191 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, combating climate 
change is an explicit objective of EU environmental policy. Under this goal, EU is pursuing the targets of reducing GHG emissions 
by 40% by 2030 and by 80% by 205083. This significant contribution to reducing global warming potential of manufacturing 
activities in Europe could be also complimented by the reduction of the GHG emissions coming from the incineration or landfilling 
of the coated parts and materials. Such for example, the avoided emissions from coated plastics recycling (assuming PVC 
reduction potential for all coated plastics) could be estimated equal to 175*1.27=222tons CO2eq. 
A recent study conducted by Material Economics84, shows how circular business models, re-circulation of materials and greater 
material efficiency of products are the keys to build a competitive industrial economy with zero net emissions in Europe. All these 
keys are being addressed by DECOAT. To achieve this objective, three types of circular strategies associated to each other 
have been envisaged to reduce EU industrial emissions: (i) the reuse of different materials, (ii) the reduction of the amount of 
materials that are discarded in the manufacturing or construction process, (iii) the creation of new business models that reinvent 
the way we provide services and goods. In practice, these broad strategies translate into a wide range of measures: changes in 
product design and materials choice, improved technology, modernized value chains, etc. The benefits of circular approaches 
are strengthened by the fact that many of these measures are complementary and that many of these abatement 
opportunities are economically attractive. A more circular economy would have many other benefits as well, such as reduced 
geopolitical risks, local job creation, lower air pollution, and reduced water use. 
Social impact of DECOAT is based on the reduction of waste generation and of the system carbon emissions into human health 
and general well-being improvements. Basic regulations regarding H&S issues include arrangements for implementing the health 
and safety measures, identified by the risk assessment, set up emergency procedures, provide clear information and training to 
employees. Moreover, recycling initiatives and businesses based on technical solutions and business models suggested by 
DECOAT will increase GDPs and create work places (respective to the EU policies in employment and labour market) and 
stimulating local economies (Small business Act). The suggested DECOAT recycling schemes have a high potential to tap into 
the EU Social Economy framework (Social Business Initiative, Social Innovation policy making, Single Markets Acts 1 and 2). 
Additionally, the GHG emissions reduction due to the implementation of DECOAT solutions has a potential to avoid otherwise 
necessary measures for climate change adaptation, including in local communities and groups with high vulnerability. 
DECOAT results will help to achieve several European policies, in waste reduction, climate change action and mitigation, 
and social impact (see also section 2.1.1). DECOAT also fits in the Circular Economy Package consisting of an EU Action 
Plan for the Circular Economy that establishes a concrete and ambitious programme of action, with measures covering the whole 
cycle: from production and consumption to waste management and the market for secondary raw materials. The DECOAT 
developments on automated sorting fit the EU strategy for digitisation the manufacturing industry. 
2.1.4 External conditions influencing the expected impact 
Current low market demand for recycled plastics, which is limited to 6% of plastics demand in Europe is discouraging 
private investments in recycling capacities. In the EU, uptake of recycled plastics in new products is low and often remains 
limited to low-value or niche applications. One of the reasons for the low use of recycled plastics is the misgivings of many product 
brands and manufacturers, who fear that recycled plastics will not meet their needs for a reliable, high-volume supply of materials 
with constant quality specifications. The European Commission will promote the development of international standards to 
boost industry confidence in the quality of recyclable or recycled plastics. It will also explore more targeted sectoral 
interventions in key sectors with high potential like packaging, construction and automotive.  
Legislation and regulations on recycling, re-use and waste form important drivers, potentially further enhanced by public 
procurement. There are several European directives on these issues that directly affect the production methods and materials 
choice of electronics consumer goods and cars. For the DECOAT sectors, following directives are crucial:  
 Waste Framework Directive (Directive 2008/98/EC) aims for a European recycling society with a high level of resource 
efficiency by increasing re-use and recycling of waste from households to a minimum of overall 50 % by weight by 2020. 
 Waste Directive – Electrical and Electronic Equipment (Directive 2012/19/EU). Waste of electrical and electronic equipment 
(WEEE); eg computers, TV-sets and fridges is a fast growing waste streams in the EU, expected to grow to more than 12 
million tonnes by 2020. Overall aim is to recycle at least 85% of electrical and electronics waste equipment by 2016 in EU. 
 
83 https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2050_en 
84 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 29 of 127 
 European Directive 2005/64/EC on the type-approval of motor vehicles with regard to their reusability, recyclability and 
recoverability) state that 85 % of the mass of the vehicles included in the M1 and N1 categories (passenger cars and pick-
up trucks) must be recyclable/reusable. 
 With respect to heavy duty vehicles, including busses and trucks, there are currently no End-of-life regulations that impose 
mandatory recycling and/or recovery targets76. 
These directives (or the lack of) pose challenges (and opportunities) for the automotive and consumer goods sector. The DECOAT 
developments will help PANASONIC, MBT and MAIER to use renewable materials in (parts of) their products, thus 
working towards the directives. 
The Circular Economy Action Plan85 aims at improving the uptake of secondary raw materials. DECOAT exactly aims for 
this by overcoming existing barriers for coated plastics material. DECOAT goal is to enable recycling and thus re-use of raw 
materials used for making coated parts. Thus, DECOAT is in line with the 7th Environment Action Programme86 and with the 
recently published ‘Roadmap to Resource efficient Europe87’ which aims at promoting waste recycling and re-use. 
In the context of ongoing and upcoming evaluations of EU rules on construction products and on end-of-life vehicles, the EC will 
look into specific ways of promoting this. In the context of future work on the Packaging and Packaging Waste Directive, thought 
will also be given to using economic instruments to reward the use of recycled content in the packaging sector. Finally, the 
Commission will work on integrating recycled content in Green Public Procurement criteria (European Commission, 2018). 
Generally, these directives and other (national, regional) legislation can have a strong positive influence on market opportunities 
for use of recycling content. As an example that will be applied to other sectors: As a result of the implementation of the Plastic 
Bags Directive (Directive (EU) 2015/720) some EU Member States have already started to set requirements for the uptake of 
recycled content in plastic carrier bags. For instance, the Spanish Royal Decree 293/2018 establishes that from 1 January 2020 
plastic carrier bags with a foil thickness larger than or equal to 50 µm shall be made from at least 50 % recycled plastic. 
This shows that DECOAT will place the participating companies in pole position for when the (legislation enforced) need 
for more use of recycled material becomes even higher. 
Evolving recycling landscape 
However large the need and however impressive the targets, today only 6% of new plastic materials used stems from 
recycling88. Also within textile industry the use of recycled material is limited: for clothing only about 1% is closed loop, ca 12% 
cascade recycling3. A great deal of work is underway to improve this (also via European projects), focussing on technical, 
economic and logistics aspects. As a result, we assume in the near future well-established networks throughout Europe 
where waste is collected and brought to local recycling facilities. 
Current recycling schemes for plastics from WEEE and ELV treatment rely mainly on post shredder treatment approaches since 
only large scale products are subjected to manual dismantling due to economic reasons. Coated products of concern in the 
DECOAT project might be too small (e.g. switches) or too inaccessible (e.g. dashboards) for manual dismantling. Thus, 
identification of coated plastics in plastic shred by automated detection systems will be key for future access to coated plastics. 
DECOAT will therefore investigate optical identification tools for coated items to be implemented in sophisticated WEEE 
or ELV sorting technologies (WP3). This technology will ensure the future access to EoL products containing DECOAT 
ready-to-recycling coating systems.  
Textiles and especially complex textiles as backpacks are not recovered in specific waste streams and currently end up in landfills 
(if allowed) or incineration plants. However, the high durability of such products qualifies them for an EoL treatment by re-use or 
repair companies. Such entities are intended to be future sources of complex EoL textile waste such as the ones addressed in 
the DECOAT framework and which will be investigated in detail.  
Reluctance of adopting recycled materials in the industry because of specific processing needs, lower performance 
and/or early negative experiences. Several companies did already first trials with recycled materials and experienced difficulties 
in their processing, e.g. on reproducible quality levels or in processing. These first negative experiences, even if not valid anymore 
with the current materials, often remain and keep people biased towards further trials with recycled materials. The DECOAT 
technology providers are aware of this perception and counteracting on it will be a key part of the message brought during 
dissemination. One way to promote the DECOAT technology and the recycled material will be via the public eco-design tool, see 
Task 7.5. 
Cost of novel solutions and cost for recycling process/recycled materials 
DECOAT solutions will mean that the coatings will be more expensive at initial production phase (ca 10-15% as rough estimate). 
This is often rather small fraction of the total cost of the product, eg the bike bags. Further, gain will come because of less waste, 
 
85 European Commission: Circular economy Action Plan – closing the loop 
86 European Union: Seventh Environment Action Programme  
87 European Commission: Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe.  
88 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/plastics-factsheet-industry_en.pdf  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 30 of 127 
ability to reuse materials. Therefore, rely on the emerging new business models and schemes like EPR – Extended Producer 
Responsibility, increase cost for waste disposal, etc. 
General economic situation. The automotive and household appliances sectors are cyclic sectors, implying that they strongly 
depend on the general economic situation. This can influence the sales foresights, especially for MAIER, MBT and PANASONIC. 
Currently, economic conditions in the US and Europe are high but in the future a higher market fragmentation for the industry due 
to the emerging economies is coming into play, making innovations even more important. Companies driven by innovation in the 
area of circular/recycling will beyond doubt benefit and maintain market share. Therefore the coated parts recycling solutions 
offered by DECOAT will help to become more resilient against economic fluctuations.