3.3 Consortium as a whole 
............................................................................................................................................. 66  
3.3.1 Description of the consortium 
................................................................................................................................. 66  
3.3.2 Industrial/commercial involvement in the project 
.................................................................................................... 67  
3.3.3 Other countries 
....................................................................................................................................................... 67
3.4 Resources 
...............................................................................................................................................................
... 68  
  
    
  
1 Excellence  
  
‘You can't solve a problem on the same level it was created. You have to rise above it to the next 
level’  
(Albert Einstein, scientist)
1.1 Objectives   
The last decade has experienced 
a strong increase in technological 
developments for improved 
material functionality. One of these 
involves surface treatments, which 
employ complex (multilayer) 
structures designed to provide 
multifunctionality in a single 
solution. Within this proposal text, 
for the sake of simplicity, we will 
refer to these  complex 
 multilayer  surface treatments 
as ‘coatings’. This definition 
includes functional and 
performance coatings on 
textiles, paints on plastics, foil 
lamination and adhesion layers 
for plastics  parts  (polymer-
polymer  and polymer-metal 
 connections).  These ‘coatings’ 
Raw  
materials &  
chemicals 
Coated product parts 
Products  
with coated  
parts 
Circular  
use demo: 
technical (KO5),  
environmental (KO6)  
& economical (KO7)  
feasibility 
Recycled  
coated parts 
WASTE:  
landfill or  
incineration 
EoL 
products 
Current  
material  
flow 
KO1 
Debonding 
solutions via  
triggerable 
polymer  
material structures 
 KO2 
Adapted  
design 
KO2 
Upgraded  
mechanical &  
chemical  
recycling process 
Sorting by  
trigger 
KO4 
KO3 
DECOAT solution for  
missing gap in circular  
use of coated parts 
DECOAT contributions  
to strengthen  
circular use 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 5 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
 have  a  wide  range  of advantages and benefits but currently cannot be recycled because of 
their hybrid nature.   
The main goal of DECOAT is to enable the circular use of coated parts by  
developing novel smart polymer material systems, and their corresponding recycling processes , 
currently a missing link – see figure. We will demonstrate the project results via concrete use-cases 
for outdoor gear, household electronics and automotive parts . A systemic approach for delivering 
breakthroughs all along the value chain will be followed, see figure.   
To reach this ambitious goal and to maximise the impact of our DECOAT project on the textile and 
plastics sector, we define the following concrete key objectives (KO):  
• KO1. Development of a toolbox of triggerable materials for debonding on demand suitable for 
use on textiles and plastics. Result: ‘coatings’1 that can be removed by various triggers, e.g. ther mal 
via infra-red, heat or steam (targeted temperatures 100-150°C), chemical treatment or ‘microwaves’2.  
• KO2. Development and design of triggerable debonding coating solutions  for ‘disassembly’ of 
parts or objects and for ‘removal’ of the coating from the  multilayer structure. Focus is on acrylates, 
polyurethanes and PVC materials. Result: generic disassembly and removal solutions for punctual 
connections (0D), linear joints (1D) and planar coatings (2D).  
• KO3. Automation of sorting according to the required trigger. Result: pilot line enabling to sort the 
coated textiles and plastics based on the separation trigger incorporated.   
• KO4. Integration of debonding systems in a continuous pilot plant recycling line for coated 
parts. Result: pilot line enabling the recyclability of coated parts (flexible and rigid). The system will 
integrate the following elements: sorting and grinding, the novel debonding system, mechanical 
recycling and melt extrusion, all steps running in a continuous way.  
• KO5. Demonstration via use cases (outdoor gear, household electronics and automotive parts) using 
the pilot recycling plant and the adapted coating processes during manufacturing. Result: circularity 
demo of the use case products. Technology and processing for the use cases brought to TRL  5, 
accompanied by a plan for upscaling & industrialisation.   
• KO6. Assessment of environmental impact and implementation of safety -by-design (safe 
product, safe production and safe use and recycling). Result: full LCA study for the debonding 
concepts; reduced uncertainties and risks for human and environmental safety of DECOAT solutions.   
• KO7. Exploitation and business plans  for the DECOAT res ults, including for the use cases 
manufacturing guidelines to ensure implementation at industrial scale. Further, for the more generic 
results (design-material concepts) a thorough analysis will be done for wide scope exploitation within 
the textile and plastics sectors. Result: tailored business plans for DECOAT (company) partners, public 
research roadmap and a strategy to further exploit and develop the generic DECOAT results, as a 
basis for implementing the market creating potential of the DECOAT approach.   
• KO8. Dissemination and communication among relevant European communities. The main 
target is the European materials and recycling community, supplemented by the wider stakeholders 
group, both for getting extra feedback during project implementation an d for promoting our results.  
Result: raise awareness,  engage for collaboration and adaptation/integration of the project 
developments in applications beyond those covered within DECOAT.
1.2 Relation to the NMBP work plan  
The DECOAT products will be designed to enable separation (and thus recycling) by incorporating smart 
additives in the adhesive that are activated by a specific trigger (e.g. heat, humidity, microwave, chemical, 
mechanical). Additionally, an efficient sorting process correlated with the trigger and a pilot recycling plant 
will be developed to illustrate circular use. In this fashion, DECOAT will directly respond to two of the 
                                                
1 ‘coatings’ refers here to coatings, paints and adhesives as defined above and as will be used for simplicity throughout this whole document  
2 ‘microwaves’ will be the most likely option (although it could also be another form of electromagnetic heating like Rf heating -see also section 
1.4.1) and as such will be used for simplicity throughout this whole document  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 6 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
three types of materials design objectives put forth in the call scope : ‘Design of polymer material 
structures with intrinsic sorting/recycling abilities’ (bullet point 1) and ‘developments of separation 
and recycling technologies’ (bullet point 3).   
NMBP-26-2018 call - challenge & scope  DECOAT response  
products with smart intrinsic recycling 
and/or sorting abilities  
Three product families using multilayer coated parts are 
targeted: backpacks, household electronics and automotive 
parts. Each of them will be made from multi -layered materials 
that allow debonding for recycling and that can be sorted via the 
trigger mechanism. These are representative for a wide range 
of coated and painted textiles and plastic based consumer 
goods.  
harmonise with circular economy 
principles  
The 3 basic circular economy principles are 3: (i) Design out 
waste and pollution; (ii) Keep products and materials in use; (iii) 
Regenerate natural systems. DECOAT will enable coated, 
hybrid and painted materials to harmonise with principles (i) and 
(ii)  
help industry to better match the EU 
environmental targets at the same time 
as improving their competitiveness  
DECOAT targets the re -use and recycling of waste materials 
from households to increase to a minimum of 50% 4. We will 
mainly contribute for ‘pla stics’. DECOAT will also contribute to 
the EU environmental targets for the automotive sector4.  
design of polymer formulations with 
smart additives,   
DECOAT will make use of a toolbox of smart additives: 
microwaveable additives, microcapsules or bonding/ debonding 
adhesives for separation.   
developments of separation and 
recycling technologies  
DECOAT will tailor microwave technology, heat, steam and 
dissolving to enable separation of the coating from the textile or 
plastic.  
demonstrate the actual circular use of 
such materials through re -
processing of recycled products  
A pilot will be developed for the use cases to demonstrate the 
circular use of the materials. Both closed -loop (for same 
application) and open -loop (across applications but of same 
value level) recycling will be considered.  
evaluation of properties of re-processed 
products in an industrial environment  
Properties of the use case products made with the reprocessed 
materials will be evaluated by the RTDs and by the DECOAT 
manufacturers (DECOAT end-users) according to their normal 
testing conditions.  
full Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of the 
material production and life-cycle  
LCA is included in DECOAT activities and is a Key Objective. 
Scope: raw material acquisition and processing, manufacturing, 
distribution and transport, use phase, end of life, and benefits 
and loads beyond system boundaries (secondary systems).  
Activities should start at TRL3, 
…achieve TRL5  
DECOAT approach fulfils this criterion, see section ‘positioning 
of DECOAT’  
  
                                                
3 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-
economy/overview/concept  4 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/targets.htm  
4 2000/53/EC directive  “… for all end-of life vehicles, the reuse and recovery shall be increased to a minimum of 95 % by an average weight per 
vehicle and year.”  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 7 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service.
1.3 Concept and approach  
(a) Overall concept underpinning DECOAT  
The playing field. Increasing recycling is crucial, especially for plastics and textiles, as illustrated by 
the recently published European strategy on plastics 5 or the voluntary engagement of the plastics 
industry to recycle 50% by 20406. However large the need and however impressive the targets, today 
only 6% of new plastic materials used stems from recycling 7. Also within the textile industry the use 
of recycled material is limited: for clothing only about 1% is closed loop, ca 12% cascade recycling 3. A 
great deal of work is underway to improve this (al so via European projects), focussing on technical, 
economic and logistical aspects. As a result, we assume in the near future well-established networks 
throughout Europe where waste is collected and brought to local recycling facilities . At first, this 
network will deal with the current generation of products and materials that are not made for recycling. 
Consequently, only a small fraction of all materials is being recycled because the cost to the yield and 
quality ratio is too high compared with the one of virgin materials. Therefore, the next steps are products 
designed for recycling and made of intrinsically recyclable materials . This concept is being 
developed, e.g. for high added value applications like aerospace. However, for vast application areas this 
principle is not very advanced yet.   
The identified need. DECOAT will implement a solution for a specific class of hard to recycle items: 
textiles and plastics parts with (multilayer) ‘coatings’ . For plastics, these can be found eg in 
automotive, construction and electronics consumer goods. For textiles, typical uses are for technical 
textiles (outdoor gear, protective clothing, automotive applications and construction) and interior textiles 
(e.g. upholstery, mattress covers or curtains). The coating can be added for performance or aesthetics 
reasons. Coating, paints or adhesives have to possess excellent adhesion because of the durability of the 
coated product, and as such cannot easily be removed. Consequently, full objects are discarded, even 
though the coating often only comprises some % of the total weight . With DECOAT we will reduce 
the amount of waste material to the specific adhesive. 
This holds for end-of-life products but it is also one of 
the types of production scraps that are not efficiently 
recycled yet. Within this larger topic of debonding an 
emerging specific challenge is how to deal with  
scrap and end-of-life parts containing integrated 
electronics (from smart textiles, smart plastics and 
wearables).   
DECOAT proposed solution: enable the recycling 
of coated parts, which refers to a two -level 
approach: (i) ‘disassembly’ is separating the 
connections among the different physical parts; (ii) 
‘debonding’ or ‘removal’ refers to the removal of 
coatings or tie layers from the fabric or plastics object. 
This 2-step approach is illustrated in the figures for  a 
backpack. These two steps can be performed 
separately (or simultaneously in some cases) during the recycling process. DECOAT triggerable 
separations mechanisms will be suited for both steps and fill the missing gap for circular use of coated 
parts (see sketch in section 1.1). Within DECOAT, we will focus mostly on the 2nd level, i.e. the removal of 
coatings. But, the same principle of triggered debonding enables the disassembly step. So, DECOAT 
developments are relevant for both steps and we will refer to the processes as ‘debonding’.   
Interdisciplinary aspects : DECOAT combines expertise and knowledge from several disciplines: 
polymer chemistry, physics, coatings and paints, textiles and plastics processing, recycling, 
design, and environmental science . This is needed and allows tackling the interdisciplinary issues 
                                                
5 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/plastics-strategy.pdf   
6 https://www.plasticsconverters.eu/single-post/2018/01/16/European-Plastics-Industry-works-towards-50-plastics-waste-recycling-by-2040    
7 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/plastics-factsheet-industry_en.pdf   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 8 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
required for reaching circularity. One such key issue is to tune the existing knowledge on triggerable 
materials to industrial requirements for coated textiles and plastics.   
Stakeholder involvement: interaction with the stakeholders is deemed crucial, especially with the 
waste actors. Therefore, ISWA has been added as partner , a worldwide association of solid waste 
actors that promote sustainable waste management and perform dissemination and  policy work. For 
further strong interaction with a wide group of stakeholders, the DECOAT Advisory and Support Group 
(ASG) has been established, containing 17 members from coating and recycling companies, industry 
associations, a public authority, standar disation bodies and a publisher, see also section 3.2.1.1f and 
section 4 for a detailed description.  
Societal engagement: DECOAT results will create a new market of recycling coated textiles and 
plastics, which will lead to job creation. Of special intere st is (partial) disassembly which enables repair, 
e.g. in small local workshops.   
Positioning of DECOAT: Main technology elements, starting and targeted TRL are summarized 
in the table below:  
Technology element – assessment of status  Start  Target  
Microwaveable (MW) additives  exist but manufacturing and design methodologies 
need to be developed for integration in coatings and paints for the DECOAT 
applications. Rely on triggering of MW additives for fast curing thermoset resins 
and polyester annealing, which is well-established.  
3  5  
Microcapsules for debonding coatings: concepts based on heat, steam, microwaves are 
shown at lab scale (CTB and NTUA). R&D needed to validate debonding in relevant 
environments.  
3  5  
Bonding/debonding adhesives: industrially available (e.g. INDAR) for applications with 
metals and ceramics but needs to be transferred to polymeric/textile materials  
4  5-6  
CreaSolv® process was developed for recycling of soluble thermoplastics. It will be 
applied to dissolve polymeric coatings from textiles and polymer surfaces. After 
separation, the coating polymer can be recovered from the solvent. Suitable 
solvents need to be developed for specific coating chemistry.  
3  5  
Trigger assisted mechanical recycling : mechanical recycling as established in paper 
industry will be modified to treat plastic parts and textiles that contain coatings 
and/or paints by incorporating additional elements (debonding system & sorting 
technology) and redesign other ones (grinding & drying system)  
4  5-6  
Automatic sorting technology: is used in the plastic recycling sector, based on a 
number of monitoring technologies. The right technology is to be selected and 
calibrated for novel DECOAT triggerable materials.  
3  5  
Summarized: we start from technologies with TRL 3 (-4) and target TRL5 (-6) by the end of DECOAT. 
As much as possible conventional processing technologies will be used, which eases scaling up. We 
will continuously monitor the performance of the technologies along the project to ensure reaching TRL 5, 
as first steps towards future commercialization. Linked (inter)national research and innovation 
actions.  
Project Acronym (type of project) - Link with DECOAT  Partner  
(C=Coord)  
EcoMeTex (FP7) - Separation layer for carpets based on expandable microspheres, will 
be further developed as one of the separation technologies  
CTB  
RADIACAM (UK) - Microwaveable yarn for disassembly of mattresses and car seats  CTECH  
MARKERS (BE) – Markers for better sorting towards recycling  CTB (C)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 9 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
RECYCOAT (BE) – recycling of coated materials, eg separation by means of steam or 
infrared using additives  
CTB (C)  
FiberEUse (H2020) – Large scale demonstration of new circular economy value-chains 
based on the reuse of end-of-life fibre reinforced composites  
MAIER  
SMARTFAN (H2020) - Development of smart composites with self-healing capsules and 
carbon nanomaterials/ smart recycling activities  
NTUA  
BYEFOULING (FP7) - Synthesis, functionalization and up-scaling of nanoparticles for 
marine coating applications. Encapsulation based on Layer Double Hydroxides (LDH), 
Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) and Polyoligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) for controlled 
release of antifouling compounds  
NTUA  
LORCENIS (H2020) - Synthesis of carbonaceous nanomaterials and super absorbent 
polymers8  
NTUA  
SHELL (GR) - Synthesis of carbon nanotubes and nano-/micro capsules for coating 
applications  
NTUA  
INNOVIP (H2020) – Solvent based separation of composite films applied in vacuum 
isolation panels (VIP) in order to recycle film components during End of life treatment.   
IVV  
FORCYCLE (DE) – CreaSolv® process has been used to separate polymer/polymer and 
polymer/metal composites by dissolving one polymeric component of the composite   
IVV (C)  
FOURMI (FR): Development of thermo-strippable paints for the selective paint removal of 
aircrafts  
RESCOLL   
Wear2™ (UK) – The innovative Wear2 technology provides the capability to easily 
disassemble garments with the application of a simple end -of-life treatment using MW 
technology.  
CTECH  
REBIOFOAM (FP7) – The development of a flexible and energy -efficient pressurised 
microwave heating process to produce 3D -shaped renewable bio -polymer foams for a 
novel generation of transportation packaging.   
CTECH  
LIBRE (H2020): Novel precursor fibre materials from blends of modified lignin and 
biopolymers for carbon fibre. Includes use of dielectric susceptors to enhance the heating 
efficiency using MW or Rf energy.   
CTECH, 
CTB  
ECODISM (FP7) - development of debondable glazing adhesives for ELVs  RESCOLL  
ECOBULK (H2020) – Circularity in automotive sector (among others)  IRIS  
URBANREC (H2020) New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into 
high added value  
RECycled products   
AIMPLAS(C) 
CTB  
EXTRUCLEAN (LIFE+): Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances 
during the recycling process of polyethylene hazardous waste packages, employing 
supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2)   
AIMPLAS(C)  
eCircular - The EIT Climate KIC eCircular Flagship programme will accelerate the 
circularity of plastic-based material systems and dematerialisation of plastic demand, with 
the vision of a reaching a carbon-neutral material system by 2050. The Flagship thrives for 
digital innovations for waste prevention and their up-scaling.  
ECOMAT  
                                                
8 Kanellopoulou I.A., Karaxi E.K., Karatza A., Kartsonakis I.A.., Charitidis C.A, Hybrid superabsorbent polymer networks based on crosslinked 
poly (methacrylic acid) encapsulated with Si02 for novel applications, 5th International Conference of Engineering Against Failure, 20 - 22 June 
2018 - Chios Island, Greece  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 10 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
  
(b) Overall Methodology:   
For describing the general DECOAT methodology, we group the DECOAT activities according to lab-scale, 
pilot scale and demonstration. The supporting activities are mentioned separately.  
Materials and material structures R&D at lab scale   
‘Triggerable materials’ : R&D on the  microcapsules, nano -additives, their integration in coatings, 
characterisation of their effects when triggered. We will develop a portfolio of techniques, each will be 
characterised, listing the strengths and weaknesses for the respective application domains. Integration in 
a coating system, directly in the coating or via a primer.  Triggerable debonding coating solutions both 
for the ‘disassembly’ of parts 
(‘1st level) and for the ‘removal’ 
of the coating from the 
substrate (2nd level).   
Process development at 
pilot scale:  Sorting 
technology: Research on 
sorting to discriminate post-
consumer and post production 
waste based on type of 
debonding trigger to ensure 
the materials can be identified 
& guided  to  the 
 fitting  recycling technique.  
Piloting of a recycling line 
for coated parts: conception, 
design and building of an 
actual pilot line, performing 
test runs on generic coated 
textiles and plastic parts, 
validation via the recycling of 
the use cases prototypes.  
Demonstration of circularity 
via use cases (see sketch): 
The novel coatings will be 
applied in the existing processes by the manufacturers/ endusers via three use cases. The (small scale) 
production of products will undergo the recycling process, the recovered  materials  will  be 
characterised and re-used. Evaluation of the reprocessed products.  
  
Transversal activities:  
Environmental & safety assessment : detailed assessment of environmental (full LCA) aspects and 
development of an ecodesign tool. Ensure  Safety-by-Design implementation via use of non -hazardous 
substances, e.g. for microcapsules or solvents (EC Regulation No. 1272/2008). Apply proper recycling 
and waste treatment (Directive 2008/98/EC).   
Innovation management: Economic assessment (full cost of ownership, business plans); dissemination: 
raise awareness from early on to maximise wide uptake of DECOAT results; communication to promote 
public awareness of circular economy values; focus on interaction with wider stakeholders and with the 
ASG.   
Coordination: efficient project implementation, project risk management.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 11 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Gender analysis. We will follow gender driven innovation and develop gender neutral demonstrators. 
DECOAT partners have a strong focus on women’s employment (e.g. at VAUDE 65% women , including 
the CEO and 33% of executive positions)9.
1.4 Ambition  
DECOAT aims at overcoming obstacles from current recycling technologies by designing coating 
formulations with smart additives, which allow adequate sorting, separation and recycling . 
Developments of separation and recycling technologies will be investigated and new separation 
technologies utilising novel mechanical and chemical recycling procedures will be validated, to meet the 
EU's circular economy and environmental targets.  
1.4.1  Progress beyond state-of-
the-art  
Building further on the available 
knowledge, expertise and patented IP 
within the DECOAT consortium, we 
will research and develop a 
debonding system based on 
triggerable additives, mechanical 
recycling, chemical recycling 
(Creasolv process) and latest coating 
(monitoring) technology. We will investigate two debonding systems: (i) a single layer with the trigger 
inside and (ii) a two -layer system consisting of a 
standard coating and a ‘primer’ layer (see 
sketches). Note that ‘primer’ is used here as 
common name for tie layer or primer or base layer. 
For selected combinations of the coating-substrate 
materials, we will research several triggers and 
several options for the actual removal of the 
coating (process conditions, 1-step versus 2-step). 
The output will  be a portfolio of debonding 
strategies, mentioning for each of the solutions the 
pros and cons. This novel information will form the basis for our DECOAT demonstration of circular use 
of coated parts but also be made available to the wider stakeholder community for further use.   
In the next paragraphs we describe the concrete progress beyond the state -of-the-art that DECOAT 
ambitions for (i) triggerable materials, (ii) optical monitoring for process optimisation and sorting 
of the coated waste, (iii) actual recycling and (iv) eco-design aspects.  
(i) Triggerable materials and related debonding systems – mainly related to WP1 & WP2 work  
Coatings that debond on demand  lose their adhesive function when an external trigger is applied. 
Partner CTB researched a novel separation layer for textiles by embedding thermally expandable 
syntactic microspheres (in FP7 proje ct ECOMETEX). Separation concept was shown on lab scale in 
boiling water, which is not an efficient process as it needs extensive energy (heating, drying). Partner 
RESCOLL developed an  innovative, patented (see section 1.4.2) interfacial debonding adhesive  
technology (INDAR™ Inside ) permitting the dismantling of structural aerospace assemblies without 
damage and was used for selective thermal stripping of aircraft paints. Partner NTUA has developed a 
variety of ‘smart’ nano- and microcapsules based on various materials (ceramics, metals, polymers), 
that react on external stimuli (water, mechanical stresses, microorganisms, etc), in projects LORCENCIS 
and BYEFOULING (see also project table above). Partner CTECH developed additives for interaction 
with microwaves. Based on that, a unique patented (polyester) yarn was developed, which disintegrates 
during microwaving11. This yarn enables easy and inexpensive removal of e.g. zippers (disassembly step). 
                                                
9 Source: http://www.vaude.com/angebote/nachhaltigkeitsbericht/2013_Nachhaltigkeitsbericht_screen_ENGL.pdf   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 12 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
DECOAT novelty: Using the available IP and expertise, we will  develop triggerable additives for water-
based coating formulations with a lowered debonding temperature as compared to existing procedures, 
although exceeding the processing and working temperature required/set by industrial demo cases. A 
sufficient difference between the manufacturing, maximal service and the debonding temperature will be 
ensured and will be realised by improving the heat direction towards the additives, e.g. by heat focussing 
layers or thermal conductive paints. Thermo -responsive core -shell nanostructured copolymers, Super 
Absorbent Polymers (SAP) and novel hybrid microwave susceptible materials (based on metal 
nanoparticles, silicon carbides and multiwall carbon nanotubes MWCNTs) will be investigated. Separation 
will be done by heat sources (like steam, microwaves and IR) that are available at industrial level to avoid 
the need for additional, or only very limited, drying. To reach a clean surface after debonding, we focus on 
controlled interfacial decohesion. For detection purposes, fluo rescent molecules will be added on the 
“smart” additives (dyes).  
The table below gives an overview of the materials to be developed and the polymer coating 
matrices to which they can be added. Already a first matching between the trigger mechanism and 
the polymer matrix is made, based on the chemistry of the particles and what is available in literature. 
As mentioned this is a first matching, further investigation within the DECOAT project is needed. Below 
the table, each of the triggerable materials is di scussed, giving more info on their synthesis and the 
challenges for their use in an actual debonding system.  
Triggerable materials  Coating 
Polymer 
matrix  
Triggers  
Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers  
Core: e.g. poly(propyl methacrylate) or poly(butyl methacrylate)   
Shell: e.g. poly(4-vinylpyridine-co-methacrylic acid), ethylene-glycol-
bismethacrylate,   
Functionalised with: organic dye (I), iron oxides (supermagnetic 
nanoparticles)  
Acrylic, PU12 
PVC13  
Heat / Steam 
(Temperature)  
Super Absorbent Polymers   
Core: Cross-linked poly(methacrylate-co-ethylene glycol 
dimethacrylate)  
Functionalised with: organic dye (II), iron oxides (supermagnetic 
nanoparticles)  
Acrylic 
Epoxies14  
Selective  
Solvents (H 20 
or organic 
solvents)  
Microwave assisted materials  
MWCNTs (decorated with metal nanoparticles or grown on SiO2 
nanoparticles)  
Susceptors: Metaloxide nanoparticles (e.g. ferroelectric oxide particles), 
BaTiO3, siliconcarbide, ZnO, silica or alumina  
Blended with high dielectric polymer  
PU15  
PVC16  
Epoxies17  
MW 
irradiation  
Blowing agents (INDAR)  
Blowing agents: azodicarbonamide and polycarboxylic acid  
Blended into formulations for primers, combination with other triggers  
Epoxies, PU18   Heat / Steam 
(Temperature)  
Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers  
Partner NTUA has vast experience in synthesis and development of tailored microcapsules and 
nanoadditives with functional properties (currently at TRL3)19,20,21. Partner DEVAN has built over the 
years a strong IP portfolio of microcapsules for various applications22.  
DECOAT novelty: we will make progress on the following topics to realise this triggerable material:  
Microcapsule core: selection of polymers with thermo -responsive properties or inclusion of a ctive 
ingredients that help delamination of textile layers (eg. poly(propyl methacrylate) or poly(butyl 
methacrylate).  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 13 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
                                                           
11 Patent WO2013/189956A1, see also www.wear2.com   
12 M.Hirose, et al.,The structure and properties of core-shell type acrylic-polyurethane hybrid aqueous emulsions, Progress in Organic Coatings, 
31, (1–2) 1997, 157-169  
13 A. Gharieh, et al., Preparation of core–shell impact modifier particles for PVC with nanometric shell thickness through seeded emulsion 
polymerization, Iranian Polymer  
Journal 23(1), 2013  
14 I.A. Kartsonakis, et al., Multifunctional epoxy coatings combining a mixture of traps and inhibitor loaded nanocontainers for corrosion 
protection of AA2024-T3, Corrosion Science, 85, 2014, 147-159.  
15 E. Orgiles-Calpena, et al., Effect of Amount of Carbon Nanotubes in Polyurethane Dispersions, Macromolecular Symposia, 2012.  
16 K. Trommer, et al., Processing and Properties of Carbon Nanotube PVC Composites, L. Appl. Chem., 2014, 10  
17 J. Zhang, et al., Functional interphases with multi-walled carbon nanotubes in glass fibre/epoxy composites, Carbon, 48, 8,  2010, 2273-2281 
18 EP2265681 (B1), EP2519596 (B1), EP2519565 (A1), EP1611217 (B1), EP1814935 (B1) 19 A.C. Balaskas, T. Hashimoto, M. Curioni, 
G.E. Thomson, Nanoscale 2017 9:5499-5508.  
20 A.C. Balaskas, I.A. Kartsonakis, L.-A. Tziveleka, G.C. Kordas, Progress in Organic Coatings 2012 74:418-426.  
21 I.A. Kartsonakis, A.C. Balaskas, E.P. Koumoulos, C.A. Charitidis, G.C. Kordas, Corrosion Science 2012 57: 30-41.  
22 Patents EP1658131 (B1), US2008193761 (A1), US2016009596 (A1)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 14 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Microcapsule shell: selection of suitable shell components to enclose the core material. In thermo-
responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers, a protective thermoplastic shell with tunable 
glass transition temperature (Tg) and melting temperature (Tm), will be tailored to have a higher Tg 
than the core’s polymer. The Tg is highly related to segmental polymer chain motion. As polymers warm 
up, the shell with the high Tg will act as a protective coating for the polymeric core, which will be in melting 
conditions at elevated temperature. When the ambient temperature surpasses the Tg of the shell, the inner 
core (material) will have a high chain mobility enabling detaching of the surfaces. At this defined moment 
the core material is released from the capsule, triggering de bonding. On the one hand, the shells should 
not react with the core material and on the other hand they should have a good chemical compatibility with 
the surrounding matrices. Examples of possible materials are: melamine resins, polyurea/polyurethanes, 
polyacrylates. In addition, the shells should provide a good storage for the active ingredients during the 
entire lifetime of the products, and only rupture/or release the active ingredient when triggered (end of the 
product life).  
Functionalization of the protective thermoplastic shell to increase its compatibility with a wide 
range of ‘coating’ formulations, also for INDAR technology (see below). The main materials: PU, PVC, 
acrylic, epoxies. Of potential further interest: amino, cyanates, isocyanides, hyd roxyls, sulphonamides, 
and phthalates. DECOAT consortium is aware that some forms of these substances have restrictions, so 
REACH compliance will be checked (see also Task 6.1).  
The use of the microcapsules in the debonding system : The microcapsule concentration (ca. 5% or 
less) and cross-linking density of the adhesive will be tailored and optimized, for strong adhesion during 
product use but also for ease of debonding at end-of-life. The latter will be achieved by exposure to heat 
as this will melt the shell, and thus activate the core. Homogeneous heat dissipation and activation of the 
microcapsules will be obtained by adding superparamagnetic nanoparticles (Fe 3O4). Application of 
irradiation will locally (=near the microcapsules) raise the 
temperature10,11. The aim is to develop materials that will be 
able to create ‘soft flexible points’ inside the crosslinked 
adhesive network in the presence of the external stimuli, 
thus improving detachment.  
Super Absorbent Polymers (SAPs)   
SAPs can absorb and retain extremely large amounts of a liquid 
relative to their own mass. Water-absorbing polymers, which are 
classified as hydrogels when cross -linked12, absorb aqueous 
solutions through hydrogen bonding with water molecules. In deionized and distilled water, a SAP may 
absorb 300 times its weight (from 30 to 60 times its own volume) and can become up to 99.9% liquid.  
DECOAT Novelty: The SAP materials  will exhibit a spherical shape with a two-layered structure: the 
polymeric core will be a lightly crosslinked hydrogel and the outer surface will be a highly crosslinked layer. 
The water absorption capacity of the SAPs is influenced by the nature and relative amounts of monomers 
used in the synthesis13. In this sense, the regulation of the crosslinker amount (both in the core and shell 
material) will be the key-property to achieve the desired degree of water absorbency for the debonding 
effect as well as the required protection of the hydrophilic core for obtaining a stable waterborne 
formulation14. Clearly, the amount of crosslinker is a decisive parameter for the swelling behaviour of 
                                                
10 Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, Volume 435, 2014, 99-104.  
11 Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Volume 302, Issue 1, 2006, Pages 267-271.  
12 Kabiri, K. (2003). "Synthesis of fast-swelling superabsorbent hydrogels: effect of crosslinker type and concentration on porosity and absorption 
rate". European Polymer  
Journal. 39 (7): 1341–1348  
13 Kabiri, K., et al., Superabsorbent hydrogel composites and nanocomposites: A review. Polymer Composites, 2011. 32(2): p. 277-289.  
14 Chang, S., et al., Multi-scale characterization of surface-crosslinked superabsorbent polymer hydrogel spheres. Polymer, 2018. 145: p. 174-
183.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 15 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
hydrogels and the aim is to achieve a compromise between the crosslinking level and a stable gel 
structure15,16.  
The effect of the pH on the water absorbency of 
the SAP spheres will be also investigated. The 
dispersion of the coreshell SAP materials will be 
investigated in an aqueous solvent where swelling 
equilibrium experiments will be performed to study 
water absorption at different pHs. When the pH 
favours the re pulsive forces between the 
polymeric chains, the water absorbency is 
increased. On the other hand, when a screening 
effect of the polar groups of the polymer chains takes place, the repulsive forces between the charged 
polymer chains are minimized and the water absorbency in greatly decreased. Based on this 
phenomenon26, the pH value of the waterborne formulations developed will be selected based on the value 
where the minimum water absorbency is observed. In this way, the SAP materials will be in a not swollen 
state during their incorporation in the coatings and they will be activated only upon the trigger.  
To apply the MW trigger, these structures will be also functionalized with  thermally-responsive 
magnetic nanoparticles (eg Mn-Zn ferrites or Ni or iron oxide) which will be selected based on the Curie 
temperature that matches the crosslinked layer’s melting point17. This functionalization will make the shell 
more susceptible to heating so that the shell can be selectively molten, as described also for the  case of 
the thermo-responsive core-shell co-polymers, allowing the lightly crosslinked hydrophilic core to absorb 
a large amount of water, causing the swelling and activating the debonding.  
To apply the Creasolv process,  lipophilic super-absorbent polymers18 for the absorption of the 
desirable organic solvents will be prepared by selecting the appropriate compounds both for the polymer 
chains that control the compatibility with the media and the ionic groups that are dissociable in polymer 
gels (e.g. alkyl ammonium salts). Candidate materials include acrylate monomers copolymerized with 
methacrylates as crosslinkers to yield lipophilic polyelectrolyte gels. The nature of the organic solvent and 
specifically its polarity (dielectric constant) will influence t he swelling behaviour of the SAP materials 
produced. For this reason, the ionic group content will be adjusted to avoid the formation of physical 
interactions which will negatively influence the swelling behaviour of the lipophilic SAP.   
Hybrid materials reacting to MW triggers  
Two forms of dielectric heating are commonly used industrially differing in wavelength of the 
applied electromagnetic radiation. These are Rf heating using wavelengths at 27 and 40MHz and 
MW heating using 2.45Ghz and 896MHz . Depend ing upon the material to be processed, there are 
advantages and disadvantages of using the different forms of radiation, but the main advantage is the 
direct heating of the material by the application of the radiation with no external heat transfer or hot surface 
required. Using Mw and Rf can be done either as a batch system or a semi batch system. In the latter 
case the materials are placed into a screened cavity and then heated by the application of the desired 
power for a defined time. This gives some advantages in the design because the system can be enclosed 
ensuring no leakage of radiation. Materials can be introduced in containers, treated and then removed to 
be processed further. Continuous processes are also possible for both Rf and MW systems for e xample 
conveyers can be used to introduce and remove the materials into the applicator zone.    
The main microwave absorption mechanism of a polymer is reorientation of the dipoles  when 
submitted to an electric field, the presence of these groups in the molecule is necessary. Some polymers 
contain groups with large dipoles, such as epoxies, amino, cyanate, isocyanides, hydroxyls, 
sulphonamides and phthalates. The materials with the best dipole mobility exhibit high absorption 
                                                
15 Goncalves, A.A.L., et al., Synthesis and characterization of high performance superabsorbent hydrogelsusingbis[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl] 
phosphate as crosslinker. Express Polymer Letters, 2016. 10(3): p. 248-258.  
16 Cipriano, B.H., et al., Superabsorbent Hydrogels That Are Robust and Highly Stretchable. Macromolecules, 2014. 47(13): p. 4445-4452.  
17 A. S. Ahmed y R. V. Ramanujan, Curie temperature controlled self-healing magnet–polymer composites, J. Mater. Res., 2015. 30 (07): p. 
946-958.  
18 Ono, T., et al., Lipophilic polyelectrolyte gels as super-absorbent polymers for nonpolar organic solvents. Nat Mater, 2007. 6(6): p. 429-33.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 16 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
efficiency and the efficiency of the coupling depends on the strength of the dipole, its mobility and mass, 
as well as its dipole matrix state. The choice of the polymers and the formulation will therefore need to be 
investigated for an optimal heating effect. By applying electromagnetic radiation to a material, movement 
of the molecules via dipole interactions with the oscillating electric field is induced, resulting in molecular 
friction. This leads to dielectric heating of materials.  
Comparison of Rf and MW heating key properties  
Parameter  Rf  MW  
Applied heating efficiency  order of 60%  order of 65%  
Uniformity of heating  Good   Can be less uniform   
Impedance matching  Can be difficult for certain applications Easily applied   
Energy delivery  Accurate and fast   Less controlled   
Remote power sources  Ok  Ok with waveguide transfer to the applicator  
Screening to comply with EMC  Easy   More difficult  requirements  
Tailor heating to materials  Easy   (More) difficult    
Common characteristics  
Volumetric heating –no external Dielectric heating does not require physical Low shear transport 
(conveyorised possible) heat transfer contact with the product  
Typical susceptors that are used nowadays for MW heating  are metaloxide nanoparticles (e.g. 
ferroelectric oxide particles  
e.g. BaTiO3, siliconcarbide, ZnO, silica or alumina). To date, use of microwave heating in carbon-based 
materials research of is limited , mainly focused on liquid solutions. However, more rapid and efficient 
heating is possible in electron -rich solid materials, because the target materials absorb energy of 
microwaves effectively and exclusively. Carbon-based solid materials are suitable for microwave-heating. 
Specifically, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have excellent electrical properties resulting from sp 2 networks of 
carbon atoms. The number of free electrons which can migrate freely over the whole of the layer is about 
one per each carbon atom. The free electrons enable CNTs to absorb microwave energy considerably 
and to be heated effectively by microwaves 19.The tuning feasibility of the permittivity value by chang ing 
MWCNTs concentration (1-5%) has been also proven20.  
Other applications like annealing, regeneration and detection based on microwave heating of CNTs have 
been reported.  
DECOAT novelty:  
The main idea is the possibility to include susceptors in a primer layer to provide a heating effect to 
separate the substrate and the top coating. The susceptor may also be part of the actual coating in case 
of a single layer. The bulk polymer would need to be a low dielectric material to avoid MW heating of the 
bulk. The aim is to provide selective heating in the area of the susceptor, to either melt (and remove) the 
primer and thus also the coating on top, or to melt the entire coating itself and remove the coating layer.  
For the heating, we will start with MW heatin g as most likely option . Also Rf will be tested and the 
possibility to add (as extra) some radiant heating component. In DECOAT, it will be investigated which 
would be the best energy source, or combination, to use in order to achieve the effect.   
To tune the heating and to make it more uniform, we will optimise the % and type of additive. We will 
also investigate the addition of MW transparent material such as silica or alumina to disperse the particles 
and moderate the heating effect. Indeed, heating needs to be limited to prevent thermal runaway causing 
                                                
19 T. Kim, et al., Microwave heating of carbon-based solid materials, Carbon letters Vol. 15, No. 1, 15-24, 2014.  
20 M. Giorcelli, et al., Microwave absorption properties in epoxy resin Multi Walled Carbon Nanotubes composites, 2013 International 
Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications (ICEAA), Italy, 9-13 Sept. 2013  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 17 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
melting or charring of the bulk polymer. Issues might occur if the component contains e.g. metal parts (e.g. 
fixings/brackets) which could cause arcing or materials fillers that heat strongly in a MW/Rf f ield. This 
potential variability of feed would need to be considered, even though we will try to limit the variability via 
the previous disassembly step and the monitoring and sorting of the waste.   
We will start making formulations with common susceptors  such as small metal particles (nano 
particles), ferroelectric oxide particles e.g. BaTiO 3, silicon carbide or blends with high dielectric polymer. 
The primer layer or the coating will need a lower melting point compared to the bulk material.   
A novelty for targeted MW heating will be the exploration of carbon -based 
particles, like carbon powder, MWCNT and CNT/MO (Metal Oxide) nanocomposites 
(see picture on the side21). The latter are a new generation with interesting properties 
that not only combine the p roperties of CNTs and MO but also hold new properties 
caused by the interaction between them. Additionally, use of these materials in a 
polymer coating formulation can overcome some common disadvantages. For 
example, metal oxide nanoparticles have a tendency to agglomerate because of their 
dangling bonds. In CNT/MO composites, depositing nanoparticles on the surface of 
the nanotube prevents their agglomeration. The aggregation of nanotubes in aqueous 
media is solved by functionalization. As a result, these nanocomposites are attractive for a wide range of 
applications compared to the isolated nanoparticles because CNTs act as a carrier to stabilize the 
nanoparticles, maintaining their integrity.  
This will help the induction of the heat through MW and Rf inside the coating, since CNTs will work as a 
thermal conductive network inside the polymer matrix, which should be very beneficial for the 
debonding functionality.   
(ii) Automated Sorting technology based on DECOAT triggerable additives – mainly related to WP3 
& WP4 work  
For the actual recycling of DECOAT products to be implemented in a future waste management 
configuration, an efficient and automated sorting is required based on the material composition for 
defining the respective recycling route and for s eparating them from non -recyclable parts (e.g. 
standard coated parts not including triggers). Due to the lack of recycling options, textiles are often not 
separately collected or sorted and automotive non-metallic parts shredded as a mixture that is energetically 
valorised at best, plastics (especially packaging, WEEE) are industrially sorted via spectroscopic 
identification systems (e.g. NIR, X-ray, colour, laser and combinations)35 or even hand sorting. The latter 
is unreliable and not suitable for the DECOAT materials as the smart additives cannot be seen by human 
workers. Partner IRIS has experience in developing tailored fast online VIS/NIR spectroscopic tools for 
plastic processing monitoring to identify precisely their composition and to detect traces  of unwanted 
substances22,23.   
NIR absorbance spectroscopy is well established as a technique for inline sorting of a wide range of 
materials, including agricultural products such as food products; minerals 24  and plastic waste 39. In 
particular, Steinert GmbH40 provides a wide range of sorting machines with NIR imaging, handling plastic 
waste, household waste, compost, building waste, and minerals produced by mining. Waste plastics are 
especially suited for NIR absorbance characterisation, as they exhibit strong spectral features in the near 
infra-red. Conversely, most plastics have similar appearance and shapes in the visible wavelength range, 
so using conventional machine vision for sorting is not effective. Allied with this, a large proportion of waste 
                                                
21 Vinod K. GuptaandTawfik A. Saleh, Synthesis of Carbon Nanotube-Metal  Oxides Composites; Adsorption  
and Photo-degradation 35 Plastic handbook chapter 8: PLASTICS RECYCLING AND BIODEGRADABLE 
PLASTICS, Susan E. Selke:  
22 OPTIJECT project (Grant Agreement no. 262623), www.optiject.eu  
23 B2B contracts for the detection of good batches of recyclates as well as for HSI-based monitoring solution for plastic identification in recycling 
line  
24 Steinert KSS Optical Sorting Machine, Steinert GmbH, Widdersdorfer Str. 329 – 331, D-50933 Cologne, Germany. 
https://steinertglobal.com/mining/industrial-minerals/ 39 PICVISA Ecopack, PICVISA Optical Sorting, C/Isaac Newton, 2, 08280 Calaf 
(Barcelona) España, http://picvisa.com/en/p/productos/ecopack-plastic-sorting-21-18 40 https://steinertglobal.com/magnets-sensor-sorting-
units/sensor-sorting/nir-sorting-systems/  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 18 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
plastic materials will be presented as macroscale objects of a single material type, which means they are 
easily imaged using the spatial resolution available with common hyperspectral cameras.   
Challenges remain in sorting plastics, including distinguishing materials that have multiple component 
materials, such as coatings, colouring agents and fillers, or separating objects that are dark coloured, or 
which have been used for containing different materials, including hazardous ones.   
Recently, the addition of fluorescent markers has been developed as a way to add specificity to 
objects that are difficult to sort based on NIR spectroscopy of their basic material type. Such organic 
dyes absorb light of a particular wavelength and emit light with a longer wavelength. This property, called 
fluorescence, can be detected with extremely high sensitivity and therefore, only a very small concentration 
of a fluorescent dye is sufficient. Coatings with a thickness of ~ 1 μm require a dye concentration in the 
order of some parts per billion, to enable the detection of the fluorescence. Such a small concentration in 
a thin layer is not visible to the eye and does not affect physical properties like mechanical strength.  
In terms of process control of transparent organic coat ings, such a system has been recently 
developed, with the involvement of partner IVV, by the Fraunhofer Polymer Surfaces Alliance POLO®25. 
For the excitation of the dye molecules a (monochromatic) light source (LED, laser) is required, and a 
digital camera can be used to detect the fluorescence light. Depending on the dye’s optical properties 
additional components such as filters might be necessary. These properties can be used to tag materials 
and coatings26 and for example determine coating thickness. In addition, some dyes show a fluorescence 
effect, whose intensity and wavelength is influenced by the surrounding molecules, the pH, the ionic  
strength of the medium, or by the viscosity of the matrix, showing a stronger fluorescence depending on 
the cross-linking degree of the resin.  
In terms of sorting, fluorescent markers are already well established as a means of sorting cells or other 
biological species27. A prototype system has been developed to sort small flakes of plastic, by the addition 
of fluorophores28, which reduces the minimum size of an object that can be sorted, and handles more 
complex polymer blends. A commercial fluorescent marker and sorting system for polymers is offered by 
Polysecure29. This system requires the addition of fluorophores to the polymer itself, and in sufficient 
quantities for detection, and so the amount of fluorescent material required is a limiting factor to the general 
use of this technology. A new product under development by Nextek Ltd., called PRISM30, is based on the 
addition of fluorescent inks to the labels of plastic containers, which strongly reduces the amount of 
fluorophore required, but presents chall enges if the labels have been partially removed or degraded in 
handling.  
Fluorescent markers are typically produced in the form of molecular dyes/ nanoparticles. Dyes are the 
most cost -effective fluorophore, which makes them attractive for waste sorting. However, where 
nanoparticles are already deployed as functional additives, such as paramagnetic oscillators, it should be 
possible to add the functionality of fluorescence to existing pa rticles, or microspheres. Such dual -use 
particles have been developed for combined cancer -cell imaging and destruction 31 . Commercial 
fluorescent paramagnetic microspheres are available32, while customised particles will be investigated that 
are suitable for material properties of debonding adhesives under development. While carbon nanotubes-
based nanocomposites are expected to require fluorescence dyes, other standard metallic nanoparticles 
(eg iron oxide) can be identified using standard X -ray fluorescence s pectroscopy without dye addition. 
Dispersion of nanoparticles in thin films can be characterised by diffractometric techniques49.  
                                                
25 https://www.polo.fraunhofer.de/de/Aktuelles/downloads.html  
26 Holländer et al., (2015). "Process control for thin organic coatings using fluorescence dyes." Progress in Organic Coatings 88: 71-74.  
27 David W. Galbraith, Flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell sorting in plants: the past, present, and future, Biomédica 
2010;30(Supl):65-70  
28 S. Brunner, P. Fomin, Ch. Kargel, Automated sorting of polymer flakes: Fluorescence labeling and devel opment of a measurement system 
prototype, Waste Management 38 (2015) 49–60  
29 Polysecure GmbH, Engesserstrasse 4a, 79108 Freiburg / Germany, http://www.polysecure.eu/en/product-marker-solution/product-marker-
solution/  
30 Nextek Ltd., Level 2, 1 Kensington Gore, London SW7 2AR, United Kingdom. http://nextek.org/portfolio/sorting-with-markers/  
31 Shang-Hsiu Hu and Xiaohu Gao, Nanocomposites with Spatially Separated Functionalities for Combined Imaging and Magne tolytic Therapy, 
J. AM. CHEM. SOC. 2010, 132, 7234–7237  
32 Spherotech Fluorescent Magnetic Particles, Spherotech, Inc. 27845 Irma Lee Circle, Unit 101, Lake 
Forest, IL 60045, USA 49 http://optinanopro.eu/optinanopro01/files/2018/06/ApplicationNote-Texture.pdf  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 19 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
DECOAT novelty : In terms of process control, fluorescent dyes, applied in ppm (parts per million) 
concentrations in core and shell of the triggering materials, and resulting in a specific fluorescence will be 
used in the design the microcapsules. The detection system records the fluorescence intensity distribution, 
which finally will be converted into volume distribution of the core and shell within the coating. Moreover, 
the curing states of the core and shell can be imaged by using special dyes. The advantage of such a 
system is to measure and control all thickness/curing state relevant parameters at the same time during 
production. In terms of sorting, these fluorescent markers in the core -shell will be unique to the 
microcapsule and its triggering mechanism, and therefore allow sorting each part to the appropriate 
channel and process for debonding and separation. The amounts of fluorophore are limited, and localised 
to the region of the part containing the adhesive layers, so that in the case where more than one additive 
is present, they can be identified separately, and a multiple stage recycling route can be implemented. All 
in all, we will research and optimise the hardware based on tailored photonic techniques  and software 
using advanced chemometrics analysis and combining several technologies as required for 
identifying each relevant material. They will be adjusted to sort bonded and coated materials. Similar 
techniques will be used to control proper removal and quantify residues as needed to ensure quality of 
reprocessed substrate material and for the tracking important parameters of the core shell synthesis, 
nano/micro composites dispersion and coating thickness as determinants of trigger efficiency.  
(iii) Upgraded mechanical and chemical recycling process – mainly related to WP4 work  
Trigger assisted mechanical recycling . Mechanical recycling is often most preferred from  economic 
viewpoint. However, it is often limited in capabilities, e.g. for removal of contaminants. A well -known 
method is using a continuous high speed centrifuge to remove water and other impurities during plastic 
recycling. To our knowledge, combination with a trigger is not known at pilot or industrial level.  
DECOAT novelty: develop a continuous recycling pilot line to separate the coating from the coated 
plastics and textiles part  by using a high speed industrial centrifuge  (mechanical separation) th at 
integrates the trigger mechanisms and that can be combined with the novel sorting technology. The 
idea is to start with grinding in medium size parts (3 x 3 cm), to have the material pass through an activation 
step (e.g. microwave, IR or steam oven tunnel or chemical bath), to trigger the debonding and to start the 
separation process. The centrifuge movement will permit that the coating, even if its weight is comparable 
to the weight of the substrate material, will go out of the system fairly easy. Finally, the ‘decoated’ polymer 
(plastic parts, textile fibres) will be extruded and pelletized to be used again for melt extrusion. CO2 will 
be introduced during the melt extrusion process to remove residual amounts of coating and VOCs.  
Chemical recycling via  CREASOLV process : This is a solvent based selective extraction process 
developed by partner IVV that allows pure plastics at the molecular level to be recovered due to their 
specific solubility. It has no by-product (solvents can be used in closed loop en dlessly with only few ppm 
lost in each cycle) and a very low environmental impact demonstrated by peer-reviewed LCAs33,34. Unlike 
general chemical recycling that generate monomers requiring a new polymerization step, Creasolv® 
generates polymers. One further advantage is that via successive steps with tailored solvents, even mixed 
input materials can be recycled. Furthermore, due to the mild processing conditions (no supercritical 
conditions), the polymer maintains its properties as opposed to mechanical recy cling. So far, CreaSolv® 
has been applied to standard thermoplastics like PS, PE, PVC, PA, etc. It has also already been 
successfully tested on lab-scale for recycling of PVC/PET composites35.  
DECOAT novelty: the process will be adapted for typical textile and plastics coatings enabling the 
recovery of selected coating materials . In combination with DECOAT core/shell microcapsules and 
lipophilic SAPs, the CreaSolv® treatment will be researched as a potential method of triggering, e.g. by 
triggering the swel ling of SAP’s and also as a method to remove remaining contaminants after the 
application of a previous (mechanical) debonding process.  
                                                
33 https://polystyreneloop.org/content/8-downloads/presentations/10-lca-of-etics-eol-treatment-of-eps.pdf    
34 Freegard, K.; Tan, G.; Morton, R. 3rd interim report on WRAP Project PLA-037. The Waste & Resources Action Programme, Banbury (UK), 
2006.  
35 U.Knauf et al. Recycling of PVC/PET composites - Production of pure and homogeneous recyclates, and process monitoring – Kunststoffe / 
Plast Europe Vol 90 (2) 24-26,  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 20 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
(iv) Demonstration of circular use and related eco-design– mainly related to WP5 work  
Circular use of raw materials of  coated parts. DECOAT emphasises on the removal step, i.e. the 
separation of the coating from the substrate. However, we also want to show that it is possible to recycle 
the materials, coating and substrate afterwards.   
DECOAT novelty: DECOAT ambitions to show this circular use and wants to demonstrate it for one generic 
coated textile and for one generic coated plastics case. We want to select two such generic systems and 
will show circularity of the material use. For the actual debonding, we will apply t he most suitable 
technology developed within DECOAT. For the recycling of the coating and of the substrate material, we 
will rely on the best available technologies at that moment.   
2000  
Difficult to predict already now but some good candidates: PVC coated PES fabric and ABS coated PUR. 
The actual recycling of the thermoset PUR is outside the scope of DECOAT but several efforts (eg H2020 
projects URBANREC, see also section 2.1.2) are ongoing. DECOAT will rely on these efforts for showing 
the circular use.  
Further, we want to also make prototypes of actual parts for the use cases presented by the end -users, 
see also next section. These prototypes will be based on eco -design of the coatings,  implementing the 
DECOAT findings. The outcome will be strategies to design single and multilayer coating solutions for 
textile and plastic substrates using our DECOAT developments.  
A public tool will be released that helps to integrate DECOAT technology in the eco-design of coated parts.  
  
1.4.2 Innovation potential  
The innovation potential of DECOAT is rooted in the current need for improved high tech material 
solutions for implementation of cost efficient solutions for recycling of coated textile and plastic 
parts. A significant contribution can be delivered to the emerging remanufacturing industry in 
Europe by helping it to extend to plastic parts.  
Recycling of coated plastic parts. The current technology for recycling painted parts is 
based on chemical bath, which is expensive, prone to contamination, and difficult to 
implement on small scale (so for SMEs that need to recycle the scrap). The technology 
is only available in some large recycling companies and OEMs. This chemical bath has a 
removal efficiency of ca 95-98,5%. The current 1,5% of coating that remains causes a 
dramatic loss of properties in the recycled material . Taking all this into account, the 
innovation potential targeted by DECOAT is to (i) find alternatives for the current chemical baths 
for a more environmental -friendly process that is easier and cheaper to implement at small 
scale/companies; (ii) achieve a removal efficiency of >99% in a single step, leading to higher quality 
recycled material at market affordable price.   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 21 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Market size coated plastics: European plastic parts production was almost € 37billion euro (Eurostat – 
2016 data). Assuming that ca 20% is coated, we find a European market value for coated plastic parts 
of more than €7 billion . For the coating materials themselves (acrylates, 
polyurethanes,…), the worldwide market on plastics w as valued at ca. € 5 
billion (2015). The global demand for automotive coatings is ca. 3 million 
tonnes, with the European share over 20% (2016)36.   
Recycling of coated textiles . In the past recycling of PVC coated PET 
fabrics and pilot scale recycling has been tried, using chemical recycling, 
e.g. TexyLoop54. Further, textile recycling mainly focusses on shredding of 
uncoated textile fabrics (typically production waste, also some post -
consumer) into short fibres that are reused for non -woven production. And 
although coated textiles are often used, no economically viable solutions 
targeting a reasonable value after recycling exist today. The innovation 
potential targeted by  
DECOAT is to present coating solutions made with recycling in mind, both 
from the design and materials side. Moreover, the corresponding techniques 
will be developed. This innovation potential is on medium-term as DECOAT 
will offer a novel option, in-between the existing pure mechanical and 
chemical recycling, for dealing with coated textiles and plastics.  
Market size coated textiles : The global coated fabrics market is 
projected to reach almost €25 billion by 2021 , at a CAGR of more than 
4% in terms of value, during the forecast period, 2016 to 2021 37. The 
European textile coatings market is projected to witness growth over 
4% up to 2024. Rising industrial, transportation, and building & construction 
are driving the market for textile coatings. Along with these, increasing 
quality and performance standards in textile coating based fabrics a re also 
driving the market. Recent market potential of microencapsulated 
products/ additives is estimated at ca. €5 billion, growth ca 5 -7%/y38 and ca. €1 billion within the 
technical textile and clothing industry39, focusing on applications like medical, sportswear and leisure.  
The global textile coating binders market is dominated by thermoplastics (2015 data): PVC-Polyvinyl 
Chloride (ca 40%), Polyurethane (ca. 20%) and Acrylics (ca. 7%). PVC is the most used coating for various 
applications due to its low cost, easy weldability, and easy coloration and printability. PU benefits from 
being an eco -friendly textile coa ting, and is widely accepted and preferred by manufacturers in North 
America and Europe. Applications for coated textiles are very diverse, but main areas are: 
transportation, building and construction  and (technical) clothing , e.g. for outdoor, workwear, 
protective clothing40.   
Although currently limited, there is a strong driver for using coated textiles for daily clothing as it has 
been shown that the coating is reducing microfibre losses during washing by up to 50% 41. But, 
having to deal with coatings would hamper and delay the current emerging recycling of textiles even more. 
This is a potentially very large opportunity DECOAT technology can tap into.  
Recycling of automotive plastics. During the process of recycling ELV (End -of-Life Vehicles), most of 
the metal is recovered from cars, and the rest of materials and parts are shredded to obtain what is called 
                                                
36 https://www.zionmarketresearch.com/news/global-plastic-coating-market and http://www.european-coatings.com/Markets-
companies/Coatings-market  54 Recycling of flexible composite materials – see: www.texyloop.com   
37 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/coated-fabric.asp and https://globenewswire.com/news-
release/2016/11/23/892449/0/en/Global-Coated-FabricsMarket-2016-2021-Market-is-estimated-to-reach-USD-20-41-billion-in-2016-
and-is-projected-to-reach-USD-24-91-billion-by-2021.html   
38 Source: Gerald Rafler, Head of the Fraunhofer Institut Applied Polymer Science, Potsdam (2016)  
39 Estimate based on European Textile Association statistical data on technical textiles and clothing segments  
40 https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/textile-coatings.asp (2016)  
41 A New Textiles Economy (2017), see: https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/a-new-textiles-economy-redesigning-fashions-
future   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 22 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
ASR (automotive shredder residue) 42. This ASR represents 20 -25% of the original car weight, it 
contains typically 20 to almost 50% plastics and most of it is currently landfilled or burned. The EU 
directive (2000/53/EC), demands that only 5% of total ELV is landfilled. The plastic separation in the ASR 
is complex and the purity that is currently feasibly is not enough to have productive mechanical properties 
in the recycled plastic. It is stated that “ The recovery [of plastic material] has remained marginal; yet 
it should develop rapidly now, given the EU requirements regarding material recycling. Manual dismantling 
allows cleaner recovery, yet it is severely limited by productivity …. Conversely, it seems illusory to recover 
really clean materials, such as PUR, after passing them through a shredder, even though washing 
procedures have been tested ”60. Therefore, rather than focussing on small incremental 
improvements, DECOAT proposes a radical novel approach.  
The global automotive industry is set to reach 114 million cars in worldwide sales annually by 2024, 
with an expected growth on average of 2.8%43. Within the EC report ’GEAR 2030‘44 (2017), the opportunity 
for building novel or extending existing value chains for a circular automotive sector is highlighted, as well 
the possibility for novel business models, eg for the recycling or re -use of (spare) parts. DECOAT feeds 
directly into this opportunity, by providing novel technological solutions for both disassembly and recycling. 
The high-end premium car segment which uses a lot of aesthetics coatings  (ca. 13% of MAIER’s 
turnover) is ‘booming’: it increased with more than 50% from 2010 to 201645.   
Of special interest for the automotive sector is the increased use of composite parts, especially in 
electric vehicles. This currently hampers the EoL processing as recycling of composite parts is much 
more difficult as (coated) metal parts. Therefore vehicles are designed that are easier to recycle, eg by 
making them easier to (partially) disassemble, even in a robotised manner. This offers a huge opportunity 
for the recycling industry and linked activities. DECOAT technology for recycling parts fits perfectly in this 
scheme.  
Opportunities exist also for trucks and busses , the latter are covered by partner MBT. Although less 
common then cars, there are roughly 1 million so -called HDOR (Heavy duty and off -road vehicles) 
discarded every year. Disassembly is much more common and far advanced with some brands for metal 
parts (iron, steel, aluminium, up to ca 75-85% of the total weight). Remaining challenge is dealing with 
complex multi-material parts (with electronics). DECOAT technology could contribute.   
Emerging market: recycling of smart textiles and plastics with integrated electronics . The market 
for smart textiles and wearables is expected to enter an exponential growth phase from an expected 
total world market of nearly 1.5 bn US$ by 2021 46 to almost 3 bn US$ for the EU market alone in 202447. 
Eg DECOAT partners MBT, MAIER and CTAG are working on integrating electronics into various 
(interior) car elements. Next to the actual manufacturing, a missing solution to recycle the smart plastics 
hampers the market introduction. Therefore, we will also look into this emerging automotive application.   
Remanufacturing is the process of returning a used product to its original performance specifications 
(from the customers’ view). It is a strategy to reduce manufacturing's environmental impacts while boosting 
profitability. If considered during the early stages of a product's design, the concept of ‘active disassembly’ 
can be applied enabling the rapid and non -destructive disassembly of products with minimal component 
damage, which facilitates remanufacturing. DECOAT technology can aid to implement active disassembly, 
easing the actual disassembly (DECOAT – 1st level) and for making it easier to upgrade used parts by 
removing the coating so that it can be recoated. Remanufacturing is especially of interest for the 
automotive market. The worldwide automotive parts remanufacturing market (focus on metal parts) was 
valued at US$ 33.16 Billion in  
2016 and is estimated to grow at a CAGR of 6.6% from 2017 to 202548. DECOAT technology could help 
to extend it also to plastics parts. Note that this is much stronger than the actual a utomotive market 
                                                
42 A. Buekens, X. Zhou, Recycling plastics from automotive shredder residues: a review, J Mater Cycles Waste Manag (2014) 16:398–414  
43 https://www.consultancy.uk/news/13900/global-car-market-to-break-through-100-million-in-sales-by-2020  
44 https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/26081/attachments/1/translations/en/renditions/native  
45 Statistica Charts: https://www.statista.com/chart/9309/super-luxury-car-sales-are-booming/   
46 Kamitis – Smart Textiles Study 2016-2021  
47 Grand View Research - Smart Textiles Market, Smart Fabrics Industry Report (2017)  
48 https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/9b2rfv/global_automotive?w=4  (2017)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 23 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
(worldwide 2.8%, in EU only 1.7%). Economic benefits for both remanufacturing companies as well as the 
customers are considered as the biggest driver for the overall automotive parts remanufacturing market. 
Remanufacturing aids in reducing  cost pertaining to major parameters such as material, machining, 
production time, energy, fuel and labour costs, among other. In addition, present -day automobiles are 
made flexible so that they can easily incorporate remanufactured parts without affecting the performance 
of the vehicle.  
Remanufacturing goes wider than the automotive sector: the EU Remanufacturing Network estimates 
the current size of the EU remanufacturing industry to be almost €30bn, employing around 190,000 
people. Their market study shows that the industry could triple to €90bn by 2030 and employ as many 
as 255,000 people 49. As DECOAT technology will also be able to apply on large full part s, it can 
contribute to and benefit from the remanufacturing opportunity . The ERN study 68 identified the top 
barriers for remanufacturing becoming more widespread, i.e. volume/availability of a ‘core’ (used part 
intended to become a remanufactured product)  and quality of the core. For coated parts, DECOAT 
technology answers to those barriers. The aerospace sector was shown as the sector where 
remanufacturing is currently being used most. On 2 nd and 3rd place are automotive and EEE (Electrical 
and Electronic Equipment). The INDAR technology of partner RESCOLL is indeed already emerging in 
the aerospace sector. Our goal is to make it also enter other sectors, like automotive and EEE. This shows 
that DECOAT will also be useful for further development for disass embly of parts for these sectors (and 
debonding of coatings).  
The global adhesives market was valued at ca. €35billion in 2015 and is projected to reach ca. €50billion 
by 202150. The share of debondable adhesives is nowadays only ca. 0.5% of the general adhesives 
market. The water -borne adhesives (= DECOAT scope) account for ca 50% of the global market. If 
DECOAT results reach 1% of this market, we can address a global market of ca. €170-250million.  
The above motivates the selection of the DECOAT use cases: watertight backpack for outdoor gear 
(VAUDE), power switches and sockets for household electronics (PANASONICS) and automotive 
parts (with integrated electronics) (MBT, MAIER) as applications and sectors where recycling of 
coated materials is needed but no economically viable solutions are available yet.  
FREEDOM TO OPERATE. The consortium carried out a patent survey to specify possible opportunities 
not only to achieve knowledge advancements, but also to proceed in technological advancements in terms 
of patenting. The survey was conducted in the spirit of investigating and detecting unexplored areas and 
approaches of the field and to avoid possible overlapping with existed protected intellectual knowledge. 
The consortium decided that although a number of patents exist in similar fields, DECOAT project offers 
a huge opportunity to achieve technological advancements beyond the state of the art.  
Patent No – Title   Short Description   DECOAT’s Innovation potential  
CN105710044A:  
Intelligent  
classification 
system for 
recoverable  
garbage   
Intelligent classification for recoverable garbage: 
infrared (IR) sensor, metal detector, core control 
classification module and voice prompt module 
(IR sensor and metal detector used for detecting 
type of garbage.  
DECOAT will develop an 
automated sorting technology 
based on triggerable additives.  
CN100386453C:  
Method for 
decoating on 
 waste  plastic 
metal    
The present invention relates to a method of 
recycling scrap metal, in particular a plastic waste 
containing metal plating layer simultaneously 
recycling waste plastic and metal plating method 
faded.  
DECOAT will develop a method 
for decoating a paint laye r from 
a plastic substrate in order to 
recycle both the coating and the 
substrate  
                                                
49  https://www.circle-economy.com/european-remanufacturing-industry-estimated-at-e30bn-with-potential-to-triple-by-
2030/#.Wy-ubExuJZU  (2016) 68 Remanufacturing Market Study by ERN, Oakdene Hollins (2015)  
50 Global Adhesives and Sealants Market– Trends and Forecasts (2016 - 2021), edited in October 2016 by MORDOR INTELLIGENCE  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 24 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
US20140287299A1:  
Heat-Debonding  
Adhesives  
A debonding tool provides current to conductive 
contacts on the conductive layer for generating 
heat in the heatgenerating layer when it is desired 
to debond the structures that are attached 
together in electronic devices, using the adhesive 
member.  
DECOAT will develop 
triggerable primers for interfacial 
debonding for electronic 
devices, automotive parts and 
textiles  
US5100494A:  
Structural bonding 
and debonding  
system  
The pieces are debonded or separated by 
passing a relatively high electrical power through 
the heating element, to soften or melt the 
adhesive.  
DECOAT will use triggers such 
as microwave, Rf irradiation, 
heat and steam together with 
smart nanomaterials, for 
softening/melting adhesives.  
US7901532B2:  Invention utilises thermoexpanadable 
microspheres and  
DECOAT will use super 
absorbent  
Method and 
apparatus for 
bonding and 
debonding 
adhesive 
interface surfaces  
thermal energy to debond interfaces in an 
adhesive system or as vehicle carriers. It 
discloses a method of curing the adhesive system 
prior to the debonding step so that the same 
adhesive system may be used for both phases. It 
is especially useful in the automotive industry for 
end of vehicle life dismantling.  
polymers as microspheres 
which will react to moisture and 
heat. The applications are not 
only limited to automotive 
industry, but also to  
electronics and textiles  
US20150202858A1: 
Laser film 
debonding method   
A laser-based coating removal method debonds 
a film from a substrate rather than ablating the 
film. Laser light is transmitted through a 
transparent film to an underlying bonding layer for 
bonding the film to one or more additional films 
and/or a substrate. The laser light is absorbed at 
the bonding layer and the transparent film is 
released. In some embodiments, after the 
transparent film is released it is able to be 
physically removed.  
DECOAT will use microwave 
and Rf irradiation instead of 
laser light. Automated optical 
sorting will be also 
implemented.  
US6288158B1: 
Modified 
superabsorbent 
polymer  based 
 on  
polyacrylonitrile 
emulsions  
The surface of a polymer containing hydrolyzed 
polyacrylonitrile in the form of particulates, is 
modified by crosslinking in a water/alcohol 
reaction mixture and in the presence of silica. The 
resulting product features improved absorbency 
under load and lesser degree of gel blocking  
DECOAT will synthesize a new 
generation of SAP’s 
functionalising their surface with 
thermo-responsive coatings and 
decorating them with metal 
oxide nanoparticles.  
US6537341B2:  
Process for 
recycling fiber 
composite  
materials  
A process for recycling composite materials that 
comprise fibers and a matrix includes exposing 
the composite material to electromagnetic waves 
in the form of microwaves. The electromagnetic 
waves induce an  introduction of energy into the 
composite material, leading to a separation of 
fibers and matrix. The separation operation can 
be assisted by a suitable solvent.  
DECOAT will develop a 
recycling route based on 
microwaves and Rf irradiation 
for coated plas tics and textiles. 
In combination with the above, 
the Creasolv process will be act 
synergistically.  
In spite of the existing prior art (described in section 1.4.1), according to the knowledge of the partners, no 
patents exist that block the envisioned developments and innovations. Quite on the contrary, several 
DECOAT partners own key patents related to the developments. An overview of the most important 
ones:  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 25 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
DECOAT scope  DECOAT partner – relevant patents  
Debonding 
adhesives  
RESCOLL: proprietary INDAR technology via patents EP2519596 (B1), EP2519565 
(A1), EP2265681 (B1), EP1814935 (B1), EP1611217 (B1)  
Microcapsule 
production & 
application  
DEVAN: has an extensive know-how, through the PCT/IB2006/050605 patent, for the 
grafting of a covalent bond between the microcapsules’ shells and the textile fibres. 
The incorporation of these microcapsules into fabric substrates creates new 
functionalities for the treated materials.  
Microwaveable  
trigger (for yarns)  
CTECH: ‘Article assembly disassembly system’ - Patent WO2013/189956A1  
Nano- and 
microcapsules  
NTUA: "Multifunctional Coatings including Nanocontainers with Self-Healing, 
Antibacterial and  
Photocatalytic Properties" - Patent no 1007721; ‘Hybrid Coatings including 
Nanocontainers with Antifouling Properties" - Patent no 1007729; "Functional Multi-
stimuli responsive polymeric nanocontainers-microcontainers as drug delivery 
systems" - Patent no 1007882.  
Creasolv®   IVV: “Process for recycling soluble polymers or polymer blends from plastic 
containing materials” - Patent No EP0894818B1; “Method for increasing the 
concentration of at least one polymer from a polymer containing waste material, and 
polymer recyclate” - DE102013212813A1; “Method for recycling plastics and use of 
thereof” - EP1888677B1.  
  
The DECOAT consortium is convinced that the triggered debonding approach presented here is 
still largely uncharted and that opportunities are multiple to patent IP, including options to extend 
and elaborate some of the existing patents of DECOAT partners.  
  
2 Impact  
‘Do not go where the path may lead, go instead where there is no path and 
leave a trail’  (Ralph Waldo Emerson, writer)
2.1 Expected impacts   
DECOAT fits extremely well in the European Circular Economy strategy as it aims for a systemic 
innovation for the recycling of coated textile and plastic materials. The materials solutions will 
build further on latest (carbon) nanotechnology, microencapsul ation and polymer developments 
and lead to several scientific and technological breakthroughs. DECOAT results will create new 
markets for triggerable additives, optical material detection systems and for recycling equipment 
and processes. Together this amo unts to over 150 million annual turnover, i.e. the potential to 
directly create ca. 500 jobs.  Moreover, DECOAT materials and process innovations will give a 
competitive edge to a relevant share of the European companies active along the coated textiles 
and plastics value chains that could generate a total turnover of ca. €1.7 billion, implying  that 
DECOAT would further help to secure ca 5.000 jobs.  
2.1.1 Expected impacts set out in the work programme  
In the subsections below, we list how DECOAT will resp ond to each of the expected impacts of the call. 
We focus on the impact within and beyond DECOAT and try to illustrate both aspects.  
2.1.1.1 Meeting the EU's circular economy and environmental targets while demonstrating a clear benefit, 
i.e. more efficient or economic than the state of the art in order to enable market uptake in the 
short to medium term  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 26 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Efficiency aspect: The current disposal methods for coated textiles and plastics are landfilling, 
incineration or (very limitedly) chemical bath recyclin g, that all have severe disadvantages.  
Incineration51 conventionally leads to the release of significant greenhouse gas CO2, pollutants like NOx, 
SO2, and particulate matter. Additionally, heavy metals and dioxins are emitted. Given the high energy 
content, much of the heat is recovered as energy source. However, the residual product consists of bottom 
ash, fly ash, and air pollution control residue, which is currently also landfilled. The incineration process 
involves a flue gas cleaning process, which may give rise to externalities to wastewater. For landfill70 
disposal, the main emissions are CO2 and CH4. Moreover, leachate is released to the surrounding soil and 
water. In addition to environmental impact, both incineration and landfill processes require f acilities with 
serious disadvantages, e.g. for the people living in the vicinity. Chemical baths are currently used to 
remove coatings and to recycle the left -over fraction but they are very limited and cumbersome from 
environmental side (see section 1.4.2 ). These dramatic impacts will be avoided by the DECOAT 
innovations, as instead of being disposed of, the majority of the original material can get a secondary life-
cycle. This saves on the production of virgin material, thus contributing to significantly reducing emissions 
throughout the value chain.   
DECOAT offers a solution to coated plastics and textiles recycling via the development of triggered 
debonding of coatings via improved mechanical or chemical recycling, resulting in  a highly promising, 
efficient alternative to current recycling and material design standards.  
Economic aspect:  for doing the extra sorting and activation of the trigger, an additional cost during 
recycling of ca €80 -100/ton is estimated (including OPEX and CAPEX), largely depending on the 
stimulation mechanism (e.g. infrared vs microwave). This is an economic attra ctive proposition as the 
current process of non-coated plastics recycling, including extrusion and pretreatment (grinding, washing, 
drying) costs ca. €300 -400/ton. So, coated parts recycling can be enabled by ca. 20% extra cost 
compared to non-coated parts, which is close to but below the only current solution (solvolysis ~ 
€500/ton).  Contribution to EU’s circular economy and environmental targets , which specifically 
recommends accounting for the entire plastics value chain 6. The primary focus of the EU ci rcular 
economy for plastic use and production is to promote the reuse, repair, and recycling needs of plastic 
value chains through enhanced sustainable design. DECOAT directly addresses these challenges by 
developing a smarter initial design to plastic and  textile coating that can be removed upon end -of-life 
status, allowing a high percentage of the original material to go on to a second life -cycle. This directly 
supports the EU’s goals to achieve a “modern, low-carbon, resource and energy-efficient economy” while 
making “a tangible contribution to reaching the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris 
Agreement”.  
2.1.1.2 Create new technologies and business opportunities for the recycling industry across Europe, 
especially in the area of composites and plastics where the challenge is high  
Key DECOAT result: novel technologies for triggerable coatings (
 KO1, KO2)  
For: (i) R&D driven SMEs in area of chemistry, formulation, paint, adhesives, … (ii) product designers & 
developers  
Impact: For group (i): a novel market will be created of (additives for) coatings, paints and adhesives 
that are fulfilling the recycling need. The global adhesives market was valued at ca. €44billion in 2016, 
and is expected to register a CAGR of 5% during the forecast period (2018 -2023) 52. This sector 
contributes more than €13 billion to the EU economy and employs more than 41,000 people . The 
share of debondable adhesives is nowadays only ca. 0.5% or ca. €65 million of the general 
adhesives market. Our results will contribute to increase this market share as we expect to generate a 
market of DECOAT triggerable additives of ca. €20 million (see part D2 of the PEDR). The DECOAT 
partners will be ideally positioned to capitalise on this growing market: RESCOLL expects the project to 
lay the basis for a new product line of debondable adhesives and primers for textiles and plastics products. 
RESCOLL has the capacity to scale-up to production via its subsidiary company STILZ Chimie to which it 
wants to transfer the developed technology (royalty based agreement), and which is currently capable of 
                                                
51 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/econ_eva_landfill_report.pdf  
52 Innovations in Multi-material Joining Technologies, Frost & Sullivan 2013  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 27 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
producing up to 20 tons/year. DEVAN will be able to continu e to fuel the growth of their turnover in 
microcapsules products based on DECOAT results. CTECH is using already microwaveable additives but 
so far only in yarns via the extrusion process. DECOAT will allow different market sectors to be entered, 
notably for coatings for textile and plastics.  
For group (ii): the DECOAT concepts will be useful for designers and product developers as they can use 
these new concepts for making ‘recyclable-by-design’ products. Further, DECOAT will boost repair 
services as DECOAT results can also be used for developing products that allow easy repair by enabling 
easy exchange of parts (via another use of the disassembly concept of DECOAT). This is relevant for local 
workshops that want to offer repair services but also for a lar ge brand like VAUDE who already offers 
repair services . Finally, DECOAT triggerable material solutions will also be useful for other 
application areas where it is needed to separate materials for recycling. This is for example the case for 
coated plastic p arts in construction or for the composites sector, fueling also additional sectors like 
aeronautics and marine etc. For the latter, DECOAT solutions could be used to weaken the interface 
matrix-reinforcing fibres so that recycling becomes easier. Further, as mentioned before DECOAT 
solutions are also an opportunity to recycle the emerging smart textiles and plastics and wearables. 
ALL DECOAT partners will benefit from this exploitation beyond the initial DECOAT scope but it will be 
especially interesting for the research partners in the project (CTB, AIMPLAS, IVV, CTAG and NTUA) for 
whom this offers a way to exploit results beyond DECOAT.  
Key DECOAT result : novel recycling processes  based on combination of mechanical and chemical 
recycling with a triggerable material (
 KO4) and the linked automated sorting (
 KO3).   
For: (SME) players in the recycling industry, that are more and more emerging; established recyclers of 
plastics and companies that design and build turn-key recycling lines  
Impact: typically for common coated materials, only mechanical recycling is now economically feasible as 
full chemical recycling is not cost efficient. DECOAT (via partners IRIS and AIMPLAS) offers a way to 
upgrade existing mechanical processes by adding tools that requires limited investment, for activating 
the trigger and for automated sorting. Once DECOAT triggerable materials come on the market 
existing recycling lines will have to be upgraded for the sorting.  
Key DECOAT result: demonstration of circular use of the demo cases products (
 KO5).   
For: (i) DECOAT end -users PANASONIC, MBT  and VAUDE; (ii) manufacturers, and their suppliers, of 
coated textile and plastics based consumer goods, eg TIER 1 for automotive, textile manufacturing sector, 
coatings and paints industry, … Impact: For group (i) DECOAT will create direct business oppor tunities. 
Partner MAIER employs ca. 2400 people with a 300M€ turnover, and owns plants in Spain, Italy, the 
UK and Czech Republic . It is supplier of plastic components for the most important automotive OEMs 
(e.g. PSA Group, TOYOTA, AUDI, RENAULT, JAGUAR -Land Rover, GM, BMW, NISSAN, etc.). Being 
the first on the automotive market to offer DECOAT triggerable coating solutions is expected to give an 
important competitive edge that could relevantly boost ca. 20 -25% of the product portfolio. Partner 
PANASONIC is part of one of the largest brands all over the world and the Panasonic Eco Solutions 
Türkiye plant is one of the largest companies that produce on this scale in one place in Europe 
(100.000.000 pcs/year). PANASONIC employs more than 250.000 people all ove r the world. Panasonic 
Eco Solutions Türkiye focusses on the products that are mainly targeted in DECOAT, e.g. Power Switches 
and Sockets, Group Sockets, Fuse Boxes, Low Voltage Switchgear Products, Meters, Automated Meter 
Reading Systems, Building Automat ion Systems. DECOAT results are relevant for 15% of the product 
portfolio. Partner VAUDE ranks among Europe's leading outdoor brand names and employs over 500 
people in Germany. Its product portfolio comprises full range of outdoor gear: backpacks, shoes, tents, 
garments. The use of more sustainable and recyclable materials opens up commercial opportunities as 
being at the forefront there is a winning marketing argument. Goal is to integrate the technology as a start 
in a ‘coated backpack’ line, comprising ca 10.000 backpacks per year (average weight ca 1.5kg). This 
would be ideal to reach the larger public. Partner MBT , ca. 6000 employees, is one of the largest 
manufacturing companies in Turkey. Mercedes-Benz Türk is the country’s leading bus and truck exporter. 
Today 80 % of the buses produced by Mercedes -Benz Türk are exported to more than 70 countries, 
especially to Western Europe. DECOAT will bring MBT the important competitive and commercial 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 28 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
advantage of recycling know-how and possibility for procuremen t of cheaper (secondary) raw materials. 
MBT has turnover of ca. €3.3 billion, the share of the busses in it is ca. €520million, the share of the trucks 
is ca. €870million.  
For group (ii), the wider European community of manufacturers and users of coated p lastics and 
textiles, DECOAT will offer concrete examples that can be adopted to vastly extend the share of 
products (parts) that can be recycled in their own product portfolio. This will leverage the DECOAT 
impact as this wider community is large in EU: t otal plastics industry: ca €350 billion turnover (data from 
EUPC); textile & clothing sector: ca €170 billion turnover (data from EURATEX).   
Key DECOAT result: environmental, safety & economic assessment of triggerable material solutions 
(
 KO6, KO7).   
For: manufacturers faced with need to separate complex products  
Impact: ECOMAT, IRES and OSM will be able to use the gained expertise for offering consultancy 
services. Using the DECOAT tool (see Task 6.5), industrial partners will be able to channel the im pact 
assessment of the products to their life cycle scenario and respective business models.  
DECOAT business opportunities and market creation potential will lead to job creation : DECOAT 
results are relevant for ca. 3.5 million tons of waste worldwide (see section 2.1.1.3). As argued in part D2 
of the PEDR, DECOAT is well -geared to reach ca. 280kton (8% share, which will bring important 
opportunities all along the value chain. For calculating the opportunities we refer to part D2 and we assume 
that 1 full time job corresponds to €350k. This leads to the opportunity of installing the DECOAT recycling 
equipment (optical detection, MW equipment, Creasolv system), which is estimated in total at €35million. 
Although this is a one-time opportunity, the related post-installation services, maintenance and upgrades 
are expected at 20% of the initial installation cost, leading to a continuing turnover of ca €7million annually 
or ca 20 jobs. Further we have the market of triggerable additives: €20 million per year or ca. 60 jobs; the 
recycling of the coated parts: €140million per year or ca. 400 jobs. In total this means DECOAT has the 
potential to directly create ca. 500 direct jobs.   
DECOAT developments will contribute to the competitiveness of the European manufactu ring industry, 
which is an important employer, for example: automotive sector: ca. 3 million manufacturing jobs (EC 
data); textile & clothing sector: 1.7 million jobs (EURATEX data). It is calculated in part D2 of the PEDR 
that DECOAT materials and process  innovations will give a competitive edge to European 
companies active all along the coated textiles and plastics value chains that is relevant to a total 
turnover of ca. €1.7 billion, implying that DECOAT will help to secure ca 5.000 jobs.   
2.1.1.3 Demonstrate a potential reduction in landfill waste volume by > 50%  
DECOAT will lead to a decrease in landfilling by an estimated 75% as the largest fraction of coated 
parts (the bulk) will be re -used. Indeed, the coating itself does (in most applications ) not relevantly 
participate to the volume. Nevertheless, to account for potential damage at the coating interface, we 
assume a 5% loss of the bulk volume. Depending on the type of recycling used in combination with the 
trigger, it might be possible to recycle the coating material. However, here we assume the coating itself is 
not recuperated, so 5% volume remains landfilled. One further element to take into account is that the 
recycling process of the bulk itself will not be perfect. A fair estimate is to assume 80% efficiency. So, ca. 
75% of the volume of the initial coated waste can be recycled, see also the concrete case study in section 
2.1.4.  
This reduction is relevant for in total almost 3.5 million tons of coated plastic from cars, electrical 
and electronic equipment and coated textiles. This number is calculated based on the following 
data and estimates53:  
• Automotive parts: ca. 2.1 million tons of coated plastic come from end -of-life vehicles (ELV) 
per year. Motivation: 27 million cars are discarded every year 73, at 225 kg plastic per car (15% of 
average total car weight74) leads to ca. 6 million tons plastics ELV from cars of which ca. 35% is coated/ 
                                                
53 The estimate of the ‘coated’ fraction for the various sources is based on the best available knowledge of the (end-user) partners 
of the DECOAT consortium 73 Automotive Recycling. Devalued is now revalued’ Plastic Market watch. SPI (2016) 74 ‘Automotive 
The world moves with plastics". Plastic Europe (2013)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 29 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
painted. As these coated plastics are par t of the ASR of EoL vehicles, this fraction is mainly 
landfilled (see also section 1.4.2).   
• Heavy vehicles parts: ca. 800 ktons of coated plastics. Motivation: ca. 1 million heavy duty vehicles 
reach yearly the EoL stage in Europe54. Taking the average weight per vehicle (15 ton55) and 15% of 
plastics we have ca. 2250ktons plastic waste. We assume again that ca. 35% of these parts is coated/ 
painted.   
• Electronic goods: ca 200 ktons of painted plastic come from electronic goods ( (W)EEE = 
(waste) electrical and electronic equipment) per year. Motivation: ca. 3.45 million ton of WEEE is 
yearly collected (Eurostat 2015). On average, ca 20% is plastics 56. Further, we assume that ca. 30% 
is coated/painted, which leads to ca 200ktons.  
• Coated textiles: ca 350 ktons are wasted per year that could be recycled using DECOAT solutions. 
Motivation: the total market for coated textiles is ca. 1 million ton / year 57. The combined share of PU, 
acrylic and PVC (=DECOAT scope) is ca 70%. Furthermore, due to improved collection practices, we 
estimate that ca 50% of the products will be available for recycling (currently only 25%58 but increasing 
trend), which leads to ca. 350 ktons.   
2.1.1.4  Reduction of the carbon footprint of the corresponding products by > 30% (based on a full Life 
Cycle Assessment).  
The actual carbon footprint, and other relevant environmental parameters, will be calculated during 
DECOAT via a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). The study will include all life cycle stages as represented in 
the figure below, impacts of each of them shall be considered during the assessment. At this moment, we 
estimate the potential of the proposed technologies for carbon footprint reduction. To do so, we consider 
the first use of virgin materials in an open loop product system, wher e no changes occur in the 
inherent properties of the recycled material. Here, the “business as usual” baseline scenario 
comprises the assumed current End -of-Life (EoL) treatment (landfill and incineration), and the 
DECOAT scenario comprises recycling of th e bulk material from the products in their EoL . This 
recycling would allow to receive the “emission credits” due to avoided emissions during the virgin bulk 
material production that the recycled material is intended to replace (avoided burden approach). Th ese 
credits are deducted from the total impact of the product as a part of the EoL stage. In exchange, the 
impacts of the triggerable debonding process and the average composition of the coated parts to be 
recycled are also allocated to the product system.   
  
 
  
The emissions from logistics, use, andfill disposal and incineration are assumed to be equal for both EoL 
scenarios, and thus not included in the inventory for the current calculations. This and all other 
methodological choices will be further analysed and evaluated in dedicated sensitivity analyses during the 
execution of the full LCA. Thus, the total impact can be expressed as follows:  
                                                
54 M. Saidani et al. ‘Heavy vehicles on the road towards the circular economy: Analysis and comparison with the automotive industry’ Vol 135 
108-122 (2018).   
55 ‘Research on the Weight of Buses and Touring Coaches’, see: https://www.iru.org/sites/default/files/2016-01/en-nea-bus-2007.pdf   
56 Seyring et al. (2015). Study on WEEE recovery targets, preparation for re-use targets and method for calculation of the recovery targets  
57 MarketsAndMarkets report (2017)  
58 http://www.foeeurope.org   
  
Raw materials  
acquisition and  
processing for  
bulk material  
( 
Bm) and  
coating  
mat 
erial (Cm) 
  
Manufacturing  
of the product  
processing of  
( 
the bulk  
material and  
the coating  
Bpr+Cpr)  
  
Logistics 
  
EoL treatment  
including  
disposal and/or  
recycling  
( 
Erecycling)  
with Credits  
acquisition) 
  
Use 
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 30 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
TOTAL = Bm + Cm + Bpr + Cpr + EoL, where  
EoLavoidedburden = Erecycling – Credits  
However, the credits shall be calculated based on the impact of the primary production of bulk material 
and recycling efficiency. The formula was used to derive the generalized calculations on the potential 
of DECOAT to reduce environmental impacts of prod uct systems, as well as a case study of a 
coated PVC product was made to validate the general approach and make it tangible. Tables below 
show the results, including further assumptions for the generalized calculations.  
Baseline scenario:  
Intermediate   Calculation  Generali sed: CO2eq  Example PVC  
waste  CO2eq  
calculation  assumptions  value  unit  value  unit  
Virgin bulk 
material  
 Bm  Bm = 0.8*B  Bm comprises 80% of 
the material impact  
0,95  kg/kg  1,9  kgCO2/kg  
Material 
processing  
 Bpr  Bpr = 0.2*B  Bpr comprises 20% of 
the material impact  
0  kg/kg  0,38  kgCO2/kg  
Coating material   Cm  Cm = 0.5*C  Cm comprises 50% of 
the coating impact  
0,05  kg/kg  0,2  kgCO2/kg  
Coating 
processing  
 Cpr  Cpr = 0.5*C  Cpr comprises 50% of 
the coating impact  
0  kg/kg  0,25  kgCO2/kg  
Total Baseline   T = 
Bm+Bpr+Cm+Cpr  
T=B+C    1  kg/kg  2,73  kgCO2/kg  
DECOAT scenario:  
Intermediate  Calculation  Generalised: CO2eq  Example PVC  
waste  CO2eq  
calculation  assumptions  value  unit  value  unit  
Virgin bulk material  Bm  Bm = 0.8*B    0,95  kg/kg  1,9  kgCO2/kg  
Material processing  Bpr  Bpr = 0.2*B    0  kg/kg  0,38  kgCO2/kg  
Coating material  Cm  Cm = 0.5*C    0,05  kg/kg  0,2  kgCO2/kg  
Coating processing  Cpr  Cpr = 0.5*C    0  kg/kg  0,25  kgCO2/kg  
DECOAT debonding  
(Erecycling)  
R  R = Cpr = 0.5*C    0  kg/kg  0,25  kgCO2/kg  
Bulk material 
recovering 
efficiency  
EffBm  EffBm     80  %  80  %  
Coating material 
recovering 
efficiency  
EffCm  EffCm = 0  Pessimistic 
assumption, no coating 
material recovery  
0  %  0  %  
Recovering bulk 
material (Credits)  
Bmrec =   
Bm*EffBm  
Bmrec =   
0.8*B*EffBm  
   0,76  kg/kg  1,52  kgCO2/kg  
Recovering coating 
material (Credits)  
Cmrec =   
Cm*EffCm  
Cmrec = 0     0  kg/kg  0  kgCO2/kg  
Total DECOAT  Trec =  
Bm+Bpr+Cm+Cpr + 
R – Bmrec - Cmrec  
Trec = B+1.5*C -  
EffBm*0,8*B   
    0,24  kg/kg  1,46  kgCO2/kg  
Environmental impact reduction in two scenarios:  
Intermediate  Calculation  Generalised: CO2eq  Example PVC  
waste  CO2eq  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 31 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
 calculation  assumption  value  unit  value  unit  
Total Baseline  T  T=B+C     1  kg/kg  2,73  kgCO2/kg  
Total DECOAT  Trec  Trec = B+1.5*C - EffBm*0,8*B       0,24  kg/kg  1,46  kgCO2/kg  
Footprint reduction  
(ΔEOL)  
Tred = Trec – T  Tred = 0.5*C - 0.8*B*EffBm    -0,76  kg/kg  -1,27  kgCO2/kg  
DECOAT impact   
(relative reduction)  
Trel=-Tred/T  Trel=EffB*80%(B/T) – 50%(1-   
B/T)  
 76,0  %  46,5  %  
  
On the generalized level, the relative reduction of 
environmental impacts due to DECOAT introduction can be 
expressed as a function of the bulk material recovery 
efficiency (recycling rate), and a contribution of bulk material 
to the total product’s enviro nmental impact. The distribution 
of relative reduction values dependent on the two parameters 
is presented in the graph on the right.  
With the assumptions made about the contribution of the bulk 
material into the total environmental impact of the product 
(80%) it is necessary then to keep the recycling rate 
(efficiency of recycling) above 62.5%. However, for the target 
applications, the B/T ratio if not expected to in the lower 
ranges, and the recycling rate is expected to be designed 
above 95%. Thus, the products’ performance will realistically 
always be in area on right upper side of dashed line, i.e. we will comply with and even outperform this 
expected impact.  Additional benefits that were not included would further reduce the environmental 
impact during waste handling i.e. the reduced emissions that result from not incinerating or landfilling the 
materials, and possible recycling of the coating material.  
Under current circumstances, the production of 1kg of coated PVC results in 2.73 kgCO2/kg virgin material. 
The DECOAT process would cut the carbon emission by 46%  (1.46 kgCO2/kg virgin material), 
assuming that the DECOAT process has a material recovery efficien cy EffB of 80% (this reflects a 20% 
loss due to processing energy and lost base material during processing). This also means the DECOAT 
process would result in a 76% reduction in waste generation (80% efficiency results in 0.76 kg virgin 
material recovered per kg virgin material input into the system). These initial outcomes of the case study 
show that DECOAT expected impacts exceed the desired 30% reduction in carbon footprint and 
also the 50% reduction of landfilling (see section 2.1.3).   
  
2.1.2 Improving innovation capacity and market creating potential  
Innovation capacity comprises the internal ability to respond to external opportunities with an 
innovative solution that leads to profitable business. DECOAT claims to significantly increase the 
innovation capacity in the coatings, adhesives and paintings sector and the related value chain 
(material suppliers, end users) by  combining two external opportunities: (i) the global need for 
recyclable coated parts (= market pull) and (ii) the large(r) scale a nd low(er) cost availability of 
smart multifunctional additives such as nano- and microparticles (carbon-based among others) (= 
technology push). DECOAT developments and results aim at capitalising these challenges, both from 
pure technical standpoint as from supporting activities (standardisation, LCA, benchmarking) as described 
below.   
DECOAT will  boost the innovation capacity of the debonding technology providing partners 
(RESCOLL, DEVAN, CTECH, IRIS, MAIER) by demonstrating the advantages of their materials and 
processes for different use cases for VAUDE, PANASONIC, MBT and MAIER. A direct advantage for 
the end -users will be the reduced cost for sourcing material as the cost of recycled material (at ca. 
€500/ton, see section 2.1.1.1) will be lower as virgin ones.   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 32 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
An important aspect for the improved innovation capacity for these technology providers, mainly SMEs, is 
that the DECOAT partners with high visibility and brand ownership (VAUDE, PANASONIC and MBT) 
will support these technology providers in getting the DECOAT solutions into the market. Such flagship 
early adopters are important to realise the innovation potential (e.g. for market pull effect and ‘enforcing’ 
their suppliers to use DECOAT technology, guarantee for re-use of recycled materials, marketing efforts) 
from which DECOAT will form the basis. The end use cases are summarised in the table below.  
The goal is that by the end of DECOAT exploitation agreements will be signed among DECOAT 
partners for the further development of the results. Given the expectation that full market readiness of 
the DECOAT developments will still take some extra investments, this will be important to set the follow -
up actions to get to a higher TRL level towards a successful market deployment of DECOAT results on 
medium to long term.  
 DECOAT use cases   
  Use case  Recycling drive & 
challenge  
Estimated impact  
VAUDE  
Water-tight bike bag  
  
Fabric material: PES, TPU 
coating  
Ca 28%-72% substrate-
coating(!)  
Weight fabric: ca 700g/m2 
Currently no solution to 
recycle these coated fabrics, 
also not of the production 
waste (bag produced in 
Germany).  
Case relevant for all PU 
coated fabrics (of VAUDE)  
Typical outdoor gear 
consumer is very 
environmentally 
minded. VAUDE 
wants recyclable 
products as a world 
first for its clients.   
VAUDE already has a  
strict policy on 
corporate social 
responsibility and  
also has its internal  
‘Green Shape  
Standard’59  
Quantities of a typical 
product line are ca. 
10.000 pieces/year, 
resulting in approximately 
30t/year. DECOAT 
technology relevant for 
several product lines: 
bike bag, several 
backpacks, rain coats,…  
VAUDE manufactured in 
total over 2.5 million 
products in 2016, total 
turnover ca.  
€ 100 mio. DECOAT 
relevant on mid-term 
for ca 35% of turnover.  
PANASONIC -   
Switches & sockets  
  
PC, ABS and PC-ABS as 
substrate materials. Three 
types of ‘coatings’: (i) Foil 
Print with alu foil (ca 50µm); 
(ii) Chrome coating via 
dipping (primer of copper, 
chrome top layer); (iii) 
Painted layer, based on 
styrene-acrylic emulsion (ca 
15µm)  
PANASONIC wants to  
produce a ‘green line’ 
of products that are 
fully environ-mentally 
friendly without 
compromising on the 
aesthetics.  
PANASONIC produces 
ca 60 tons of coated 
plastic switches, sockets 
and other coated 
electronics parts.  
DECOAT approach  
expected to be 
integrated in ca 80% of 
them within 5 years after 
project end  
MBT - Cockpit part  Substrate material is a 
polyurethane (PUR) foam.  
Coating is an ABS foil.  
ABS foil mechanical 
recycling and   
PUR chemical recycling  
Both parts are 
currently not 
recyclable.   
Up to now, no 
regulation for ELV in 
case of buses and 
trucks. MBT wants to 
be pro-active and 
MBT manufactures 
yearly ca 4000 busses. 
Plastic parts make up ca 
15% of the weight. 
Expectation is to have at 
least 50% of coated 
parts using DECOAT 
solutions.   
                                                
59 http://csr-report.vaude.com/gri-en/product/greenshape-concept.php   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 33 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
engage in increased 
recycling  
MAIER – exterior 
automotive part: Rear 
door garnish  
 
  
Material: ABS  
Minimum-Maximum process 
temperature: 210-250ºC  
Size: 
900mmx200mmx50mm  
Total weight: 400 gr (2% 
coating) Coating thickness: 
ca. 50 µm vs thickness of 
the plastic 2 mm Coating: 
PUR (acrylate), 
primer+Colour+Clearcoat  
MAIER wants to 
validate a coating for 
automotive sector 
that can be easily 
debonded from the 
plastic substrate. 
This will make 
decorated 
components easier 
to recycle so the 
materials can be 
reused for the very 
same applications, 
which is currently 
impossible because 
even the smallest 
amount of impurities 
produce surface 
defects on 
aesthetical parts.  
For each part, expected 
sales are typically ca. 
200.000 pieces.   
Expectation: 3-4 parts 
can integrate DECOAT 
technology  
within 5 years after the 
project, corresponding 
turnover in the range of € 
5mio.   
Turnover of MAIER is 
expected to reach 
€385mio in 2018, a 
strong growth up from 
€296mio in 2016. On 
longer term, DECOAT 
results are relevant for up 
to 20% of MAIER 
turnover, corresponding 
to roughly €90100mio, 
taking into account the 
expected continued 
growth.  
MAIER – interior 
automotive part: Fascia  
 
Material: ABS/PC 
Min. and max. 
process 
temperature: 210-
250ºC Size: 
230x280x80 mm  
Total weight: 200 gr (1,5% 
coating)  
Coating thickness: ca 30 
µm vs thickness of plastic 2 
mm Coating materials: 
thermoset PU (acrylates). 
One layer. Colour.  
  
The market creating potential of DECOAT stems from the systemic innovation of making coated 
textile and plastic parts recyclable. This means novel markets for triggerable additives (for partners 
RESCOLL and DEVAN), for optical monitoring systems (IRIS) and  for the recycling systems 
(CTECH). This implies that on medium to long term a new novel value chain will be created for recycling 
of coated parts, building on initial DECOAT developments.  
Waste 
stream  
Production waste  EoL waste  
Coated  
textiles  
(roles of) fabrics , 
scraps  
→ Directly 
processable  
Textile-based 
products,  → Need 
removal of 
accessories   
(buttons, zippers,…)   
Crucial: collection 
logistics  
Consumer  
electronics  
individual parts / 
halffinished products 
at OEM →Directly 
Full products → 
Need 
shredding/ 
disassembly   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 34 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
For realising the DECOAT impact, a 
crucial part is that waste streams 
with triggerable coatings have to be 
made available in suitable form and 
in sufficient amounts . There are two 
main inputs: production waste and EoL 
post-consumer waste. We have 3 
streams to consider: coated textiles, 
consumer electronics components and 
automotive (see table with overview).   
For production waste, there should 
be no issues: triggerable coated items should be collected separately , which is no problem as 
manufacturing companies have now already several separate waste types they collect. Logically, it will 
take some years before sufficient products with DECOAT-based technology reaches the EoL stage. 
The  
real strength of the DECOAT technologies is exactly that it is also suite d for EoL because the triggerable 
coated waste can be detected and thus processed separately.   
We illustrate the case of coated outdoor textile products . On short term, partner VAUDE will offer 
its clients the option to send back its EoL products that include DECOAT technology. That way, items 
will be grouped together and can be recycled. On medium term, collectors of EoL textile (like group De 
Boer Recycling Group – ASG member) will have to install the optical detection equipment for triggerable 
coatings and thus separate this waste stream. Then, they can send it to recyclers (transitional phase) or 
recycle it themselves (longer term). This will require them to extend their current recycling equipment with 
equipment based on the DECOAT recycling plant.   
Also for the recycling of coated electronics parts, an extension of the current waste processing 
equipment to separate triggerable coatings and to channel that fraction to DECOAT recycling lines. 
This will be implemented by players like REMONDIS (member of DECOAT ASG). Full recyclability of its 
products will be a competitive advantage for PANASONIC.   
For the automotive parts, the situation is more complex and DECOAT has to rely on supporting 
developments in vehicle disassembly . Indeed, currently only a smal l fraction of the vehicles is 
dismantled, only hazardous components or very valuable ones. The rest is all together shredded and 
separated. Focus in that process is on the recycling of metals, the rest is called the ASR or automotive 
shredder residue (see also 1.4.2) and is a highly mixed stream, containing also (some) shredded coated 
scrap. To avoid low yield and need to separate shredded fractions of very mixed composition, our recycling 
technology should be fed with disassembled coated vehicle parts. Although the latter is not evident at the 
moment, there are good foresights that this will be the case in the future. DECOAT will help partner 
MAIER to be prepared for this novel market situation. Furthermore, DECOAT will seek synergies with 
the project Multi Cycle, just approved in the SPIRE10 call, coordinated by IRIS and counting several 
partners in common, where similar challenges will be faced in terms of identifying and dismantling specific 
(in that case composite) parts prior to recycling. For support in  this matter, we have included car 
dismantling company GBP in the ASG.  
Furthermore, an ongoing development is the robotic disassembly of cars driven by the need for a 
more thorough car disassembly, especially with the growing share of electrical vehicles 60. In fact, the 
fraction of metal is decreasing in cars, so there is a need to recycle more of the other fractions to keep 
with the increasingly stringent ELV directives. The latter is often only feasible if the (valuable) parts are 
dismantled beforehand. Manual dismantling is not evident, therefore efforts are ongoing for robotisation, 
focus on removing electronics parts. Such logical development in sustainable manufacturing and 
                                                
60 
http://www.centreforsmart.co.uk/system/publications/attachments/000/000/183/original/Robotic_disassmbly_for_increased_recovery_of
_strategically_important_materials_fro m_electrical_vehicles_04102017.pdf (2017).   
processable / some 
disassembly  
Already commonly 
collected  
Automotive 
parts  
individual parts at Tier 
1 →Directly 
processable  
Car parts & ASR  
→ Need disassembly  
Crucial: improve logistics 
for high(er) degree of 
disassembly of target 
valuable parts  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 35 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
production will support the acceptance of new processes that could be needed fo r DECOAT products’ 
EoL.   
A special case is formed by HDOR (Heavy Duty and Off Road vehicles), which includes busses and 
trucks. There, disassembly and remanufacture is already more installed than for standard (light) vehicles. 
For example, more than 93% o f all the materials in a standard DAF truck can now be reused and the 
plastic parts of a DAF truck can easily be separated during dismantling75. DECOAT results will help 
partner MBT who is specialized in bus manufacturing, and via the mother company DAIMLER also 
in trucks, in working further in this direction.  
Europe has a leading position in high quality, engineered items like coated textiles and plastics . 
Next to the actual DECOAT partners, we want to make the wider European textiles, plastics and coatin g 
and adhesives industry aware of the novel possibilities offered by the triggerable coatings and debonding 
and helping them to make the transition. For easing this transition, DECOAT will develop the eco -design 
tool, which means that the service providing SME partners IRES and ECOMAT will get a chance to boost 
their activities. Consultancy will also be given by the DECOAT RTD partners (CTB - textiles, AIMPLAS –
plastics & recycling sector, IVV, CTAG- automotive and NTUA – microcaps, nanomaterials). For example, 
AIMPLAS will be well-placed to offer engineering and consultancy to recycling companies wanting to adopt 
DECOAT technologies, via upgrading their current recycling facilities, or via building new ones. We will 
prepare the EU industry to switch to the next generation of coatings that can debond on demand and help 
them to implement this all along the value chain. We will give the European textiles, plastics, coatings 
and recycling sectors an important and lasting competitive advantage via triggered debon ding 
solutions.   
We will specifically engage in close collaboration with other related projects (such as MULTICYCLE, 
see also above and Task 7.5) and look into common publications/events to  raise awareness towards 
relevant target groups on the emerging recycling possibilities for coated textiles and plastics.   
2.1.3 Environmental and social impact – policy framework  
Environmental impact of DECOAT is tapping into the sustainable development policies of the EU, which 
is committed to a ‘high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment’ (Article 3 of 
the Treaty on European Union). As it has been shown in section 2.1.1.4, the suggestions of the DECOAT 
project can facilitate reduction of greenhouse gases emissions and amount of the generated waste to be 
landfilled or incinerated. The potential for waste generation reduction is ca.  
2.1 million tons for automotive parts, ca 200 kilotons for electronic goods, and ca 175 kilotons for 
coated textiles. That refers to including these amounts of the recycled material to the material recovery 
level of the waste management pyramid compared to the lower levels of energy recovery and landfillin g. 
This is especially relevant in view of the current EU waste policies and regulations (see 2.1.4, including an 
overall trend for developing circularity and for landfilling ban in some European countries (such as 
presumed by Austrian and German Landfilling Ordinances). Moreover, the estimated amounts of material 
recovery have a very large GHG emissions reduction potential. Under Article 191 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union, combating climate change is an explicit objective of EU environmental 
policy. Under this goal, EU is pursuing the targets of reducing GHG emissions by 40% by 2030 and by 
80% by 205061. This significant contribution to reducing global warming potential of manufacturing activities 
in Europe could be also complimented by the reduction of the GHG emissions coming from the incineration 
or landfilling of the coated parts and materials. Such for example, the avoided emissions from coated 
plastics recycling (assuming PVC reduction potential for all coated plastics) could be e stimated equal to 
175*1.27=222tons CO2eq.  
A recent study conducted by Material Economics62, shows how circular business models, re-circulation of 
materials and greater material efficiency of products are the keys to build a competitive industrial economy 
with zero net emissions in Europe. All these keys are being addressed by DECOAT. To achieve this 
objective, three types of circular strategies  associated to each other have been envisaged to reduce 
                                                
61 https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2050_en  
62 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 36 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
EU industrial emissions: (i) the reuse of different materia ls, (ii) the reduction of the amount of materials 
that are discarded in the manufacturing or construction process, (iii) the creation of new business models 
that reinvent the way we provide services and goods. In practice, these broad strategies translate into a 
wide range of measures: changes in product design and materials choice, improved technology, 
modernized value chains, etc. The benefits of circular approaches are strengthened by the fact that 
many of these measures are complementary and that many o f these abatement opportunities are 
economically attractive. A more circular economy would have many other benefits as well, such as 
reduced geopolitical risks, local job creation, lower air pollution, and reduced water use.  
Social impact  of DECOAT is bas ed on the reduction of waste generation and of the system carbon 
emissions into human health and general well -being improvements. Basic regulations regarding H&S 
issues include arrangements for implementing the health and safety measures, identified by the  risk 
assessment, set up emergency procedures, provide clear information and training to employees. 
Moreover, recycling initiatives and businesses based on technical solutions and business models 
suggested by DECOAT will increase GDPs and create work place s (respective to the EU policies in 
employment and labour market) and stimulating local economies (Small business Act). The suggested 
DECOAT recycling schemes have a high potential to tap into the EU Social Economy framework (Social 
Business Initiative, Social Innovation policy making, Single Markets Acts 1 and 2). Additionally, the GHG 
emissions reduction due to the implementation of DECOAT solutions has a potential to avoid otherwise 
necessary measures for climate change adaptation, including in local com munities and groups with high 
vulnerability.  
DECOAT results will help to achieve several European policies,  in waste reduction, climate change 
action and mitigation, and social impact (see also section 2.1.1). DECOAT also fits in the Circular 
Economy Package consisting of an EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy that establishes a concrete 
and ambitious programme of action, with measures covering the whole cycle: from production and 
consumption to waste management and the market for secondary raw materia ls. The DECOAT 
developments on automated sorting fit the EU strategy for digitisation the manufacturing industry.  
2.1.4 External conditions influencing the expected impact  
Current low market demand for recycled plastics , which is limited to 6% of plasti cs demand in 
Europe is discouraging private investments in recycling capacities . In the EU, uptake of recycled 
plastics in new products is low and often remains limited to low -value or niche applications. One of the 
reasons for the low use of recycled plastics is the misgivings of many product brands and manufacturers, 
who fear that recycled plastics will not meet their needs for a reliable, high-volume supply of materials with 
constant quality specifications. The European Commission will promote the develo pment of 
international standards to boost industry confidence in the quality of recyclable or recycled 
plastics. It will also explore more targeted sectoral interventions in key sectors with high potential 
like packaging, construction and automotive.   
Legislation and regulations on recycling, re -use and waste form important drivers, potentially 
further enhanced by public procurement. There are several European directives on these issues that 
directly affect the production methods and materials choice of electronics consumer goods and cars. For 
the DECOAT sectors, following directives are crucial:   
• Waste Framework Directive (Directive 2008/98/EC) aims for a European recycling society with a high 
level of resource efficiency by increasing re-use and recycling of waste from households to a minimum 
of overall 50 % by weight by 2020.  
• Waste Directive – Electrical and Electronic Equipment (Directive 2012/19/EU). Waste of electrical and 
electronic equipment (WEEE); eg computers, TV-sets and fridges is a fast growi ng waste streams in 
the EU, expected to grow to more than 12 million tonnes by 2020. Overall aim is to recycle at least 
85% of electrical and electronics waste equipment by 2016 in EU.  
• European Directive 2005/64/EC on the type-approval of motor vehicles with regard to their reusability, 
recyclability and recoverability) state that 85 % of the mass of the vehicles included in the M1 and N1 
categories (passenger cars and pickup trucks) must be recyclable/reusable.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 37 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
• With respect to heavy duty vehicles, including busses and trucks, there are currently no End-of-life 
regulations that impose mandatory recycling and/or recovery targets75.  
These directives (or the lack of) pose challenges (and opportunities) for the autom otive and consumer 
goods sector. The DECOAT developments will help PANASONIC, MBT and MAIER to use renewable 
materials in (parts of) their products, thus working towards the directives.  
The Circular Economy Action Plan 63 aims at improving the uptake of secondary raw materials . 
DECOAT exactly aims for this by overcoming existing barriers for coated plastics material . 
DECOAT goal is to enable recycling and thus re-use of raw materials used for making coated parts. Thus, 
DECOAT is in  line with the 7th Environment Action Programme 85 and with the recently published  
‘Roadmap to Resource efficient Europe64’ which aims at promoting waste recycling and re-use. In the 
context of ongoing and upcoming evaluations of EU rules on construction pro ducts and on end -of-life 
vehicles, the EC will look into specific ways of promoting this. In the context of future work on the Packaging 
and Packaging Waste Directive, thought will also be given to using economic instruments to reward the 
use of recycled content in the packaging sector. Finally, the Commission will work on integrating recycled 
content in Green Public Procurement criteria (European Commission, 2018).  
Generally, these directives and other (national, regional) legislation can have a strong po sitive influence 
on market opportunities for use of recycling content. As an example that will be applied to other sectors: 
As a result of the implementation of the Plastic Bags Directive (Directive (EU) 2015/720) some EU Member 
States have already started to set requirements for the uptake of recycled content in plastic carrier bags. 
For instance, the Spanish Royal Decree 293/2018 establishes that from 1 January 2020 plastic carrier 
bags with a foil thickness larger than or equal to 50 µm shall be made from at least 50 % recycled plastic.  
This shows that DECOAT will place the participating companies in pole position for when the 
(legislation enforced) need for more use of recycled material becomes even higher.  
Evolving recycling landscape  
However large the need and however impressive the targets, today only 6% of new plastic materials 
used stems from recycling 65. Also within textile industry the use of recycled material is limited: for 
clothing only about 1% is closed loop, ca 12% cascade recycling 3. A gre at deal of work is underway to 
improve this (also via European projects), focussing on technical, economic and logistics aspects. As a 
result, we assume in the near future well-established networks throughout Europe where waste is 
collected and brought to local recycling facilities.  
Current recycling schemes for plastics from WEEE and ELV treatment rely mainly on post shredder 
treatment approaches since only large scale products are subjected to manual dismantling due to 
economic reasons. Coated products of concern in the DECOAT project might be too small (e.g. switches) 
or too inaccessible (e.g. dashboards) for manual dismantling. Thus, identification of coated plastics in 
plastic shred by automated detection systems will be key for future access to coated  plastics. DECOAT 
will therefore investigate optical identification tools for coated items to be implemented in 
sophisticated WEEE or ELV sorting technologies (WP3). This technology will ensure the future 
access to EoL products containing DECOAT ready-to-recycling coating systems.   
Textiles and especially complex textiles as backpacks are not recovered in specific waste streams and 
currently end up in landfills (if allowed) or incineration plants. However, the high durability of such products 
qualifies them for an EoL treatment by re-use or repair companies. Such entities are intended to be future 
sources of complex EoL textile waste such as the ones addressed in the DECOAT framework and which 
will be investigated in detail.   
Reluctance of adopting recycled materials in the industry because of specific processing needs, 
lower performance and/or early negative experiences. Several companies did already first trials with 
recycled materials and experienced difficulties in their processing, e.g. on reproducible quality levels or in 
processing. These first negative experiences, even if not valid anymore with the current materials, often 
remain and keep people biased towards further trials with recycled materials. The DECOAT technology 
                                                
63 European Commission: Circular economy Action Plan – 
closing the loop 85 European Union: Seventh Environment 
Action Programme   
64 European Commission: Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe.   
65 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/plastics-factsheet-industry_en.pdf   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 38 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
providers are aware of this perception and counteracting on it will be a key part of the message brought 
during dissemination. One way to promote the DECOAT technology and the recycled material will be via 
the public ecodesign tool, see Task 7.5.  
Cost of novel solutions and cost for recycling process/recycled materials  
DECOAT solutions will mean that the coatings will be more expensive at initial production phase (ca 10 -
15% as rough estimate). This is often rather small fraction of the total cost of the product, eg the bike bags. 
Further, gain will come because of less waste, ability to reuse materials. Therefore, rely on the emerging 
new business models and schemes like EPR – Extended Producer Responsibility, increase cost for waste 
disposal, etc.  
General economic situation . The au tomotive and household appliances sectors are cyclic sectors, 
implying that they strongly depend on the general economic situation. This can influence the sales 
foresights, especially for MAIER, MBT and PANASONIC. Currently, economic conditions in the US a nd 
Europe are high but in the future a higher market fragmentation for the industry due to the emerging 
economies is coming into play, making innovations even more important. Companies driven by innovation 
in the area of circular/recycling will beyond doubt benefit and maintain market share. Therefore the coated 
parts recycling solutions offered by DECOAT will help to become more resilient against economic 
fluctuations.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact  
(a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
To ensure successful exploitation of the DECOAT results, dissemination and exploitation activities will 
run in parallel with the project implementation . Integrity and consistency of all dissemination and 
exploitation efforts will be supervised by the Exploitation and Innovation Manager (OSM, see also section 
3.2.1.1b). The strategy for these activities is as follows:  
• Dissemination: all partners will collaborate in dissemination of results among the relevant industry 
sectors;  
• Exploitation: industrial take-up of the materials and related processes developed in DECOAT plays a 
central part: each partner will be involved in defining a preliminary business plan for its key exploitable 
results (KER).  
WP7 includes tasks dedicated to the dissemination and exploitation of the project achievements. 
The Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of Results (PEDR) will be completed at the start of the 
project (preliminary version of D7.2, see WP7), improved and evaluated through the duration of the project. 
It will ensure that all project partners have a joint understanding of dissemination and exploitation 
and which knowledge protection measures will have to be taken.   
The draft PEDR  
The draft PEDR presented in this section will be further elaborated from the start of DECOAT and regularly 
assessed and adapted to the actual evolution of the project, see the related (incremental versions of) 
deliverables that will be delivered in WP7. We will also follow and implement as much as possible the 
guidelines as recently published by the EC on social media:  
‘Social media guide for EU funded R&I projects’66.  
A. Target audience and message for a complex network of stakeholders.  
Disseminating project results at working groups and strategic committees beyond the consortium will take 
place. We will address the following groups of stakeholders to maximise the impact: 
plastic/textiles/coatings converters, end users, waste managers, recyclers (to generate a push/pull effect 
across the value chain) but also policy makers and the wide public (to promote the EoL products’ collection 
and promote innovative public procurement for DECOAT solutions).  
B. Channels for dissemination: from public online to interpersonal face-to-face 
interaction.  
                                                
66 http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/other/grants_manual/amga/soc-med-guide_en.pdf  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 39 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Dissemination will be based on three  major channels: (i) Online dissemination – website and social 
media, webinars, electronic newsletters, and digital press releases; (ii) Offline dissemination - classical 
vehicles of knowledge transfer like project workshops, publications, conferences and trade fairs, printed 
factsheets and flyers; (iii) personal direct dissemination via the formal and informal (personal) networks 
of DECOAT partners. A list of key dissemination channels specific for each partner has been 
collected (see the partner descriptions in section 4.1).  
C. Preliminary overview of dissemination actions: continuous actions and dedicated 
campaigns.  
To disseminate as efficiently as possible (in terms of reach and cost), two main pillars are defined: (i) 
continuous dissemination relying on existing events and means and (ii) organising dedicated DECOAT 
dissemination campaigns and events.   
(i) Continuous dissemination.   
Goal: Raise awareness and interest, ensure that ‘external stakeholders’ remain aware of DECOAT, keep 
them committed and ens ure they can follow the project progress. Creating opportunities for direct 
interaction with interested stakeholders, regular newsletter for sharing project news and announcing 
conferences/events. Continuous activities also include: updating project inform ation on the DECOAT 
website and on social media platforms, distributing leaflets,… Thereby using the materials and channels 
established in DC1 (see below).  
Audience: with this regular stream we want to reach as wide a public as possible, including key 
stakeholders and also the wider public, depending on the content.   
Key message: broadcast of smaller news items, updates, events, … but also more extended updates on 
the progress of the value chain demonstration that will be implemented in DECOAT.  
Organisation: ISWA as WP7 leader will coordinate. Dissemination material will be collected from ALL 
PARTNERS and a schedule will be set-up to efficiently organise the dissemination, leveraging synergies 
and avoiding any possible overlaps.  
(ii) Dedicated DECOAT Dissemination Campaigns (DC)  
Goal: the Dissemination Campaigns (DC) will give a boost to DECOAT’s dissemination efforts at crucial 
times in the project schedule. The goal is not to depend on external events to be able to promote the 
project but to proactively choose our own stages and adequate timing. This requires the ability to garner 
the attention of and create impact with a significant number of relevant stakeholders, and the consortium 
is confident to be able to create this momentum for its camp aigns given the ASG and the associations 
within or closely associated with the consortium and the extensive existing dissemination channels. 
Because the dedicated Dissemination Campaigns (DC) form the key element of the activities, they are 
described separately below.   
DC1 – create awareness. Goal: to create awareness for and stimulate interest in DECOAT based on the 
ambitious goals, innovative nature, commercial and sustainability potential, and the diversity and 
reputation of the consortium members.  Target audience: ASG, materials researchers, potential end-users, 
the coating community, the general public, policy makers, in short: very wide and covering all actual and 
potential target audiences.   
Activities: the dissemination activities will start im mediately through a press release linked to the kick off 
meeting. Further key activities are performed through the setting up of the DECOAT project website and 
having first dissemination material available (e.g. DECOAT leaflet -digital and print), all following a distinct 
project visual identity. Furthermore, the consortium will make extensive use of consortium partners’ 
dedicated professional social media channels, especially LinkedIn and Twitter.  When: by Month 4 - 
Responsible partner: ISWA and CTB (as coordinator)  
DC2 – call for collaboration. Goal: Call for collaboration to continue and expand on DECOAT results that 
need external partners or licensee to be exploited, i.e. results stemming from WP1 -WP4 that can be 
applied outside the use cases of WP5.  Target audience: ASG, innovators/entrepreneurs, large enterprises 
with own R&D, innovative SMEs, related current and future projects, coating/plastic converters, recyclers, 
waste management bodies, product designers and developers.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 40 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Activities: public even ts organized by DECOAT, compilation of a white paper on DECOAT coating 
debonding solutions.   
When: max 4 months after MS5 (M30 - end of main development work in WP1 -4) is reached (M34) - 
Responsible partner: CTB  
DC3 – promotion of DECOAT results . Goal: Promotion of project results (focus on new solutions for 
recycling of coated parts) to pave the way for their further development, exploitation and 
commercialisation.   
Target audience : materials and coating community, current and future research consortia,  
innovators/entrepreneurs, plastics converters, textile industry, end users, policy makers, standardisation 
bodies and regulators, general public.  
Activities: press releases, publication of peer-reviewed and other articles with the goal of promoting project 
results with a clear focus on the use cases. Dissemination via selected conferences and own DECOAT 
events. Storytelling as format for presenting the prototype cases, highlighting the promising role of the 
novel DECOAT solutions. By specifically targeting end users, investors and policy makers, DC3 will pave 
the way for their adoption, commercialisation, and further development.  
When: by M45 - Responsible partner: ISWA  
An overview of dissemination actions in given in the table further below (pag 32) . In section 4, for 
each partner its specific dissemination channels, like conferences, networks,… are listed.  
D. Exploitation activities: identification of results, outline of potential and steps to bring 
to market  
D1 Identification of key results  
The table below (pag. 34) shows the overview of the Key Exploitable Results integrated along 
our partner’s value chain and initial exploitation also in link with previously discussed 
dissemination steps. The results most suited for direct industrial exploitati on are further elaborated 
in part D3 – Steps to market and preliminary business plans below.   
D2 Outlining of the potential market  
Plastic Recycling and recycled plastic market: The global plastic recycling market has been gaining a 
steady momentum over the past few years due to the related directives and growing awareness about 
CO2 emissions and the need to reduce them. This, together with the overflowing state of landfills has also 
triggered an urgent need for recycling plastic instead of producing virg in material. The global plastic 
recycling market, valued at €25 bn in 2015 (of which only €2 Bn in EU67), is expected to reach a figure of 
€45 bn by 2024. During the forecast period of 2016 and 2024, the global market is expected to grow at 
a CAGR of 6.9% . Steady growth is expected in the global market due to ever more stringent laws and 
increasing environmental awareness, especially in EU. In 2012, out of the 25.2Mt of plastics collected for 
recycling, 6.6 Mt were recycled in EU and 8.9 Mt were incinerated. Incineration is massively used, with for 
example 38.8% of plastic packaging waste68. Currently, according to the Plastic Recyclers Europe, 1000 
companies are operating with 30.000 employees and a 3Mt installed capacity. Currently, the European 
installed pl astic recycling capacity is practically being fully used and mostly focused on 
packaging, indicating the huge potential for new investments for and adopting new (more) efficient 
technologies, provided they are proved economical viable.  
We calculate that D ECOAT solutions address ca 3.5 million tons of coated waste material (see section 
2.1.1.3). For calculating our direct impact, we assume that we reach on longer term 8% of the potential 
market, i.e. ca 280ktons. This means that DECOAT can improve the competitiveness and innovation 
capacity for a market segment of ca €1.7billion  (assuming on average a commercial value of ca 
€6000/ton for these coated materials). For reaching a market share of 8%  we count on the market 
pulling effect of the ‘brand owners’ in DECOAT  (Daimler group via MBT, PANASONIC and VAUDE) 
and on the ASG members, especially on the leveraging effect of the industrial associations and networks. 
These will help to motivate companies outside DECOAT to adopt our technology. A natural entry to the 
                                                
67 Coltelli M.B., Aglietto M., Riutilizzo dei materiali polimeri, Edizioni Nuova Cultura, 2015   
68 Plastics Europe, association of plastics manufacturers : Plastics, the facts 2017  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 41 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
market will be addressing production waste . Nowadays at industrial level ca. 10-12% of the freshly 
produced coated parts are considered production waste  because of the combination of complex 
coating/painting processes and very high -quality standards, especially in automotive, electric electronic 
and transport industry. These parts cannot be reused because they are ‘contaminated’ with the coating 
material. They can be sold at less than €100/ton for very low added value applications or, even worse, be 
discarded of for land-fill or thermal recovery. This is an important loss factor because the commercial value 
of the parts is estimated at ca. €6000/ton. Estimating the actual material value is diff icult as the coated 
parts concerns both expensive engineered polymers as well as less valuable materials. On average, we 
estimate their value here at €2000/ton. Given the easy material availability (see also above) and an 
estimated recycling cost of ca. €500/ton (for logistics, triggered removal and recycling using CO2 assisted 
extrusion, see also section 1.1.1.1) , DECOAT can offer a viable solution for recuperation of coated 
production waste delivering cost effective secondary materials.  
DECOAT will create a market need for the triggerable additives . Starting again from the 280ktons of 
coated waste material, and assuming that on average a coating or primer layer represents 3% of the total 
part weight and that we need to add 5% of triggerable additives, we calculate a need for 420tons of 
additives per year in Europe. At an average cost of ca. €50/kg, this means a DECOAT triggerable 
additives market of over €20 million annually, or ca. 60 jobs.   
Implementing the DECOAT technology will significantly boost the  recycling sector: if we consider 
again the recycling cost of €500/ton, this corresponds to ca €140million extra annual turnover, or ca 
400 jobs, created by enabling the recycling of these (280kton of) coated parts.   
To realise this, recycling lines will need to integrate (or be updated in case of existing ones) with 
the optical detection technology (estimated at ca €150k/unit by IRIS), the MW technology 
(estimated at €70k/unit by CTECH) and/or the Creasolv technology (estimated at ca. €2000k/unit by 
IVV). Assuming a typical recycling line has a capacity of 5kton/year, approximately 60 lines are required 
to process the target material of 280kton. All lines will need the optical detection system, leading to a 
market of €9million (60 x 150k€). We assume that 30% will use ‘standard ovens’ (no direct DECOAT 
benefit), but 50% of the lines will install MW or other heating equipment, so a market of €2.1million (30 x 
€70k) and roughly 20% a Creasolv system, leading to €24million (12 x €2000k). All this sums up to a one-
time market of ca. €35million , which will create a recurrent annual turnover of ca €7million (20%) 
thanks to related services (consulting, maintenance, updating).  
SWOT analysis for DECOAT . Relative competitive strengths and weaknesses for the DECOAT 
applications have been analysed according to a preliminary SWOT Analysis that will be further elaborated 
and finalised within DECOAT.   
Strengths  
Novel set of triggerable techniques for debonding  
Unique mix of interdisciplinary skills and expertise  
Strong industrial participation, including R&D driven 
SMEs  
Weaknesses  
Cost of coating will increase 
  need to offset this by 
focussing on total cost (and potentially into new 
business models) for commercialisation  
Opportunities  
Answer the unmet demand for recycling of coated 
parts  
Grab potential of techniques that have proven merits 
for other applications, e.g. microwave additives   
Contribution to EC regulations concerning Plastics 
Strategy DECOAT solutions are transferable to 
other applications, e.g. in construction, composites, 
furniture, also for enabling repair  
Threats  
A systemic approach is needed, might be difficult to 
introduce the novel concepts 
  counterbalanced by 
the strong pressure 
to recycle plastics, see e.g. the EC initiatives  
Low virgin material prices, depending on oil price 
  
on longer term continuing low oil prices are highly 
unlikely  
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 42 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Table: overview of planned dissemination activities and link with key dissemination elements: dissemination campaigns “DCN” 
(DC1, DC2 and DC3), continuous communication (“Cont.”) and Advisory & Support Group (“ASG”).  
Activity  Goal  Concrete action  Lead /  
partners  
Timing  Target 
group  
Expected impact  
Website  Regular updates, 
news section, 
partner info, event 
listing, etc.  
Design and formulate contents, keep up to 
date  
ISWA, 
CTB  
Operationa 
l by M4, 
cont.  
All  
stakehold 
ers  
Central repository of project 
information; communication 
materials direct back to 
here to achieve continuous 
engagement.  
Workshop and 
webinars to 
selected 
stakeholder 
groups  
Minimum of 6 
workshops to 3 types 
of audiences in 3 
regions, with 15-30 
participants. At least 
4 webinars with 25 
participants each.   
Identification and acquisition of 
audiences, creation of workshop and 
webinar contents based on the needs of 
different target groups, delivery of 
workshops. Selection of most suitable 
speakers from among the consortium, 
market to relevant potential audiences, 
deliver to as many participants as 
possible; post-event distribution, make 
available on website  
ISWA, all 
but  
primarily  
RTDs &  
industrial  
DC2 & 3  All  
stakehold 
ers  
Boost for exploitation as 
these are very specifically 
targeted to audiences 
known to take a strong 
interest in the project. Also 
feedback for project to 
improve its processes and 
dissemination. Cost-
effective in-depth 
dissemination of project 
results to diverse 
stakeholder groups.  
Final public 
event  
One event, at least 75 
participants  
Organisation of professional high-level 1-
day conference on the novel DECOAT 
debonding solutions and materials  
ISWA,  
NTUA, all 
partners  
DC3  Internatio 
nal 
highlevel  
attendee 
s   
Multiple key contacts and 
avenues for post-project 
exploitation and uptake.  
Dissemination 
of public 
deliverables  
As appropriate, i.e. 
linked to workplan 
deliverables  
Creation of reports or other documents or 
actions as required by the deliverables  
Led by the partner in charge of meeting the 
respective deliverable  
ISWA, 
all 
partners, 
as per 
the 
workplan  
DC1, 2 & 3  Mainly 
research  
/ project  
communi 
ty, ASG  
Engage research 
community and provide 
evidence of the potential  
and opportunity connected 
with  
DECOAT  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 43 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Flyers, 
brochures, 
factsheets, 
white papers, 
etc. - print 
and digital  
Public dissemination, 
tailored to specific 
groups such as 
scientific, policy 
makers, etc. 2,500 
prints to be 
distributed.  
Creation of visually attractive and 
professionally written documents.  
ISWA, 
CTB, all 
partners  
Flyer by 
M4, others 
based on 
developme 
nts in DC 1  
& 2  
All  
stakehold 
ers, ASG  
Easy-to-grasp general or 
condensed specific 
information to raise 
awareness, stimulate 
interest, and get a general 
audience to engage with 
the project   
Social media,  
e.g. YouTube,  
Twitter,  
LinkedIn,  
ResearchGate  
Regular posts 
(monthly); targeting 
>5,000 followers  
Regular posts via all available channels; 
engagement and interaction with followers 
and readers.  
ISWA, 
CTB, all 
partners  
Cont.  All  
stakehold 
ers  
Initial awareness raising, 
broad but 'superficial' 
network, spreading news 
widely quickly, reinforcing 
all public dissemination 
activities.  
Coverage in 
mainstream 
media  
At least 3; this can 
be newspapers, 
radio shows, 
science-focussed TV 
shows.  
Liaison with media outlets and 
submission of material to them, e.g. in the 
form of articles, interviews, videos scripts, 
in-person appearances  
ISWA, all 
partners  
DC 3  General 
public  
Create awareness among 
the general public and 
stimulate interest in the 
sustainability potential of 
recycling coated parts.  
Articles in 
peerreviewed 
journals and 
magazines  
minimum of 5  Liaison with the most relevant media. 
Drafting and submission of professional, 
ready-for-submission, scientific articles.  
RTDs, 
ISWA  
DC2 & 3  Scientific 
audience  
Disseminate project results 
to potential adopters for 
exploitation in future 
research.  
Press releases  Every 6-12 months. 
Distributed across the 
media channels of all 
partners.  
Write informative and well-edited 
document with links to relevant websites; 
distribute to all accessible media 
networks through the partners and via 
other communication channels, e.g. 
website  
ISWA, 
CTB, all 
partners  
Cont., but 
especially  
DC2 & 3  
All  
stakehold 
ers  
Key for dissemination 
through 'traditional' media 
outlets.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 44 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
International 
trade fairs and 
conferences  
At least 1 trade fair 
and 3 conferences 
per year, including 
presentations, 
exhibition, 
sponsorship /media 
partnerships  
Keep track of all relevant events, prioritise 
among them and coordinate partners' 
attendance; arrange for exhibitions and/or 
sponsorships where feasible and relevant, 
and push for speaking contributions. 
Coordinate with other initiatives/projects   
ISWA, all 
partners  
DC2 & 3  Scientific, 
business, 
industry 
stakehold 
ers  
Meeting and presenting to 
the most relevant 
exploitation target groups 
for a direct innovation and 
knowledge transfer   
Outreach to 
local 
communities, 
schools, and 
universities  
At least 3 information 
events or 
opportunities to share 
project information, 
targeting 100 
students, citizens, or 
pupils.  
Connect with relevant organisations such 
as schools, universities, consumer or 
citizen organisations, NGOs, public 
events; provide details about project, 
suggest talks and information that could 
be disseminated to respective audiences.  
ISWA, all 
partners  
DC2 & 3  General 
public  
Create awareness among 
the general public and 
stimulate interest in the 
sustainability and recycling 
of coatings.  
Leverage 
existing 
channels: 
memberships, 
company 
newsletters, 
etc.  
Several times/year  Assist partners with disseminating project 
information among their networks; 
potentially translation of materials into 
languages other than English; identify key 
networks into which to disseminate and 
organise input of project information with 
the respective consortium partner 
associated to the network.  
ISWA, all 
partners  
Cont.  All  
stakehold 
ers  
Mobilising existing networks 
to create visibility for 
DECOAT, disseminate to 
organisations already 
working with our partners 
and likely to have matching 
interests, exploitation 
potential within partners’ 
peer groups.  
  
Table: overview of Key Exploitable Results.  
Description of   
Exploitable  
Result  
Main  
Partner(s)  
Our specific improvement vs 
the current status  
Exploitation: what is the (market) need / 
business opportunity it responds to ?   
Which strategy to follow ?  
Potential users (outside 
consortium) and timing  
Activities to reach 
users – link to 
DECOAT 
dissemination 
actions  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 45 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Triggerable 
debonding system 
for removal of 
coatings from textile 
and plastic 
substrates  
CTB,  
AIMPLAS,  
DEVAN  
Currently there exist no 
practical technologies for 
removal of coating, only 
limitedly via chemical 
dissolving. Targeted  
release of coating via a 
trigger in an economic and 
environmental way  
No current method to recuperate 
coated textiles For first time enable 
the recycling of coated textiles  
Offer technology via licensing  
(Large) companies 
specialised in coating and 
coating formulation producers 
(for substrates outside scope 
of DEVAN)  
Within 1st year after 
DECOAT ending  
DC2 – find partners 
for licensing  
Present at coating 
fairs and 
conferences  
Recycling pilot line 
for the triggered 
removal of coatings  
AIMPLAS,  
CTECH,  
IVV  
Selection of components to 
increase the efficiency, 
speed and quality of the 
plastic separation.  
Knowledge on plastic 
recycling & pilot plant 
elements optimization.  
Use of MW technology for recycling of 
coated parts  
Generate corresponding technical 
assistance and technological transfer 
to interested parties.   
Commercial agreements. Intellectual 
property.  
Technology transfer  
Recycling companies wanting 
to extend their capabilities to 
also  
recycle coated parts  
During DC3 event, 
a visit to the 
recycling line will be 
planned in  
Materials needed for the triggered debonding:     
 
Thermoresponsive 
core-shell 
nanostructure d 
co-polymers  
NTUA, 
DEVAN  
A variety of core-shell 
polymer nanoparticles 
can be found in 
literature.   
Use in waterborne 
formulations for textile 
industry.  
Function under specific 
stimulus (temperature).  
Novel debonding technologies for the 
removal of  
coatings over plastics and textiles will 
be developed with the use of 
nanostructured copolymers, 
functioning under thermal triggers. 
Core-shell co-polymers will be 
combined with dyes to enable “smart 
sorting” in the recycling industry.   
Expected sales price: €40-50/kg  
Possible Patent is foreseen. 
Licensing or, if strong enough IP, 
potential for start up creation  
Coating (ingredient) 
producers  
Extended use: Use as drug 
delivery systems 
(medicine sector); Use 
also in environmental 
clean up  
Market ready ca 5 years after  
DECOAT.  
Scientific 
conferences and 
publications  
Presentations at 
coating and paint 
conferences 
Interact with via 
ASG member 
‘European  
Coatings’ Journal   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 46 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
 Super Absorbent  
Polymers  
NTUA  A variety of core-shell 
polymer nanoparticles can 
be found in literature. 
Commercial available, but 
no structured. Size of 
micrometers.   
 Use in waterborne 
formulations (steam and  
Novel debonding technologies for the 
removal of  
coatings over plastics and textiles will 
be developed with the use of SAPs, 
which will operate under heat and 
steam triggers, as well as in selective 
solvents. Recycling industry will 
benefit since new processes with 
smart separation techniques will be 
implemented.  
Coating (ingredient) 
producers Extended use: 
SAPs can be also used in 
other sectors such as 
agriculture, personal 
intensive care costumer 
goods, waste water 
treatment, medicine for drug-
delivery systems, sealants.  
 
  selective solvents).  
 Nanostructured  
Low polydispersity index  
Possible Patent is foreseen. Licensing.  Market ready within 2-3 years 
after  
DECOAT  
 
 MW& Rf 
assisted 
hybrid 
carbonbased 
nanomaterials  
NTUA, 
CTECH  
Heating in the research of 
carbonbased materials has 
been mainly limited to liquid 
solutions. Microwave 
heating of solid state 
carbon-based materials and 
especially CNTs, has 
distinct merits, but they have 
scarcely been reported (T. 
Kim, et al, 2014).  
Hybrid CNTs will be 
synthesised either grown on 
SiO2 nanoparticles or they 
will be decorated with metal 
oxide nanoparticles to 
enhance the inductive heat 
due to MW irradiation.  
CNTs are very strong mechanically and 
thermally, recycling should not affect 
their properties. Hybrid CNTs will have 
a competitive advantage in comparison 
to current commercial ones due to their 
multifunctionality. Possible selling price 
€50/kg (as hybrid materials). 
Establishment of spin-off company for 
the commercial exploitation of the 
hybrid materials. MW equipment: 
licensing to equipment manufacturers, 
equipment leasing to recycling 
companies. Expected cost per system 
depending  
on capacity – estimated at average of 
€70k/system.  
Targeted users:   
Hybrid CNTs: the recycling 
industry, also composites and 
coatings sector.  
MW equipment: recyclers  
Hybrid CNTs market ready 
within 2-3 years after DECOAT  
MW equipment market ready 
by end of the project  
Hybrid CNT: 
scientific 
conferences and 
publications  
MW equipment: 
fairs and industry 
events Present to 
networks concerned 
with waste and 
recycling, like 
WRAP in UK.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 47 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Debondable 
adhesives and 
primers  
RESCOLL  Limited commercial products. 
No commercial primer 
available for debonding.  
Development of debonding 
primers and adhesives with 
processing and debonding 
capabilities (thermal 
triggering) adapted to the 
use cases.  
New bonding solutions for recycling, 
maintenance and upgrade of bonded 
products. Improvement of disassembly 
and sorting of multimaterial assemblies.  
Sales of the adhesives and primers 
formulations  
Automotive sector (OEM and 
TIER1), consumer goods, also 
aerospace and  
composite sector   
Ca 5 years after DECOAT as 
the durability of the 
debondable system must be 
proven before product launch  
Attendance to fairs 
on bonding / 
coatings. Webinars 
on debonding. 
Commercial 
brochures and 
online information 
(webpage/blog 
articles).   
Production for new 
users  
(prospection work)  
Monitoring 
systems for  
optimal  
DECOAT  
materials  
processing and 
end of life 
sorting and 
recycling  
IRIS  Generic sorting systems 
using a number of 
techniques exist but they 
are not adjusted to 
DECOAT materials which 
are new. Looking at the 
most  
versatile/performant/cost 
effective combination of 
techniques, we will design 
and deliver optical systems 
that allow optimising 
DECOAT handling 
processes  
throughout its life cycle  
Ability to actually identify and recycle 
the new material. Availability of 
secondary raw materials. Green image 
of the value chain. Quality control for the 
debonding / coating recycling.  
Sales of monitoring and sorting 
systems. Cost: will depend from case 
to case. Rough estimate of on average 
150k€ (including the chemometrics 
model)  
Recyclers of waste streams 
When the materials and 
recycling lines are becoming 
available on the market, IRIS 
would need in the range of 1 
year to provide a system for a 
larger plant  
Demonstration 
events at  
the pilot plant of  
AIMPLAS or IVV will 
help as it will be a 
practical showcase 
of the systems to 
engage potential 
new end users, eg 
during DC3 event  
Novel  
application of the  
CreaSolv®  
Process  
IVV  Dissolution and recovery of 
thermoplastics from 
composites and plastic 
mixtures. Application to 
coated textiles and special 
equipment in ELV and 
WEEE  
Process might enable recovery of pure 
fibre polymers from post-consumer 
textile waste; Process might increase the 
share of target  
polymers of WEEE recyclers 
licence the process  
Chemical engineering 
companies will build 
equipment, recyclers will run 
novel treatment plants  
Market uptake after further 
upscale within 3-4 years  
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 48 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Recyclable 
coated parts: 
textiles for 
outdoor use;  
consumer  
electronics; 
structural 
automotive parts  
VAUDE,  
PANASONI 
C,  
MBT  
Recycling of coated 
textiles/plastic parts is so far 
not possible/ viable.   
First time a workable, cost 
competitive solution.   
Circularity on coated textiles within our 
outdoor textile industry.  
Promote the novel DECOAT solutions 
throughout our supplier chain and 
stimulate/force them to adopt the novel 
technologies (market pull strategy).  
End user clients – target group 
of highly environmentally 
concerned people, eg 
LOHAS69  
End-user suppliers: textile and 
plastic finishing and coating 
companies, worldwide  
Follow up project to bring to 
sufficient  
high TRL - within 2-3 yrs after  
DECOAT  
Use of press 
releases at DC1 and 
DC3 to 
communicate to 
general public and 
the   
Recyclable 
automotive 
aesthetic 
components  
MAIER  A high percent of the 
aesthetic components of the 
vehicles are coated. There 
is no cost effective 
debonding process that 
could bring good quality 
recycled material for 
manufacturing aesthetic 
components, because the 
smallest impurities produce 
surface defects on aesthetic 
parts.   
MAIER will validate a coating that can be 
easily debonded from the substrate. This 
will make decorated components easier 
to recycle so the materials can be 
reused for the very same applications, 
which is currently impossible.  
Carmakers strive to develop circular 
economy model. MAIER will increase its 
market share by offering aesthetical 
finishes that can be recycled.  
Sales of the coated parts.   
Most of the carmakers 
established in Europe are 
clients, so potentially every 
automotive OEM is a 
customer. Sales: As soon as 
the DECOAT technology is 
ready to be industrialized (will 
require high TRL project – eg 
type FTI).  
  
Participation in fair,  
promotion of 
DECOAT  
results during visit to 
clients  
Ecodesign tool  
for opportunities 
identification and 
benefits 
assessment of 
recyclable 
coatings (based 
on LCA, LCC 
and safety 
aspects)  
ECOMAT,  
IRES  
Currently the existing eco-
design tools do not cover 
the applications to be 
considered within the 
project. The DECOAT tool 
will allow to map the main 
impact hot spots of coating 
materials applied to a 
‘product’ (i.e. coating & 
substrate) and will be able to 
identify the opportunities 
The favourable results of the full 
assessments could be used by 
manufacturers to proceed with green 
marketing and communication 
strategies, as well as relevant 
certification and labelling of their 
products, leading to increased market 
shares due to better environmental 
performance. Release (basic version of) 
the tool in public domain, free to use by 
Major manufacturers in 
automotive plastics, coated 
fabrics and coated electronics 
sectors.  
Within 3-5 years after 
DECOAT  
Extend to domains outside 
DECOAT   
Within >5yrs after DECOAT  
The open version of 
the tool will be 
available for free 
use on DECOAT 
website. 
Communication of 
the tool will be 
implemented via 
main channels of 
the  
                                                
69 LOHAS = Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability, see e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LOHAS   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 49 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
and benefits of 
implementing the  
DECOAT debonding 
technology.  
all but offer (paid) technical consultancy 
to use the (extended) tool optimally  
Dissemination of the tool use 
among the manufacturers has 
a high potential to facilitate the 
use of the  
DECOAT solutions in their 
practices.  
DECOAT partners, 
including 
newsletters, 
publications, fairs 
and conferences.   
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 50 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
D3 Steps to market and preliminary business plans  
  
The DECOAT industrial partners, whose foreground should ultimately lead to 
industrialisation/commercialisation, have carried out preliminary business plan canvassing from 
which a compound brief is outlined below.  This is based on the market creating potent ial (section 
2.1.1.2), the available amounts of coated waste (section 2.1.1.3) and the outline of the market potential 
(part D2 of the PEDR) and taking into account the improved innovation capacity (see section 2.1.2).  
  
DECOAT BUSINESS CANVAS  
Vision  
Provide sustainable solution 
for introducing  coated 
 parts  into circular 
economy.  
Competitive advantage  
Novel smart polymer material systems for 
debonding of coatings, applicable to the 
main industries - the respective recycling 
method and the related processing.  
Target market  
Coated  materials 
 industries that are 
impossible to recycle up to 
now  
Problem: (multi -layered) 
coated parts not recyclable 
because of permanent 
bonding  
Solution: Create triggered 
debonding systems for 
coated parts, the linked 
recycling process and the 
corresponding circular 
economy roadmap.  
Marketing activities  
Workshops with Industry Engineers and 
Technicians in order to adopt DECOAT 
materials and processes  
Participation in exhibitions and events with 
booth and presentations  
Market pull by ‘big brands’ & technology push 
by innovative R&D (SME) companies  
Mass marketing to the general public to act as 
leverage for industry to adopt DECOAT 
solutions  
Video production, use of social media,  create 
public awareness  
Sales channels  
Already established 
partners’ network in their 
countries and across EU  
Industrial exhibitions  
Direct  use  from 
 Industrial partners  
Licensing agreements  
Business model  
Materials: Direct use by the  
Industrial partners;   
Processes: licencing 
agreements with related 
industries  
Equipment: direct sales of 
optical monitoring and 
recycling equipment  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 51 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Budget and funding:  
Financial summary:  
The initial target will be to 
license the DECOAT 
recycling process know -how 
to recyclers and to sell the 
DECOAT recycling 
technology.   
Funding required:   
Further development costs 
need to be covered (eg via 
H2020).   
Further investments:  
Needed to increase the TRL 
of DECOAT technology to 
market readiness, via 
combination of public and 
private funding   
Novel market creation for DECOAT 
outcome   
   
Revenue channels   
(after 7yrs)  
Recycling activities of 
coated parts (€140mio/yr)  
Triggerable additives 
sales: microcaps, carbon-
based nanomaterials,.. 
(€20mio /yr)  
Recycling equipment 
sales: advanced optical 
monitoring and sorting; 
MW oven,  
Creasolv systems  
(€35mio total)  
Recycling Equipment 
servicing: maintenance, 
technical consultancy  
(€7mio/yr)  
E. Training development  
Audio-visual material will be prepared from the development work and demonstration activities. The 
material will be used to train personnel from the company partners and public material will be put online 
(interactive way) to improve skills and competences of pe rsons working in (mainly) the plastics, textiles 
and recycling industry. Workshops hosted at the pilot plant set ups at AIMPLAS and IVV, among others, 
will be organized to promote DECOAT foreground. The workshops will act as multipliers of dissemination 
efforts.  
F. Standardisation and Regulatory requirements  
Participating in standardisation activities will enable DECOAT to: (i) gain intelligence on standards in areas 
touched by DECOAT, e.g. recycling, sustainability, carbon footprinting, end-of-life and safety; (ii) contribute 
to the development of new standards and ensure that specific needs are taken into account; (iii) establish 
contacts with other stakeholders, experts and regulators at national, European (CEN) and worldwide (ISO) 
levels. See also Task 7.4.  
G. Evaluation of the PEDR  
The plan will also envisage ways of measuring the dissemination and exploitation efforts and its 
impact on DECOAT partners and the stakeholder community . We will continuously pay attention to 
this but also do explicit evaluations before starting the DC2 and DC3 action so that the PEDR can still be 
adapted for the final DECOAT part, see WP7 (Task 7.1).  
Management of research data  
Data and Knowledge produced during the DECOAT project will be handled within the tas ks of the Data 
Management Plan. DECOAT will also join the Open Data Pilot. A data repository will be created in order 
to store raw data, results, reports and deliverables produced during the project. During the early stages of 
the project, partner IRES will discuss with partners and take a decision about the accessibility of the data. 
A justified decision on which simulated and experimental data will be confidential and which will be public 
will be made. As Data Repository, one of the European Open Access is foreseen.   
Raw data generated by instruments during experiments will be open and shared with the public. 
Confidential and sensitive data related with industrial processes or products will be restricted and shared 
only among the Consortium partners. In m atters of reusability, not sensitive or raw data will be shared 
among the research community through existing web Data Repositories such as the UCI repository 70, 
                                                
70 See: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.html   
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
Recycling activities 
Triggerable Additives 
Recycling equipment 
Recycling Equipment servicing 
Years after DECOAT end 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 52 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
which is widely used for Materials Data. Access rights and intellectual property will be managed according 
to the grant agreement and the consortium agreement. The kinds of data generated by the project are 
described in the following table.  
Research Data produced    Accessibility  Data Exploitation, Accessibility and Reusability  
Experimental Procedures   Public  Reports, publications  
Experimental Data   Consortium  Storage and preservation in data repositories  
Data  for  Economic  
Environmental Impact  
and  Public or Consortium  Storage and preservation in data repositories 
and possibly public or private reports  
Sensitive Industrial Data   Consortium  Storage and preservation in data repository 
(private)  
In terms of Data Exploitation and Reusability, partners working towards publishing their work (articles, 
monographs, conferences etc., preferably in high impact journals) are committed to comply with the “Open 
Access” guideline of the DECOAT project. More specifically, published work should be easy to access, 
online readable, easy to download and print. This can be done by sharing the above mentioned 
publications into online archives and providing open access to them such as Open Access Infrastructure 
for R esearch in Europe (OpenAIRE) and the Directory of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR). 
Knowledge management and IP protection  
Knowledge management to ensure open access. DECOAT project is focused on ‘research & 
innovation’ (this being a RIA) so a fair num ber of scientific articles is expected (see Table pag 32). For 
these publications, publishable results will follow an open-access model in order to optimize the impact of 
publicly funded scientific research, both at European level and at Member State level. For what concerns 
other dissemination activities (Website, Workshops, Conferences and Fairs) DECOAT is fully committed 
to ensure full dissemination and high transparency of the data and results to ensure “public 
access” to project results. Only limitation is that it should be in line with the IPR management . We 
will make for example large parts of the environmental and economic evaluation (from WP6) publicly 
available. The strategy is clearly to provide as much as possible the knowledge generated by DECOAT to 
relevant communities for free, e.g. via partner ISWA and via ASG partners (like EUPC, EuMaT, European 
Coatings) as this will be beneficial for further collaboration and for levering the DECOAT impact.  
IPR Management during DECOAT. Management of knowledge, intellectual property and of other 
innovation related activities involves the recognition of project results/innovations that may have 
commercial value, the protection of novel materials and processes developed in DECOAT and the 
determination of ownership of technologies and resolution of ownership co nflicts. For the success of 
DECOAT all project partners agree on explicit rules concerning IP ownership, access rights to any 
Background and Foreground IP for the execution of the project and the protection of intellectual property 
rights (IPRs) and confid ential information before the project starts. Such issues will be addressed in the 
Consortium Agreement that will be developed in line with the Grant Agreement (cf. H2020 General model 
grant agreement).   
Consortium Agreement. The purpose of the Consortium Agreement is to establish a legal framework for 
DECOAT in order to minimize any internal issues during the DECOAT implementation. It will be based on 
the DESCA 2020 Model Consortium Agreement regulating albeit general definitions and purpose through 
descriptions responsibilities of participating parties, project entry, duration and project termination, as well 
as mutual liabilities.   
Ensuring freedom to operate. For the preparation of the DECOAT proposal a patent analysis was made, 
see section 1.4.2. This  showed that for implementing DECOAT there is freedom -to-operate. During 
DECOAT implementation, the external IP situation will be monitored as part of the exploitation activities 
(see Task 7.2). If forced to by the appearance of an external patent, mitigat ion actions will take place 
leading potentially to an adjustment of the scope of DECOAT.   
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 53 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Access Rights to Background and Results during the project. To ensure a smooth execution of the 
project, the DECOAT partners agree to grant royalty -free Access to Ba ckground and Results IP for the 
project implementation. All project partners will determine any Background IP they are willing to submit to 
DECOAT within the Consortium Agreement before the project starts. IP Ownership within the 
consortium. IP on Results shall be owned by the project partner carrying out the work leading to such IP. 
If any IP is created jointly by at least two partners and it is not possible to distinguish between the 
contributions of each of the project partners, such work will be jointly  owned by them. Any such joint 
inventions and all related patent applications and patents shall be jointly owned by the contributing parties.   
External Non‐Disclosure Agreement (NDA). Any external party interested in testing materials developed 
within DECOAT during the project must write a LOI (Letter Of Intent) to the consortium, indicating the intent 
and purpose of their contribution. Each LOI has to be approved by the consortium and the interested party 
has to sign an NDA.   
(b) Communication activities  
The DECOAT consortium will promote the project and its results, by providing targeted information to 
multiple audiences, in a strategic and effective manner and engaging in one- and two-way exchange. The 
communication activities will start at the onset o f the project and continue throughout its entire duration. 
The communication strategy has the key objective to show the benefits of DECOAT results to the 
European coating, plastics and recycling communities.  
The communication strategy has been delineated to ensure a high visibility of the project and to help 
maximize the impact of results. We follow the guidelines from the Lead Market Initiative Ad -hoc Advisory 
Group for Bio-based Products71: “Design and implement a communication strategy involving all part ners 
in the value chain and all other stakeholders to achieve coherent messages on bio -based products. 
(COM/9)”. Detailed description:  
• Goal: firstly to reach out to the general public to create positive momentum for recycling of materials 
(especially as their collaboration will be needed to collect certain items like EoL textiles) and, secondly, 
make them aware of the impact of EU collaborative projects;  
• Method: using story-telling to make the matter easier accessible and to show the human face of the 
involved people   
• Audience: wider public as coated products are being bought all the time by all the people. As such our 
back pack will be used as an example close to public.  
• Key messages: importance to select recyclable by design products as this will have a life cycle impact.  
• Channels: use of press release in combination with popular media is seen as the most effective to 
reach a larger public. This will be backed up by use of social media (YouTube, Twitter,…) and the 
project website and available public m aterial, accessible for an (interested) layman. These outreach 
activities will be carried out at EU, national, regional and local level, under the responsibility of the local 
partners, but coordinated by the dissemination manager.  
Communication activities  will support the key dissemination moments that are formed by the three 
Dissemination Campaigns (see part C of PEDR) as that should be excellent moments to reach a wider 
audience and to focus on user acceptance in turn generating further demand for recyclable products.   
We will also interact with other European (H2020) projects and relevant European networks, see Task 7.5.   
3 Implementation  
  
‘If you skilfully follow the multidisciplinary path, you will never wish to come back.’   
(Charlie Munger, investor)  
  
                                                
71 See: LMI Ad-hoc Advisory Group for Bio-based Products – List of Priority Recommendations 2011, see: 
https://biobs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/generated/files/policy/2011%20Lead%20Market%20Initiative%20LMI%20Biobased%20Products
%20Priority%20Recommendati ons.pdf   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 54 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service.
3.1 Work plan  
3.1.1 Overall structure of the work plan and graphical representation of components and their 
interrelations  
  
The key development of  
DECOAT is the 
debonding WP1:  
Triggerable materials  
for coating technology. 
The work plan is 
basically centred around 
this novel technology, 
both for the technical R&D work and for the supporting activities.   
On technical level , we first need to develop the necessary 
materials and processes on lab-scale. This will be realised  
for  different  triggerable 
materials and will lead to a  
WP5: Demo - circular use  
portfolio of debonding S 
technologies, each will be U 
characterised, listing the P 
strengths and weaknesses for P the 
respective application O domains 
(WP1). The coating R and 
debonding process as well T as a 
protocol to assess the  
efficiency of the debonding will be developed in close interaction (WP2). An optical monitoring method for 
sorting and process control of the coating and for the debonding will be developed (WP3). The debonding 
process will then be scaled-up via the design and building of an actual pilot line, and performing test runs 
on generic co ated textiles and plastic parts for its validation (WP4). The novel coating systems will be 
integrated in the existing (adapted) processes by the manufacturers/end-users via use cases. The (small 
scale) production of products will undergo the recycling pro cess, the recovered materials will be 
characterised and re-used, which will demonstrate the circular use of the coated parts (WP5).   
For the transversal activities, we will perform a detailed assessment of the environmental aspects (full 
LCA), of the cost s (LCC) and ensure Safety -by-Design implementation, e.g. for microcapsules (WP6). 
Because of the systemic change targeted by DECOAT, emphasis is put on the implementation of 
innovation management: economic assessment (incl. preliminary business plans), dissemination to raise 
awareness from early on to maximise wide uptake of DECOAT results; communication for interaction with 
wider stakeholders and promote public awareness of circular economy values (WP7).   
All these technical and supporting activities will  be efficiently coordinated (WP8) , which also 
includes reporting, updating the work plan, data and risk management and interaction with the DECOAT 
Advisory and Support Group (ASG).  
For the work plan, we focussed on a more detailed description of the tasks that already can be well-defined 
steps in the DECOAT activities, e.g. which materials will be developed, which optical detection to be 
develop, supporting activities. The exact cont ent of most activities later in the project (mainly WP5) will 
depend strongly on choices that need to be made during the project implementation, so these task 
descriptions are deliberately kept more open.   
WP6: Environment & Safety  
WP7: Exploitation, Dissemination & Communication  
WP8: Coordination  
WP2:   
Triggerable  
debonding  
 WP3:  
Automated 
sorting 
WP4:   
Continuous  
pilot line  
 
 
 

 
 
  
[DECOAT]    Page 41 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 57 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
3.1.3 Detailed description of the Work Packages  
  
Work package number  1  Start Date or Starting 
Event  
M1  
Work package title  Triggerable materials for coatings  
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of participant  CTB  AIMPL 
AS  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANAS 
ONIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  
Short name of participant  RESCO 
LL  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMAT  IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
Objectives:   
The main objective in this work package is to develop triggerable materials for debonding on demand.  
• Specification and requirements of end user cases on materials  
• Synthesis of microcapsules, nanoparticles and smart hybrid materials, with triggerable response to 
heat, steam and irradiation, for weakening the adhesive strength and facilitating layer separation  
• Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers   
• Synthesis of SAP based microcapsules (water or solvent swelling). Synthesis of novel multi-
structured SAPs microcapsules with magnetic nanoparticles to react under MW irradiation.  
• Development of microwave assisted materials (hybrid CNT structures with SiO2 and/or metal 
nanoparticles)  
• Characterization of developed triggerable materials  
  
Description of work  
Within this WP, all triggerable nano - and micro-materials will be developed and characterised, in order to 
work upon specific stimulus (heat, steam, mechanical, microwave, chemical).   
Task 1.1 – Specifications and requirements for end -use cases - Definition of testing procedures - 
CTB, NTUA, CTAG, VAUDE, PANASONIC, MAIER, DAIMLER (M1-M4)  
Within WP1, we will work towards materials that provide a generic solution for de -coating, ie solutions 
generally valid for substrate with a coating of for example PVC, acrylate or TPU. All polymer matrices used 
within the project will be defined. However, to focus the project efforts, we will concentrate on the challenges 
posed by the use cases that are selected by the endusers, see section 2.1.2. Here, we list these parts as 
well as their basic functional requirements. The goal is to further specify these requirements within this task 
so that a clear picture emerges of the core needs (must haves), of the options (nice to have) and of the 
boundary conditions. Moreover, the requirements during operational conditions will be considered, in order 
to choose the appropriate materials, which will be developed in the following tasks.  
Application  Biking bag  Switch and socket   Rear door  Fascia  Cockpit part  
 coated fabric  (PANASONIC)  garnish  
 (MAIER)  (MBT)  
 (VAUDE)  (MAIER)  
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 58 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Currently Substrate: Substrate: PC, ABS, Substrate: Substrate: Substrate: foamed used PES 
PC-ABS multilayer ABS Coating: ABS/PC PUR  
material – TPU  Coating: TPU  
 Coating; TPU Coating: Alu foil,  Coating: ABS foil  
substrate/  (acrylates)   (acrylates)   
Chrome coating,  
coating/  
Spray painting  
Coating/ Ca 50% Ca 25% coating Ca 2% (50μm Ca 1.5% (30μm Ca. 60% substrate weight 
each weight on  on   
relation  2 mm)  2 mm)  
 
Critical  
physicomechanic 
al  
properties  
Waterproof  
HF-
weldable  
Durability  
Flexibility  
Mechanical 
performance, 
e.g. tensile 
modulus, impact 
strength, stress 
at break  
Flammabılıty 
Water and 
humidity 
absorption  
GLOSS: 75-85UB   
(D25 1413)  
Orange peel:  Lw <7-
18 s/ gama  
(D25 5540)  
Abrasion / Mar 
resistance: Gloss 
reduction <2UB  
Mechanical 
performance, 
e.g. tensile 
modulus, 
impact strength  
 the 
roducts 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 59 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
For example, MAIER started to determine the technical requirements of the final demonstrator parts to 
be developed in project, see table below. At the onset of DECOAT, precise specifications will be defined 
for the interior and exterior part, taking as a reference the standards of automotive OEMs (PSA, Toyota, 
etc). The main characterizations defined by MAIER will be directed to the fulfilment of the specifications 
especially related to high gloss aesthetic, abrasion and scratch resistances of its p determi ned by the 
principal OEMs, which are the final users of the products.   
Task 1.2 – Synthesis of microcapsules and nanoparticles with triggerable response to heat and 
steam for weakening the adhesive strength and facilitating layer separation - NTUA, CTB, 
DEVAN, RESCOLL, CTECH (M3-M24)   
In this task, different nano and microstructured materials are proposed for multiple functionalities to 
coatings. One important point that will be considered from the beginning is the compatibility between the 
nanomaterials and coating formulations, that will be tested in WP2. The goal is to make during the first 
phase of the project, adequate quantities of the materials (ca 100g/each) will be made available to WP2 
(coating formulations development & testing) and to WP3 for detection.  
Subtask 1.2.1 – Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers  
Microstructure particles with a melamine formaldehyde, polyurea or acrylate -based shell comprising 
triggerable response active core ingredients will be developed within this sub-task by DEVAN. The active 
ingredients will be chosen on the basis that upon heat treatment, they will expand and break the 
polymeric microcapsules walls and will be released into the coatings, weakening the adhesive strength 
and facilitate layer separation. In this WP, DEVAN will make use of its know-how (see also section 1.4 
enhance the compatibility of nanomaterials with the coating formulations. At this point, both the chemical 
linkage between the nanomaterials and coating formulations will be addressed, but also the particle size 
distribution of the particles in the coa formulations: homogeneous particles have a less negative impact 
in the coating characteristics, such as gloss loss and smoothness, which will be tested within WP2.  
In this sub -task, different hybrid core -shell na nostructured co -polymers will be also synthesized by 
NTUA. Organic polymers with glass temperature (T g) in the range of 20 oC to 40oC such as poly(propyl 
methacrylate) and poly(butyl methacrylate) will form the core, in order to act as softening points in the 
primers of RESCOLL which will be incorporated. To avoid this function during everyday operation, a 
protective shell will be appl ied around the core. The shell will consist of copolymers such as poly(4 
vinylpyridine-co-methacrylic acid) due to the fact that these polymers demonstrate higher Tg (151oC and 
220o than the processing and operational temperature of the products, as well a s the debonding 
temperature that will be studied in WP2. Furthermore, the presence of methacrylic acid structure units 
in the copolymer shell will impart hydrophilic properties nanostructured co -polymers rendering them 
dispersible in water-based solutions (waterborne formulations). Moreover, the polymers that constitute 
the shell will be cross-linked using an appropriate compound such as ethylene-glycol- 
Furthermore, different dyes which will be investigated and selected, will be used as the initiator for t he 
aforementioned radical polymerizations in order the final product to demonstrate absorption under visible 
irradiation (in-situ polymerisation with the selected dye, in order to enable smart optical sorting in WP3). 
Finally, iron oxides will be incorporated into the shell that will act as magnetic beads into the produced 
core-shell nanostructured co-polymers, which will be under 100 nm. The aim of proposed synthesis is 
the fabrication of multifunctional materials with smart intrinsic sorting properties th at will be able to 
increase their functionality in the presence of a possible magnetic field, due to the presence of inductive 
heat, improving its properties.  
Subtask 1.2.2 –Super Absorbent Polymers (SAP)   
One of the strategies to obtain coatings with debonding properties is to incorporate Super Absorbent 
Polymers (SAP). Cross linked cores will be fabricated via radical polymerization. Furthermore, organic 
dyes will be also used in the structure of the SAPs, to enable the optical sorting in WP3. Different kinds 
of agents can be also incorporated within the SAPs for additional functionalities, to form hybrid materials 
that will react onto stimuli such as microwave irradiation. End-of- 
achieved by exposure to heat sources (e.g. IR radiation), which leads to the melting of the microcapsule 
shell, along with activation of the inner superabsorbent core by steam (moisture), in the case of water 
swelling. The SAPs will also combination with the Creasolv technique (WP2) where they will swell under 
selective solvents to enhance the debonding functionality.  
, that 
) to 
ting 
- 
C, respectively) 
to the 
bismethacrylate. 
debonding 
- 
life separation can 
be 
be used in 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 60 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Subtask 1.2.3 – Microwave & Rf assisted materials   
NTUA will investigate the synthesis of hybrid microwave and Rf assisted materials, based on metal 
nanoparticles, silicon carbides and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). Emphasis will be given to 
the MWCNTs, the growth of which will be achieved through the Catalytic Thermal Chemical Vapor  
Deposition (CT-CVD) method. The MWCNTs will be functionalised with metal nanoparticles or will be grown 
on SiO2 nanoparticles. They will be incorporated in the coating in a concentration lower than 1% wt. The 
aim will be to provide selective heating of th e primer layer and remove the coating, or to melt the coating 
itself and remove the coating layer. Heating effect could be tuned by changing % of additive or to add MW 
transparent materials such as silica or alumina to disperse the particles and moderate the heating effect.  
In addition, in order to enhance the selective heating and melting properties of the adhesive, enhancement 
of the efficiency of induction to microwave will be examined adding nano -sized metal particles with high 
dielectric constant, e.g. zinc oxide. Zinc oxide has high dielectric constant that could shorten the microwave 
treatment time needed for debonding because of the selective heating of the adhesive in a shorter time by 
enhancing the heating efficiency of the adhesive by the irradiation of microwave.  
Task 1.3 –  Triggerable primers for interfacial debonding – RESCOLL (M3-M24)   
RESCOLL will develop debonding primers as described in patent EP1611217. These primers will be based 
on the combination of degradation agents (blowing agents ) and binders, selected to fit with mechanical 
properties and thermal constraints of the different use cases. Thermal triggering of the primers (in the range 
of 100 to 200°C) will allow to cleanly separate the parts at the location of the primers. The nano particles 
and microcapsules developed in Task 1.2 will be incorporated in the primer formulations. The formulated 
primers developed in WP1 will be used as a baseline for further adjustments in WP2.   
Task 1.4 – Selection and up-scaling of the most promising process - DEVAN, NTUA (M12-M39)  
The most promising core/shell microcapsules that will be developed in the Task 1.2 will be selected for 
further up-scaled production. DEVAN will undertake the up -scaling, to provide enough materials for the 
demonstration activities to the rest WPs. The goal is to provide the amounts required for further testing in 
WP2, WP3 and especially WP4 and WP5. Therefore, DEVAN will upscale the most promising prototypes 
in its pilot plant micro-encapsulation reactors with sizes up to five kilograms. DEVAN will check and prepare 
guidelines to scale up the production of the successful microcapsules prototypes to ton scale.  
Task 1.5 – Characterization of developed triggerable materials - NTUA, (M6-M24)  
The aforementioned produced materials (Task 1.2-1.4) will be characterized with several methods in terms 
of their morphology, structure and composition. The average nanocontainer size and their morphology will 
be determined by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). The 
coated and hollow nanocontainers will be characterised by FT -Infrared Spectroscopy (FT -IR), 
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA), Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA), energy dispersive xray analysis 
(EDX), dynamic light scattering (DLS) and X -Ray Diffraction (XRD). The magnetic particles to be used in 
thermoplastic matrix will be characterized in this task by means of advanced microscopic techniques.   
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D1.1 Specifications and requirements according to the demonstrators needs (M3, CTB)  
D1.2 Delivery of thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-polymers (M12, DEVAN, NTUA)  
D1.3 Delivery of Super Absorbent Polymers (M10, NTUA)  
D1.4 Delivery of microwave assisted materials (M21, NTUA)  
D1.5 Final report on synthesis of materials and their optimisation for incorporation into 
coatings (M24, NTUA) D1.6 Up-scaling production of the most promised triggering material 
(M24, DEVAN)  
  
Work package 
number   
 2  Start Date or Starting Event   1   
Work package title    Development of coating debonding 
systems   
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 61 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of 
participant  
CTB  AIMPLA 
S  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANASO 
NIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  
Short name of 
participant  
RESCOL 
L  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMA 
T  
IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
 
Objectives:  
• Integrate the triggerable materials (from WP1) into coating formulations  
• Develop coating debonding systems on to 2D substrates and a protocol to evaluate the debonding 
effect  
• Assessment and optimisation of the separation capacity of the coating debonding systems  
• Extend the debonding to a widened set of substrate materials (chemistry and geometry)  
• Tailoring of debonding coating systems in interaction with and according to the needs of WP3, WP4 
and WP5  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 62 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Description of work  
Task 2.1: Coating formulations, basic coating tests and characterisation - NTUA, CTB, AIMPLAS, 
CTAG, IVV, RESCOLL, DEVAN (M1-M12).   
The triggerable materials developed in WP1 will be added to polymeric coating formulations used in textiles 
(TPU, PVC, acrylates) and in plastics (TPU, PVC, epoxy). The goal is to first obtain coating for mulations 
with a relatively high loading of the triggerable additives and to maintain the required properties of the 
coating formulation, typically viscosity, wettability, foaming properties. Next, also combinations of different 
triggers into a single coating will be tested.  
The main challenge will be to obtain coating formulations with a sufficient loading of the additives, that are 
stable in time, i.e.   the occurrence of agglomeration or sedimentation should be monitored and prevented.   
Next in this task, simple flat A4-samples will be produced on PES textiles and on PC and ABS plastic 
plates. The coating process will be investigated, e.g. the influence of the triggerable additives on drying 
time and wettability.   
At this stage, a single layer of coating will be produced in one thickness. These coated A4-samples will be 
used for physicochemical and mechanical characterisation. This includes chemical and elemental 
composition will be studied by FT -Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) and Energy Dispersive X -Ray Analysis 
(EDX), respectively. The morphology of coatings will be studied with optical microscopy and SEM and AFM 
measurements (to complement the coating surface characterization at nanoscale). The dispersion of the 
nanoparticles and microcapsules in the final solid state coatings will be evaluated with microCT 
measurements. Also other relevant (nano)mechanical properties will be evaluated, e.g. (nano -)scratch 
tests, microhardness, nanoindentation, roughness.   
The produced coated materials will also be used for defining the protocol for measuring the debonding 
effect, see next task.  
Task 2.2: Development of DECOAT protocol for assessment of debonding - CTB, RESCOLL, IVV, 
CTAG, AIMPLAS, NTUA, MAIER, MBT (M3-M18).   
The goal of this task is to define a protocol to determine the debonding or separation capacity of the coatings 
with triggerable additives. Although it might seem fairly easy, this is a crucial step for the project. It will help 
to assess the efficiency of the different options, how they can be compared and optimised.   
This task will start as soon as first results of 2.1 are available, because first triggerable coated substrates 
are needed to debond and to evaluate. We will start from the existing standardised  test ASTM D3330 for 
180° detachment (peel strength test method of adhesive). Goal is to have an objective measurement 
method to be able to determine if the separation is sufficient or not. We will define parameters like the 
residual bond strength, the maximum amount of remaining coating allowed for each material/ end use case 
in order to be able to recycle the substrate material in a high -tech application (circular use). We will also 
develop basic evaluation for measuring the quality of the substrate mater ial after the debonding process 
and for the ability for rebonding/recoating of substrates.   
The outcome of this task will be the ‘DECOAT protocol’ for measurement of the debonding.  
Task 2.3: Optimisation of the coating debonding system and assessment of the separation capacity 
– CTB, AIMPLAS, IVV, NTUA, CTECH, RESCOLL, MAIER (M7-M24).   
Here, we will build on the experience gained in Task 2.1 on the actual coating process. Indeed, we will 
further tune, still using A4scale flat substrates, the concentration of trigger additive, in order to determine 
the lowest concentration needed for an effective separation. The additives will be tested via addition into a 
primer layer (with a trigger -less top layer) and added in a single layer coating. The influence of the 
application method for these layers will be studied, e.g. via direct coating or transfer coating in case of knife 
coating on textiles) as th is results in a different degree of penetration into the substrate. The latter is 
expected to have a large influence on debonding effect. So, the difference between these coating 
techniques will be assessed.  
To structure these activities, one can in princ iple opt for grouping via the triggerable additives or via the 
external trigger applied. Here, we opt to describe as close as possible to how the practical work will be 
organised, which will be a combination of both:   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 63 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
 To understand the debonding mechanism of the thermally triggered microcapsules their behaviour will 
be investigated by looking at the volume expansion of thermally expansive microcapsules by the 
heating trigger. The shape and size of the particle before and after the heating will be observe d using 
SEM.   
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 64 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
• For the coatings triggered by MW, the main activity will be to develop MW processes to ensure sufficient 
uniformity within the cavity. Therefore, several process parameters will have to be tuned: power, pulse 
duration, cavity uniformity of process,… The main challenge will be to determin e the energy input 
needed for good debonding while ensuring none of the materials suffers deterioration, e.g. because of 
charring. MW will be applied to standard susceptors, the novel carbon -based susceptors and SAPs 
functionalised for MW interaction.  
• For the blowing agent based  adhesives and primers  (INDAR technology) we will prepare 
bonded/coated samples for comparative assessment of initial mechanical performance vs reference 
material configurations (i.e. not debondable) and residual mechanical perfo rmance after triggering (in 
the debonded state). Mechanical testing will be based on international standards, depending on 
substrates and applications (peel, lap shear, pull out, scratch test for paints). Thermal ageing resistance 
of the debonding formulations will be tested to ensure that no anticipated loss of mechanical strength 
or debonding capability occurs. The blowing agents will also be combined with MW triggering and with 
microcapsule addition to check reinforcing / synergistic effects.  
• The chemical triggering (the Creasolv process) is based on a difference in dissolution of the coating 
and substrate materials. Different types of coating-substrate combinations will be shredded and fed to 
the process. This will be done for standard coatings and for coatings with SAPs functionalised to interact 
with specific chemical solvents. Further, we will investigate the influence of dense versus foamed 
coatings and the type of coating-substrate interface (from very flat towards high roughness). For each 
material the specific process conditions need to be defined like type of solvents, duration of treatment 
and temperature. Furthermore, specificity of the chosen solvent and dissolution conditions will be 
double-checked with respect to substrate polymers and other plastics types that may be present in real 
waste streams.  After solvent based debonding the purity of the obtained fractions will be evaluated by 
means of e.g. microscopy, IR and DSC.  
The separation capacity of the coating debonding systems based on abov e mentioned various 
combinations of triggerable additives and external triggers will be assessed according to the 
‘DECOAT protocol’ (see Task 2.2). Depending on the additive, the suitable debonding triggers will be 
evaluated: thermal (oven, IR, steam), MW and chemical. For each additive it needs to be checked whether 
the suited debonding process actually leads to a separation of the coating layer and the substrate. It is 
expected that this testing will lead to a further refinement of our testing protocol, so this task will run in strong 
interaction with Task 2.2.   
The measurement protocol will also reveal, after the debonding step, how much residual coating will still be 
present on the textile or plastic. The ‘cleanliness’ of the substrate will be evaluated via microscopy or IR. If 
a considerable amount of impurities is still present, an additional step in the Creasolv process can be 
considered to dissolve these impurities, see also Task 4.3.  
Task 2.4: Broadening the application field of the coating debondi ng system - RESCOLL, DEVAN, 
CTB, CTAG, MAIER, MBT, PANASONIC, VAUDE (M18-M30).   
Up to here all research will be performed on flat substrates of specific chemistry (PES, PC, ABS). Here we 
extend: in real life coated items are not flat, but 3D objects (espe cially for plastics). The coating technique 
will need to be adapted to be able to coat 3D objects. Further, the triggerable coatings will also be applied 
onto standardly used substrate materials like PA for textile and PUR, PE and PP for plastics. The geometry 
and chemistry will have an influence on the separation capacity, so the most promising combinations of 
triggerable material and external trigger will be here assessed again.  
In real life coatings are having a functional performance (see T1.1), which cannot be compromised by the 
addition of the triggers. The developed coating will therefore be assessed for these properties like 
waterproofness, abrasion resistance, weldability (typical for textile substrates) and scratch resistance, gloss 
and anti-corrosion (typical for plastic substrates).  
The outcome of this task will be a portfolio of coating debonding solutions. A solution in the portfolio will be 
specified by the triggerable material, the external trigger, the coating matrix, the substrate material and 
geometry, the need for a primer lay er or not, and an evaluation of separation capacity (energy and time 
needed, cleanliness of substrate).  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 65 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Task 2.5:  Tailoring of most promised debonding systems for further processing in WP3, WP4 and 
WP5 - DEVAN, AIMPLAS, CTB, RESCOLL, NTUA, IVV (M18-M39).   
According to the results of previous tasks and request, samples for WP3, WP4 and WP5 will be prepared 
when the other WP2 tasks are finished.  
Within tasks 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4, a whole range of materials (combinations) will be developed. Key element will 
thus be the selection and development of solutions ideally suited for the subsequent steps of sorting, (large 
scale) debonding, actual recycling and reuse of the materials. A selection of the most interesting solutions 
will be made based on mechanical properties, processability and performance in the final coated parts (tests 
will be done in the framework of WP5). In addition, focus will be given to the tailoring of the coating properties 
facilitating their further use for the specific end-user parts. A close interaction with WP3, WP4 and WP5 will 
be established to allow constant feedback.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 66 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D2.1 – Report: development of coating formulations and basic coatings (M12, NTUA)  
D2.2 – Protocol for determining the separation capacity (M18, CTB)  
D2.3 – Final report on the development of coating debonding solutions  (M24, CTB) D2.4 – Report: 
broadened applications (M30, RESCOLL)  
  
  
Work package number  3  Start Date or Starting 
Event  
  
Work package title  Optical monitoring of debondable materials, processing, sorting and recycling  
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of 
participant  
CTB  AIMPLA 
S  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANAS 
ONIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  
Short name of 
participant  
RESCOL 
L  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMA 
T  
IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
Objectives:   
The main objectives in this work package are :  
▪ To select a suitable technique for identifying each of the debonding triggers developed within WP1 
to direct end of life products to the suitable recycling process  
▪ To monitor the processing related to the trigger: synthesis of triggerable materials, coating and 
debonding step, determination of the actual separation performance  
▪ To develop the monitoring approach for the recycling pilot line   
▪ To design an optical sorting and control system to detect and single out the triggerable parts from a 
waste stream  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 67 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Description of work  
Task 3.1 Monitoring of the microcapsule production and coating and debonding processes - IVV, IRIS, 
NTUA, RESCOLL (M5-M18).   
Within this task, we will develop the optical methods that will help to control the crucial processes of DECOAT: 
microcapsules production (T3.1.1), coating process (T3.1.2) and the debonding process (T3.1.3).  
Throughout this task, samples will be provided  by WP1 and WP2, together with reference measurements 
results, to calibrate the planned photonic techniques.  
Subtask 3.1.1. Microcapsules monitoring via selected dyes  
In line with WP1, IRIS and IVV will work with NTUA to define a range of dyes to be used in the core or shell 
of the microcapsules. Those will be selected in terms of the wavelength they emit, the detection threshold, 
the cost and the compatibility with the coating matrix and substrate material.  
Those dyes will be added during the synthesis process. NIR and measurements based on fluorescence dyes 
(referred to as POLO technique) will be tested to monitor the thickness of the shell (via the ratio with the core 
and size measurement), but also of the crosslinking ratio (as allowed by specific dye s selected for POLO 
system), where applicable. Indeed both parameters are determining the microcapsule response to the 
respective stimuli for debonding.   
Subtask 3.1.2. Primer and nano/micro-composite coating monitoring  
A method based on hyperspectral im aging (HSI) will be developed by IRIS to monitor the thickness and 
distribution of primer on the substrate where it is applied in case of INDAR modified materials to ensure that 
the proper debonding can then take place. In terms of coatings containing eith er microcapsules or metallic 
nanoparticles, a dispersion monitoring system will be set up based on respectively fluorescence spectroscopy 
imaging or diffractometry.  
Subtask 3.1.3. Debonding process monitoring  
The key step for DECOAT is the actual debonding. Within Task 1.1 we will define the requirements for ‘purity’, 
in Task 2.2.2 we will work out a protocol for determining, off -line, the debonding capacity. Here, we will 
develop the optical method to monitor the debonding process online.   
Samples with various degrees of removed coatings will be provided to assess the capability to quantify 
residual coating material. This is needed as such contaminations caused by residual coating material can 
affect the further reprocessing. Hence, the optical 
 
monitoring can provide the necessary quality control. This will be based on POLO for materials containing the 
fluorescent dyes or on HSI.  
  
Trigger to be monitored  Possible technique  Parameters  
Thermo-responsive core shell nanostructured co -polymers eg. Core poly(propyl POLO, NIR Shell Crosslinking 
methacrylate) or poly(butyl methacrylate) + DYE 1, Shell:  poly(4-vinylpyridine-co- Core/shell Ratio methacrylic acid), 
), Crosslinked shell (using e.g. ethylene-glycol-bismethacrylate), optionally with nanoparticles (NPs) + DYE 2 (POLO)  
Super Absorbent Polymers (Core: Crosslinked poly(methacrylate-co-ethylene glycol POLO, NIR Core Crosslinking 
dimethacrylate) + DYE 3 (POLO) +  Shell: organic polymers such as poly(ethyl Core/shell Ratio methacrylate) and 
poly(methyl methacrylate) + DYE 4  
Microwave & Rf assisted materials (MWCNTs, MWCNTs functionalised with  NIR, 
diffractometry  Dispersion  metal nanoparticles or grown on SiO2 nanoparticles, SiC, Metal oxide 
nanoparticles (e.g. ZnO, iron oxide silica or alumina) + optional DYE 5  
Coating with one of above listed core shell  fluorescence  Dispersion 
spectroscopy HSI  
INDAR modified primer e.g.  HSI  Control  of  applied  
Epoxy + 30% blowing agents like azodicarbonamide or polycarboxylic acid  thickness  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 68 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Note: The above dyes used in the core shell structure are for the trigger material detection within final items so that the 
right treatment can be selected for disassembly. Further dyes will be considered to integrate in the core of the 
microcapsules to track for example the risk of premature triggering.   
Task 3.2 Selection of the identification techniques for triggerable materials - IRIS, IVV, RESCOLL, 
DEVAN, NTUA (M9M24).   
This task deals with the identification in a waste flow of the parts that include the triggered materials developed 
in the project. Test will begin with single-point measurement before shifting to imaging solutions that can deal 
with macro -scale objects. It is relevant to automatized waste sorting facilities but also as the triggered 
materials may only be locally discernible in section views (e.g. in case of primer/adhesives as opposed to 
coatings, especially for bonded parts, level 1 disassembly) or in case a spatial distribution of 
thickness/residual coating is needed. Tests will init ially start with monomaterials of triggered materials and 
then continue with coated substrates (case that will be validated in WP4-5) and bonded materials.  
For the microcapsules dispersed in a coating or adhesive, we will rely on detecting the dyes that were selected 
in the previous task independently of the matrix polymer to which they are added. Related inputs from IVV 
obtained during task 3.1 will be provided as a basis. Fluorescence spectroscopy coupled with an HSI camera 
will be used as most versatile technique but alternative techniques could be considered in case of insufficient 
resolution or for post project exploitation in more specific cases to lower the inv estment such as: (i) 
Fluorescence spectroscopy single point in tandem with a conventional (unfiltered) machine vision camera; (ii) 
Filters and grey-scale camera with a set of narrow band-pass filters in tandem with a conventional (unfiltered) 
machine vision camera; (iii) RGB camera (only if dyes emit in the Visible range and can be distinguished).  
For the INDAR primer or MW triggerable materials nanocomposites , we will respectively use NIR based 
technique and fluorescence spectroscopy (optionally X ray or simple fluorescence in case also fluorescence 
dyes are grafted to the particles). The techniques will be calibrated with a relevant set of samples from WP2. 
For each case where several options are possible, the most suitable one will be selected depending on cost, 
detection level, versatility (e.g. to detect several of our triggers), etc.  
Task 3.3 Sorting prototype concept and prototyping - IRIS, IVV (M19-M39).   
Subtask 3.3.1. Design and building of the hardware systems  
Based on the results of the offlin e trials performed in the previous task and in interaction with the design of 
the pilot line from WP4 (Task 4.2), the architecture of the system hardware will be conceptualized. The needs 
(and linked suitable positioning) for the inspection systems will be  defined. In principle we need the initial 
detection and post coating removal verification. That will be the basic hardware system. Two variations will 
also be considered: the option without the monitoring of the removal and the option to identify triggera ble 
parts before the assembly/grinding.   
The optical systems, as well as the enclosure and other optomechanical parts will be designed using 
mechanical CAD tools (e.g. SolidWorks) with inputs from ray -tracing software (e.g. ZEMAX) or Maxwell 
solvers when appropriate. The components (light source, beam shaping and imaging optics, detector and 
data acquisition hardware) will be selected from commercially available options whenever possible and be 
customised when necessary.   
Subtask 3.3.2 Software development  
The software is needed for driving the instruments, processing the data by means of predictive models and 
delivering the results  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 69 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
through the user interface and towards the pilot line operators. Hardware drivers and the raw data acquisition 
layer will be set up for the core device used in the previous subtask. The right modelling package will be 
embedded. The initial software version , which will include the required mathematical treatment of the 
images/spectra, will be delivered for the lab test rig for each of the triggered materials type.  
The final version of the software, adapted for semi -continuous sorting, will be built upon the initial version 
while incorporating additional functions required by the recycling pilot line (WP4) operator. In particular, the 
software will integrate in a single front end the software modules required for each  of the core devices. A 
simple user friendly Graphical User Interface will be set up by IRIS with guidance from AIMPLAS and the 
recyclers in the Advisory and Support Group.  
Subtask 3.3.3 Hard- and software validation  
Using the hardware and software from T3.3.1 and T3.3.2 respectively, the imaging capabilities will be 
validated before transferring and integrating the system into the pilot line. The hardware, software and 
calibration models will be adjusted as needed. A user manual including operational gui delines will be 
delivered. Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) procedure will be implemented following ISO 9001:2008 
processes.  
Task 3.4 Guidelines for use of optical techniques for monitoring and quality control in coatings and 
textiles and plastics processing – OSM, IRIS, IVV (M28-M39).   
Within tasks T3.1, T3.2 and T3.3 several techniques will be tested and applied to plastics and textiles 
processing. Indeed, we will develop solutions for the process control of the microcapsules production, of 
coating thickness and uniformity, of the debon ding. We will also determine the level of contamination (from 
the left-over coating) on plastics and textiles as well as the presence of specific markers within waste streams.  
These results will be used to provide guidelines for required process monitoring systems to be implemented 
in line during the post project upscaling phase to support constant production quality. However, these results 
will be also be useful beyond the applications foreseen within DECOAT. Therefore, we will also compose 
guidelines for use next to DECOAT.  
  
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D3.1 Concepts for inline process control (M18, IVV)  
D3.2 Selection of sorting techniques for each of the triggered materials (M24, IRIS)  
D3.3 Report on the design and building of tailored monitoring systems for the sorting step in the recycling 
pilot plant + the prototype itself (M30, IRIS)  
D3.4 Guidelines for widened use of the optical DECOAT techniques (M39, OSM)  
  
  
Work package 
number   
4  Start Date or Starting 
Event  
  
Work package title  Continuous recycling pilot line   
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of 
participant  
CTB  AIMPLA 
S  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANASO 
NIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number                    
Short name of 
participant  
RESCOL 
L  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMA 
T  
IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 70 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Objectives:  
• Set up of pilot plant to recycle coated textiles and coated plastic parts for mechanical and for 
chemical recycling  
• Evaluation of the coating debonding systems using the pilot recycling lines   
• Validation of the pilot recycling lines using a well-defined waste stream of coated textile and plastic 
materials  
   Quality analysis of the recycled materials and evaluation of their potential use  
Description of work  
Task 4.1 Set-up and implementation of the recycling pilot line - AIMPLAS, CTECH, IVV, IRES, IRIS 
(M18-M33).   
Although in practice, the chemical and mechanical part can be combined, the so-called mechanical 
recycling line will be located at AIMPLAS and the so -called chemical recycling line at partner IVV . 
This is due to practical reasons: the chemical 
part cannot easily be transported and requires a non-explosive environment.  
Based on the results obtained in Tasks 2.3 and 2.4 and in WP3, this task will be focused on designing, 
implementing, controlling and optimizing the components of the recycling pilot plant.  
Subtask 4.1.1 Mechanical line.   
The following devices will be installed and adapted to set up the mechanical pilot recycling line:  
1) Optical sorting: to remove the non-suitable parts in the waste stream and to show the identification of the 
triggers  
2) Grinding: reduction of the size of the plastic parts for improving the efficiency of the activation system and 
for more easy feeding the waste into the centrifuge and the recycled plastics into the extruder,   
3) Activation: this is the unit where the triggers (IR, heat, MW) can be applied to loosen the (primer layer of 
the) coating to ease separation. The key activity here is the building of dedicated MW equipment: cavity 
design, selection of energy range, feeding system.  
4) Separation: actual physical separation of coatings and plastic parts. Two options: (i) ‘spinning’ the material 
in a high speed centrifuge – this is expected to be the most general technique; (ii) density separation for 
some material combinations like coatings on a TPU foam (for example the MBT use case).  
5) Melt pelletising: final extrusion step to obtain recycled pellets free of coatings to be reused for new 
applications. The melt extrusion process will be assis ted by Sc-CO2 cleaning technology for removal of 
VOCs and odors.  
In addition, IRIS will install the monitoring systems delivered in WP3 in the selected points of the recycling 
process for sorting and coating removal control. They will train AIMPLAS staff and attend the initial trials to 
verify the correct monitored results.  
Subtask 4.1.2 Chemical line.   
The plant (size of 10kg batches) will include a grinding unit, dissolution unit, a separation unit, that allows 
separating dissolved coating from undissolved substrates, as well as drying unit for both undissolved and 
dissolved materials and a final extruder incorporating degassing, which will produce recycled granules. If 
degasification problems occur, grinded materials from the separation units will be introduced in the 
AIMPLAS melt compounding unit with Sc-CO2 cleaning technology.  
Task 4.2 Activation system dependent process optimization (Creasolv, MW and IR) at laboratory 
level - IVV, AIMPLAS, CTAG, CTECH, NTUA (M18-M33).   
For each of the coated waste streams that we consider, a selection needs to be made to identif y which of 
the proposed debonding systems, developed in WP2, is the most suitable activation technology. This 
selection will be based on an analysis with respect to their effectiveness in activating the triggers in the 
distinct applications among different  materials. This needs to be done for the triggered mechanical and 
chemical type of recycling. This work builds further on the activities from WP2 (especially Tasks 2.2 and 
2.3) and will be implemented in interaction with Task 2.4. In other words: the lab-scale findings of WP2 will 
be upscaled and translated towards industrial equipment. The outcome of task 4.2 will be established 
processing parameters for the different activation systems.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 71 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Subtask 4.2.1 Mechanical line.   
Using tests specimens with coatings with various percentages of MW susceptors (prepared in WP2) and 
discontinuous laboratory MW and standard ovens, the capacity of the melting of the primer layer will be 
evaluated. With the help of a DoE methodology, the materials with susceptors will be subjected to different 
MW and heating doses (taking into account as main parameters of the equipment: frequency, voltage power 
and time of exposure). The increase of temperature of the specimen during the test will be monitored by an 
infrared camera. The objective is to reduce the time inside the oven to less than 5 minutes without matrix 
degradation. The goal is that the process does not modify the final properties of the matrix. The properties 
of removed coating material w ill be measured using DSC and/or TGA tests. The amount of remaining 
coating on the plastic part will be evaluated according to protocol defined in Task 2.2.2. The activation 
technologies will be characterised using parameters such as: not affecting the pro perties of the substrate 
material, residence time in the oven and the energy and materials required for the coating removal.   
Subtask 4.2.2 Chemical line.   
The Creasolv® Process will be used for a selective dissolution of coatings and for initial sample production. 
This may be done a) by dissolution of the coating itself, or b) in case of presence of a primer layer by 
dissolving that layer only. Whereas a) would allow a solid/liquid separation of dissolved coating from 
undissolved substrate directly, b) implies a subsequent separation of coating films from substrate matter. It 
is expected that coating material and substrate will exhibit differences in density, thu s separation of both 
after removing the primer layer will be performed by density separation in liquids exhibiting a density 
between the densities of both materials. This in order to obtain a stream with components that can be 
separated by density or other separation technologies. Dissolved coatings will be separated from the solvent 
and the solvent will be completely re-used in the  
process. The coating polymer will be recovered and evaluated for a suitable second life application in 
Task 4.4.  
Task 4.3 Validation of the recycling pilot line performance using well -defined waste streams made 
with flat testspecimens - AIMPLAS, IVV, MAIER, MBT, PANASONIC (M30-M39).   
The goal is to validate the two recycling pilot lines. For this purpose, specific test samples will be produced. 
The test samples will be a combination of coating material, triggerable additive and substrate. The task will 
validate the recycling pilot plan ts (mechanical at AIMPLAS and Creasolv at IVV) for at least two types of 
substrates (plastic object and textile fabric).   
Each of the defined process parameters will be optimized for each waste stream to minimize energy/material 
consumption per kilogram o f treated material and maximize the final properties of the final recycled 
products.   
Task 4.4 Maximising the application potential of the recycled materials - CTAG, AIMPLAS, 
PANASONIC, MAIER, MBT, 
IVV, CTB, NTUA (M30-M42)   
Here, we will characterise the recycled materials coming from Task 4.3. First, we need to determine the 
purity of the material, see also Task 2.2.2, to check if we get in the scaled up line the same levels as on 
smaller scale. Second, we need the classical characterisation to determine  the quality of the recycled 
materials and to determine the recycling yield, using the most suitable techniques (for example Electronic 
microscopy, DSC, DMTA, rheological tests, thermal behaviour, ageing behaviour). NTUA can support this 
task with: SEM/EDX , TGA, rheology measurements, hardness measurements, microCT analysis.  The 
purity of the substrate material will be investigated by specific analysis (microscopy, FTIR, DSC, REM). 
CTAG can test the recycled material following end -user standards: climate ageing, UV and IR resistance, 
resistance to different chemicals, fatigue, impact, tensile strength. The quality of the recycled materials will 
be determined following the suitable EN/ISO standards to assess if we are above or below the maximum 
level of damage that the coating can withstand and considering the different types of materials.   
On top of that, we will study the selection of suitable additives to upgrade the recycled polymer materials , 
eg by protecting from degradation during recycling with the g oal to widen their lifespan (e.g. thermal 
protection, antioxidants, compatibilizers, chain extenders, UV stability, etc.). For this, we will use the state-
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 72 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
of-the-art at that moment as this is a field in full progress. The goal is to optimise the substrate material 
during recycling for maximising the circular use.  
Based on the characterisation and ‘upgrading’ of the recycled material, an analysis of the potential uses of 
the recycled materials will be done. This will depend on the purity of the materials we can get. This is crucial 
as the re-use of the recycled materials might not be necessarily for the same applications as the original 
one, but might be more suited for other applications. We will investigate that, making sure that these other 
applications go for the highest added value as possible.  
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D4.1 Prototype: mechanical and chemical recycling pilot line (M30, AIMPLAS)  
D4.2 Report: process optimisation for the different activation technologies (M33, IVV)  
D4.3 Report: pilot line validation and performance (M39, AIMPLAS)  
D4.4 Report: main properties of recycled streams and their potential applications (M42, CTAG)  
  
  
Work package 
number   
5  Start Date or Starting Event   M31  
Work package title  Demonstration circular use   
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of 
participant  
CTB  AIMPLA 
S  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANASO 
NIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  
Short name of 
participant  
RESCOL 
L  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMA 
T  
IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 73 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
Objectives: General objective is the demonstration of the circular use of coated parts via 
triggered debonding  
• Make prototype of a ‘circular coated part’ for at least 4 actual parts – one for 
each end-user 
   Demonstration of circular use for at least 1 plastics and 1 textile 
based part  
• Prepare for industrial take-up  
  
 
Description of work:  
Task 5.1: Eco -design of use case products in view of project technological developments - MBT, 
MAIER, CTAG, PANASONIC, ECOMAT, VAUDE (M31-M42).  
Activities of this task aim at selecting the most appropriate materials and processing, among those 
developed in previous WPs, to be used for the manufacturing of the final prototypes. The primary selection 
criterion will be the level of compliance to the requirements of each end use case, as specified in WP1, both 
in terms of materials properties and in terms of production parameters. Interim results of the LCA, LCC and 
safety analysis (WP6) will also be considered as well as the updated intelligence on exploitation (WP7).   
Where needed a redesign of the (coating of the) part will be performed to make the recycling easier. This  
could mean for example the addition of a tie layer to introduce the required debonding adhesives or using 
a different type of coating material.  
The redesign will also have to take into account that materials need to be used that can go through several 
cycles of use.  
We will consider the full cycle of processes the parts / products need to go through. This means that based 
on the developments made in WP1 to WP4, the full value chain for making the product circular cycle 
will be made. This includes the use  of the debonding technology developed. That way, we will make a 
realistic assessment of the disassembly, the triggered mechanical recycling and/or the Creasolv recycling 
steps that will be needed to obtain the substrate material, and potentially also the coated material, again as 
a secondary raw material. If the initial requirements, defined in Task 1.1 can be met, the materials could be 
fully used for the same application again. In the case not all requirements can be fulfilled, the most likely 
scenario, alternative solutions will have to be sought, eg addition of virgin material, use of the materials for 
alternative but also high value applications, perhaps adding an extra cleaning/recycling step/…   
The outcome of this task will be a report describing for at least 8 material combinations (which will be 
based on the use case of the end users) the value chain and technologies to reach circularity. These 
8 cases will act as examples and the goal is to make this public, to inspire and stimulate external partners.  
Task 5.2: Manufacturing of prototypes - MAIER, MBT, CTAG, PANASONIC, AIMPLAS, CTB (M36 -
M46).   
Manufacturing of at least 4 prototypes , ideally one for each end -user (VAUDE, MAIER, DAIMLER, 
PANASONIC) to show the proof of principle for ‘circular’ use.   
The goal of the task is to show that products can be produced meeting the necessary requirements and that 
the coating can be removed. This means that apart from the actual coated part, (some of) the other parts of 
the product need to be made, to be able to show the full disassembly, decoating and recycling process.  
The goal is to manufacture these four prototypes out of the following list of the use cases, see section 2.1.2. 
Comprehensive testing will be done, according to the specifications of each pro totype, by the end -users 
(VAUDE, PANASONIC, MAIER and MBT) in collaboration with the RTD partners.  
Task 5.3 Implementation of circular use cases - AIMPLAS, MAIER, MBT, PANASONIC, CTAG, VAUDE 
(M39-M48).  
For at least two of the use cases (one for plastics substrate and one for textiles substrate), we will 
show ‘multiple circular use’ for a coated part. For showing this, we will use: (i) the pilot recycling developed 
in WP4; (ii) the optical sorting and monitoring systems developed in WP3. For the pilot plant recycling trials, 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 74 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
we aim for at least 10-15kg of material to be processed in a batch process. Given that the use case products 
we target (see section 2.1.2) typically weigh some kilograms, it implies that we aim for showing circularity 
on products sets o f some tens of pieces. We will focus on the debonding step, i.e. the so -called 2nd level 
(see also section 1.3(a)). Where also the 1st level, i.e. the disassembly, is needed, this will be done manually. 
Goal is to show the use of the materials for at least two cycles, with minimum addition of virgin material.   
Further, we want to show the circular use of two generic items : one coated textile and one coated 
(injection moulded) plastic part. For each of them, we will aim for at least 5 cycles of material use , with 
minimum addition of virgin material. This will require the selection of coating and substrate materials that 
allow being recycled. For these trials, we need to focus on material combinations (coating and substrate) 
that are able to go through several recycling cycles. For textiles, a logical candidate could be a PES fabric 
with a PVC or TPU coating. For plastics, an ABS substrate painted with PUR, epoxy or acrylic.  
Task 5.4 Evaluation & Guidelines for further industrial take-up – MAIER, MBT, PANASONIC, CTAG, 
IRES, VAUDE (M39M48).  
From the technical side, and with the help of WP6, the guidelines will include elements like which trigger to 
add to which coatings/substrates, practical debonding systems, set-up of recycling lines, recommendation 
for further scale up,…. Other aspects to be considered will be the practical handling of the materials (eg 
shelf life), safety aspects where needed,…   
This will help “production” and “marketing” to consider new strategies to promote the debondable coatings 
and to compensate for the anticipated (slightly) higher cost of the new DECOAT-based products.  
  
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D5.1 Ecodesign of coated parts –value chain for at least 8 cases (M42, MBT)  
D5.2 Report on production of prototypes (M46, MAIER)  
D5.3 Demonstration Circular use cases (M48, AIMPLAS)  
D5.4 Guidelines for industrial up-take (M48, MAIER)  
  
Work package 
number   
6  Start Date or Starting Event  M1  
Work package title  Environment and Safety  
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of 
participant  
CTB  AIMPLA 
S  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANASO 
NIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  
Short name of 
participant  
RESCOL 
L  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMA 
T  
IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 75 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Objectives:   
• Life cycle assessment (LCA) will analyse environmental aspects and impacts of product systems and 
will assess how the developed products and processes will affect the environment, and human health, 
in their life cycle perspective.   
• Cost evaluation: Economic and market analysis refers not only to the cost of the formed materials but 
also contains the wider implications of technology selection on company performance.   
• Risk assessment and Safe-by-Design (SbD) approach will be applied in the early stages of DECOAT 
project. During the R&D and design phases of the proposed technologies SbD approaches will be 
introduced and used as a result of a continuous evaluation.   
• Health risks assessment by performing in vitro toxicity tests.  
• An innovative eco -design tool will be developed to identify benefits and strategies to support the 
industrial sectors.   
Description of work:  
Task 6.1: Risk assessment & Safe-by-Design principles - IRES, NTUA & ALL PARTNERS (M1-M39).   
A Safe-by-Design approach will be applied in the early stages of DECOAT project and will emphasize on 
the decision making process regarding design, materials used and methods in order to enhance the safety 
of final products and con trol the related health risks. Safe -by-Design aims at addressing safety issues 
already during the R&D and design phases of the proposed technologies. Safe by Design approaches will 
be employed to minimise health hazards, environmental and economic impacts.  One of the key elements 
for establishing a safety management system and implementing Safe by Design principles into the DECOAT 
project, is to ensure that risks associated with hazards are evaluated and managed within acceptable safety 
requirements, via risk assessment techniques and methods. DECOAT project aims to set out specific duties 
applying to employers and manufacturers focusing on risks associated with the use of hazardous 
substances. Special attention will be given to the description of properties, health hazards, precautions for 
use (e.g. REACH) and safe handling of hazardous substances, providing vital information not only to the 
employers but also to end-users. Finally, the aim of this task is to supervise safety procedures at the early 
stage an d update them periodically while toxicological information received from Task 6.4 (from 
nanomaterials synthesis to the final disposal) becomes available.  
Task 6.2: Life Cycle Assessment - ECOMAT, IRES & ALL PARTNERS (M12-M46).   
Life cycle assessment studies will be implemented in order to evaluate the environmental impacts of the 
product systems incorporating the developed coatings and the respective recycling processes, as well as 
determine the environmental performance improvem ents of the suggested processes compared to the 
current end-of-life scenarios (landfilling or energy recovery). Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a structured, 
comprehensive and internationally standardised method for environmental impacts of product systems. LCA 
takes into consideration products’ full life cycle, beginning from the extraction of resources, continuing with 
the production, use, recycling and ending with the disposal of remaining waste. It is distinguished from other 
environmental assessment met hods by two unique features: the analysis from ‘cradle -to-grave’ and the 
‘functional unit’. Specific guidelines and standards, such as ISO 14040 and 14044, provide the 
indispensable framework for Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA). DECOAT project will take advant age of this decision support tool, using commercial 
software, in order to 
develop competitive and sustainable innovative products.  
By M12 the four most prominent applications (coated material + coating) will be chosen for serving as a 
base for the assessment within the project as case study parts (1 coated textile, 1 coated electronics part, 
2 automotive parts). The assessment of environmental impacts of the product systems will be based on the 
functional units of a service provided by a respective part to the main end user over a period of one year.  
The assessments will run from M12 on and in the beginning (estimated TRL3 -TRL4) would include 
screening LCA studies with identification of the hotspots for the materials and production choices at the 
moment of assessments on the laboratory or experimental scale, as well as the assessment of the base 
level product systems scenari os. These will make a significant contribution to the development of the 
technology, incorporating eco -design strategies to the product development. Once the technology 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 76 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
development reaches the point of a reasonable certainty about the production processes (TRL5) and allows 
to decide about the type of coating material and product recycling technology for each of the trial parts, a 
full LCA will be implemented. As a result, four full LCA studies will be reported covering each of the study 
case part with the c hosen coating material and recycling technology. Sensitivity analysis is to be 
implemented for the final full LCA studies in order to evaluate the performance from the perspectives of 
different scenarios of the products’ future, and to validate the improvements independently on the analyses 
methodological choices. Special attention will be paid to evaluation of the impact of methodological choices 
regarding the product systems’ end -of-life, including landfilling, incineration, bulk material recycling, and 
coating material recycling.  
Data collection will be conducted continuously throughout the project. It will include regularly primary data 
collection for the processes under investigation with involvement of technical experts in workshops and 
questionnaires and supported by the secondary data collection with use of internationally recognised 
databases, including specialized on the process data in coating industry.   
Task 6.3 Life Cycle Costing - IRES, NTUA, ECOMAT & ALL PARTNERS (M18-M46).  
Life Cycle Costing (LCC) is an assessment of all costs related to a product or service, over the entire life 
cycle, from production over use until disposal. IRES will combine LCC with LCA in order to provide a holistic 
approach regarding Life Cycle Cost. This combination w ill lead to the estimation and the same time 
minimisation of the economic impact arising from the applied processes and the material used. As a general 
pillar of this WP economic analysis will include material costs, manufacturing costs, operation costs an d 
maintenance costs of developed multifunctional systems. A comparison among all these costs, regarding 
DECOAT’s innovative materials and traditional ones, will be made. Main focus of this task will be the 
economic sustainability and the competitiveness of  both the final materials and the developed processes. 
In this framework, LCC will be applied in order to ensure that the evolution of the produced materials will be 
evaluated on time to match with the commercial life of recycling products. In addition, issues related to the 
evolution that technology and the market can be submitted, giving a competitive advantage that will boost 
the EU’s circular economy. Thus, the economic analysis which will take place into DECOAT project refers 
not only to the cost of ma terials and manufacturing but also includes the wider implications of technology 
selection on project’s performance.  
Task 6.4 Toxicity, Release and Exposure assessment - NTUA, IRES, CTB, AIMPLAS, CTAG, CTB, IVV 
(M6-M39).   
Due to that fact that safe by design always includes a compromise between functionality and safety, residual 
health risks cannot be excluded in DECOAT proposal, where a variety of nanomaterials is synthesized in 
WP1. In this task, this residual health risk will be assessed by performing in vitro toxicity tests initially on the 
developed hybrid nanomaterials, which have not been extensively studied. Moreover, release tests will be 
executed to the final formulations and representative specimens, to ensure that the nanomaterials are 
embedded in the adhesives, without any risk of mitigation. Finally, exposure assessment will be conducted 
to identify, characterise and quantify releases in the recycling processing activities (WP4) that may present 
an exposure risk, through open source software. The activities undertaken will allow the development of 
best practice risk management, to minimise and control the health risks for researchers, manufacturers and 
end-users involved with the project.  
Task 6.5 Eco-design tool - ECOMAT, IRES, OSM (M12-M46).  
To make use of the results of the assessments of the WP6, and to facilitate dissemination of DECOAT 
technological solutions,  
Task 6.5 will develop an eco-design tool for benefits and strategies identification. The tool aims to support 
the industrial sectors (both Project partners and external parties) to identify eco -design strategies for new 
products based on the DECOAT solutions (qualitative module), as well as to quantify the benefits of using 
the DECOAT solutions in their businesses (quantitative module). To increase accessibility of the tool, it will 
be developed in the form of a web tool available for use by the external parties at the website of the DECOAT 
project. The scope will focus on one generic combination of a coated material and a coating solution, and 
thus would be applicable to multiple products within different sectors. The exact materials and coatings will 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 77 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
be identified and selected in M12 based on the preliminary assessment results on the most prominent and 
elaborated combination.  
The tool will be developed in three main stages. At the first stage (M12-M18) internal and external research 
will be implemented  
to identify the functionality o f the tool and the scope of the required output information. At the end of the 
stage, the conceptual design of the tool will be developed, including structure, features and functionality. 
The second stage (M19 -M36) will focus on translating the conceptual design into a qualitative and 
quantitative assessment tool with the main purpose of communicating the tangibility of DECOAT results. As 
this stage the basic architecture of the tool will be developed. The tool will exploit first the preliminary 
screening LCA results, and will be digitalised as a web-based tool that went through technical and functional 
testing. The qualitative outputs will identify the main user’s opportunities to benefit from including DECOAT 
solutions into own product design or value chain. At the final stage (M24 – M48) the tool will be adjusted to 
the quantitative higher certainty results of full LCA and LCC studies, incorporating the qualitative 
assessment of the potential benefits to exploit the DECOAT solutions.   
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D6.1. Risk assessment & Safe-by-Design Report (prelim M24 ; final M39, IRES)  
D6.2. Life Cycle Assessment (prelim M18, final M46, ECOMAT)  
D6.3. Cost evaluation Report (prelim M24, final M46, IRES)  
D6.4. Risk management Plan including Toxicity, Release and Exposure assessment. (M39, NTUA, IRES)  
D6.5 Online tool for the benefits assessment by the external parties (qualitative test version M36, final 
M46, ECOMAT)  
  
  
Work package 
number   
7  Start Date or Starting Event  M1  
Work package title  Exploitation, dissemination and communication  
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of 
participant  
CTB  AIMPLA 
S  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANASO 
NIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  
Short name of 
participant  
RESCOL 
L  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMA 
T  
IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
Objectives:   
• Professional dissemination and communication, including definition of target groups  
• Setup and implement exploitation and IP strategy to protect and leverage DECOAT results  
• Develop documents for policy input to promote the industrial take-up of DECOAT developments  
• Ensure DECOAT complies with relevant standards and interact with standardisation bodies to 
promote standardisation  
• Create liaisons with relevant EU Clusters, EU projects and external bodies for leveraging DECOAT 
impact  
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 78 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Description of work:  
Task 7.1 Update and evaluation of outreach strategy - CTB, OSM, ISWA, ECOMAT, ALL PARTNERS 
(M1-M48).  
The goal of this task is to extend the initial PEDR and to have a first more detailed plan, collecting input 
from ALL partners, by M6. Afterwards, the PEDR will be regularly (i.e. 12-monthly) updated, ad hoc updates 
will be done as needed. This frequent updating is considered needed for optimising the activities among 
the partnership.  
When implementing our outreach activities, we will focus on 3 main areas:  
(i) exploitation & technology transfer, preparing for further (industrial) uptake and leveraging of DECOAT 
outcome  
(ii) dissemination to ‘peers’ and wider stakeholder community  
(iii) communication to EU citizens – waste & recycling, especially of the thematic of textiles and 
plastics recycling as this topic is ‘living’ among the wider public in several European countries. Via 
DECOAT we want to convey the message that science and technology can bring valuable solutions for 
environmental issues (and is not only causing them).  
Within the PEDR we will also include evaluation activities: at least yearly, and also after major events (eg 
after press release or an event).   
Task 7.2: Exploitation and technology transfer - OSM, ECOMAT, ALL partners (M1-M48).   
Exploitation activities  will cover the assessment of the market and of the exploitation/business 
potential by the SMEs and the industrial partners. It will start with a cost benefit analysis identifying its 
particular possibilities for production and commercialization. The exploitation plan will study in detail the 
different exploitation strategies for the project outcomes and those to be involved after the end of DECOAT. 
Major input to the effort will be provided by the SME and industry partners involved in 
the technical and economic aspects. Barriers that may prevent the market penetration (see also section 
2.1.4) of the DECOAT solutions into the manufacturing industry will be identified and strategies to overcome 
them outlined. The industrial partners will further develop preliminary business plans for the relevant 
DECOAT outcome, elaborating the preliminary draft plans for exploitation provided at proposal stage (see 
section D2 of the PEDR). Such updates will be done at M18, M36 and M48.  
Throughout the project the Exploitation and Innovation Manager (EIM, see also section 3.2.1.1) will also 
have the task to identify (potentially) patentable results generated by the partners and ensure they are 
protected. At the end of the technical development of each use case, a specific IP study will be conducted 
in order to highlight the new knowledge acquired during the study  and to better determine the degree of 
innovation of the product or the process. When an exploitable (potentially patentable) result is identified, a 
working group of relevant partners will be established under coordination of the EIM. After a thorough study, 
suggestions will be made regarding the scope and type of the patent according to the stakes and the 
strategies of the involved partners, while keeping in mind the Consortium Agreement regulations. This IP 
study will focus on the ownership; the nature of the knowledge, and its perceived potential for exploitation; 
the agreed status of the item concerning access rights, plans to use the knowledge in exploitation, or plans 
to disseminate it outside the consortium; measures required, or in place, to ensure protection of IP for the 
item.  
Technology transfer. Since technological innovation will be generated within DECOAT, partners will be 
committed to serve as sites of technology transfer. Additionally, the Enterprise Europe Network will be used 
for technology transfer as it is the largest European Innovation Transfer Network and it reaches especially 
small businesses. The network includes chambers of commerce and industry, technology centres, 
universities and development agencies.  
Task 7.3: Dissemination & communication - ISWA, ALL PARNTERS (M1-M48).   
Website, logo and newsletter. A distinctive logo of DECOAT is already created and will be used on the 
website (will be setup and designed by OSM) and all project promotional material. The public section of the 
website will offer general information on the project and the technology area, as well as all public 
deliverables and other public documents produced in the framework of the project. Electronic newsletters 
with the progress of workflow will be available every 4 months. Special attention will be given to the quality 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 79 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
of the web pages: ISWA will be in charge of their development and frequent updating. ALL PARTNERS will 
be expected to contribute to the content for the newsletters and report on their activities and (partial) results. 
ISWA will disseminate project news, including to its members and partners, and incorporate the 
developments in their own bimonthly Newsletter.  
Continuous dissemination. Presentation of work progress of DEC OAT and of its results to the most 
relevant target groups will rely on participation to international meetings. It is anticipated that from ca. 12 
months on, DECOAT presentations should be given regularly by partners at relevant events. For these 
events, ISWA will piggyback on important conferences on this topic taking place at the city/municipality 
level, helping keep the costs low and reach a wider audience. Appropriate events (conferences, fairs, 
workshops) have been identified, see table in section 2.2 and also in the partners description (Section 4). 
ALL PARTNERS are expected to contribute to the content for the presentations and report on their activities 
and (partial) results.  
Dissemination campaigns (DC). An important part of this task is the implementation of the 3 DCs. These 
DCs aim to give a boost to the dissemination at specific timings over the project. More specifically the first 
DC wants to increase the awareness of the project while with the second DC the cooperation with partners 
outside DECOAT is stimulated. Finally DC3 will serve as ‘final event’ to promote the final project results and 
to aid the continuation of DECOAT after the project end. Part of the DCs will be the communication 
activities, including the press releases for DC1 and DC3. See also section 2.2.  Task 7.4 Policy input and 
standardisation - ISWA, AIMPLAS, CTB, CTAG, ECOMAT (M12-M48).  
Life Cycle Costing (LCC) performed in WP6 is an assessment of all costs related to a product or service, 
over the entire life cycle, from production over use until disposal. Thus, the economic analysis which will 
take place into DECOAT project refers not only to the cost of materials and manufacturing but also includes 
the wider implications of technology selection on project’s performance.  
Standardization activities bridge the gap between research and the introduction to the market, which will in 
turn bri ng significant economic benefits. The standardization activity within DECOAT will address: i) 
Identification of current standards that fall within the scope of the project, especially those addressing the 
“Sustainability Analysis”; ii) Identification of th e need for standardization; iii) Organization of workshops 
within identified technical committees; iv) Evaluation of how the innovative products from the project meet 
ongoing regulatory requirement such as REACH but also OECD guidance, especially those in the WPMN 
(Working Party on Manufactured Nanomaterials; e.g. Life Cycle Studies applied for nanomaterials) or in the 
WPRPW (Working Party on Resource, Productivity and Waste) (e.g. waste management of nanomaterials 
such as landfill, recycling or incineration).  
We will closely work with national and European standardisation bodies, see also the inclusion of CEN -
CENELEC, ELOT and UNE in the Advisory and Support Group. One of the DECOAT aspects that can open 
a new field of standardisation related to recycling is the definition and protocol for ‘debonding’, see also task 
2.2.2. For further acceptance and take-up by the industry such protocols are of high relevance. DECOAT is 
well-placed as several of its partners are involved in standardisation matters.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 80 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Examples: AIMPLAS is participating in the follow committees of standardization: AEN / CTN 53 / SC 8 on 
"Recycled Materials"; AEN / CTN 53 / SC1 AEN / CTN 53 / SC6 on "Raw material specifications and test 
methods"; CTB participates for example in CEN TC248 WG4 ‘Textiles – coated fabrics’ (convenor of this 
WG is part of the DECOAT ASG, see also section 4.1).   
Task 7.5 Liaison with EU Clusters, EU projects and external bodies - CTB, IRES, IRIS, NTUA, ALL 
PARTNERS (M12-M48).  
This task will facilitate the engagement with EU Clusters, in the areas of exposure and risk assessment 
being addressed in the work package and across the project. A couple of concrete anticipated activities:  
• CFPC – the Carbon Fibres and Advanced High Performance Composites, via IRES who is chairing 
its Working Group of Safety and Standardisation. Goal: share experienced -based good practices on 
hazard and exposure data.   
• EU Nano-Safety Cluster, via partner NTUA who is chairing the Materials and Standards Working. Goal: 
share best practices, learn from other (in parallel running) projects.  
• EMCC - European Materials Characterisation Council, via partners NTUA and IRES who are in its 
Organisational Management Board. Goal: interaction for the characterisation of the nanomaterials.   
• Vision2020 – Helix on Circular Plastics: is being built by partner AIMPLAS; is expected to mobilise a 
number of stakeholders that could be relevant for / reached via DECOAT.  
• European (H2020) projects running in parallel, for example MULTICYCLE (SPIRE-10-2018) being 
coordinated by IRIS, that will start fall 2018. It is dedicated to the recycling of composites and is naturally 
linked with DECOAT. Also interest to align with other projects from that call (SPIRE-10-2018) and from 
this call (NMBP -26-2018). Goal: exchange latest results & information, create synergies, search for 
common dissemination & communication activities.   
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D7.1 - Project ‘online’ (social media) strategy and promotional material available – DC1 (M3, ISWA)   
D7.2 – Updated planning for PEDR (prelim M4 + updates M18, M30, M42, CTB)  
D7.3 – Strategy and business plans for exploitation and tech-transfer (prelim M4, update M18 & M30, final 
– M48, OSM)  
D7.4 – Organisation of event ‘call for collaboration’ - DC2 (M34, CTB)   
D7.5 - Final event: Technology Transfer Symposium/Workshop - DC3 (M46, ISWA)  
D7.6 - Report on policy, standardisation input and liaison activities (M48, ISWA)  
  
  
Work package 
number   
8  Start Date or Starting Event  M1  
Work package title  Coordination  
Participant number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  
Short name of 
participant  
CTB  AIMPLA 
S  
IVV  CTAG  NTUA  VAUDE  PANASO 
NIC  
MBT  MAIER  
Person/months per 
participant:  
         
Participant number  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  
Short name of 
participant  
RESCOL 
L  
CTECH  DEVAN  IRIS  ECOMA 
T  
IRES  OSM  ISWA    
Person/months per 
participant:  
          
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 81 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
Objectives:   
• Efficient management at administrative and technical level: taking appropriate actions to meet the 
project objectives and assuring the continuing commitment of the DECOAT partners.  
• Day-to-day coordination: ensuring integration of all activities, organising the information flow, GA 
meetings, etc.   
• Provide detailed activity reporting and planning, enabling the EC to properly review the project 
progress.  
• Data Management: The efficient data management will ensure that research data will be easily 
discoverable, accessible, assessable and intelligible, usable beyond the original purpose for which 
they were collected, interoperable to specific quality standards, whenever relevant.   
Description of work:  
Task 8.1: Efficient management at the administrative level - CTB, IRES, ALL PARTNERS (M1-M48).   
The task consists of the accounting and distribution of the budget, the analysis of project expenditure and 
the collection of cost statements. It includes communication with the EC and partners in the synthesis and 
distribution of periodic financial reports. The 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 82 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
periodic reports (progress reports and periodic activity reports) will be consolidated by the coordinator, 
supported by the Quality Manager.   
Task 8.2: Day-to-day coordination - CTB, IRES (M1-M48).   
The day to day coordination will be realised through the structures and procedures as described in section 
2.1:  
• The Coordinator (CTB) will maintain an overview of the project and will directly report to the EC project 
officer,  
• The Project Steering Committee (PSC) will take major project related decisions and report them to the 
Coordinator and the workpackage leaders. The PSC is composed of the Quality Manager (IRES), the 
Exploitation & Innovation Manager (OSM), the Demonstration Manager (DEVAN) and the Research 
and Technology Manager (NTUA). The role of each manager is described in section 3.2.1.1.  
The coordination includes also the development of the overall layout and updating of the internet based 
Collaborative Work Platform will optimize the management and the progress of the project (coordinator and 
Dissemination Manager).  
This task comprises also the organisation of the nearly 6-monthly General Assembly (GA), see exact timings 
in the Gantt  chart, and the technical meetings, the communication strategy, risk management and conflict 
management (see also section 3.2.1).  
Task 8.3: Detailed activity reporting and updating of the planning and project risks - IRES, CTB, 
ALL PARTNERS (M1M48).   
The task comprises collecting and reporting the results as well as setting up a detailed work plan containing 
the description of the subtasks. A set of indicators which will provide an instrument to monitor the progress 
of each task and of the project acti vities will be defined by Month 4. These indicators will be specific, 
measurable and scheduled in time. This task will be undertaken by the coordinator CTB and Quality 
Manager (IRES).  
This task of planning involves also the risk management, which will be carried out by considering the main 
steps of risk assessment (risk identification, risk analysis, risk evaluation) together with monitoring and 
communication. The preliminary risk identification has been developed at proposal stage (see section 3.2.4) 
and will be regularly updated during the project. The assessment of risks will be developed through 
project internal workshops and surveys, with inclusion of the ASG members . The evolution of the 
identified risks as well as the early warnings from possible eme rging risks related to the new technologies 
will be constantly monitored. Strategy for monitoring and mitigating risks will be developed to support the 
coordination of the project as a whole. The identification of the risks of the project will cover the fo llowing 
areas:  
• Technological risks (specific materials and process research related barriers)  
• Market risks (market adoption and acceptance, cost/time over runs, raw material supply)  
• IPR issues and exploitation (patents and scientific knowledge management)  
• Environment, regulations and safety (challenges in Policy, Regulation and Law according)  
The overview of the DECOAT project risks will be updated regularly and will be integrated in the progress 
reports.   
Task 8.4: Data Management - IRES, OSM, ALL partners (M1-M48)   
Throughout DECOAT, large amounts of Data are expected to be generated. IRES will be responsible for 
the Design and Implementation of a solid Plan for the collection, storage, evaluation and exploitation of the 
data that will be produced during and after DECOAT. Openness, accessibility to beneficiaries and reusability 
of the produced Data will also be ensured by the Data Management Plan, in order to open the road for the 
Open Innovation Environme nt (OIE). The Data Management Plan includes all the necessary steps for 
efficient collection, safe storage, deep exploitation and evaluation of the data. These steps involve the Data 
Repository for sharing data and the Design and Implementation of a proces s, which will integrate data 
coming from different sources (Data Mapping) and securely store them. IRES will also take action for 
Metadata Handling and Sensitive Data Handling. Furthermore, Data produced throughout DECOAT will be 
shared among open European Research Databases. The project will comply with the newly imposed rules 
concerning data quality, sharing and security (also GDPR principles will be applied).   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 83 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
A Data Management Plan will be produced by M12 and updated at the project midterm and end. We will 
ensure that: research data will be easily discoverable, accessible, assessable and intelligible, usable 
beyond the original purpose for which they were collected, interoperable to specific quality standards, 
whenever relevant. The database will be used as a first basis for exploitation of results and further exchange 
of knowledge and expertise.  
Deliverables - description (leader, month):  
D8.1 - Quality & Risk Manual: definition for monitoring risks and for internal self-evaluation system (IRES, 
M4)  
D8.2 - Data Management Plan (IRES, M12, updated on M36)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 84 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
D8.3 
  8.5: Periodic progress reports (CTB, M8, M22, M38), in between expected official reporting at 
M16, M30, M48.  
D8.6 – Final report on Data Management and (IRES, M48)  
  
3.1.4 List of Work Packages  
Table 3.1b: List of work packages   
No.  Work Package Title  Lead Part. 
No.  
Lead  Part.  
Short Name  
Person- 
Months  
Start  
Month  
End 
Month  
1  Triggerable materials for coatings  5  NTUA  102  1  39  
2  Development of coating debonding 
systems  
1  CTB  128  1  39  
3  Optical monitoring  13  IRIS  91  4  39  
4  Continuous recycling pilot line  2  AIMPLAS  125  18  42  
5  Demonstration circular use  8  MAIER  126  30  48  
6  Environment and Safety  15  IRES  99  1  46  
7  Exploitation, dissemination and 
communication  
17  ISWA  86  1  48  
8  Coordination  1  CTB  55  1  48  
        812      
  
3.1.5 List of Deliverables  
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables   
No.  Deliverable name  W 
P  
Lead  Part. 
Short Name  
Type72  Dissem 
.  
Level73  
Delive 
ry 
date  
D1.1  Specifications & requirements according to the 
demonstrators needs  
1  CTB  R  CO  M3  
D7.1  Project ‘online’ & promotional material available – 
DC1  
7  ISWA  DEC  PU  M3  
D7.2  Updated planning for PEDR – Preliminary  7  CTB  R  CO  M4  
D7.3  Strategy & business plans for exploitation – 
Preliminary  
7  OSM  R  CO  M4  
D8.1  Quality & Risk Manual: monitoring risks & internal 
self-evaluation   
8  IRES  R  CO  M4  
D8.3  Periodic progress report  8  CTB  R  CO  M8  
D1.3  Delivery of Super Absorbent Polymers  1  NTUA  R  CO  M10  
D1.2  Thermo-responsive core-shell nanostructured co-
polymers  
1  DEVAN, 
NTUA  
R  CO  M12  
                                                
72 R: document, report; DEM: demonstrator; DEC: websites, media actions, videos, etc.; OTHER: software, etc.  
73 PU: public, fully open; CO: confidential; CI: classified  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 85 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
D2.1  Report: development of coating formulations and 
basic coatings  
2  NTUA  R  CO  M12  
D8.2  Data Management Plan  8  IRES  R  CO  M12  
D2.2  Protocol for determining the separation capacity  2  CTB  R  CO  M18  
D3.1  Concepts for inline process control  3  IVV  R  CO  M18  
D6.2  Life Cycle Assessment – Preliminary report  6  ECOMAT  R  CO  M18  
D7.2  Updated planning for PEDR - Update  7  CTB  R  CO  M18  
D7.3  Strategy & business plans for exploitation - Update  7  OSM  R  CO  M18  
D1.4  Delivery of microwave assisted materials  1  NTUA  R  CO  M21  
D8.4  Periodic progress report  8  CTB  R  CO  M22  
D1.5  Final report on synthesis of materials and their 
optimisation  
1  NTUA  R  CO  M24  
D1.6  Up-scaling production of the most promised 
triggering material  
1  DEVAN  R  CO  M24  
D2.3  Final report on the development of coating 
debonding solutions    
2  CTB  R  CO  M24  
D3.2  Selection of sorting techniques for each of the 
triggered materials  
3  IRIS  R  CO  M24  
D6.3  Cost evaluation Report – Preliminary report  6  IRES  R  CO  M24  
D6.1  Risk assessment & Safe-by-Design Report – 
Preliminary report  
6  IRES  R  CO  M24  
D2.4  Report: broadened applications  2  RESCOLL  R  CO  M30  
D3.3  Report on the design and building of tailored 
monitoring systems for the sorting step in the 
recycling pilot plant + the prototype itself  
3  IRIS  R,  
DEM  
CO  M30  
D4.1  Prototype: mechanical and chemical recycling pilot 
line  
4  AIMPLAS  DEM  CO  M30  
D7.2  Updated planning for PEDR - Update  7  CTB  R  CO  M30  
D7.3  Strategy & business plans for exploitation - Update  7  OSM  R  CO  M30  
D4.2  Report:  process  optimisation  for 
 the  different  activation technologies  
4  IVV  R  CO  M33  
D7.4  Organisation of event ‘call for collaboration’ - DC2  7  CTB  DEC  PU  M34  
D6.5  Online tool for benefits assessment by external 
parties – test version  
6  ECOMAT  Other  CO  M36  
D8.2  Data Management Plan - Update  8  IRES  R  CO  M36  
D8.5  Periodic progress report  8  CTB  R  CO  M38  
D3.4  Guidelines for widened use of the optical DECOAT 
techniques  
3  OSM  R  CO  M39  
D4.3  Report: pilot line validation and performance  4  AIMPLAS  R  CO  M39  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 86 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
D6.4  Risk management Plan including Toxicity, Release & 
Exposure  
6  NTUA, IRES  R  CO  M39  
D6.1  Risk assessment & Safe-by-Design Report – Final 
report  
6  IRES  R  CO  M39  
D4.4  Report: main properties of recycled streams & 
potential applications  
4  CTAG  R  CO  M42  
D5.1  Ecodesign of coated parts –value chain for at least 8 
cases  
5  MBT  R  CO  M42  
D7.2  Updated planning for PEDR - Update  7  CTB  R  CO  M42  
D5.2  Report on production of prototypes  5  PANASONIC  R  CO  M46  
D6.5  Online tool for benefit assessment by external 
parties – final version  
6  ECOMAT  Other  CO  M46  
D6.3  Cost evaluation Report – Final report  6  IRES  R  CO  M46  
D6.5  Life Cycle Assessment – Final report  6  ECOMAT  R  CO  M46  
D7.5  Final event: Technology Transfer 
Symposium/Workshop – DC3  
7  ISWA, CTB  DEC  PU  M46  
D5.3  Demonstration Circular use cases  5  AIMPLAS  DEM  CO  M48  
D5.4  Guidelines for industrial up-take  5  VAUDE  R  CO  M48  
D7.6  Report on policy, standardisation input and liaison 
activities  
7  ISWA  R  CO  M48  
D7.3  Strategy and business plans for exploitation and 
tech-transfer - Final  
7  OSM  R  CO  M48  
D8.6  Final report on Data Management  8  IRES  R  CO  M48
3.2 Management structure and procedures  
3.2.1 Organisational structure and the decision-making  
Since the overall consortium is not too large (16 partners) the organisational structures and the 
decision making process are kept as straightforward as possible . Both aspects are described in 
the next sections. It is of high importance not to neglect the necessary management elements to avoid 
conflicts or uncertainty about responsibilities and obligations.   
3.2.1.1 Organisational structure   
The sketch shows the structure of the 
project organisation with the arrows 
indicating the lines of communication. The 
coordinator will report directly to the EC 
Project Officer. The Project Steering 
Committee or PSC will interact with the 
coordinator who m aintains an overview of 
the project. The workpackage leaders will 
oversee the workpackages and report progress to coordinator and PSC.   
The main goals of the project coordination are: (i) organize the information flow in timely manner and 
accurately inside the consortium to meet project objectives; (ii) take the appropriate decisions to reach 
the project objectives; (iii) provide the EU with reports and organize reviews for the suitable tracking of 
the project progress. a. The Coordinator   
European  
Commission  
Project  
Officer  
PSC: 
QM, RTM, DM, EIM 
Representatives  
of the partners 
& 
WP LEADERS  
responsible 
for WPs 
GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 87 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
The project will be coordinated by CTB which has a large experience with European projects. Dr Guy Buyle 
will act as project coordinator (CV in section 4), a role he also fulfilled already in FP7 projects (DECOCOAT, 
S(P)EEDKITS) and in H2020 (BIO4SELF). CTB, as coordinat or, has the overall responsibility of 
DECOAT’s project management as well as all the EU Commissions liaisons required for the proper 
operation of the project. Both CTB and members of PSC have a wide experience to handle any conflicts 
and other challenges that may occur during the lifetime of the project. The coordinator will rely on the WP 
leaders for monitoring the technical implementation of the project. He can take urgent low level decisions, 
if necessary and after discussion with the WP leaders. He can propose to the partners solutions and 
contingency plans in case of delay, discrepancies or when a technical choice has to be made. b. The 
Project Steering Committee (PSC)  
A Project Steering Committee will be installed as a supervisory body supporting the project’s normal 
operation. The PSC will supervise crucial decisions related both with all relevant administrative 
management and scientific technical matters and will be responsible of the operation of the technical work 
programmes. More specifically, PSC has a double role:  
• It is the governing body that prepares the decision for the General Assembly. It is responsible for 
proposing redistributions of funds if needed and for the management of the joint funds. Other tasks 
include approving the continuously updating and assuring agreement on the PEDR (see Task 7.1), as 
well as settling potential conflicts among partners.  
• It will assess the work within the WPs and ensure alignment of the individual WPs with the general 
DECOAT objectives. This means that the PSC is responsible for the overall management of the project. 
It will meet at least every six months. Its members can vary as the project needs, but the PSC will at 
least consist of the coordinator and the following managers:  
Quality Manager (QM) – IRES – Dr. Elias P. Koumoulos (CV in Part 4)  
The quality manager will be in charge of disseminating the quality procedures, stimulating their use and 
monitoring, with appropriate metrics, the implementation. This role will also incl ude contributing to the 
DECOAT required reporting, prvoding templates for reporting and setting up a review process, in 
collaboration with the Coordinator, to ensure proper quality of the DECOAT deliverables. Dr. Elias P. 
Koumoulos with wide experience in the field of QM will guarantee high level project deliverables. He will 
establish quality assurance into the DECOAT project through the development of a Quality Manual.   
Exploitation and Innovation Manager (EIM) – OSM - Dr. Emmanuel Sofianopoulos (CV in Part 4)  
The Project Exploitation and Innovation Manager will be responsible for ensuring the value of the project 
outcomes towards commercialisation and sustainability of the project foreground. This role is appointed to 
Mr Emmanuel Sofianopoulos from part ner OSM who is a Materials Engineer but has extensive 
professional engagement in supporting organisations towards exploiting their research results. He will use 
adequate processes and tools in order to collect the appropriate data for planning & executing the business 
plan of the project. He will also be responsible to monitor the project to guarantee consistency between 
technical and market choices. In brief he will oversee all activities related to IPR, supervise the compliance 
of all partners with the pr ovisions regarding intellectual property rights, use and dissemination laid down 
in the Consortium Agreement.   
Research & Technology Manager (RDM) – NTUA – Prof. Costas A. Charitidis (CV in Part 4)  
The Research & Technology Manager (RTM) will have an adv isory role on the R&D decisions within 
DECOAT and will ensure that the project milestones and goals are achieved. The responsibilities of RTM 
will include: determining, implementing and monitoring research and development strategies, policies and 
plans. This role is appointed to Prof. Costas Charitidis (NTUA), who has extensive R&D experience both 
as coordinator (in 5 EU projects) and partner in other European and National initiatives, dealing with high 
impact technological advancements. Prof. Costas Charitidis has served as Official External Reviewer and 
Project Technical Advisor of the European Commission (2010 -2016). His research topics include among 
others Materials Science & Nanotechnology, Nanomaterials Processing and Carbon-based Materials.   
Demonstration Manager (DM) – DEVAN – Mr Roberto Teixeira (CV in part 4).  
The Demonstration Manager will be the member of the PSC who reports on the demonstration activities. 
For this goal, the DM and the WP leader of WP5-Demonstration will work closely together. The goal of the 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 88 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
DM is to ensure that DECOAT will remain focussed on the demonstration of circular use of coated parts 
by using the novel coating debonding systems that we will develop. Mr Teixeira is ideally place for that. 
He is the R&D Manager of DEVAN, leading the R&D department towards the development and 
implementation of innovative products for the worldwide textile market. As such he is familiar with taking 
novel developments a stage further to their successful demonstration in collaboration with cli ents for the 
final end-users. Moreover is his technical background in coatings and microcapsules. c. Work Package 
leaders  
The work package leaders, identified in Table 3.1b, are responsible for the day -to-day coordination and 
management of the individual WPs. This task involves:  
• Keep up to date with the technical state of the art and passing on this information to the partners where 
necessary  
• Provide guidelines to the different partners regarding their specific tasks and timing  
• Ensure work is carried out according to planning, minor deviations can be settled within a WP or among 
the concerned WP leaders and partners, larger deviations need to be reported to the PSC and 
coordinator  
• Collect the data for the review reports to be sent to the coordinator and all relevant partners  
• Prepare the progress reports in due time for the PSC and especially to the coordinator who edits and 
submits to the EC 
  Report any other important issues to the coordinator d. The General Assembly 
(GA)   
The General Assembly consists of one representative from each partner , the first person mentioned 
in the partner description (section 4). A second, proxy representative, will be designated from each 
organization in the case of absence of the first representative. The General Assembly will represent the 
highest level of decision making within the project and will decide the overall project strategy, including 
contractual matters and exploitation matters. Critical DECOAT decisions will be taken by the GA. In 
summary, the mission of the GA is: assessment of the work done; decisions about the strategy of the 
project; major decisions on technical issues; analysing technical conflicts between partners and proposing 
agreements; defaulting party management; studying the evaluation reports on all activities of all partners; 
deciding by confidential vote about allocation of finances, adding new members to the consortium, 
reviewing or amending the EU contract, change or exchange of  
WPs. Moreover, the GA will also take responsibility for th e exploitation and dissemination plan from the 
project. Meetings of the General Assembly may also be held by teleconference or other telecommunication 
means. The GA will meet 10 times:  
roughly every 6 months but with higher frequency at the beginning of D ECOAT (see also Gantt 
Chart – section 3.1.2). e. The Collaborative Work Platform (CWP)   
A dedicated internet based Collaborative Work Platform will be set up. It will provide the partners with 
all the necessary information on the project (reports, results, technical choices, publications, conferences). 
The Coordinator will be responsible for updating and dissemination of the information. The CWP dedicated 
to the project will have a public part serving the dissemination activities (see description of WP7) b ut will 
also have a protected part restricted to consortium members. The platform will contain for example the 
following functions: document centre, partners information, administrative documents. The CWP will also 
use the custom software from OSM that all ows parallel processing of databases and files. Informs 
automatically on task evolution and deliverables and creates a virtual working space for exchanging ideas 
and brainstorming. f. Advisory and Support Group (ASG)  
In order to ensure quality and industr ial relevance beyond the consortium, DECOAT established the 
Advisory and Support Group (ASG). It consists of external expert(s) who will participate as non -funded 
partners giving advice for technical developments, innovation and exploitation (in other value chains) and 
to evaluate the DECOAT work concerning the main goal of developing triggerable debonding coating 
systems and prepare their wider take up. Therefore, the ASG will also act as a bridge between the 
DECOAT (funded) project and the next phases of the development, via continuation projects and industrial 
take up. The ASG will interact with the consortium on a six-monthly basis and, where and when relevant, 
selected members of it can be asked to participate in the GA meetings. Travel costs for the AS G will be 
covered by the travel budget of the coordinator. The role of the ASG members will be to: (i) judge the 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 89 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
efficiency and effectiveness of work undertaken; (ii) ensure that the consortium is exposed to a divergent 
alternative view; (iii) introduce industrial requirements from other sectors; (iv) bring intelligence on already 
existing in the boarder scientific and technical communities.  
The ASG consists of 17 (!) members. DECOAT wants to realise a systemic innovation in the coating 
and recycling world, therefore large external support and advice from a wide range of stakeholders 
is considered a necessity. The ASG is put together with this philosophy in mind. It contains European 
associations and networks (incl. EUPC), 2 European Technology Platforms (T extile ETP, EuMaT), 
recycling and coating companies (incl. REMONDIS and DE BOER RECYCLING GROUP), a public body 
dealing with waste management (OVAM) and 3 standardisation bodies (incl. CEN -CENELEC). Also 
European Coatings, the publisher of the leading jour nal on coatings and adhesives, is included to 
guarantee DECOAT results will reach the sector. If needed, and with the approval of all DECOAT partners, 
the ASG can be further extended.  
3.2.1.2 Decision making   
The basis for all decision-making within the consortium is the Consortium Agreement (CA). As model for 
the CA, the DESCA model for companies is selected74, which was specifically developed to fit H2020 and 
which is recommended by the EC. It describes in detail all procedures related to project managem ent, 
dissemination and IPR. It will be tailored to the specific DECOAT needs once the project is approved.   
a. The General Assembly (GA) – top level   
During the General Assembly the representatives of the partners decide on important project management 
issues (see also 3.2.1.1). Before each GA meeting, partners will have to prepare a short report to be 
uploaded on the collaborative work platform. These reports should include the main results achieved by 
the partners, the main difficulties encountered and the publications and/or conference participations during 
the reporting period. These points will be discussed during the GA. Financial issues will be discussed as 
needed. The GA will also decide on IPR and exploitation routes. b. Technical Meetings – day-to-day 
decision within a WP/task  
Besides the GA there will also be interim meetings attended by a limited number of partners to address 
particular WPs, as deemed necessary. Additionally, contact among partners will be maintained by email 
or telephone, with  regular written progress reports circulated to all partners. Technical (telco) meetings 
with a reduced number of partners will be strongly encouraged to promote technical exchange and 
multidisciplinary cross training among partners. This will allow decisi on making at practical day -to-day 
level. Depending on the scope, they will be shared by the task leader or WP leader. c. Conflict 
management   
The coordinator, assisted by the PSC, will propose corrective actions if necessary, following consultation 
with GA members. If, for any reason, the coordinator and PSC cannot resolve the conflict, the GA will 
conclude on the conflict by majority vote (in c ase of draw, the coordinator has the decisive vote). For 
serious and urgent matters, an extraordinary GA can be called. d. Overview of milestones  
MS  Milestone name  Related 
WP(s)  
Estim. 
date  
Means of verification  
MS1  Requirements defined (WP1), needed 
for further developments in WP1 &2, 
start WP3  
  
DECOAT Prepared for ‘outreach’  
 WP1 →  
WP2, 
WP3  
  
WP7  
M4  Deliverable D1.1 –Specs & 
requirements available  
  
D7.1-dissemination material and 
D7.2dissemination plan available   
MS 2  Selection of triggerable materials – start 
wider coating research (T2.4), narrow 
scope of WP3, start of LCA (T6.2) & 
eco-design (T6.5)  
WP1 ,2 →  
WP2,WP3  
& WP6  
M12  D1.2 – Thermo-responsive 
microcaps and D2.1 –first coating 
formulations and basic coatings 
available  
                                                
74 Source: http://www.desca-2020.eu/   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 90 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
MS 3  Selection of debonding systems, based 
on WP1 & 2 work and using prelim 
LCA results; start of WP4  
WP1, 2, 6   
→   
WP1, 3 & 
4  
M18  Debonding measurement protocol 
(D2.2) and prelim-LCA study 
(D6.2) available  
MS 4  Selection of most promising materials 
for application in subsequent industrial 
tests based on WP1, WP2, prelim-
LCC results, prelim SbD & risk 
assessment, input for ‘final  
direction’ of pilot line (T3.3 and T4.2)  
WP1, 2 & 
6  
→  
WP3, 
WP4  
M24  Final reports for material 
synthesis (D1.5) and debonding 
system  
development (D2.3) available, as 
well as prelim-LCC (D6.3) and 
prelim SbD & risk study (D6.1)  
MS 5  Prototype system for monitoring of pilot 
line available, updated exploitation info; 
needed for  
start of pilot line validation (T4.3) & start  
demonstration (WP5)  
WP3, 7  
→  
WP4, 
WP5  
M30  Optical detection prototype (D3.3) 
and update exploitation strategy 
(D7.3)  
MS 6  Pilot line operational and final risk 
assessment and management plan ok; 
start of actual demonstration ‘circularity’ 
(T5.3)  
WP4,6  
→WP5  
M39  Pliot line validated (D4.3), risk 
documents available (D6.1-final 
and D6.4)  
MS 7  Demonstration of ‘circular use’, 
supported by LCA and quantitative eco-
design tool  
WP5,6 & 7  M48  Availability of final reports on 
circular demo (D5.3-test report & 
D5.4guidelines), final LCA (D6.5) 
& LCC (D6.3) and final 
exploitation plan (D7.3)  
  
3.2.2 Motivation for the proposed structure and decision-making process  
The WP leaders will take the lead in their respective WP and closely work together with the WP partners. 
In addition, they will not only be the contact point for the WP partners, but also for partners active in the 
other WPs. Regular contacts in between the WP leaders will therefore be organised to assure good flow 
of materials and project information.   
Besides the obvious roles for the coordinator and the WP leaders, a PSC with different managers with 
extensive expertise in scientific management, has been  established for the DECOAT project, which will 
allow a close follow-up of all crucial steps needed for a successful H2020 project. The people selected for 
the PSC are experienced and well placed to take up their role and will closely cooperate within the PSC. 
They will also be the main sparring partner for the ASG.   
The well -structured decision making process as described above (see section 3.2.1.2) will aid and 
stimulate the project progress as scheduled and avoid delays. The coordinator, in consultation with the 
respective WP leader, can take low level decisions with no or a minor impact on the other WPs and overall 
project progress. The project steering committee (see section 3.2.1.1b), completed with the required WP 
leaders, can take medium level decisions with the agreement of General Assembly. The General Assembly 
itself is responsible for all important management issues and thus takes the high level decisions.   
This overall decision-making structure is supported by well-defined deliverables and clear milestones, which 
will be closely tracked during the proposal and serve as the basis for decision points.   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 91 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
3.2.3 Innovation management  
The innovation management that  involves the process of 
managing an organization's innovation procedure, starting 
at the initial stage of ideation, to its final stage of 
successful implemen tation, will  ensure that there is an 
open culture for and focus on innovation in the project. We 
will ensure that ALL PARTNERS in the consortium 
understand both market and technical problems, and allow 
partners to respond to external or internal opportunit ies, and 
use its creative efforts to introduce new ideas and processes. 
This will also include promoting to use innovation management 
tools, encourage team members to undertake small -scale 
innovations that support the achievement of project objectives, 
ensure a continuous flow of new opportunities, ideas, and 
concepts that are aligned with the strategic project objectives, 
and identify new and disruptive innovation opportunities. As 
systematised complementary innovation management tools, 
we will monitor on the one hand side the novelty of our results (via technology watch and patent reviews) 
as well as track the evolution of the TRL of our results periodically to assess that they will reach the planned 
maturity in their path towards the market deployment.  
The process of innovation management has already started with the identification of the market 
opportunity that exists for recycling of coated parts, the translation of this knowledge into the 
DECOAT concept and the preliminary market analysis performed for those market sectors (see part 
‘D2’ of the PEDR in section 2.2.2(a)) that are represented by the consortium partners (i.e. outdoor gear, 
electronics consumer goods and automotive). During the more explorative R&D work (in WP1, WP2 and 
WP3) of DECOAT, the most promising results and technologies will be selected according to both their 
technical performances (basis are the target requirements defined in Task 1.1), their transferability in 
industrial scenarios (raw materials accessibility, productivity, processing requirements) and their final cost 
for industrial take -up and exploitation (investment costs, operational costs). The project management 
approach proposed provides mechanisms to identify and resolve potential risks. Accordingly, the risk 
mitigation measures reported in section 3.2.4 have been and will be selected according to their impact on 
the future and potential for the exploitation of the DECOAT results.  
Two specific aspects of the innovation management we want to highlight: (i) introducing a sy stem 
innovation; (ii) following a market pull and technology push.   
Within the project INNOQUALITY (coordinated by CTB), success factors were determined for several types 
of innovation (eg incremental, process, product or systemic innovation). The project  showed that 
introducing a systemic innovation is the most difficult because it involves all the stakeholders along the 
value chain. Within DECOAT, we will build on the experience and insights gained from INNOQUALITY for 
optimal innovation management. Further, we want to apply a combination of technology push (ie promoting 
our results) and market pull. The latter means that one addresses the end users.   
Having recognized that continuous and effective innovation management throughout and beyond the 
duration of DECOAT will be crucial for the successful deployment of the novel DECOAT technologies and 
for their introduction to the market, the consortium has (i) engaged partner OSM with specific expertise in 
innovation services; (ii) included several activities dedicated to ‘Innovation Management’ (see Tasks 7.2-
exploitation, 7.4-standardisation & policy and Task 7.5 - external liaison) and (iii) appointed an Exploitation 
& Innovation Manager as a member of the PSC (see Section 3.2.1.1b).   
3.2.4 Overview of risks, their potential impact and proposed contingency  
Description of risk  
 
Description of  
Consequences  
(Combined impact 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 92 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
and likelihood 
assessment)  
Lower response of the 
materials to the triggers.  
WP1  Higher loading of additives 
needed (Medium)  
Reconsideration of additive types, 
combine additives for higher response.  
Difficulties in up-scaling 
the promising materials   
WP1  Loss of functionality, demo 
cases will be delayed 
(Low)  
Although less efficient, commercial 
available materials can be considered for 
certain cases  
Debonding system 
results in substrate 
material with too high 
impurity level 
(insufficient removal of 
coating material)  
WP2  Single debonding step 
not sufficient, multi-step 
needed, making recycling 
more complex and 
expensive  
(Medium-High)  
Multi-step recycling process needs to be 
designed, e.g. by combining triggered 
debonding with subsequent Creasolv 
step.   
Alternative cleaning, e.g. water jet or 
ultrasonics.  
Developed triggers not 
compatible with coating 
formulation or coating 
process   
WP2  Delay as new materials 
need to be developed in 
WP1 (Low) DECOAT 
solution not applicable for 
certain coating 
chemistries (Med-High)  
Re-plan work of WP1 and WP2, closer 
interaction  
between WP1 and WP2  
Limit application cases to certain coating 
chemistries, scout for alternative 
opportunities  
Optical detection requires 
more time to develop  
WP3  Delay in the development 
of optical detection (Low).  
Increase WP3 efforts, better alignment 
with WP4 will be needed  
Equipment failure 
regarding the evaluation 
of recycled materials   
WP3  Need to shift the timing of 
the deliverables (Low).  
Contingency plans for back -up services 
within the consortium members.  
R&D work requires much 
more sampling & testing 
as planned  
WP1,2,3, 
4, WP8  
Delayed deliverables, 
narrowed scope of 
investigated materials 
(Medium)  
Re-plan activities, earlier selection 
making to limit number of tests (eg via 
earlier decisions for MS3 and/or MS4); 
redistribute resources  
Prototype pilot line 
unable to meet 
expectations  
WP4  Pilot line delay or not able 
to deal with certain 
materials due  
to too quality or efficiency 
(Medium)  
Search for alternative pilot line 
components (eg other heating), find less 
demanding use cases.  
Would have high impact but unlikely to 
occur.  
Prototyping of some 
coated parts /products 
not feasible with 
DECOAT solutions  
WP5  Delayed and alternative 
prototypes (Medium)  
Need to redefine the prototypes that can 
be made, will cost extra time but 
alternative options should exist  
Delay of data collection 
for LCA, LCC, SbD; 
responses not received 
in time  
WP6 & 
WP8  
Delay of related 
deliverables, eco-desing 
tool with limited 
functionality (Low)  
Personal communication with ‘missing 
partners’, redefine scope of eco-design 
tool  
IPR issues: 
disagreement on 
ownership rules, 
rejection of patent 
application, external 
WP7 & 
WP8  
Results cannot properly 
protected, loss of 
freedom-tooperate (Low-
Medium)  
IP studied (Task 7.2), risk management in 
Task 7.3 with focus on IPR issues to early 
detect and tackle potential problems. 
Would have high impact but considered a 
very low probability.  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 93 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
patent publication with 
competing solution  
Changes in industry needs  WP5 
& /external market conditions. 
 WP7  
Products do not meet the  
identified needs (Low)  
If needed, project use cases will be 
adjusted to realign with end-user needs. 
Constant watch on market needs, eg via 
ASG members.
3.3 Consortium as a 
whole  
3.3.1  Description of the 
consortium  
  
Consortium & resources : a well -balanced mix of 17 partners from 10 different countries. Total 
budget of ca. 5.97 M€ and 812 person months for the project during of 48 months. 11 partners are 
companies (including 7 SMEs), a substantial amount of the resources will go them: ca. 55% to the 
companies, ca. 40% to the SMEs.  
Experts who hold all the 
expertise required and 
access to facilities needed 
in order to reach the 
ambitious aim of the 
DECOAT proposal have 
been chosen carefully to 
collaborate in this  
Consortium. As no single 
organization or country has 
the capacity to s uccessfully 
bring about the innovations 
and validations intended in 
DECOAT on its own, a well-
balanced consortium has 
been arranged, with 
partners that are 
complementary to each 
other and are willing to closely cooperate in creating a research environment as envisioned in DECOAT 
ambitious aims. All partners in this consortium have been selected in view of their individual expertise and 
complementarities. The project involves partners from EU members and administers the resources in 
terms of personnel, knowl edge and equipment that are required for success. This multinational 
cooperation is essential in order to reach the intended objectives.   
All partners, except for PANASONIC, have previous successful experience in multilateral collaborative 
research and have successfully worked previously in EU-funded research projects. Their resources will be 
assembled to form a coherent and synergistic project. In addition to the skills and capabilities of each of 
the DECOAT partners, each partner also represents a networ k of contacts, technology and market 
overview that in some cases is much greater than the consortium itself.  
The DECOAT consortium will be supported by the 17 members of the ASG, see section 3.2.1.1f.  
Partner (Cntry)  Expertise & capacity  DECOAT main role  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 94 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
 RTD PARTNERS  
CTB (BE)  Textile expertise – coating  Debonding coatings on textiles, dissemination; 
coordination  
AIMPLAS (ES)  Plastics expertise – coating 
& recycling  
Pilot line implementation for recycling of coated flexible 
and rigid parts  
FRAUNHOFER  
IVV (DE)  
Chemical  recycling  via  
Creasolv process  
Adaptation of Creasolv  (chemical recycling) for 
recuperation of coating and fabric via dissolving coating  
CTAG (ES)  Automotive expertise, 
testing  
Requirements, reprocessing & testing recycled 
materials  
NTUA (EL)  Microcapsules & 
nanoparticles  
R&D on microcapsules  & nanoparticles for use in 
adhesives with triggerable response   
 INDUSTRY PARTNERS: end users and materials/technology providers  
VAUDE (DE)  
  
Backpack and outdoor 
goods producer – Large 
Industry  
Lead end use case for outdoor gear (backpack). 
Contribute with design and product development 
departments.  
PANASONIC 
(TK)  
  
Electronic consumer goods 
– Large Industry  
Lead end use case: household electronics. Contribute 
with design and product development departments.  
MBT (TK)  Automotive busses & cars – 
OEM Large Industry  
Lead end use case automotive. Contribute with design 
and product development departments – focus on 
structural parts.  
MAIER (ES)   Automotive parts – Tier 1 
Large Industry  
Lead end use case automotive. Contribute with design 
and product development departments – focus on 
aesthetics parts.  
RESCOLL (FR)  Adhesives  &  coatings  
materials– SME  
Develop debonding adhesives  and coating 
formulations for use on textiles and plastics (activation 
type, type of trigger)  
CTECH (UK)  Microwaveable additives 
and microwave equipment 
– SME  
Microwaveable additives for use in coatings for textiles 
and plastics, building on experience with integration in 
yarns  
DEVAN  
MICROPOLIS 
(PT)  
Microcapsules producer – 
SME  
Develop microcapsules for coating formulations  to 
enable triggered debonding (by heat, steam, …)  
IRIS (ES)  Inspection systems – SME  Providing tools for optimising recycling process: 
sorting/selection  
 SUPPORTING ACTIVITIES  
ECOMAT (NL)  Environmental & systemic 
assessment – SME  
Full LCA, analysis of total cost of ownership, development 
of new systemic business models; expertise in coatings 
and fibres  
IRES (BE)  Safety and health expertise 
– 
SME  
Safety-by-Design implementation : use of non -
hazardous substances and proper waste treatment   
OSM (UK)  Exploitation, tech transfer 
SME  
Business opportunity identification, business plans 
compilation   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design  
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 95 of 70  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Subm ission Service. 
ISWA (AU)  Waste management 
expertise, access to 
recyclers  
Data on waste streams; dissemination & communication to 
wider stakeholders; policy making; …  
  
3.3.2 Industrial/commercial involvement in the project  
The industrial partners form the majority in the consortium: 11 industrial organisations out of 17 partners. 
In particular 7 SMEs and 4 large enterprises, able to cover all crucial steps along the value chain, starting 
from materials synthesis and formulat ion, coating formulations, coating processes and the actual 
manufacturing of final products. These partners have been carefully selected in order to facilitate 
exploitation of DECOAT results. In fact, aiming to ensure the industrial relevance in the DECOAT project, 
we have 4 SMEs leading WP, we have 3 SMEs (out of 5 members in total) in the Project Steering 
Committee and from the total budget, ca. 55% goes to the industrial partners, more than 40% goes 
to the SMEs (see also section 3.4).  
PANASONIC is a newcomer to European collaborative projects; the other industrial partners have 
good experience from the framework, partners MAIER, DEVAN and IRIS even as coordinator of 
projects themselves. As described in 2.2, DECOAT industrial partners will also be actively involved 
in the dissemination  of results, with the end users focusing on their distributors and clients and 
technology providers on potential markets and customers. The industrial partners will also have a key role 
in the exploitation of results through the actions outlined in 2.2/D1-D3.  
Apart from the industrial partners within the project, more companies/sectors have expressed their 
interest in DECOAT either directly or through their associations (see support letters in Part 4) and will 
support the spreading and take up of DECOAT results to and by the industry via participation in the ASG 
(see section 3.2.1.1f). Members of the ASG will have access to intermediate products and processes 
guidelines, parts of the LCA/LCC studies and can be test users for the ecodesign tool etc. The goal is that 
the ASG acts also as a sound board, providing feedback and recommendations to the consortium to ensure 
that project results are relevant for applications by other users/markets, extending their exploitation beyond 
the actual duration and scope of the DECOAT project.  
3.3.3 Other countries  
All participants in the project are based in European Countries.   
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 1 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
4 Members of the Consortium
4.1 Participants  
The DECOAT consortium consists of 17 partners and further a group of 17 partners who expressed 
their support to the consortium via a Letter of Support. The latter group forms the Advisory and 
Support Group or ASG. Both groups are described below; the Letters of Support are included 
behind the actual DECOAT partners.   
Participant 
no.  
Short name  Participant organisation name  Country  Organisation 
Type  
1 
coordinator  
CTB  Centexbel  BE  RTD  
2  AIMPLAS  Asociacion De Investigacion De Materiales 
Plasticos Y Conexas  
ES  RTD  
3  IVV  Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der 
Angewandten Forschung e. V. – IVV  
DE  RTD  
4  CTAG  Centro Tecnológico de Automoción de Galicia  ES  RTD  
5  NTUA  National Technical University of Athens  EL  UNI  
6  VAUDE  Vaude  DE  IND  
7  PANASONIC  Panasonic Eco Solutions Elektrik San. Ve Tic. 
A.Ş.  
TK  IND  
8  MBT  Mercedes-Benz Turk A.S.  TK  IND  
9  MAIER  Maier S. Coop.  ES  IND  
10  RESCOLL  Rescoll  FR  SME  
11  CTECH  C-Tech Innovation  UK  SME  
12  DEVAN  Devan Micropolis  PT  SME  
13  IRIS  Innovacio i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible 
S.L.  
ES  SME  
14  ECOMAT  Ecomatters  NL  SME  
15  IRES  Innovation in Research & Engineering 
Solutions  
BE  SME  
16  OSM  Open Source Management Ltd.  UK  SME  
17  ISWA  International Solid Waste Association  AU  Assoc  
    Advisory and Support Group (ASG)      
  EUPC  European Plastics Converters  EU  Assoc.  
  GO4CIRCLE  Circular economy industry  BE  Assoc.  
  TECPART  German association of manufacturers of 
technical plastic products  
DE  Assoc  
  ZWE  Zero Waste Europe  EU  Assoc.  
  Coating Cluster  Cluster of coating companies   BE  Cluster  
  Recycling 
Network  
Recycling Netwerk Benelux  NL  Cluster  
  Textile ETP  European Apparel and Textile Confederation  EU  Eu  
Technology  
Platform  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 2 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
  EuMaT  European Technology Platform for Advanced 
Engineering Materials and Technologies  
EU  Eu.Technolog 
y Platform  
  REMONDIS  Recycling company  DE  IND  
  DEBOER  Textile Recycling company  NL  IND  
  GBP  Recycler – Car disassembly company  ES  IND  
  FCC  Fomento De Construcciones Y Contratas Sa  ES  IND  
  COVERPAINTS  Coatings Industry  EL  SME  
  European 
Coatings  
Europe’s leading monthly journal for the 
coatings industry  
DE  Publisher  
  OVAM  Public Waste Agency of Flanders  BE  Public body  
  ELOT  Hellenic Organization for Standardization   EL  Public body  
  UNE  Spanish Organization for Standardization  ES  Public body  
  CEN-CENELEC  European Organization for Standardization  EU  Public body  
  
DECOAT CONSORTIUM PARTICIPANTS  
  
Partner 1 – CTB – Centexbel  
  
Country  BE  
Core Competence: coating and finishing of textiles, formulating, application on lab 
and semiindustrial scale and testing  
Brief description of legal entity:   
Centexbel (CTB) is the Belgian scientific and technical centre for the textile and plastic converting industry, 
with strong links to the majority of these companies. CTB offers a complete range of standardized testing, 
it is a notified body and can deliver  CE marking and testing. CTB is also involved in standardization 
committees and offers technological advice and training to companies in Belgium and abroad.  
The research focus of CTB is on applied research, funded by private contract as well as national a nd 
international agencies (e.g. H2020, Eranet, Interreg). Some well selected subjects for strategic research 
are: (i) finishing and coating technology; (ii) implementation of nanotechnology; (iii) intelligent textiles; (iv) 
3D textile structures via braidi ng and knitting; (v) extrusion processes and related polymer formulation 
(incl. biopolymers).  
DECOAT role and main tasks:   
• Project coordinator; leader of WP8 (coordination)  
• Leader of WP2: development of debondable coatings on textiles and their characterisation  
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:   
Centexbel has much experience in the coating and lamination of textile. In most cases these coatings are 
functionalised to obtain specific properties, e.g. recyclability.   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 3 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:    
Dr Ine De Vilder, Research scientist. G ender: F. After finishing her studies as industrial chemical 
engineer, Ine obtained a PhD in chemistry. Since her start at CTB more than 7 years ago, she has 
conducted research in the field of textile functionalization and surface modification. She has been involved 
in multiple private, regional and European research projects with a broad range of topics like flame 
retardancy, protective clothing, architectural textile, bedding, hotmelt applications etc. She has specific 
expertise in the development of coat ed or laminated textiles enabling recycling (e.g. coated/laminated 
textiles in which all components consist of the same material, specific design of textiles enabling 
separation of the different layers).  
Dr. Myriam Vanneste, R&D manager.  Gender: F. Myriam has a PhD in polymer chemistry. She has 
been involved in the management of national and international research projects for more than 10 years. 
She is the head of the R&D group working on finishing and coating of textiles and, as such, has extensive 
knowledge on the latest innovations in this area. One of the recent focusses of the research is the 
recyclability of coated and laminated materials and use of recycled materials as coating material.   
Dr. Guy Buyle, Manager EU research of CTB. Gender: M. Guy holds a Masters of Engineering degree 
and obtained his PhD in Physics on the subject of plasma treatment of surfaces. Since his start at CTB 
he has mainly been working on European projects, under FP6, FP7 and H2020, being strongly involved 
in activities like dissemination, exploitation and coordination.  
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5)  
Developments for better recycling ; Myriam Vanneste, Ine De Vilder, Jo Wynendaele, Pieter Heyse, 
Isabel De Schrijver; presentation; International Carpet Conference; 28-29/05/2015  
Coding system for recycling textiles ; Tobias Schlüter, Thomas Gries, Myriam Vanneste, Mike De 
Vrieze, Isabel De Schrijver, Stijn Corneillie; Future Textiles (2017), 6, 38-39.  
Making Textile from Waste - The technical textile solution to industrial waste; Ine De Vilder, Health 
and Safety International, April 2017, p. 41-49  
Recycling carpets with the help of markers; Mike De Vrieze; Unitex, (2017) 3; 24-26  
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:   
 
RECYCOAT – Recycling of coated materials (National collective research project, HBC.2017.0686, 2018-
2020)  
URBANREC New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled 
products (H2020,  
GA N° 690103)  
ECOMETEX – Ecodesign methodology for recyclable textile coverings used in the EU construction & 
transport industry” (FP7, NMP-2011-small5-280751, 2012-2015)  
MARKERS - Markers for recycling (Cornet, HBC.2016.0293, 2017-2018)  
CarPVB – Coating applications for recycled PVB (Cornet, HBC.2017.0245, 2018-2019)  
KARMA2020– Industrial feather waste valorisation for sustainable keratin based materials (H2020, GA 
N°723268)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 4 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major 
skills, equipment:  
  
  
 CTB has knowledge and equipment to 
incorporate additives into coating 
formulations.  
  
 Fabric coating and finishing 
equipment, both lab scale (A4 -size) 
and pilot scale (roll -to-roll, 0.5m 
width). Available techniques are 
knife coating (direct and transfer 
coating), yarn coating, hotmelt, 
padding,… UV and IR technology, 
corona technology,…  
  
 Further, CTB has extensive testing 
equipment and expertise for 
evaluating the properties of coated 
textiles, eg mechanical behaviour, 
abrasion durability, laundry 
resistance, comfort issues, chemical 
composition,…  
Participant’s dissemination channels:    
Fairs and congresses  
• Techtextil fair 2021, 2023  
• Dornbirn conference  
• International coating and laminating conference, Belgium  
• Newsletter CTB – reaches virtually all textile companies in BE  
• CTB workshops and conferences – CTB organizes on a monthly basis workshops for its members, 
mainly textile, plastic and composite related companies from BE, FR, NL. Further, CTB organizes 
yearly a major European conference. In the past, such conferences were already organized on themes 
like functional coated textiles or recycling. In the frame of DECOAT again such a conference will be 
organized. Every year an INFO happening is organised for informing companies about the latest 
coating developments at CTB.   
• Cluster “Innovative Coatings”, with over 70 company members. Centexbel is one of the steering 
partners and responsible for organisation of workshops and matchmaking between companies.   
Networks:  
• EURATEX: CTB is active member, taking part in the lead of the Textile Flagships for Europe Initiative  
  TEXTRANET: European Network of Textile Research Organisations  
  ECP4: European Composites, Plastics and Polymer Processing Platform. It is an industry -driven 
collaboration that unites the top-level European research institutions, regional plastic clusters and EU-
level industrial organizations of plastics and composites converters.  
   
  
  
  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 5 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
 
Partner 2 – AIMPLAS - ASOCIACION DE INVESTIGACION DE MATERIALES PLASTICOS Y 
CONEXAS   
  
Country  Spain  
Core Competence: polymer materials, their transformation 
processes and recycling.  
Brief description of legal entity:   
AIMPLAS, Technological Institute of Plastics located in Valencia, is a private, non-profit Association with 
more than 500 associated companies created i n 1990. AIMPLAS is formed by +120 highly skilled 
professional, more than 65% with a Masters, Engineering or equivalent degree in Chemistry, polymer 
engineering, materials engineering or equivalent, including 15 PhD.   
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on thermoplastic and 
thermosetting plastic materials & products, its transformation processes and their recyclability and 
sustainability. AIMPLAS generates new knowledge and tech nologies that can be transferred to 
companies in order to help them to increase their effectiveness and competitiveness.  
AIMPLAS has a broad expertise in the fields of recycling, compatibilization, reactive extrusion, 
biopolymers and renewable source mate rials, special assisted processing technologies and 
nanocomposites, gained during the last years in the frame of EU and national projects. Nowadays, 
AIMPLAS is involved in more than 25 European projects and has participated in 77 projects in FP5, FP6, 
FP7, LIFE+, CIP-EcoInnovation EU Programmes, among others, coordinating 27 of them. At National and 
Regional levels AIMPLAS participates in around 100 projects yearly.   
AIMPLAS, as RTD is focused to help companies in the plastic sector to develop new products  and 
increase their competitiveness through innovation, has more than 20 pilot plants representing the most 
relevant polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry nowadays and has 
state-of-the art test facilities for chemical,  optical, morphological, mechanical and physical 
characterisation. These pilot lines and laboratories are used by many customer’s every year allowing 
them to test new materials, optimize production processes and launch new products to the market, 
supported by AIMPLAS technical staff, resulting in more than 5000 assays, 170 technical assessments 
and 120 skills training actions to more than 1500 clients per year. AIMPLAS has state-of-the-art 8500 m2 
facilities, including thermoplastics and thermoset pilot plants, analysis and testing laboratories (physical-
mechanical, chemical, packaging, automotive and construction) and training areas  
DECOAT role and main tasks:   
Selection of the components of the pilot recycling line.   
Set up and evaluation of the pilot line to recycle coated textiles and coated plastic parts for outdoor gear, 
household electronics, buses and automotive applications.   
Quality analysis of the recycled materials and evaluation of their potential use.   
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:   
AIMPLAS’ fields of work are related to technological research and development on plastic materials and 
products, their transformation processes and their recyclability and sustainability. AIMPLAS has pilot 
plants and testing laboratories that enable the full characterisation of both waste and recycled materials, 
including chemical, optical, morphological, mechanical and physical properties. It also has wide 
experience in selective separation of complex wastes, d econtamination of recycled plastics for the 
elimination of hazardous substances and/or odour, improvement of recycled properties of plastics through 
additivation and compounding, recycling of thermoplastics and elastomers, optimization of recycling 
processes and the properties of recycled plastics.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 6 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:    
Dr. Enrique Moliner (male), holds a PhD in Industrial Engineering by the Universitat Jaume I of Castellon 
(Spain). He has over 9 years of experience in national and international R&D projects in the field of 
environment and technological innovation. He has been working as a researc her at the Department of 
Sustainability and Industrial Recovery of AIMPLAS since 2014. His expertise is focused on environmental 
assessment of materials, technologies, processes and products associated with plastic industry, using 
environmental impact assessment tools such as life cycle assessment or carbon footprint. He also has 
experience in technical and legal advice on environmental issues to be considered for the development 
or improvement of products (ecodesign). Speaker at seminars and conferences, a uthor of technical 
articles for scientific journals and magazines, and professor in training courses on ecodesign, life cycle 
assessment, carbon footprint and environmental labelling.  
Mrs. Eva Verdejo (female), holds a Bachelor Degree in Chemistry from the University of Valencia. She 
joined the Institute in  
 
1993, being the current Head of Department of Sustainability and Industrial Valorization of AIMPLAS. Her 
expertise is focused on sustainable development, materials from natural resources, biodegradable 
plastics and recycling. She holds large experience in proposal writing and participation/coordination in 
relevant national and international R+D projects related to her expertise (BIOSTRUCT, RECYTUBE, 
ECO-RUBBER, POLYMIX, BREAD4PLA, etc.). Speaker at numerous seminars and conferences, author 
of technical arti cles for scientific journals and magazines, and professor in different sustainability and 
recovery-related courses.  
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5)  
• Garrain D, Vidal R, Martinez P, Franco V. Environmental Impact of Plastic Moulding in Spanish 
Industries Using Life Cycle Assessment Methodology. Ingenieria Quimica 2009, 29-35.  
• Vidal R, Martinez P, Mulet E, Gonzalez R, Lopez -Mesa B, Fowler P, Fang JM. En vironmental 
Assessment of Biodegradable Multilayer Film Derived From Carbohydrate Polymers. Journal of 
Polymers and the Environment 2007, 15:159-168.  
• Martí-Ferrer F, Vilaplana F, Ribes-Greus A, Benedito-Borrás A, Sanz-Box C. Flour rice husk as filler 
in block copolymer polypropylene: Effect of different coupling agents. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science 2006, 99:1823-1831.  
• Vidal R, Moliner E, Martínez G, Rubio MC. Life cycle assessment of hot mix asphalt and zeolite-based 
warm mix asphalt with reclaimed asphalt pavement. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 2013, 
74:101-114.  
• Moliner E, Muñoz C, Garraín D, Franco V, Vidal R. The ecological footprint of transporting waste in 
the province of  
Castellon. Selected Proceedings from the 15th International Congress on Project Engineering 2012, 
103-115. ISBN: 97884-615-7674-6  
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:   
URBANREC New approaches for the valorisation of URBAN bulky waste into high added value RECycled 
products (H2020, GA N° 690103)  
ECOBULK: Circular Process for Eco-Designed Bulky Products and Internal Car Parts (H2020 GA N° 
730456)  
C-SERVEES-Activating Circular Services in the Electric and Electronic Sector (H2020 GA N° 77614)  
LIFE EXTRUCLEAN : Demonstrative Project for the removal of hazardous substances during the 
recycling process of polyethylene hazardous waste packages, employing supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-
CO2) (LIFE13 ENV/ES/000067) KARMA2020– Industrial feather waste valorisation for sustainable 
keratin-based materials (H2020, GA N°723268)  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 7 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:   
• Equipment for mechanical, thermal, electrical, rheological and physical tests.  
• Rheometer, optical and electronic microscopy, DMA, DSC, Thermogravimetry, Raman 
Spectrometer.   
• Recycling pilot plant: Grinding facilities, washing equipment with sorting capacity, horizontal 
centrifuge equipment  
• -Pilot plant: Sc-CO2 cleaning & VOC removal  
• -Extrusion equipment  
  
  
Participant’s dissemination channels:    
Magazines & journals : Waste Management & Research; Journal of Cleaner Production; Journal of 
Industrial Ecology; The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment; Waste Management; Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling; Journal of Environmental Management; Journal of Polymers  and the 
Environment; and broader audience journals (Science, Nature).  
Events: Ecofira (Spain); Circular Materials Conference (Sweden); K-Fair (Germany); PRSE Plastic 
Recycling Show Europe  
(The Netherlands); Sustainable Plastics (Germany); Conama (Spain); International Conference on 
Sustainable Waste Management (Turkey); European Circular Economy Conference (Belgium);   
Stakeholders will be involved through demo workshops to promote market a cceptability and encourage 
sustainable production and consumption.  
Networks:  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 8 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
ECP4 (European Composites, Plastics and Polymer Processing Platform), CICLOPLAST (Spanish 
Plastics Recycling and Recovery Organization), EuPC (European plastic converters association), 
ANARPLA (Spanish association of plastic recyclers).   
  
 
Partner 3 – IVV - Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Angewandten Forschung e. V.  
  
Country  Germany   
Core Competence: Recycling Plastics  
Brief description of legal entity:   
Fraunhofer is the leading organisation for applied research in Europe, undertaking contract research on 
behalf of industry, the service sector and government. At present, Fraunhofer has about eighty research 
units, including seventy-two research institutes, at over forty locations in Germany. An annual turnover of 
about €2300 million is generated by contract research by a staff of about twenty-five thousand employees. 
Fraunhofer’s institute für Verfahrenstechnik und Verpackung (Fraunhofer -IVV) will particip ate in this 
project:  
Fraunhofer’s Institute for Process Engineering and Packaging (Fraunhofer -IVV) has two hundred and 
twenty-one employees and an annual turnover of €18 million. The Fraunhofer-IVV develops and optimizes 
products and processes primarily i n the area of food ingredients, functional films, product safety, food 
quality, biogenic raw materials as well as plastics recycling. The department ‘Recycling polymers’ at 
Fraunhofer-IVV has been founded in 2005 and deals with the separation of pure polym ers from plastic 
containing waste by means of mechanical pre -treatment and solvent based technologies (CreaSolv® 
Process).  
DECOAT role and main tasks:   
Fraunhofer will mainly be involved in WPs 2-5. In WP2 Fraunhofer will closely interact with developers of 
triggerable debonding with respect to applied polymers and will identify suitable solvent formulations and 
conditions for coating materials. In WP3 Fraunhofer will assist automated sorting by im plementation of 
dyes which allow in -line measuring of coating thickness. Fraunhofer’s contributions to WP 4 and 5 will 
include implementation of CreaSolv® Technology in the DECOAT pilot line and its use in the course of 
demonstration.    
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:   
Fraunhofer-IVV has 20 years of experience in solvent based separation of plastic mixtures. Starting with 
laboratory scale experiments in 1996, the CreaSolv® process can now separate most thermoplastic 
materials from complex waste streams and produce recycled polymers with defined virgin-like properties, 
whereas the applied solvent is recycled completely within the process. Thus, the recycling process 
encourages the circular economy approach, as most recent project results (e.g. PolystyreneLoop) have 
shown that product qualities of recycled polymers comply with specifications of virgin plastics, enabling a 
use of recycled plastics in initial applications. Having such a technical recycling concept validated, 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 9 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Fraunhofer-IVV provides expertise in defining and building stru ctures for a circular economy of plastics 
and composites.  
Key staff members undertaking the work:    
Dr. Martin SCHLUMMER (male) – Senior Scientist in the Dept. Recycled Plastics department, holds a 
Ph.D. in Chemistry from University of Erlangen. He has been with Fraunhofer-IVV as a research fellow 
since 1999. As a responsible scientist for process development and analytical process evaluation he 
participated in and co -ordinated more than 20 national and international research projects and (co -
)authored more than 45 publications in peer reviewed scientific journals.   
Dr. Andreas MÄURER (male)  – Head of Dept. Recycled Plastics department at Fraunhofer, holds a 
Ph.D. in Chemistry from University of Erlangen. After a two-year experience of industrial research in the 
paper business, he has been working for FhGIVV, since 1994: first as a Dep. Head of the Dept. Process 
Engineering, then as head of Dept. Product Safety and Analysis and since 2005 as head of Dept. 
Recycled plastics. Mäurer co -ordinated more than 3 0 national and international research projects and 
(co-)authored more than 30 publications.   
Dr. Esra KUCUKPINAR. (female)  – received her B.Sc. in Chemical Eng. from Boğaziçi University, 
İstanbul, in 1995 and her M.Eng. in Chemical Eng. from the Stevens I nstitute of Tech., New Jersey, in 
1997, with a focus on polymer processing. She was employed at the Highly-filled Materials Institute, New 
Jersey, as a research engineer. She joined the RTD Centre of Arçelik in 1997, as a research specialist. 
In 2003 she r eceived her Ph.D. in Chemical Eng. from Boğaziçi University. Since 2003, she has been 
employed at Fraunhofer -IVV as a senior scientist and project leader mostly for international projects 
funded by the European Commission, from FP5 onwards. She has co-authored more than 30 publications 
in peer reviewed scientific journals and presented her research work in various international conferences.   
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5)  
Fabian Knappich, Ferdinand Hartl, Martin Schlummer, Andreas Mäurer: Complete Recycling of 
Composite Material Comprising Polybutylene Terephthalate and Copper. Recycling (2017), 2, 9  
Ueberschaar, Maximilian; Schlummer, Martin; Jalalpoor, Daniel; Kaup, Nora; Rotter, Vera Susanne: 
Potential and recycling  
 
strategies for LCD panels from WEEE. Recycling 2 (2017), No.1, Art. 7, 19 pp. ISSN: 2313-4321. DOI:  
10.3390/recycling2010007  
Katharina Kaiser, Markus Schmid, Martin Schlummer, Andreas Mäurer. Recycling of Polymer -Based 
Multilayer Packaging: A Review. Recycling 2018, 3(1), 1; doi:10.3390/recycling3010001  
Fabian Knappich, Martin Schlummer, Andreas Mäurer, Harald Prestel: A New Ap proach to Metal - and 
Polymer-Recovery from Metallized Plastic Waste Using Mechanical Treatment and Subcritical Solvents. 
Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management (in print). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10163-018-0717-6  
Sandra Kiese, Esra Kucukpinar, Esra Kucukpinar, Matthias Reinelt, Horst -Christian Langowski. A 
systematic approach for the accurate and rapid measurement of water vapor transmission through ultra-
high barrier films. Review of Scientific Instruments (2017), 88(2):025108  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
[DECOAT]    Page 10 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:   
INNOVIP - “Innovative multi -functional Vacuum -Insulation-Panels for use in the building sector”, EU 
H2020, Grant No 723441, Coord.: C. Sprengard, Germany: Fraunhofer -IVV is a partner (2016 -2019): 
Fraunhofer-IVV works on the development of high barrier multi -layered structures for vacuum insulation 
panels and co ntribute to the INNOVIP project by practical demonstration trials on the separation and 
material recovery from finished INNOVIP insulations.  
CLOSEWEEE - “Integrated solutions for pre -processing electronic equipment, closing the loop of post -
consumer high-grade plastics, and advanced recovery of critical raw materials antimony and graphite”, 
EU H2020, Grant No 641747, Coord.: K. Schischke, Germany. Fraunhofer-IVV works on the application 
of the CreaSolv® Process for the recovery of high -grade ABS and PC/ABS  as well as the recovery of 
antimony trioxide.  
DISPLAY - “Upscale of Material Recovery from Display Applications and Printed Circuit Boards”, EIT raw 
materials, Project No 16270, Coord.: M. Schlummer, S. Grieger, Germany: Fraunhofer is coordinating 
(2017-2021): Fraunhofer-IVV works on the development of recycling options for plastics in post-consumer 
display appliances by using the CreaSolv® process.   
PSLoop – “Polystyrene Loop”, EU LIFE, Grant No 16ENV/NL/000271, Coord.: J. Noordegraaf, The 
Netherlands: Fraunhofer– IVV is a key partner (2017 -2021): Fraunhofer has developed the CreaSolv® 
Process, which is upscaled in this project for the purpose of recovering POP free recycled polystyrene 
from PS foams containing HBCD.  
FORCYCLE – “Recovery of metals from composite from metal -polymer-composites” Grant No. 
BAF01SoF0-65342. Coord. M. Schlummer, Germany. Fraunhofer -IVV was coordinating (2014 -2017): 
Fraunhofer-IVV developed recycling processes for the recovery of polymers from polymer -metal-
composites including metal plated plastics and carbon fibre reinforced plastics. The processes reached a 
TRL of 5.  
DECOAT relevant significant infrastructure and/or major skills, equipment:   
CreaSolv® pilot plant: Fraunhofer IVV runs a flexible CreaSolv® pilot line consisting of some 100-250 L 
vessels for different unit operations like dissolution, mechanical cleaning, extractive cleaning, product 
drying and solvent recovery. In the past it was used to produce 5 -100 kg samples of – amongst others - 
ABS, PS, PC/ABS, PP, PE, PET and PA. This line has a capacity of 5-10 kg/day and will be the base of 
design studies deducing optimized process parameters for a 25 kg/h plant.   
  
CreaSolv® Pilot line   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
 [DECOAT]    Page 11 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
The output of this pilot line are intermediate polymer pellets that are offline transferred to a vacuum 
extrusion line which is used to parametrize a final drying of intermediate products.  
  
Participant’s dissemination channels:    
Fairs and conferences:  
• Electronic goes Green 2020,   
• IFAT 2021  
• Organisation of in-house Workshops / Conferences Magazines:  
• Fraunhofer IVV Newsletter  Networks:  
• Fraunhofer IVV is present on LinkedIN, XING  
  
  
 
Partner 4 – CTAG – Centro Tecnológico de Automoción de Galicia  
  
Country  Spain  
Core Competence: development and validation of products for the 
transport sector. Comprehensive testing facilities.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
 [DECOAT]    Page 12 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Brief description of legal entity:   
CTAG is a Spanish, private, non-profit R&D technology centre devoted to support the automotive industry 
in its research, development and innovation needs. CTAG was created in 2002 thanks to a joint initiative 
of automotive enterprises within the region.  
With a team of more than 700 prof essionals having more than 60% of international activity, CTAG is an 
ideal partner for developing new innovative products for the automotive sector using CAD product design 
and CAE simulations tools.   
CTAG is present in all the stages of product development, from initial advanced research to product life. 
The key fields of competence where CTAG concentrates its activities are: new materials, novel 
manufacturing processes, mathematical calculation and simulation, component testing and analysis of 
performances, environment, electronics, ergonomics, comfort and innovation management.   
For further information on CTAG capacities and main activities, please visit our website ( www.ctag.com) 
and check our corporative video (https://vimeo.com/120029828).  
DECOAT role and main tasks:   
WP1: Support on the definition and requirements of end-user cases on materials  
Input for WP2: Evaluation of the maximum amount of impurities allowed in the recycled material, according 
to the aimed mechanical properties, by testing different compounds with increasing amount of coating 
residue.   
WP5: Design of specifications for the material/prototype validation according to the standards an d 
protocols, development of new testing procedures if needed (depending on the functionality of the part 
selected as prototype demonstrator), characterization and validation through climate, vibration, acoustics, 
impact, fatigue, etc. testing.  
CTAG also will contribute in the supporting work packages (WP6, WP7 and WP8).  
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:   
From 2004, CTAG has a research team focused on exploring novel applications for new materials in the 
transport sector as well as enhancing the efficiency of plastic transformation processes.   
On validations side, CTAG has three buildings equipped with the ultimate testing laboratories: climatic, 
vibration & acoustics, fatigue, materials, engine, electronics and ergonomics, fitted with the cutting-edge 
technology and equipment such as two triaxial shakers integrated in acoustic and climatic chambers, 
several climatic chambers including a complete car sunlight radiation and weather resistance chamber, 
etc.  
Key staff members undertaking the work:    
Eng. Raquel Ledo (Female). She is MSc in Telecommunication Engineering by the University of Vigo, 
with a postgraduate Master in Automobile Enterprises Management and a Degree of Research Proficiency 
and Advanced Studies. From 2003 to 2006, she worked in the automotive industry (Development Manager 
in Prevent, Controller Body -in-White in PSA Peugeot Citroën). Since 2007, she is project manager in 
CTAG and Head of the Materials Innovation area from 2016. Besides her extensive experience in the 
automotive business (both in automotive suppliers and in OEMs), she was directly involved in more than 
10 EU projects, 3 of them within 7FP and 3 of them in H2020. She was the coordinator of FORTAPE 
project (H2020 -FoF2014) and Expert Evaluator in several H2020 programmes. She holds several 
publications in the field of automotive engineering an d 4 national patents. LinkedIn profile: 
https://es.linkedin.com/in/raquelledobanobre  
Dr. Alberto Tielas Macía (Male): MSc in Mechanical Engineering by the University of Vigo (2003) with a 
PhD in Manufacturing Process Engineering (2015). From 2002, working in CTAG within the Engineering 
and Development Department. From 2006, as Head of Materials and Interior Systems Department in 
CTAG. From 2010, as invited professor at the University of Vigo within the “Master in Technologies and 
Processes for the Automobile Industry”, at the Corporative University of CEAGA (the  
 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
 [DECOAT]    Page 13 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Galician Cluster of Automotive Industry) and at the public educational system of professional training. 
Involved in more than 15 national and European R&D projects, coordinating 3 of them: CarbonInspired 
(Interreg IVB SUDOE), GreenMotion (Interreg POCTEP) and SMARTCOVER (national). He holds 8 
publications in the field of materials engineering for the automotive sector and 3 national patents. He is a 
regular speaker in national and regional congresses related to the field of materials for vehicles: Workshop 
on Joint Technologies: adhesives for the automotive industry (2014), CarbonInspired 2.0 International 
Workshop:  
Nanomaterials for Industry (2012 & 2014), H2020 Green Vehicles Workshop Spain 2014, 12 th 
International Workshop on Plastics for the Automotive Industry (2012), etc. Top experienced in automotive 
engineering, injection moulding, process simulation and 3D design. LinkedIn profile: 
https://es.linkedin.com/in/alberto-tielas-48a48136  
Eng. Vanessa Ventosinos Louzao (Female): BSc in Technical Engineering in Industrial Chemistry by 
the University of Santiago de Compostela (2005). With two post -degree master courses in “Innovation 
Management” by INGAFOR (2010) & “Innovation and Quality Management” by the National Distance 
Education University (2012). From 2007, project manager and product developer within the Materials 
Innovation Area in CTAG. Involved in more than 10 research projects, in the last 6 as the project technical 
manager: Naturplas II, Greenmotion, Naturtruck, Carboprec, Fortape and Ecofunel. She holds 3 
publications related to the field of materials engineering in the automotive sector and 13 patents (Spanish 
and French). She lectured in 3 international congresses and 4 national/regional workshops. Top 
experienced in new materials for automotive applications. LinkedIn profile: 
https://es.linkedin.com/in/vanessa-ventosinos-louzao-b5bb8a24/en   
  
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5) 
Publications:  
• Tielas A., Ledo R., Ventosinos V., García D.: “Manufacturing of complex parts based on unidirectional 
tapes. Technology transfer from automotive towards aeronautic industry” Magazine of the Spanish 
Association for Composite Materials. June 2017.  
• Costas M. , Díaz J., Romera L. E., Hernández S. & Ledo R.: Influence of welded joints on the 
crashworthiness response of hybrid structural elements. SAE International. 2013-01-0755. 2013.  
Patents:   
Manufacturing process of a heating coating. ES2402034  
Programmable pulse generator to carry out pneumatic and electric fatigue tests: ES2553272  
Equipment for the acoustic and vibrational characterization ES2362834  
DECOAT relevant previous projects or activities:   
FORTAPE – Research on efficient integrated systems for the manufacturing of complex parts based on 
unidirectional tapes for the automotive and aeronautical industry. H2020 -FoF2-2014 (GA nº636860) 
www.fortape-project.eu NATURTRUCK – Development of a new Bio -Composite from renewable 
resources with improved thermal and fire resistance for manufacturing a truck internal part with high 
quality surface finishing. FP7 -SME-2013-1 (GA nº 605658)  ww.naturtruck.eu CARBOPREC – 
Developing new precursors, functionalization and pr ocessing routes for carbon fibre. FP7 -NMP-2013-
LARGE-7 (GA nº 604215) www.carboprec.eu ECOPLAST – Research in new biomass-based composites 
from renewable resources with improved properties for vehicle parts moulding. FP7 -NMP-2009-SME-3 
(GA nº 246176) www.ecoplastproject.com   
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
 [DECOAT]    Page 14 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
 Technical equipment: ( 
For the proposed work in thi 
Spain:  
 
Please include also some photographies of your relevant equipment).  
s project, CTAG will make available the following equipment and labs, located in 
our facilities in  
 
Product design:   
3D CAD tools, including modal and failure analysis, selection 
assessment for new materials, quality track, ECO -design, reverse 
engineering and mould/tool design (using CATIA V5 software).  
  
 
 
 
  
Injection moulding lab:   
Injection moulding machine Engel Victory 2550/350 without columns 
and adapted to a D60 screw, high temperature attemperators, control 
of up to 8 sequential nozzles and 16 in-mould heating zones, injection-
compression module, set of 4 different screw geometries (amorphous, 
semicrystalline, double fleet, mixer), static mixers, cavity pressure 
sensors, grinding mill, dehumidifier, IR heating lamps, MFI indexer, 
humidity indexer, thermographic camera, power supply equipment, 
microwave oven and a electroplating lab.  
 
  
Climatic laboratory:   
+20 climate chambers with a wide range of sizes, several are combined 
with other testing equipment to combine ageing with other mechanical 
validation (e.g. climatic + vibration testing). Several include the 
possibility of high-speed recording to analyse the failure mode (e.g. for 
airbag deployment). Just to mention a few: complete -car climatic 
chamber for solar radiation (200000L of capacity), thermal shock 
chamber, ozone resistance chamber, weather -o-meter, salt spray 
chamber, light and weather resistance chambers, etc.  
  
Vibro-acoustic:   
2 multi-axial electrohydraulic shakers able to reproduce any signal (one 
of them inside a climatic chamber and the other inside a semi-anechoic 
chamber), bidirectional electro -dynamic shaker, unidirectional shaker 
in a semi -anechoic chamber, pulse equipment for modal analysis of 
complex structures, kundt’s tube for acoustic measuring of porous 
material, intensity sensors, signal loggers.  
  
Durability:   
Fatigue test rig, robot for the reproduction of complicated trajectories 
(e.g. ingressegress simulation for car seats), several test benches.  
  
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
 [DECOAT]    Page 15 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
  
Material:   
Low intensity signal generator, universal test machine for traction -
compression, test bed for traction, shore durometer, spectrocolorimeter 
and reflectometer, volatile measurement, cold impact, abrasion meter, 
etc.  
  
Metrology:   
Several 3D coordinated -measuring machines (by contact, by sensing 
heads, by vision) and portable equipment for 3D measurement.  
 
   
  
Instrumentation and automatisms:   
Support for testing according to standards or customer requirements 
(programmable automatic equipment, robot arm, data loggers, 
sensors, power and tension supplies).  
 
Participant’s dissemination channels:    
Trade fairs:  
Expo Testing (Stuttgart)  
Automotive Interiors EXPO (Stuttgart)  
JEC Composites (Paris) 
Journals:  
JEC Composites, Bioplastics Magazine, Automotive Engineering 
International Networks:  
STA – Association of Automotive technical experts.   
ERTICO : public-private partnership of 120 companies and organisations representing service providers, 
suppliers, traffic and transport industry, research, public authorities, user organisations, mobile network 
operators, and vehicle manufacture SERNAUTO – Spanish association of automotive suppliers  
CEAGA (Cluster of Automotive Industry in Galicia)  
  
   

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
 [DECOAT]    Page 16 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
 
Partner 5 – NTUA – National Technical University of Athens  
  
Country  Greece  
Core Competence: NTUA is the leader of WP1 “Triggerable 
materials for coatings” and one of the key partners in synthesis, 
characterisation and processing of proposed materials. NTUA will 
develop novel smart nano- and micro-materials that will be used in 
the proposed debonding technologies.  
Brief description of legal entity:   
National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) is the oldest and most prestigious educational institution 
of Greece in the field of technology, and has contributed unceasingly to the country's scientific, technical 
and economic development since its foundation in 1836. The NTUA team comprises chemical, 
mechanical, metallurgical engineers, physicists, chemists and technicians, specialized in the fields of 
materials research and development, possessing a very experienced staff (including several professors, 
research scientists and PhD students) as well as extensive facilities for materials processing and 
characterization. R-NanoLab (http://nanolab.chemeng.ntua.gr) has all the necessary infrastructures for 
the synthesis of nano - and micro - materials. Additionally, there is the suitable equipment for the 
investigation of chemical and nanomechanical properties, as well as the surface properties and 
topographical characteristics of materials through atomic force microscopy.  
DECOAT role and main tasks:  
• Synthesis of nano-/microcapsules and smart carbonaceous hybrid nanomaterials(WP1).  
• Characterization of developed triggerable materials (WP1), coating formulations (WP2) and 
preliminary testing of specimens (WP2).  
• Support in WP3 on definition of a range of dyes to be used in the shell of the microparticles.  
• Toxicity, release and exposure assessment of nanomaterials (WP6).  
DECOAT specific competences and experiences:   
R-NanoLab (NTUA) has vast experience on the synthesis of novel stimuli-responsive nanocontainers with 
encapsulated organic substances, as well as on the synthesis and characterization of hybrid organic -
inorganic containers for coating formulations. Moreover, R -NanoLab is involved in synthesis and 
characterization of carbonace ous nanomaterials, dealing with advanced applications, such as 
antifouling/anticorrosive coatings, composite materials and smart applications, investigating also the 
toxicity and consequences of the nanoparticles.  

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design      
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018  
  
 [DECOAT]    Page 17 of 71  
This proposal version was submitted by GUY BUYLE on 28/06/2018 16:55:43 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Participant Portal Submission Service. 
Key staff members undertaking the work:    
Prof. Costas A. Charitidis (Male) is Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering of NTUA, with 
extensive R&D experience through collaborations with international research centres. He is a referee in 
International scientific journals, evaluator & scientific advisor of R&D projects, participant in European and 
National funded R&D projects. His research activity is complemented by about 110 papers in International 
Journals, a large number of lectures as an invited speaker and over 1800 citations by other researchers.  
Dr. Ioannis Kartsonakis (Male) is a Chemist, with an MSc in Polymer Science and its Applications and 
a PhD in Chemistry on the subject of synthesis and characterization of hybrid organic-inorganic coatings 
as well as nanocontainers. He has 3 patents, 49 publications in peer -reviewed international journals, 2 
publications in international books, more than 60 contributions to conference proceedings and workshops. 
His interests includes: synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials, coatings (polymeric, inorganic, 
hybrid organic-inorganic) and study of corrosion processes on materials.  
Dr. Tatjana Kosanovic Milickovic (Female)  is a Chemist with a PhD in Chemical Sciences. She has 
been involved in the technical/scientific development, implementation and project management of >20  
European and National research projects. Her research topics are in the fields of materials science, 
electrochemistry and nanotechnology with >50 scientific and technical papers published in Journals and 
Conferences. Dr. Kosanovic's scientific interests i nclude: development and characterization of 
nanomaterials, nanostructures and nanocomposites and environmental chemistry.  
Aikaterini-Flora Trompeta (Female) is a Chemical Engineer (NTUA), with an MSc in Material Science 
and Technology. Her work experience is devoted in European and National Research Projects, dealing 
with nanomaterials for advanced application. Her research interest focuses on nanomaterials production 
processes (Chemical Vapour Deposition, wet chemical techniques). Part of her research work has been 
presented on national and international conferences and several related publications in peer reviewed 
journals have been published.  
DECOAT relevant achievements: (up to 5)  
 
1. Investigation of nanomechanical properties of multilayered hybrid nanocomposites, G.C. Papanicolaou, 
C.A. Charitidis, D.V. Portan, D.K. Perivoliotis, M.A. Koklioti, Meccanica 2014 49 (11):2645-2655.  
2. Towards a holistic environmental impact assessment of ca rbon nanotube growth through chemical 
vapour deposition, A.F. Trompeta, M.A. Koklioti, D.K. Perivoliotis, I. Lynch, C.A. Charitidis, Journal of 
Cleaner Production 2016 129:384-394.  
3. Two-Shell Structured PMAA@CeO2 Nanocontainers Loaded with 2 -Mercaptobenzothiazole for 
Corrosion Protection of  
Damaged Epoxy Coated AA 2024 -T3, A.C. Balaskas, T. Hashimoto, M. Curioni, G.E. Thomson, 
Nanoscale 2017 9:54995508.