1.1 Objectives  
The last decade has experienced a strong 
increase in technological developments for 
improved material functionality. One of 
these involves surface treatments, which 
employ complex (multilayer) structures 
designed to provide multifunctionality in a 
single solution. Within this text, for the sake 
of simplicity, we will refer to these complex 
multilayer surface treatments as 
‘coatings’. This definition includes 
functional and performance coatings on 
textiles, paints on plastics, foil 
lamination and adhesion layers for 
plastics parts (polymer-polymer and 
polymer-metal connections). These 
‘coatings’ have a wide range of advantages 
and benefits but currently cannot be 
recycled because of their hybrid nature.  
The main goal of DECOAT is to enable 
the circular use of coated parts by 
developing novel smart polymer 
material systems, and their corresponding recycling processes, currently a missing link – see figure. We will demonstrate 
the project results via concrete use-cases for outdoor gear, household electronics and automotive parts. A systemic 
approach for delivering breakthroughs all along the value chain will be followed, see figure.  
To reach this ambitious goal and to maximise the impact of our DECOAT project on the textile and plastics sector, we 
define the following concrete key objectives (KO): 
 KO1. Development of a toolbox of triggerable materials for debonding on demand suitable for use on textiles and 
plastics. Result: ‘coatings’1 that can be removed by various triggers, e.g. thermal via infra-red, heat or steam (targeted 
temperatures 100-150°C), chemical treatment or ‘microwaves’2. 
 KO2. Development and design of triggerable debonding coating solutions for ‘disassembly’ of parts or objects and for 
‘removal’ of the coating from the multilayer structure. Focus is on acrylates, polyurethanes and PVC materials. Result: generic 
disassembly and removal solutions for punctual connections (0D), linear joints (1D) and planar coatings (2D). 
 KO3. Automation of sorting according to the required trigger. Result: pilot line enabling to sort the coated textiles and 
plastics based on the separation trigger incorporated.  
 KO4. Integration of debonding systems in a continuous pilot plant recycling line for coated parts. Result: pilot line 
enabling the recyclability of coated parts (flexible and rigid). The system will integrate the following elements: sorting and 
grinding, the novel debonding system, mechanical recycling and melt extrusion, all steps running in a continuous way. 
 KO5. Demonstration via use cases (outdoor gear, household electronics and automotive parts) using the pilot recycling 
plant and the adapted coating processes during manufacturing. Result: circularity demo of the use case products. Technology 
and processing for the use cases brought to TRL 5, accompanied by a plan for upscaling & industrialisation.  
 
1 ‘coatings’ refers here to coatings, paints and adhesives as defined above and as will be used for simplicity throughout this whole document 
2 ‘microwaves’ will be the most likely option (although it could also be another form of electromagnetic heating like Rf heating -see also section 1.4.1) and as such will be used 
for simplicity throughout this whole document 

Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 4 of 127 
 KO6. Assessment of environmental impact and implementation of safety-by-design (safe product, safe production and 
safe use and recycling). Result: full LCA study for the debonding concepts; reduced uncertainties and risks for human and 
environmental safety of DECOAT solutions.  
 KO7. Exploitation and business plans for the DECOAT results, including for the use cases manufacturing guidelines to 
ensure implementation at industrial scale. Further, for the more generic results (design-material concepts) a thorough 
analysis will be done for wide scope exploitation within the textile and plastics sectors. Result: tailored business plans for 
DECOAT (company) partners, public research roadmap and a strategy to further exploit and develop the generic DECOAT 
results, as a basis for implementing the market creating potential of the DECOAT approach.  
 KO8. Dissemination and communication among relevant European communities. The main target is the European 
materials and recycling community, supplemented by the wider stakeholders group, both for getting extra feedback during 
project implementation and for promoting our results. Result: raise awareness, engage for collaboration and 
adaptation/integration of the project developments in applications beyond those covered within DECOAT.