1.2 Relation to the NMBP work plan 
The DECOAT products will be designed to enable separation (and thus recycling) by incorporating smart additives in the adhesive 
that are activated by a specific trigger (e.g. heat, humidity, microwave, chemical, mechanical). Additionally, an efficient sorting 
process correlated with the trigger and a pilot recycling plant will be developed to illustrate circular use. In this fashion, DECOAT 
will directly respond to two of the three types of materials design objectives put forth in the call scope: ‘Design of 
polymer material structures with intrinsic sorting/recycling abilities’ (bullet point 1) and ‘developments of separation and 
recycling technologies’ (bullet point 3).  
NMBP-26-2018 call - challenge & scope DECOAT response 
products with smart intrinsic recycling and/or 
sorting abilities 
Three product families using multilayer coated parts are targeted: backpacks, 
household electronics and automotive parts. Each of them will be made from 
multi-layered materials that allow debonding for recycling and that can be 
sorted via the trigger mechanism. These are representative for a wide range 
of coated and painted textiles and plastic based consumer goods. 
harmonise with circular economy principles The 3 basic circular economy principles are3: (i) Design out waste and 
pollution; (ii) Keep products and materials in use; (iii) Regenerate natural 
systems. DECOAT will enable coated, hybrid and painted materials to 
harmonise with principles (i) and (ii) 
help industry to better match the EU 
environmental targets at the same time as 
improving their competitiveness 
DECOAT targets the re-use and recycling of waste materials from households 
to increase to a minimum of 50%4. We will mainly contribute for ‘plastics’. 
DECOAT will also contribute to the EU environmental targets for the 
automotive sector5. 
design of polymer formulations with smart 
additives,  
DECOAT will make use of a toolbox of smart additives: microwaveable 
additives, microcapsules or bonding/ debonding adhesives for separation.  
developments of separation and recycling 
technologies 
DECOAT will tailor microwave technology, heat, steam and dissolving to 
enable separation of the coating from the textile or plastic. 
demonstrate the actual circular use of such 
materials through re-processing of recycled 
products 
A pilot will be developed for the use cases to demonstrate the circular use of 
the materials. Both closed-loop (for same application) and open-loop (across 
applications but of same value level) recycling will be considered. 
evaluation of properties of re-processed 
products in an industrial environment 
Properties of the use case products made with the reprocessed materials will 
be evaluated by the RTDs and by the DECOAT manufacturers (DECOAT end-
users) according to their normal testing conditions. 
full Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of the 
material production and life-cycle 
LCA is included in DECOAT activities and is a Key Objective. Scope: raw 
material acquisition and processing, manufacturing, distribution and transport, 
use phase, end of life, and benefits and loads beyond system boundaries 
(secondary systems). 
Activities should start at TRL3, …achieve 
TRL5 
DECOAT approach fulfils this criterion, see section ‘positioning of DECOAT’ 
 
3 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/overview/concept  
4 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/targets.htm 
5 2000/53/EC directive  “… for all end-of life vehicles, the reuse and recovery shall be increased to a minimum of 95 % by an average weight per vehicle and year.” 
Smart plastic materials with intrinsic recycling properties by design 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-NMBP-26-2018 
 
814505 - DECOAT – Part B  Page 5 of 127