4. Added whole section Ethics from the project ’s 
approved proposal  
27.10.2022 
Ref. Ares(2025)1458423 - 24/02/2025

EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 2 of 45 
3.1. ‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, 
equipment, and other goods, works and services) – 
was added proclamation regarding the  
confirmation that all costs related to equipment 
include only the depreciation costs for the 
mentioned equipment. 
27.10.2022 
1.2 and 1.2.3 
3.1.4 
Table 3 and Table 9: Based on the implementation 
of the 2nd Amendment there is added new affiliated 
entity Hisense Gorenje Europe, d.o.o. (HGE) to the 
demonstrator’s activities. Added justification of 
costs. 
22.03.2024 
3.1.4 Removed other costs of HGE 10.12.2024 
2.2.2 Edited number of publications in the table 20  10.12.2024 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. Excellence .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2 
2. Impact ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 22 
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation.................................................................................................................... 31 
4.     Ethics……………………………………………………………………………………………………………35 
Terminology 
Acr. Explanation Acr.  Explanation 
CVM Circular value model ML Machine learning 
CMS Circular manufacturing system AR Augmented reality 
IoT Internet of things OEMs Original Equipment Manufacturers 
DLT Distributed Ledger Technologies PIM Product Information Management 
SMRE Small and medium sized remanufacturing enterprises PCB Printed circuit board 
1. Excellence  
The manufacturing sector is the greatest contributor to GDP in industrialized nations (14.5% of total GDP in 
Europe), but also it is a major consumer of 
material, energy, and a significant source of 
waste (over 370 million tonnes of waste are 
generated annually in Europe). 1 This negative 
impact can be reduced by implementing value 
recovery practices. Indeed, it has been 
demonstrated that closing the loop of the 
linear value chains provides multiple gains: i) 
remanufacturing typically uses 85% less 
energy than manufacturing  and could 
offset more than 800,000 tons of CO2 
emissions per annum at a global scal e2, ii) a 
shift in reusing, remanufacturing, and recycling 
products could create more than half a 
million jobs in the recycling industry across 
Europe3. Despite these advantages, currently 
 
1 Parker, David, et al. "Remanufacturing market study." (2015). 
2 Carbon Trust. (2014). Innovate UK’s Knowledge Transfer Network and Coventry University. Supporting Excellence in UK Remanufacturing: Stakeholder dialogue on 
opportunities and challenges 
3 World Economic Forum and the Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2014). Towards the Circular Economy: Accelerating the scale-up across global supply chains. 
Figure 1: The schematic of the phases of the Circular Value Management 
systems and the integrated digital solutions that DiCiM will cover. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 3 of 45 
in the major industrial sectors the ratio of value recovery in the form of remanufacturing to new manufacturing is 
only 1.9% across Europe 1 and has the potential to become a €100 billion sector by 2030 4. It is, therefore, quite 
evident that to foster the economic opportunity that is worth billions5, the scale, efficiency, and responsiveness of 
the manufacturing systems for value recovery activities need to be improved significantly, with the vision to reach 
those of the linear manufacturing systems.  
Therefore, the DiCiM project aims to develop and demonstrate integrated digital solutions that 
enable i) tracking, tracing, and condition monitoring of products during their use phase, ii) 
optimization of reverse logistics, and iii) supporting tools/solutions to enhance efficiency and 
responsiveness of operations during the value recovery phase.  
Through these integrated digital solutions developed using state-of-the-art technologies and knowledge, the DiCiM 
project will address value use and value recovery, phases of CVM6 (Figure 1) connected through an optimised 
reverse logistics, thus leading to a successful implementation of the Circular Manufacturing Systems7 (CMS). 
While technology is the main focus, the economic and environmental performance  of the technology 
deployment as well as the value recovery activities will be ensured. 
 
Figure 2: Traditional information management systems in the manufacturing industry are not designed for circularity and value recovery 
1.1. Objectives and ambition  
In the CMS, the value management approach includes phases of value creation, delivery, use, recovery, and reuse 
in a systemic perspective 8. Although the value use, and value recovery phase s are the main focus  of the DiCiM 
project as the call requires, the successful implementation of CMS demands a systemic approach where all phases 
of CVM are considered simultaneously and seamlessly 9,10. Therefore, besides the primary focus on value 
use and recovery, DiCiM will maintain the necessary focus on value creation and delivery as well reuse phases to 
ensure the successful implementation of CMS.  
DiCiM project directly addresses the expected outcomes of the call, by developing and demonstrating a set of 
integrated digital solutions that include an open access digital platform along with a range of support solutions 
for managers, engineers, technicians, and operators along the value chain  to support the management 
and engineering activities in a Circular Economy. DiCiM is a holistic support solution that provides the necessary 
infrastructure to build an agile, sustainable, efficient, and responsive production system for recovery 
and reuse of products, components and materials thus reducing the dependency on imported and harmful materials. 
The core goal is to facilitate and boost fundamental shifts in the way goods are produced and consumed to achieve 
 
4 European Remanufacturing Council. https://www.remancouncil.eu/  
5 Ellen MacArthur Foundation: Towards the circular economy Vol. 1: Economic and business rationale for the accelerated transition. Accessed on 07.01.16. (2012) 
6 Roci, Malvina, Niloufar Salehi, Saman Amir, Sayyed Shoaib-ul-Hasan, Farazee MA Asif, Aleš Mihelič, and Amir Rashid. "Towards Circular Manufacturing 
Systems implementation: A Complex Adaptive Systems perspective using modelling and simulation as a quantitative analysis tool." Sustainable Production and 
Consumption (2022). 
7 CMS a system that is designed intentionally for closing the loop of products/components preferably in their original form, through multiple lifecycles. 
8 Asif, Farazee. M. A., Circular manufacturing systems: a development framework with analysis methods and tools for implementation. Diss. KTH Royal Institute of 
Technology, 2017. 
9 Rashid, Amir, et al. "Resource conservative manufacturing: An essential change in business and technology paradigm for sustainable manufacturing." Journal 
of Cleaner production 57 (2013): 166-177. 
10 Roci, Malvina, Niloufar Salehi, Saman Amir, Sayyed Shoaib-ul-Hasan, Farazee MA Asif, Aleš Mihelič, and Amir Rashid. "Towards Circular Manufacturing 
Systems implementation: A Complex Adaptive Systems perspective using modelling and simulation as a quantitative analysis tool." Sustainable Production and 
Consumption (2022). 

EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 4 of 45 
sustainable resource management and reduce carbon emissions, addressing the concept of the circular economy. 
We focus on material and energy savings by enabling reuse of products, components, and materials in an 
efficient and responsive way.  
1.1.1. Objectives 
It is of great importance for the DiCiM project that the development of integrated digital solutions (both the open 
access digital platform and the support solutions) are co-created with the users to i) allow quick feedback loops so 
that issues that hinder user experience can be identified and resolved; and ii) ensure rapid technology uptake in the 
case of companies (and beyond). Therefore, DiCiM will: 
1. Develop solutions with cognitive interfaces as well as training and knowledge transfer mechanisms. 
2. Develop solutions for working with the users’ experience (mapping, analysing, and improvement) and for 
increasing engagement, especially for motivation and stimulation of pro-digital technologies implementation. 
Table 1: Project Objectives 
Objectives Results 
Call scope: Development of innovative concepts, methods, and tools that track and trace the status of relevant 
manufactured products and components, such as electronic systems and components as well as machine tools, 
and increase the transparency and accountability for these along their lifecycle. Where appropriate, proposals 
need to be able to link up with manufacturing industrial data spaces platforms, so that circular economy data can 
be shared with a larger set of organisations; 
Key area 1:  Integrated digital solutions that combine open access digital platform for lifecycle information 
management and support solutions for value recovery activities 
O1: Develop open access digital platform based on relevant 
technologies and principles (e.g., Distributed Ledger 
Technologies (DLT and Gaia-X) for data infrastructure. 
O2: Develop IoT capability to trace and track operations and 
service data. 
O3: Develop algorithms to optimize reverse logistics. 
O4: Develop digital support solutions, i.e. image processing, 
AR and condition monitoring for decision support. 
O5: Implement the digital platform , algorithms and support 
solutions in an integrated way to support all activities of value 
recovery, i.e. collection, sorting, inspection, disassembly, 
repair/remanufacturing and reassembly. 
Secure, transparent, and scalable Open access 
digital platform based on open -source 
components to increase available spare parts by 
30% annually. 
Reverse logistics cost reduction between 30% to 
50%. 
Increased efficiency in value recovery by 30%. 
Increased spare part recovery rate between 20% 
(washing machines) and 150% (refrigerators). 
OEMs, service organisations, suppliers, repair 
shops, used parts  (core) brokers and logistics 
support providers, connected on one platform. 
Call scope: Inclusion and handling of real-time production data in analysis software and tools, notably for decision 
making and control, as well as knowledge management. 
Key area 2: ML based  AI  for product information management and supporting decision -making for different 
actors of the CMS. 
O6: Apply ML for real -time decision support for optimized 
reverse logistics including product collection, inspection, and 
sorting.  
O7: Integrate Image processing and AR platform to visually 
assist with product inspection, sorting, repair and reassembly. 
Necessary data is available ion real -time for 
personnel on the field to reduce human error 
related to sorting, recovery, etc, by 90%. 
Reduce sort and tes t costs at sorting centre by 
25%. Increase refurbished units by 50%. 
Call scope: Demonstration of the support tools in at least two different realistic production environments with a 
clear target of improving quality and sustainability with significant economic value. 
Key area 3: Demonstrate the impact of Integrated digital solutions in the value use and value recovery phases of 
the CVM. 
O8: Perform whitegoods demonstrator: washing machine 
(Dem1). 
O9: Perform whitegoods demonstrator: refrigerator (Dem2). 
O10: Perform consumer electronics demonstrator (Dem3) 
O11: Perform automotive spare parts demonstrator (Dem4). 
O12: Evaluate the economic and environmental performance 
Testing i n a real production environment , 
increasing good part recovery by M48: 
Dem1 increased recoveries by 20,000 units /year. 
Dem2 increased returns by 70,000 units /year. 
Dem3 increases refurbished units by 50% /year. 
Dem4 increases used spare parts recovery by 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 5 of 45 
of the demos. 
O13: Assess the business case and upscaling potential of the 
demos. 
O14: Evaluate replication potential at the sector level. 
30% /year. 
Further KPIs are in Table 3 to Table 6. 
Platform and support solutions testing and 
validation making the developments ready for 
market launch. 
Call scope: Research must build on existing standards or contribute to standardisation.  
     All projects should build on or seek collaboration with existing projects. 
Key area 4: Integration and creation of standards and synergies with other relevant European, national or regional 
initiatives, funding programmes and platforms. 
O15: Contribute to standards such as ISO/TC 323 Circular 
Economy. 
O16: Engage with DigiPrime and CirThread projects. 
O17: Exploit APRA and European Remanufacturing 
Association’s network as well as other networks (such as 
APPLiA and DigitalEurope , and Gaia-X association) that the 
partners are a member of. 
Community of early adopters in the whitegoods 
industry and consumer electronics industry  - 
network/ecosystem (helix) of at least 200 
stakeholders by M36. 
Emerging standards and data format for open 
access platform. 
Call scope:  The support tools need to work with the user, and training and knowledge transfer, cognitive 
interfaces, as well as acceptance and uptake will be vital in the solutions proposed. 
Key area 5: Human centred approach and acceptance uptake through training, dissemination and exploitation 
activities 
O18: Co-creation and regular validation of support tools with 
end-users. 
O19: Training programs for support tools with end-users. 
O20. Develop an open network facilitating the adoption of 
the integrated digital solutions. 
O21. Disseminate demonstration results. 
O22. Mechanism of citizens and end -user engagement 
through collaboration. 
4 tailored training programs ensuring knowledge 
transfer, uptake, and user acceptance. 
2 r esearch articles  publications, m otivating 
actors from other manufacturing sectors to use 
the integrated digital solutions. 
5 researchers with upskilled careers circular 
economy and 2 new transdisciplinary/trans -
sectoral collaborations. 
Do not significant harm principles of the project: In line the research and innovation activities do not support, 
or include any activity that could make significant harm to any of the six environmental objectives identified with 
the Article 17 of the EU Taxonomy Regulation. Compliance is assessed both for activities carried out during the 
present project as well as for the expected life cycle impact of DiCiM at the commercialisation stage, to be covered 
with a complementary project. 
DiCiM supports the achievement of the Made in Europe Partnership General Objectives.  
Namely: 1. Ensuring European Leadership & manufacturing excellence 2. Achieving Circular and climate -neutral 
manufacturing 3. Mastering the Digital transformation of the manufacturing industry 4. Creating Attractive added-
value manufacturing jobs 
1.1.2. Ambition 
Value recovery is the process of reusing materials of a used product back into the production of a like-new product. 
The challenges include high cost of 
resources, complex parts design,  
limited used parts availability, lack 
of internationally accepted 
definitions and protocols, poor 
design of reverse logistics 
networks, and poor consumer 
perceptions. 
The efficiency and responsiveness 
of value recovery operations 
depend heavily on the quality and 
quantity of returning product s 
(spare parts availability) as well as 
 Figure 3: Value management phases in CMS and the focus of the DiCiM project. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 6 of 45 
the accessibility of support solutions to carry out activities. Knowing where used products/parts are and in what 
conditions can help optimize the reverse logistics process, which involves managing returns, dealing with any leases 
or refurbishments, and potentially buying surplus goods and materials. Tracking, tracing, and condition monitoring 
can provide with real time data about the location and co ndition of products. After the return of products, the 
processes of inspection, sorting, disassembly/dismantl ing, testing and repair/refurbish/remanufacturing/recycl ing 
start. 
We consider the implementation of the circular manufacturing systems and CVM (Circular Value Model) as the 
cross functional integration of the four areas where their mutual dependencies and interactions are considered and 
understood as shown in Figure 3: 
Area 1 ICT tools: Digital technologies to support CMS value phases with available technologies such as DLT 
principles for data collection, management and sharing among the value chain actors; IoT for tracing, tracking and 
condition monitoring; Big Data principles to systematically analyse and extract data collected through sensors and 
images; ML based AI to su pport decision making and Image processing and Augmented Reality (AR) to assist 
operations directly involved in value recovery and reuse activities 
Area 2 Supply chain: Integrating both forward and reverse supply chains with the support of the ICT tools that 
can solve companies' and consumers' concerns regarding traceability and data protection in a tamper-proof manner. 
To demonstrate how the integrated (forward and rever se) supply chain can be influenced and optimised through 
the product design consideration below.  
Area 3 Product design: This means designing the information management platform and products with condition 
monitoring capability with the idea of facilitating the refurbishment, remanufacturing, and possible upgrade of the 
product. To understand and feedback to the designer on how product and data management systems should be 
designed.  
Area 4 Business model : To understand and demonstrate how the product design and supply chain features 
supported by the ICT tools can trigger the emergence of new business models. It also includes dissemination actions 
to enhance public acceptance and the possibility of scaling up the value reuse business.  
Solutions currently used for supply chain communication and legal/ethical compliance monitoring 
are developed to support linear systems, none of them addresses the issues of closing the loop of 
products/materials, for multiple lifecycles. Furthermore, solu tions do not allow inter -organization 
communication and sharing of data among multiple stakeholders in a value chain.   
The DiCiM project will follow the ResCoM 11-framework and explore a systemic and systematic approach, 
considering interdependencies among business model, product design and supply chain aspects, including ICT as a 
key enabler, to overcome the classic challenges of uncertainty in quality, quantity, and timing of returning products. 
DiCiM project will demonstrate the developments in the production environment with four case studies selected 
from the automotive, whitegoods and electronics sectors which represent 68% of the total manufacturing sectors 
in Europe (more info in section 2). The testing and validation of the developments will be carried out as shown in  
Figure 4, which is expected to create a full functioning holistic solution adaptable and applicable to other sectors. 
 
11 Resource Conservative Manufacturing (ResCoM) is a research initiative and also an EC funded research project (www.recoms.eu) promoting circular 
manufacturing systems. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 7 of 45 
1.1.3. Positioning of the project 
The project builds on the results of 
the ReCiPSS 12  project which 
explored for 4 years the success 
factors for circular manufacturing 
systems, successfully implementing 
two cases with different OEMs 
showing different levels of control 
over their value chains: one case 
with full control, and one case with 
partial control (more info in section 
1.2.3). The major technology 
results are outlined below in 
relation to their TRL at project 
start and completion. 
Table 2: Project TRL maturity 
Output Leader TRL start TRL end 
An open access digital platform for lifecycle information management. SIG 4 6 
Extend the capability of the ReCiPSS spare parts data management platform C-ECO 4 6 
Develop condition monitoring capability of the washing machines  GOR, 
HGE 
4 6 
Develop IoT capability for tracking and tracing of washing machines and 
printers with lifecycle data collection, monitoring and sharing 
GOR and 
LEX 
4 6 
Apply ML for achieving longevity and optimising reverse logistics ULFS 4 6 
Apply ML based image processing for inspection, sorting, testing and value 
recovery operations  
IRIS 4 6 
Apply AR to optimize value recovery operations  TUC 4 6 
1.2. Methodology 
1.2.1. Overall methodology 
The project is organized in 4 activity streams running in parallel during the project: 
Stream 1 (Digitalised value management system) To support and interconnect Areas 1, 2 and 3 of the CMS, 
this stream covers the creation of the integrated digital solution with the design and development of an open access 
digital platform for lifecycle information management and the support solutions to sustain the implementation of 
circular manu facturing systems. The stream includes software and technology specification, architecture, 
development, and integration [WP1, WP2, WP3 and WP4], built upon the principles and research from previous 
projects (contributions in Table 9). 
Stream 2 (Synergy of the demonstrators) will deploy the open access digital platform and the support 
solutions with existing information management systems in four cases from the three selected value chains 
(whitegoods, consumer electronics  and automotive parts ) [WP5]. The stream also includes software/hardware 
integration and deployment support, data collection/analysis/evaluation, business case validation and environmental 
impact analysis [WP6 and WP7]. To foster synergies between demonstrators, a joint taskforce will be created and 
will host regular meetings between the teams implementing the four demonstrators. This Stream integrates Areas 
1, 2, 3 and 4 of the CMS. 
Stream 3 (Integration and creation of standards) which relates to both Areas 3 and 4. This stream ensures 
use of relevant standards in the development, identification of gap in standards and finally propose new standards. 
Standards provide the fundamental building blocks for product and process development, but they also make it 
easier for consumers to understand and compare competing products, generating, in turn, additional business 
 
12 EC funded research project www.recipss.eu  
Figure 4: DiCiM plans a demonstration of the developments in the real production 
environments of four companies in three major industrial sectors. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 8 of 45 
models or expanding existing ones. Standards are also necessary for easier and fairer trade between geographies 
because the same specifications are adopted for use in different countries. It includes (but not limited to) proper 
labelling of remanufactured products, creating, and promoting universally developed and accepted standards on 
reman to raise public awareness [important contributions from WP6 and WP7. Dedicated efforts in T8. 4 from 
WP8].  
Stream 4 (Exploitation & Dissemination)  Directly related to Area 4. We will compile the results of the 
demonstrators in high impact collaterals for broad dissemination [rest of tasks in WP8]. We will base our 
communication and dissemination strategy in the triple helix model, including interact ion between academia (the 
university), industry and government, to foster economic and social impact, with both individual (Table 15) and Joint 
(table 16) communication actions. Specifically, partners Crowdhelix (CHX) , Automotive Parts Remanufacturers 
Association (APRA) and the European Reman Council (ERP) to provide significant contributions. More information 
in sections 2.2.2 and 0. 
 
Stream 1: Digitalised value management system 
Digitalised value management system in DiCiM means seamless integration of the support solutions with the digital 
platform for lifecycle information management to enhance the efficiency of value use and recovery phase together 
with the reverse logistics. 
As electrical machines are used in different applications, prognostics play an essential role in improving system 
safety, reliability and enabling predictive maintenance decision making. Having an integrated health management and 
diagnostic strategy becomes an important part of a systems’ operational life cycle.   Here, data-driven prognostic 
usually deploys machine learning algorithms to identify the pattern and anomalies within the raw signals. Figure 613 
depicts the three main types of maintenance that can be applied: corrective, preventive, and predictive maintenance. 
Based on the results from ReCiPSS project and identified needs from the industrial partners (see section 1.2.3), we 
find condition monitoring as an essential part to enable preventive and predictive maintenance  and, hence, make 
activities like repair or refurbish more attractive and profitable , especially for small and middle -sized 
remanufacturing enterprises (SMREs). Condition monitoring is also an essential element to ensure the collection of 
the right products, in the right quality and quantity at the right time. 
Generally, stresses that impact electrical machines’ operation can be classified into four main categories (Thermal, 
Electric, Ambient, and Mechanical). The appearance of faults depends mainly on the products’ parameters, such as 
machine type, size, rated voltage, etc. To increase the reliability of the machine, many parameters must be 
monitored. We will use a combination of IoT and ML technologies  
The new “Right to repair” regulations compliance requires significant advances for manufacturers. It is especially 
relevant in 3 fields: 1) supporting the repair process, 2) ensur ing the supply of spare parts and 3) monitoring of 
appliance part status.  
 
13 Kudelina, K.; Vaimann, T.; Asad, B.; Rassõlkin, A.; Kallaste, A.; Demidova, G. Trends and Challenges in Intelligent Condition Monitoring of Electrical 
Machines Using Machine Learning. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 2761. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11062761  
Figure 5: The 4 streams, objectives, WPs, 
activities, and partners involved 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 9 of 45 
With DiCiM  integrated digital solution, designers can also produce repairing 
instructions, including images, videos, 3D models and a mechanical way to define 
repairing steps and procedures. These instructions will be accessible at three levels: 
1) company repair shopfloor, 2) 3rd party certified repairmen and 3) end-users. The 
information will be presented to these 3 levels using a combination of AR and ML 
to facilitate the overall repair process. At the same time, the application that is used 
to support the repairing process will capture key business information (e.g., damaged 
parts) that will be fed to the company’s internal systems. Besides, the operators will 
be assisted by a component defect detection system to execute a quick diagnosis 
(using Image Processing) of specific parts. Finally, decision makers of the company 
will be presented with Key Indicators about of spare part stock or overall 
improvements. Where data and instructions related to repair is made available to 
the operators through the open access platform.  .   
Furthermore, the upskilling capabilities of AR will also be used in the automotive 
sector (represented in the project by C-ECO) by ensuring that identified spare parts 
are correctly handled in the sorting processes. This will be achieved by checking 
that the right part is sorted in the right container and conveying this information 
visually to the worker, by utilising the capabilities of AR -glasses and connecting it 
with the logistic management system. This will reduce re -sorting process and 
delivering wrongly sorted goods to customers. 
→ The open access digital platform  
One of the factors preventing the standardisation and widespread adoption of open 
access digital platform s is their reliance on shared databases, common to the 
stakeholders in a value chain. This results in a poorly managed data that is easy to 
tamper with and the subsequent concerns regarding loss of privacy and data 
protection. This makes many large companies unwilling to share their data, that resort to isolated management 
systems, resulting in data islands along the supply chain. Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLT) has the potential 
to address the concern of the different actors of the value chain and allow cross-organisational collaboration. 
There are many existing works in the recent literature exploring the potential of big-data and DLT technology, and 
how it can disrupt the supply chains 14,15. DLT refers to the technological infrastructure and protocols that allows 
simultaneous access, validation, and record updating in a tamper-proof manner across a network that's spread 
across multiple entities or locations. At the same time, participants’ privacy can be highly respected and preserved 
with corresponding access control measures. Transactions in a permissionless mechanism are visible to the public 
while the details can be restricted. The value chain actors cou ld decide whether the stored data is public or 
restricted with levels of access control as well as can decide with which actors the data should be shared. 
While the potential benefits are quite promising, there are some challenges hindering the development of such a 
technology, which we will address during the project: 
Storage and speed scalability:  With the number of transactions increasing day by day, the digital platforms 
based on DLT such as blockchain technology (just one of the potential implementations of a DLT), have become 
increasingly heavy as all transactions must be stored for validation. Which can be  quite a time-consuming task. 
Currently, famous Bitcoin, for example, has raised to more than 391GB16 of storage and can process a maximum 
of 7 transactions per second 17, which means that a client must wait for at least 10 minutes on average to be sure 
that the transaction is included. We will implement a DLT with a focus on storage and energy consumption savings.  
Retrievability: Besides data storage, DLT will be used to provide data retrieval service to the stakeholders along 
the supply chain. However, it is non-trivial to search for data efficiently while preserving data privacy. In particular, 
the data stored on DLT are typically encrypted, which hinders the development of efficient search algorithms. To 
 
14 Benzidia, S. “E-Design: Toward a New Collaborative Exchange of Upstream E-Supply Chain.” Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal 19, no. 4 
(2013): 4-9.  
15 Wang, Y., M. Singgih, J. Wang, and M Rit. “Making sense of blockchain technology: How will it transform supply chains?” International Journal of 
Production Economics 211 (2019): 221-236. 
16 YCharts. “Bitcoin Blockchain Size,” https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_blockchain_size, Accessed: 20 Feb. 2022 
17 Blockchain Council. “Top cryptocurrencies with their high transaction speeds,” https://www.blockchain-council.org/cryptocurrency/top-cryptocurrencies-
with-their-high-transaction-speeds/. Accessed: 21 Feb. 2022 
Figure 6: Maintenance types: 
Top: corrective maintenance 
Middle: preventive maintenance 
Bottom: predictive maintenance 
Source: Kudelina et al.,2021 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 10 of 45 
solve this challenge, will also explore Gaia-X18 a secure data infrastructure ecosystem developed in Europe in which 
data is made available, collated, and shared in a trustworthy manner. i.e., with a sovereign structure that doesn't 
depend on specific providers, an ownership mechanism that allows the user to always retain sovereignty over their 
data and using a label system. This label ling system is evidence of compliance with strict rules under the Labelling 
Framework. Labels could constitute facilitation in the procurement of services and an effective method to build 
trust between users and providers 
Architecture: the main components of the open access digital platform will be a circular PIM (Product Information 
Management) and a circular core(used parts in the context of the automotive sector) -return-options management, 
see Figure 7. Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) will share selected technical information about circular  
products, parts and components with the open access digital platform from their own proprietary platforms. In 
return they will connect their proprietary e-commerce solution to the open access digital platform and can show 
information from both platforms combined. The data from the PIM will also serve as the basis for the creation of 
core-return options to return of specific products for circular value recovery. 
 
Figure 7: Preliminary architecture for open access digital platform ecosystem. 
This way OEMs will be supported by the open access digital platform with the following use cases, see Figure 7: 
1. Tag parts, components and assemblies in their own aftermarket PIM system that are eligible for remanufacturing 
or where remanufactured alternatives can be offered, 2. Share technical information from the OEM PIM to the 
circular PIM that will allow digital open access platform participants to match components with the correct products 
and to create matching core-return-options to fulfil the demand for used products. 3. Supply and Demand planning 
with respect to incentive creation for used parts return. 4. Include information from the open access digital platform 
in the OEM’s e -commerce solution offering options for selling the old component and buying a remanufactured 
component. 5. Fulfilment service for used parts return to OEM/remanufacturer: pick-up of used part, identification, 
and quality inspection, sorting according to production needs, provide information for financial clearing. 
To ensure the largest possible market for used parts, OEMs, dealers, and resellers can include circular economy 
options in their e-commerce solutions: 1. Besides OEM and Aftermarket parts, also remanufactured parts will be 
offered to the user. 2. Return options will be mentioned to return to the OEM and/or an open access participant. 
→ IoT for condition monitoring  
During the project we will leverage the power of IoT to trace, track and optimise the timing, quantity, and quality 
of returned products using a layered architecture, where IoT is used for sensor data processing, fusion, and analysis 
of all the information available: 
1. The sensor data layer consists of various IoT sensors that can measure physical surroundings and capture real-
time changes, measuring different parameters such as temperature, humidity , gas, Infra-Red (IR) sensors or 
Radiofrequency Identifiers (RFID). Taking advantage of components that may be already available in currently 
manufactured goods or easy to include during value recovery operations.  
2. The data fusion layer is required to handle various data challenges generated from monitoring potentially 
heterogeneous devices. The combined data from different sources are then passed to the data analysis layer 
for efficient knowledge generation and decision-making. 
3. The data analytic layer , in combination with AI,  is what truly enables the smart functionality of DiCiM. To 
handle the huge volume of data generated by the IoT sensors, we will explore efficient solutions  based on 
 
18 https://gaiax.se/  

EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 11 of 45 
cloud computing and parallel distributed systems.  
During Task 4.1 and Task 4.2 efforts will be directed towards the development of IoT infrastructure that reduces 
computation cost, improves network reliability, and ensures scalability. 
→ Machine Learning based a rtificial intelligence  for reverse logistics and inspection  
Very often, field technicians must cope with situations where the problem is unknown, and this scenario forces the 
company they work for to send a more experienced worker to the site. A procedure of this type is, however, 
costly in terms of time and therefore inefficient. Likewise, the same maintenance and repair interventions represent 
one of the most significant critical issues for companies.  
Machine Learning (ML) picks up patterns from data to arrive at predictions. Access to large data lakes, easiness of 
building data pipelines, increase in real-time data processing capabilities, all would make ML a powerful mainstream 
technology. This technology will be used in the sorting process, to assist detect whether a product can be reused, 
needs repair, is ready for remanufacture or has arrived at its last stage and can progress to dismantling and recycling. 
Leveraging the condition monitoring capability and IoT to streamline the data (indicating the condition of the 
products) ML can process a large amount of data (applying big data principles) collected from the products in real-
time to trigger different types of decision makings and interventions such as service intervention. This also makes 
possible service inspections through remote assistance. This is reflected in reduced repair cost and repair time, 
as the services may be planned in advance. Furthermore, a positive effect on the reparability and the lifespan of 
the product is expected together with an optimized reverse logistics that only bring products when the potential 
of value recover is the highest.  
→ Image Processing and Augmented Reality for value recovery  
We include Image Processing and Augmented Reality (AR) to compensate for the skills gap and reduce staff errors, 
ensure rapid and effective know -how sharing, increase the percentage of first -time resolutions and provide more 
accurate diagnoses. This is where this technology comes into play, helping to perform maintenance activities, virtual 
collaborations, and training of machinery. 
The available information can also be integrated with data from IoT connected devices, which allow users to view 
the relevant statistics to directly evaluate the correct functioning of an asset or used in combination with the twin 
of an asset to be manipulated in real time and accompanied by additional information. These capabilities extend 
skills and allow operators to complete maintenance and service tasks more quickly and efficiently, regardless  of 
their skill level. 
Combining ML and AR in the value recovery processes enables: 
1. Operational resources are more efficient thanks to clear and knowledge appropriate instructions. 
2. Specialised skills and experiences are transferred to the entire organisation for shared and proactive use. 
3. The training of inexperienced staff is faster and easier, thanks to collaborative learning. 
4. Productivity, safety, and customer service reach new standards. 
Product information is fed into the proposed framework for disassembly planning and content generation, ultimately 
displayed in an AR interface. Disassembly planning encapsulates information related to the disassembly sequence, 
and it is enhanced by the visual cues and animations provided by the content generation module. This information 
is ultimately presented to the operators in the AR interface.   
Stream 2: Synergy of the demonstrators 
DiCiM has chosen 4 cases as demonstrators: washing machines, refrigerators, printers, and automotive spare parts, 
representing the 3 major industrial sectors of the European Economy and waste. These demonstrators cover the 
whole reverse part of the circular value chain , i.e., reverse logistics, product sorting, disassembly, testing, value 
recovery, disassembly, and reassembly. The sectors represented by these case companies have a diverse knowledge 
base when it comes to value recovery activities. For instance, the automotive sector has the longest experience in 
value recovery activities, whereas the printing and the whitegoods industry has moderate to no experience at all 
respectively. 
From the business point of view, the printing industry is mainly business to business (B2B) and automotive spare 
parts has conventionally been business to consumer (B2C), whereas whitegoods have experience from both. 
B2B printing business has a tightly connected value chain with full control over the products, whereas automotive 
has a weakly connected value chain with no control over the products. The whitegoods sector is operating in the 
moderately connected value chain and with little effort (due to widespread authorised and local service business) 
control over the products can be easily established. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 12 of 45 
Technology-wise, the automotive spare parts sector has the most established and efficient remanufacturing 
infrastructure while in the whitegoods sector the value recovery capacity is limited to repair and after-sales services. 
In this case, the printing industry has advanced significantly but is rather far away from the automotive sector. 
These diversities and differences are the areas where DiCiM will establish synergies for cross learning and 
knowledge sharing among the demonstrators, as part of the T7.1 (WP7) dedicated for this purpose.  
Table 3: Washing machine demonstrator 
Washing machine demonstrator Gorenje and HGE 
Description As part of the ReCiPSS project, Gorenje and HGE have successfully developed new long lasting washing 
machines and piloted 300 washing machines in 4 European countries in a circular pay -per-wash scheme. 
For scaling up Gorenje plans to expand the pay -per-wash business model in different segments in the 
market with three distinct offers called Gold, Silver and Bronze. Gold offer includes brand new machine 
with premium service (i.e., service the machine instantly).  Silver offer includes one-time remanufactured 
machines with moderate service and the Bronze offer includes two times remanufactured products with 
budget service (i.e. service within 1 week). 
Challenge 
To penetrate simultaneously in all three segments at the initial stage, Gorenje and HGE needs to have 
access to many used washing machines: 1) To ‘take back’ (returning old machines by customers when a 
new machine is installed) machines and explore the ‘buy back’ market potential to recover spare parts 
for the rest of appliances. 2) Gorenje and HGE will use its B -Stock ( e.g., damaged machines during 
transportation and washing machines returned as warranty claim) as the source to scale up pay-per-wash 
business model. 3) These collected machines will be used to source spare parts that will serve all three 
segments of the pay-per-wash business model and allow cost effective maintenance and refurbishment of 
washing machines. 4) Due to high labour costs repair is quite expensive operation in circular pay -per-
wash business operation, so it’s important that every single part of it is optimized.  
Solution 
To optimise the return of the right product at the right time and value recovery activities to develop:  
1. A smart machine capable of condition monitoring  
2. IoT platform to collect information in real-time for decision making 
3. AI for optimizing the timing, quantity and quality of products need to be brought back  (predictive 
maintenance) 
4. AI for decision making of what sort of value recovery activities should be undertaken both at product 
and component level  
5. Augmented reality to support the service personnel to optimize value recovery activities 
KPIs 
1. Size of the B-stock WMs & Tumble dryer: 20 000 units /year 
2. Increase in spare part recovery efficiency: 30% (net energy Saving (avg. 39 KWh/ WM-TD): 780 MWh) 
3. Increase in spare part recovery rate: 20% (Net value Savings (avg. price of B-Sock €210): €4.2 M, Loss 
reduction: €190k, net Material saving (avg.146 kg/WM-TD): 2920 tons,  
4. Increase in logistics efficiency 50%  
5. Net CO2 saving (avg. 2.5 tons CO2 eq/ WM-TD): 50 000 tons CO2 eq 
6. DiCiM developments can be applied to B-sock of all other major appliances: 150 000 units/year 
7. This could lead to net value savings (avg. price of B-Sock all major appliances €180): € 27 M 
Table 4: Refrigerator demonstrator 
Refrigerator demonstrator Arcelik 
Description 
The largest refrigerator manufacturing factory of Arcelik is in Eskisehir, Turkey, which is a key player in 
cooling home appliances in Europe, with approximately 7M refrigerator sales globally per year. Currently, 
70.000 refrigerators are collected (due to mainly return rights and warranty claims) and a major part of 
the refrigerators are sent directly to the recycling centre annually  despite having huge potential of high 
quality value recovery such as refurbishment or component reuse. Due to insufficient capacity, only 10% 
of the collected refrigerators are  inspected to enable refurbishing operations or component reuse . The 
insufficient capacity at Arcelik is since the decision-making mechanisms in the inspection process is 
currently completely manual and based on the operators’ subjective assessment. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 13 of 45 
Challenge 1) Approximately 70.000 refrigerators are collected annually with capacity of inspecting only about 7000 
refrigerators causing huge negative economic and environmental impacts 2) Cycle time of inspecting each 
refrigerator is currently 2 hours which needs to be reduce d significantly (the aim is 10-15 minutes). 
3)The decision making of the operators are subjective and prone to making wrong decision  4) Lack of 
transparency and accountability of  recovered components and thereby, difficult to integrate them to 
production and spare parts stock management 
Solution To increase the efficiency of the inspection process, support the decision-making process of the service 
personnel and optimize value recovery activities Arcelik will 
1. Apply robot assisted image processing technique for appliance and circuit board (PCB) damage 
detection, and bacteria inspection 
2. Apply AI for image processing to support decision making in value recovery activities  
KPIs 
1. Volume returns: 70 000 units (net material saving: 70000* 100 Kg = 7000 tonnes) 
2. Increase in spare part recovery efficiency: 90% (10-15 minutes inspection time instead of 2 hours leading 
to 126 000 labour hours saved for inspecting 70 000 units) 
3. Increase in spare part recovery rate: 150% (from the current state) 
4. DiCiM developments can be  applied to capture other major appliances; 10 million units/year 
5. This could lead to net  value savings: (avg, price  €130): €13,6 M 
Table 5: Commercial printers’ demonstrator 
Commercial printers’ demonstrator Lexmark 
Description Lexmark currently collects products from the markets in at least three ways. Products returning from 
the B2B customers at the end of the leasing contract, take back printers in connection to installing new 
printers and buying back a large fleet. These products have three destinies, in best cases products are 
refurbished and sent to new customers, harvesting spare parts and in the worst -case components are 
sorted for efficient recycling. These take back processes are constantly under development. . 
Challenge 
There is a mismatch between supply and demand causing the value recovery highly inefficient.  
Furthermore, there is an issue with the lack of lifecycle as well as product usage information which is 
essential for the decision making and planning in advance of the value recovery activity (i.e. repair, 
refurbish, harvest spare parts, recycle etc.) for a specific printer. Currently, Lexmark gets some data from 
its leased printers but for other printers (sold through wholesalers and distributors or take back printers) 
no data is available. Lexmark wants to know what value recovery actions are more profit able and 
environmentally friendly and when the printers should be taken back. 
In addition, Lexmark wants to achieve carbon neutrality in its operations and products (with as little 
compensation for CO2 as possible). Lexmark uses the LCA approach, but the LCA data for hardware 
and cartridge is not accessible to everyone. Currently, it is a very manual and resource-intensive process. 
There is an interest in making the information available to a wider audience  (i.e. different roles in the 
company such as compliance, procurement, sales etc.) to support them in their decision making. Lexmark 
is interested in the whole value chain for CO2 data.  
Solution 
To optimise the return of the right product at the right time and value recovery activities Lexmark will 
develop along the project by its main entity Lexmark Hungary acting as Partner: 
1. Access the lifecycle and product usage information from the built-in sensors and monitor the condition 
of the printers 
2. IoT platform to collect information (both from the printers leased and sold through the distributors) 
in real-time and decision making  
3. Apply AI to optimize the timing, quantity and quality of products that need to be brought back 
4. Apply AI for decision making o n what sort of value recovery activities should be undertaken both at 
the product and component level 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 14 of 45 
KPIs 
1.  Reduce per unit reverse logistic cost:30% based on the situation from the 2021; cost information for 
unit reverse logistic 
2.  Reduce sorting as well as testing costs at sorting centre: 25%, included in fix cost  in comparison to 
2021.  
3.  Increase refurbished units : 50%, based on the comparison with the year 2021  and including the 
refurbished cost labor as well as refurbished material cost.  
4.  Decrease both average spare parts and the per unit refurbishment cost: 20%, based on the comparison 
with the year 2020 as baseline (cost per printer - labor, as well as cost per printer – material).  
5.  Increase social acceptance of refurbished and remanufactured printers/cartridges through awareness 
programs. Reach users via social media campaigns.  
6.  Increase salvaged units -dismantling, parts repair : 50%, based on the comparison with the year 
2021(decrease based the increased the life-time of the printer)  
7.  Increase the portfolio of returned used printers:35%, based on the comparison with the year 2020.  
Table 6: Automotive spare parts demonstrator 
Automotive spare parts demonstrator C-ECO Gmbh  
Description 
Remanufacturing is a widespread standard-business in automotive aftermarket, Nevertheless, there is no 
commercial IT-solution available in the market that exclusively supports the value recovery activities inter-
organizational. Most of the large companies rely on Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems which 
are designed for linear manufacturing systems and only include very limited functions for circular value 
recovery. Cases where internally developed software is used, they are designed for and limited  to intra-
organizational collaboration and do not support data sharing across the value chain. These “information-
islands” prevent an efficient inter-organizational allocation of used parts to value preserving and recovering 
activities such as re -using, re furbishing or remanufacturing. As part of the ReCiPSS project, C -ECO 
developed an automotive part data management platform that supports core management basing on 
financial incentives. This platform incorporates so called core -return-options which are enab ling an 
efficient tracking and management of financial incentives to motivate the return of used products. The 
concept of core-return options provides the potential to facilitate the structured return of used products 
for value recovery in any complex market environment where producers have only limited access to the 
users of their products and little control over the reverse-supply chain. 
Besides, C-ECO will implement AR in the sorting process to support the shop floor personnel. 
Challenge 
The platform currently mainly connects wholesalers from the automotive aftermarket. To fully exploit 
the potential of the concept of core-return-options and the ReCiPSS-platform, it is necessary to upscale 
the usage of the platform to increase the used spare parts return rate by a better allocation of core -
return-options to used products. This can only be achieved by connecting more users and new user  
groups to the platform, especially functions to better involve producer/remanufacturers are needed. The 
key to this is to provide relevant information and efficient user interaction tailored to the business domain 
and informational needs of the users. This should not be limited to the commercial situation, but also 
provide logistic information, product-condition-documentation, and decision-support to users. It should 
create transparency in valuerecovery business to enable them to control the value recovery chain without 
being burdened with its full complexity.   
The core collection and sorting facilities of C -ECO collect many automotive parts from different 
manufacturers. After initial inspections, used spare parts are sorted based on types, manufacturers and 
destinations and stored in the designated boxes. Quite often the shop floor personnel places used spare 
parts in a wrong box, which means additional resources for corrective actions and in worst cases wrong 
used spare parts are delivered to the remanufacturers.    
C-ECO is building on the foundation of the options-platform created within the Horizon 2020 ReCiPSS-
project. The intention in line with the DiCim-projects call is to provide a range of support solutions and 
innovative digital tools to help individuals in their business -domain in circular business processes. To 
achieve that we will develop the spe cified functions to support individuals decision, integrate them into 
the platform and compile and adapted them to specific targeted user-groups. 
EU Grants: HE CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-07 – 30.03.2022 
 
 
                                                       101091536- DiCiM- Part B - Page 15 of 45 
Solution 
To solve this issue C -ECO needs to develop a portal compiling all relevant information for 
producers/remanufacturers to control the reverse value chain: 
1. Realtime Reporting -Cockpit on core -return-options-situation, returned products and condition, 
Supply-Chain- and warehouse situation 
2. Business-logic configurator for options-execution rules as decision-making support 
3. Underlying configurator: machine-readable core description based on a human-centred description  
4. Digital twin of core-stock: Machine learning powered supply-demand-planning and forecasting function 
for incentive-creation and real-time influence on sorting-decision 
5. Apply AR technology where the shop floor personnel are equipped with AR glasses that prevent placing 
sorted used spare parts in a wrong box.  
This portal will contect to Signifikant’s PIM-platform and the ReCIPSS options-platform to propagate used 
parts demand basing on core-return options towards their users.  
KPIs 
The open access platform can increase the offer of relevant products and used spare parts in right quality 
by 30% annually. For the European Automotive reman industry that would mean: