4. ETHICS SELF-ASSESSMENT .......................................................................................................................... ............ 39  
4.1. ETHICAL DIMENSION OF THE OBJECTIVES, METHODOLOGY AND LIKELY IMPACT ...................................................... 39  
4.2. COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL PRINCIPLES AND RELEVANT LEGISLATIONS ................................................................. 39  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1. Excellence    Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
1.1. Objectives and Ambition   
1.1.1. Motivation and Vision   
The Sustainable Products Initiative (SPI) was developed by the EC, widening Ecodesign Directive 1 to reach Green 
Deal (GD) objectives 2, leading to sustainable products and making European market and industry more resource -
efficient, competitive, resilient and innovative. SPI considers a wide range of products, prioritized by CEAP 3 (e.g., 
electronics, ICT, textiles, furniture, steel, cement, chemicals) to improve their durability, reusability, upgradability 
and reparability, address hazardous chemicals pre sence, increase energy and resource efficiency and establish 
sustainability and circularity. Lack of transparency and traceability of products, their components, substances and 
environmental impacts, represent a barrier for circular economy business models  implementation4. Supply chains 
involving diverse actors (e.g., materials suppliers, producers, recyclers, consumers) complicated information 
management and combination of all the different needs and technical capabilities of companies across the value 
chain4. Recently 2030 Digital Compass highlighted the importance of digital solutions for the achievement of GD 
objectives. The uptake of digital technologies and schemes like Digital Product Passport (DPP) enable sharing of 
product-related data across the product lifecycle and along value chains, by tagging, tracing and localising  down to 
item-level identification5. Several digital technologies (e.g. blockchain, big-data, artificial intelligence, digital twins) 
are proposed for traceability of component and products along value chains and they are considered key enablers 
promoting circularity, increasing inherent recyclability of materials and upgrading secondary resources, in terms of 
manifesting their composition as potential secondary raw materials in the same or different process. Enhanced 
tracing via  
 
1 2009/125/EC  
2 COM (2019) 640  
3 COM/2020/98 final   
4 Rizos, V., Bryhn, J., Alessi, M. et al., Barriers and enablers for implementing Circular Economy Business Models Evidence from the electrical and electronic 
equipment and agri-food value chains, CEPS Research Report (2021) 5 COM/2021/118 final  

 
4  
  
DigInTraCE aims at the development of i)transparent and interoperable Decentralized Traceability platform 
using novel tracking, sensing and sorting techniques  ii)Dynamically updated DPP  schemes supporting 
certification and quality validation iii)AI based and decision making mechanisms for process and lifecycle 
optimisation iv) up-cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies  for improved secondary raw materials use 
v)contribute to standardization, open and easy accessible data vi) business models  creating new economic 
opportunities and learning resources for employees, promoting new digital skills and meeting regional social 
needs. The solutions are developed at TRL6 by the end of the project  and  demonstrated in the sectors of a) Pulp 
& Paper focused in 2 cases: composite wood and furniture; and wood and Pulp & Paper and b) Chemicals 
focused in 2 cases: plastic parts for ICT equipment and automotive market; and polymers & textiles.   
digital tools combined with novel sensing and sorting techniques, is considered an imperative success factor for 
upgrading of secondary resources, to enable cleaner production and recycling, ensure toxic -free material cycles 
limiting substances of concern and produce informed consumers regarding the origin and the way materials are 
processed. Industrial sectors with high digital traceability needs as highlighted by the P4P roadmap include chemicals, 
pulp and paper (along with the whole forest -based industry and wood value chain), ceramics and cement 5. DPP, as 
an emerging concept for digitally recording product and process information to cover the entire product life cycle by 
focusing mainly on item level identification, although being a quite challenging endeavour, it is required for enabling 
circular economy adoption, scaling and practical implementation, as it provides an easily accessible, centralized 
registry of diverse data 6. A physical link (tagging such as QR code) between the product an d the data is utilized, 
allowing value chain stakeholders, end -users and authorities to directly access a unique digital profile with 
quantitative/qualitative, static/dynamic, standardized and machine -readable data related to the product’s origin, 
composition, repair and dismantling possibilities, end of life handling etc. 7 9. The implementation of DPP requires 
multiple data sources supported by existing tools (such as EPREL database, EU eco-labels, existing BOMs etc.) via 
a step-by-step and flexible approach, based on information already available and regulated while DPP used as a link 
to decentralized information databases8. Project’s methodology and results are aligned with Processes4Planet (P4P) 
roadmap, GD, CEAP, Digital Single Market and 2030 Digital  Compass objectives and the guidelines of Orgalim 8, 
EIT RawMaterials, CEN & CENELEC9 and SPI.   
1.1.2. Objectives and Related KPIs  
DigInTraCE will pursue its realisation through 6 SMART objectives described below:  
O.1: To design, develop and implement solutions fostering and optimizing use of secondary raw materials and 
reducing waste as part of circular value chains.   
  
DigInTraCE will assure circularity of processes of sectors belonging to the process industry, by enhancing 
digitalisation Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761008 - 10/11/2022 
(WP3, WP4), upgrading by-products and optimising processes, with special focus on secondary materials, but in 
the context of whole value chain (WP2, WP5). DigInTraCE is aiming to establish Decentralized Traceability 
Platform (based on blockchain) applied to holistically optimized circular value chains, assuring availability and 
access to reliable information enhancing cross-sectoral collaboration (WP2, WP3, WP4). DigInTraCE will produce 
an advanced transparent information system with central point being the DPP, supported by live update mechanism 
(T2.2, T2.3, T4.1), enhancing the use of secondary raw materials of the own industry and improving cross-sectoral 
collaboration. Overall, DigInTraCE will comprehensively approach the optimization of secondary materials use 
through applicati on of horizontal tracing systems combined with demo/case specific chemical (e.g. protein 
recovery process innovation, bio-based adhesive development- T5.2) and digital (data-driven algorithms-T5.3,5.5 
together with sensing -T3.1 and sorting -T3.2) processes innovation leading to waste reduction and lower 
emissions.  
Relation to the call: “Propose new solutions for improved use of secondary raw materials along the value chain 
of the own industry or in other industries.”  
 
5 Processes4Planet 2050 Roadmap. (2021, January)  
6 Walden, J., Steinbrecher, A. and Marinkovic, M., Digital Product Passports as Enabler of the Circular Economy. Chemie Ingenieur Technik, 93: 1717-1727 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cite.202100121  
7 Orgalim Policy Exchange: The Sustainable Products Initiative and the EU Digital Product Passport, (2021, June 29th) Virtual Event  9 
CM\1231965EN.docx  
8 DIGITALEUROPE’s supporting paper on the public consultation on the Sustainable Products Initiative. (2021, June)  
9 European Committee for Standardization & European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization  
10 Hyperspectral imaging & Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy  

 
5  
  
KPI O1.1: At least 6 examples (produc ts or process related) of up -cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies of 
secondary raw materials implemented.  
KPI O1.2: At least 4 AI based models developed for secondary raw material optimization processes   
O.2: To develop and demonstrate new concepts for material tracing while offering a digital decentralized 
platform allowing tracing and certification of secondary raw materials    
DigInTraCE will develop information systems and digital tools for material t racing (WP4) integrated into 
multifunctional and interoperable decentralized traceability platform (T4.6) with automatic and real-time 
update (T4.1) of information on material composition, quality, history, and other crucial data updated along the 
value chain, which will be defined through integration of existing regulations and specific identified needs (T2.2). 
Those new concepts will be supported by new standardisation and certification schemes (T7.1) integrated into 
digital solutions (T4.5).  Standardization deliverables for materials and technologies as well as certification for 
subproducts types and intended use will contribute to better acceptance of the solutions and efficient launching to 
the market through support of the transparent and digitalized information system. Through incorporation of the 
project findings into new or revised standardization deliverables, that will be available for  the industry, the 
outcomes of the project will be long lasting. To assure applicability of the concepts in real-life settings, solutions 
will be applied and demonstrated in 4 pilots representing crucial sectors of i) pulp & paper and ii) chemicals and 
plastics.  
Relation to the call: “Propose methodologies for digital tracing and certification of secondary raw materials; 
Proposals should contribute to standardisation, wherever possible”  
KPI O2.1: Additional Services developed in WP3, WP4 integrated in the Decentralized Traceability platform by 
M46.  
KPI O2.2: Decentralized traceability platform being developed at TRL6 by M48, having at least 20 active users.  
KPI O2.3: At least 3 certification proposals produced for secondary raw materials based on the analyzed value 
chains.  
O.3: To design and deliver novel near real time sensing and sorting mechanisms enhancing data exchange 
through a dynamic Digital Product Passport    
DigInTraCE is based on a dynamic DPP scheme indicating properties and history of the products and material s 
on real closed -loop value chains optimised in terms of waste, by -products and secondary raw materials with 
technologies using and supporting computer vision and HIS & LIBS12, AI and Machine Learning, robotic sorting, 
recovery process based on novel extra ction methods (microwave and/or ultrasonic assisted). Novel real time 
sensing and sorting mechanism  will contribute to better identification, characterization, quantification and 
separation of by-products of the value chains (T3.1, T3.2, T5.3, T5.5). The collected data dynamically included in 
the DPP will allow to trace all produced materials (T4.1). The integration of existing PolyCertEurope certification 
scheme will be examined and novel certification schemes will be defined for subproduct types (T7.1).   
Relation to the call: “This should include real-time access to information on material compositions and material 
quality along the whole value chain; Propose digital tools for integration of product passport and/or certification 
schemes;”  
KPI O3.1: 2 sensing technologies and at least 2 sorting mechanisms deployed at least 3 demonstrator sites.   
KPI O3.2: At least 5 material parameters are added in DPP and continuously updated along the value chain.   
O.4: To facilitate access to composition and origin of material data through smart tags, smart contracts, open 
software and the usage of immersive technologies  
DigInTraCE will provide innovative solutions to facilitate access to information, that is crucial for efficient cross-
sectoral symbiotic collaboration. Those activities will be proceeded by waste streams mapping (T6.1) to assure 
that maximal potential of the collaborations is achieved and accompanied by circularity and sustainability 
performance of  the demonstrators (T6.4). Innovative solutions like functional SmartTags  (T3.3) enabling 
item/batch life cycle monitoring and dynamically transmitting data to the decentralized traceability platform will 
be tested and implemented in relevant demonstration settings. Blockchain technology will assist smart contracts 
providing automated interoperable financial services greatly facilitating financial procedures within circular 
economy setting (T4.2, T4.3), which can be challenging  
  
 
6  
  
for less experienced stakeholders. Circular collaboration will be facilitated through Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022secure and safe data channels with corresponding accessibility rights enabling intra- and 
inter-firm communication via open data/software/hardware (T4.5).  
Relation to the call: “Propose open-source software, open hardware design, and easy access to data, in order to 
facilitate access to information for the own and for other industries; Develop means and tools to indicate the 
composition and origin of recycled materials (bar code could be an option) indicating the composition and origin”  
KPI O4.1: SmartTags implemented in at least 1 demonstrator.  
KPI O4.2  Smart contracts developed and integrated in the decentralized traceability platform by M46 with 
additional financial services  
KPI O4.3: Safe and secure data channels with access control functional in the decentralized traceability platform 
by M40.  
O.5:  To validate the DigInTraCE technologies in 4 different value chains.  
DigInTraCE deals with two sectors: i) Pulp & Paper (focused in 2 cases: composite wood and furniture; and wood 
and Pulp & Paper) and ii) Chemicals & Plastics (focused in 2 cases: plastic parts from ICT equipment and 
automotive market; and polymers and textiles) with the application of digital and data driven innovations along 
with mechanical and chemical solutions, for the upgrade and optimization of value chains in terms of 
circularity, low emissions and increased waste reduction (WP6). End products of the new value chains include 
novel wood composites (panels, boards/foams), mosaic surfaces, polyester textiles etc. The project will develop 
business models (T7.3) and will support the primary effort for standardization and certification (standardization 
deliverables) of secondary materials and technologies allowing interaction with market stakeholders and 
contributing to dissemination of the project result facilitating acceptance of the developed solutions (T7.1).  
Relation to the call: “Proposals submitted under this topic should include a business case and exploitation strategy, 
as outlined in the introduction to this Destination. Proposals should contribute to standardisation, wherever 
possible”  
KPI O5.1: To demonstrate the application of digital technologies at TRL 6 in 4 demonstrator sites in Europe for 
waste reduction and processes optimisation.  
KPI O5.2: At least 5 cross sectorial business models developed.    
KPI O5.3: At least 5 technologies/products are exploited and have a clear plan for uptake after the end of the 
project.  
O.6: To empower local and regional bodies by involving them in designing educational resources for both 
workplaces and educational institutions.  Stimulate adoption of the Dig InTraCE solutions by the wider 
community and enhance knowledge transfer to maximise the impact.  
To increase adoption of key digital and enabling technologies in line with EU digital compass, DigInTraCE will 
engage in a number of educational activities. Through co-designing of learning resources  and linking them to 
replication and exploitation activities DigInTraCE aims at contributing to increased adoption of novel technologies 
and enhancement of the digital skills. DigInTraCE will produce replication packages based on developed solutions 
along with business models (T7.2), which will be specific secto ral/regional/national levels. To maximize the 
impact DigInTraCE will provide exploitation strategy  for results and will produce an implementable plan, 
including finance viability validation on value chains, to attract stakeholders to access and utilise its  results. 
Achievements and knowledge acquired will be disseminated and communicated towards the target groups and 
interested stakeholders. DigInTraCE will join its forces with other projects of the topic and operating initiatives 
for collaboration and capacity building (T7.2-7.4).  
Relation to the call: “Consider the co-design of learning resources together with local and regional educational 
organisations for current and future generations of employees, integrating them in existing curricula and modules 
for undergraduate level and lifelong learning programme. new skills and should propose innovative learning -
teaching methods that meet regional social needs and have a high potential for replication.; Proposals submitted 
under this topic should include a business case and exploitation strategy.”  
KPI O6.1: At least 2 co-design activities performed.  
KPI O6.2: Dissemination, Communication and Exploitation KPIs fulfilled as presented in Section 2.2.  
KPI O6.3: 4 value chains are validated for financial viability and are maintained after the project implementation.  
1.1.3. Ambition and R&I maturity  

 
7  
  
DigInTraCE aims to provide a cross sectoral, from sensing to sorting, from materials to products, digitalisation 
solution and propose a dynamic digital product passport scheme as landmark and in parallel develop and combine 
these digital with process and material inn ovations, to increase waste reduction, improve use of secondary raw 
materials, thus lead to circular and low emission value chains  
I. Decentralized Traceability platform   
State of the Art & Current Challenges: Supply chain traceability in complex networks is a key emerging benefit 
of blockchain11. Decentralization, immutability and transparency lead to accurate, reliable data that is trusted despite 
the absence of trust relationships among participants. Multisource data can be collected (RFID, barcodes, IoT, GPS, 
etc.) and added to the append -only blockchain ledger to update the status of each specific item in the supply chain 
journey. Combined with the fact that the tokenisation aspect of blockchains is also used for trading, market 
transparency, auctions (e.g. wholesale energy  
  
or carbon credits) and even financial instruments (bonds, derivatives), as well as hosting currency (crypto, stablecoins) 
there Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
is enormous potential to reduce the frictions inherent in trading and distributin g secondary raw materials. 
Furthermore, the combination of unquestionable provenance data via traceability provides the opportunity to develop 
economically viable new products that incorporate secondary materials, meet the green initiatives, and maximize 
circularity. Accurate and updated secondary materials information can improve product deletion analysis and 
decision-making. Blockchain can provide more accurate reusability and recyclability of materials and products 
information12.   
Progress beyond SoA: Blockchain is  already being applied to supply chains and to commodity (financial) 
derivatives. In DigInTraCE, we will investigate how a) traceability and smart contracts can be optimized with respect 
to the other technology specific to secondary raw materials, and b) break new ground by combining tokenized 
financial products associated with the blockchain -traced items in  the same platform. Public blockchain based on 
proof-of-work (PoW) such as bitcoin is notorious for its egregious energy consumption. This is not a factor in 
DigInTraCE because we will not be using a public, PoW chain but rather a private chain with no greater consumption 
than a standard cloud-hosted virtual machine.  
Tool / Technology   Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
Decentralized 
Traceability platform  
A traceability platform based on blockchain technology allowing secure data exchange 
secondary materials while also offering the possibility of additional financial services, 
TRL5TRL6  
II. Dynamically updated Digital Product Passport  
State of the Art & Current Challenges:  SPI is expected to set up the ground for DPPs that collect dynamically 
updated information about the product as its moves across the value chain. Related first efforts are focusing on the 
electric vehicles’ batteries and in construction sector13, with APIs reach cloud-based databases and connect materials 
passport to the Building Information Modelling (BIM) 14, while advanced DPP requires dynamic update and access 
control. As the European Blockchain Partnership supports  the development of services across Europe, this 
technology is considered potentially suitable tool for DPPs15 16 with some successful cases available17.    
Progress beyond SoA: In DigInTraCE novel real time sensing tools will be developed, coupled with smart tags and 
more established tracing solutions (e.g. barcodes). All the captured data will be made available through a 
decentralized traceability platform and propagated towards a dynamically  updated DPP. The newly developed 
concept is to be validated in 2 sectors and 4 value chains, pulp and paper and chemicals (plastics).  
 
11 Westerkamp, M., Victor, F., Küpper, A. Tracing manufacturing processes using blockchain-based token compositions, Dig. Com. & Net. (2020).  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2019.01.007   
12 Kouhizadeh, M., Sarkis, J., Zhu, Q. At the Nexus of Blockchain Technology, the Circular Economy, and Product Deletion. Appl. Sc. 9, 8:1712 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app9081712    
13 MATERIALS PASSPORTS, BAMB, EU Horizon 2020 project, GA No 642384.   
14 Atta, I., Bakhoum, E., Marzouk, M. Digitizing material passport for sustainable construction projects using BIM, Jrnl Build. Engnr.,43 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2021.103233   
15 Tezel, A., Papadonikolaki, E., Yitmen, I., et al. Preparing construction supply chains for blockchain technology: An investig ation of its potential and future 
directions. Front. Eng. Manag.7(4): 547–563 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42524-020-0110-8   
16 Alaranta, J., Topi Turunen, T. How to Reach a Safe Circular Economy? - Perspectives on Reconciling the Waste, Product and Chemicals Regulation, Jrnl Env.  
Law,33(1) 113–136 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1093/jel/eqaa016   
17 Bacchetta, A.v.B., Krümpel, V., Cullen, E. Transparency with Blockchain and Physical Tracking Technologies: Enabli ng Traceability in Raw Material Supply 
Chains. Mater. Proc. 5, 1 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/materproc2021005001   

 
8  
  
Tool / Technology 
/Activity  
Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
Dynamically updated 
DPP  
A new concept and implementation of a dynamically updated digital product passport, 
with a focus on secondary raw materials, TRL4TRL6  
III. Smart Tags for real time sensing  
State of the Art & Current Challenges:  Smart Tags are functional, information transmitting elements combining 
2D barcodes and RFID technologies for environmental sensing into a cost -effective tag18,19 that can contain data to 
identify individual items. Item-level identification is used in some industries (e.g., healthcare, car parts) but it is not 
widespread having challenges on durability and tag integration to the item throughout lifecycle. Further work could 
also improve engagement of value -chain stakeho lders and end -users for waste reduction, recycling procedures, 
enable new business models (e.g., asa -service, deposit -base) aligned with EU initiatives reshaping digital 
infrastructures. Future-proof data management and sharing need to be compatible with E U principles to guarantee 
cross-sectoral interoperability, data privacy and security.   
Progress beyond SoA: In DigInTraCE the full smart tag concept from the data management and storage (especially 
for traceability of raw materials), durable physical tagg ing methodology (including the sensing when feasible) as 
well as connectivity features supporting stakeholder engagement for waste reduction and raw material recycling will 
be developed. The developed tags will allow the tracing of material parameters acro ss the value chain, considering 
at least temperature and humidity, while continue being cost effective.  
Tool / Technology 
/Activity  
Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
Smart tags for real time 
sensing  
Functional Smart Tags, dynamically transmitting information to the Decentralized 
platform, with a focus on humidity and temperature, TRL4TRL6  
IV. Novel Sensing Techniques    
State of the Art & Current Challenges: Process monitoring and quality control systems are necessary for safe and 
optimal  
  
operation in industrial processes with standardized feedstock as wood Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2020and 
plastic recycling sectors. Rapid analytical  
techniques are required for continuous product and process control. Spectroscopic methods are frequently used, being 
rapid, reliable and often non-destructive analytical techniques. Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) used for real-
time monitoring of critical quality parameters, are the next step for the competitive operation of many industries. 
Numerous automated identification systems have been developed 22, such as near infrared (NIR) mainly used to 
recognize and sort the plastic polymer type by analyzing the reflected spectrum from material’s surface 21, whereas 
identification of presence of elements such as bromine, lead, mercury and chromium is performed via XRF, LIBS or 
FTIR methods 22. Challenges exist in recycling of plastic composites as fibre -reinforced plastics and multi-layered 
structures, in characterization of black components23 and in identifying recycled content, as the only accurate method 
uses very expensive auditing systems estimating values of certain parameters. Some analytical testing methods with 
moderate sensitivity and high specifici ty, such as DHS/GC-MS and Py-GC, are promising for the identification of 
degradation indicators differentiating recycled from virgin polymers 24  25. For wood by-products, to detect the quality 
and classify the suitable materials for valorization, spectros copic methods are employed, as near -infrared 
 
18 Gligoric, N., Krco, S., Hakola, L. et al. SmartTags: IoT Product Passport for Circular Economy Based on Printed Sensors and Unique Item-Level Identifiers.  
Sensors, 19, 586 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/s19030586   
19 Hakola, L., Vehmas, K., & Smolander, M. Functional inks and indicators for Smart Tag based intelligent packaging applications. Jrnl Appl. Packaging  
Research, 13(2), (2021). https://scholarworks.rit.edu/japr/vol13/iss2/3   
20 Gundupalli, S. P., Hait, S., & Thakur, A. A review on automated sorting of source-separated municipal solid waste for recycling. Waste man. 60, 56-74 (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2016.09.015   
21 Alassali, A., Barouta D., Tirion, H., et al. Towards a high quality recycling of plastics from waste electrical and electroni c equipment through separation of 
contaminated fractions, Jrnl. Haz. Mat., 387,121741, (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121741   
22 Wagner, F., Peeters, J. R., Ramon, H., et al. Quality assessment of mixed plastic flakes from Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) by spectroscopic 
techniques, Res., Cons. and Rec.,158, 104801, (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104801   
23 Araujo-Andrade, C., Bugnicourt, E., Philippet, L., et al. Review on the photonic techniques suitable for automatic monitoring of the composition of multimaterials 
wastes in view of their posterior recycling. Waste Manag Res.39(5):631-651 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0734242X21997908   
24 Dimitrov, N., Krehula, L.K., Sirocic, A.P., et al. Analysis of recycled PET bottles products by pyrolysis-gas chromatography. Polymer Degradation and Stability 
98, 972-979 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2013.02.013   
25 Akoueson, F., Chbib, C., Monchy, S., et al. Identification and quantification of plastic additives using pyolysis-GC/MS: a review. Science of the Total Environment 
773, 145073 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145073   

 
9  
  
hyperspectral imaging (NIR -HSI) for the detection of moisture content 26, the classification of wood according to 
species 27, and to differentiate composites (preservative-treated) and untreated waste wood28. In case of wood chips, 
laser scanning, machine vision and image processing are applied to calculate and categorize according to their size, 
discover and determine percentage of rot in residues 2930.   
Progress beyond SoA: In DigInTraCE spectroscopic techniques and sensors using multiple bands will be developed. 
These will be tailored-made for monitoring many key parameters according to the value chain, either wood or plastic 
residues (i.e., the ratio of polymers and heavy metals in a mix of plastic flakes, size, shape and moisture content in a 
mix of wood chips etc.). For the Chemicals process industry (polymers, textiles) demonstrator, the aim is to focus 
on the PET separation. High purities are needed in order to produce high tenacity textile fibers, so impur ities such 
as cotton, elastane, PA, residues of spin oils, presence of additives (flame retardants, water repellents, softeners, etc.) 
can influence the reprocessing of the PET and should be monitored. In this sense, the sensing technologies that will 
be used to identify the presence of impurities are: Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) for polymer identification combined 
with Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) for detection of anatomic impurities such as flame retardants. 
Also, a monitoring system based on the combination of HSI technology (for plastic identification) and LIBS 
technology (for heavy metals detection, bromine and phosphate detection, among other compounds) will be 
implemented in the recycling process of process industry producing plastic components for the automotive market. 
Customized algorithms will allow process control for the optimization of processes and final product development. 
For the estimation of recycled content in polyester waste, ‘fingerprints’ will be examined of either degra dation 
molecules or combination of additives, determining virgin by recycled polyester, as indicators and detection 
methods32.  
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
Novel spectroscopy techniques 
and algorithms for plastic waste 
and wood by-products  
Sensors with novel functionalities and applications, which could be customized in 
function of the key parameters that should be monitored within the processes,  
TRL4TRL6  
 Recycled content 
identification and 
certification scheme  
Identification of patterns within recycled materials used for integrity validation and 
certification for them, TRL4TRL6  
V. Novel Sorting Techniques    
State of the Art & Current Challenges:  To physically separate waste or by -products properly, indirect sorting 
techniques are applied using sensing to detect quality (as described above) and location of unsuitable materials, so 
that automated machines or robots can be harnessed to sort the detected  recyclables22. In automated sorting, size 
reduced infeed materials are provided on conveyer belts and scanned via photonic spectrometers in order to govern 
air nozzles to blow out specific  
  
particles. As recently reported, the particle size of such pr ocesses is decisive Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 
10/11/2022for the sorting outcome31. The sorting efficiency  
of indirect technologies is limited by the executing agencies, such as compressed air jets, suction pads and robot 
manipulators, however indirect sorting technologies present higher recognition efficiency but lower processing 
capability. Although the existing sorting techniques offer accurate results, optical sorters and/or AI-equipped sorters 
can be combined to improve product yield or sorting efficiency, as AI-driven identification and robotic manipulation 
are currently at the forefront. Machine - or deep-learning techniques should be utilized to improve data processing, 
to sort a wide range of materials, offer reliability and enable real-time recognition response, capable of operating on 
 
26 Ma, T., Morita, G., Inagaki, T. et al. Moisture transport dynamics in wood during drying studied by long-wave near-infrared hyperspectral imaging.  
Cellulose 29, 133–145, (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-021-04290-y   
27 Kanayama, H., Ma, T., Tsuchikawa, S. et al. Cognitive spectroscopy for wood species identification: near infrared hyperspectral imaging combined with 
convolutional neural networks. Analyst 144, 6438-6446, (2019). http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C9AN01180C   
28 So, C. L., Lebow, S. T., Eberhardt, T., et al. Application of Near Infrared Spectroscopy to Preservative-Treated Wood, Wood and Fiber Science,  
29 Grigorev, I., Shadrin, A., Katkov, S. et al. Improving the quality of sorting wood chips by scanning and machine vision technology. J Forest Sci, 67: 212–218,  
(2021). https://doi.org/10.17221/10/2020-JFS   
30 Scheirs, J. Additives for the Modification of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) to Produce Engineering-Grade Polymers. In Modern Polyesters: Chemistry and  
Technology of Polyesters and Copolyesters (eds J. Scheirs, J. Scheirs and T.E. Long). (2004). https://doi.org/10.1002/0470090685.ch14   
31 Lubongo, C., Alexandridis, P. Assessment of Performance and Challenges in Use of Commercial Automated Sorting Technology for Plastic Waste. Recycling  
7, 11 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/recycling7020011  

 
10  
  
robotic-based mechanical sorters 33. One main challenge for robotic sorting is dealing with light particles 32 such as 
wood chips, sawdust and plastic flakes, where it is inefficient and mechanica l separation techniques need to be 
utilized such as sieving, disc screening and air classification33 34.   
Progress beyond SoA: In DigInTraCE, a multi-spectrum analysis will be performed allowing a robotic-based sorting 
mechanism to accurate separate residues in real -time, assisted by machine - or deep -learning techniques. The 
classification of waste will be relied on the developed sensing techniques and additional industrial camera system 
that identifies all the dimensions of objects. The separation will be based on multi robots across the same line, 
upgrading the existing recycling processes, providing better classification results and identifying value chains with 
the lowest environmental impact. Specifically, robotic arms assisted with sieving and real -time by vision -based, 
machine- or deep- learning techniques, will be used for the removal of the defective items and further separation of 
the plastic fl akes (having the weight of approx. 80400g) in plastic-based pilot (Italy) and for wood residual side 
streams of different often irregular shapes and sizes ranging from several mm to larger pieces e.g., small wooden 
rectangles (20x30 cm), with larger pieces containing composites in respective wood-based pilots.    
  
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
Automated Plastic Sorting system    An automated sorter for plastic flakes, TRL4TRL6  
Automated Wood Sorting system    
An automated wood sorting system serving the needs of the pulp & paper 
sector,  
TRL4TRL6  
VI. Data-driven process optimization for increased uptake of secondary raw materials   
Optimal control and AI package for recycled plastic   
State of the Art & Current Challenges: Optimizing the parameters of injection moulding process has a substantial 
impact on the quality of the derived products and is industrial and scientific challenge: complex process depending 
on multiple crossrelated variables, optimal injection parameters s election can prevent defects and improve quality. 
Many optimization approaches and techniques are proposed e.g. Taguchi method, numerical simulation based on 
Computer Aided Engineering (CAE), genetic algorithms and artificial neural networks35. Taguchi method is simple, 
practical and effective in obtaining optimised process parameters by means of orthogonal test; however, it can suffer 
nonlinear behaviors. The optimisation of CAE is based on the simulation software, but its accuracy is strongly 
dependent on  calibration procedures. Genetic algorithms are very efficient but strongly depend on inherent 
randomized approach while neural networks allow considering of system nonlinearities, are robust and quickly 
adaptable to different case studies and experiment c haracteristics. In general, the use of AI for injection moulding 
parameters is still in its infancy and its comprehensive impact analysis is an open and challenging problem requiring 
interdisciplinary scientific approach (e.g. optimal control and system id entification, ML etc.) as well as a real 
industrial environment for appropriate case studies and related validation metrics and KPIs.  
Progress beyond SoA : DigInTraCE will fill the gap exploiting a combination of academic and industrial 
competences in Control Theory and Machine Learning (ML) for Automation (UVQ) and ICT data collection systems 
(DGS, IRIS), as well as a relevant use -case. More precisely, we will exploit and apply to the Italian pilot ML 
techniques (e.g. Regression Trees, Random Forests 36, Ke rnel regression, Support Vector Machines and Neural 
Networks37 38) and novel techniques recently developed at UVQ that combine Optimal Control, System Identification 
and ML39 40 41, with the final aim of comparing and  
 
32 Ku, Y., Yang, J., Fang, H. et al. Deep learning of grasping detection for a robot used in sorting construction and demolition waste. J Mater Cycles Waste Manag 
23, 84–95 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10163-020-01098-z    
33 Kunickaya, O., Burmistrova, O., Hertz, E. et al. Russian sawmill modernization (a case study). Part 1: optimizing processes o f low-grade timber debarking and 
wood chipping, International Wood Products Journal, 12:2, 107-115, (2021). https://doi.org/10.1080/20426445.2020.1857981   
34 Grigorev, I., Shadrin, A., Katkov, S., et al. Russian sawmill modernization (a case study). Part 2: improving the efficiency of wood chipping operations, 
International Wood Products Journal, 12:2, 128-134, (2021). https://doi.org/10.1080/20426445.2020.1871276     
35 Zhu, J., Qiu, Z., Huang, Y., et al. Overview of injection molding process optimisation technology. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1798 012042, (2021). doi:10.1088/1742- 
6596/1798/1/012042   
36 Bishop, C. M. Pattern Recognition And Machine Learning. Springer Nature, (2011).   
37 Friedman, J. H., Tibshirani, R., Hastie, T. The Elements of Statistical Learning, Data Mining, Inference and Prediction. Seco nd Edition. Springer Series in 
Statistics. (2009).  
38 Breiman, L., Friedman, J. H., Olshen, R. A., Stone, C.J. Classification and Regression. Chapman and Hall/CRC. (1984).   
39 Smarra, F., Di Girolamo, G.D., De Iuliis ,V. et al. Data-driven Switching Modeling for MPC using Regression Trees and Random Forests. Nonlinear Analysis:  
Hyb.Sys. 36, (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nahs.2020.100882   
40 Di Girolamo, G.D., Smarra, F., Gattulli, V. et al. Data-driven optimal predictive control of seismic induced vibrations in frame structures. Struct Control  
Health Monit. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/stc.2514   
41 Smarra, F., Jain, A., De Rubeis, T., et al. Data-Driven Model Predictive Control using Random Forests for Building Energy Optimisation and Climate Control.  
Applied Energy (invited paper), 226:1252-1272 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.02.126   
 
11  
  
  
improving such techniques in accordance with the KPIs of the experimental setup.Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022  
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
Optimal control and AI 
package for recycled plastic   
Optimization package increasing the usage of recycled plastic during the process of 
moulding with a control on the process itself, TRL4TRL6  
Optimisation and prediction of recipes for particleboard panels  
State of the Art & Current Challenges (A):  Post-industrial wood waste is considered a vital source of feed in 
manufacture of particleboard (or chipboard), as it exhibits adequate performance for this application while also saves 
on the use of fresh forest wood. The substitution levels of fresh wood with recycled wood in the production of 
particleboard (post-industrial and post-consumer) are claimed to range from 20% to even 80%, while the processing 
methods and parameters and mostly the features of the secondary wood materials used differ widely depending on 
location, factory and other conditions. The regained wood chips may be bonded with conventional adhesives, both 
organic or inorganic, to f orm new particleboard panels dedicated for use e.g. in furniture, insulation. Wood scraps 
resulting after cutting of planks are currently underutilized in the wood -processing industry, as they are used for 
production of wood chips. One approach to retain value of those pieces is to utilize them for manufacturing of mosaic, 
self-supporting surfaces for furniture and cladding applications. In this way minimization of generated waste and 
value addition will be achieved. One main challenge for assembling the fi nal selfsupporting surface is the 
heterogeneity and variety of sizes, shapes and colors of the obtained wooden scraps.   
Progress beyond SoA (A): In DigInTraCE, data analysis and AI tools will allow to form a correlation between the 
properties and characteristics of the recycled wood chips feed with the performance of the obtained panels, which 
will be evaluated following the prevailing European standards. The substitution levels of fresh wood chips with 
recycled ones will be tested, where conventional res ins will be employed for bonding the wood chips and forming 
the panels used (urea-formaldehyde). The optimisation of use of wood by -products will be conducted via AI-based 
algorithms and ultimately prediction of final products’ quality will be performed. Development of digital optimisation 
tool, able to automatically identify the pieces, calculate and design of original arrangements between the remnants to 
create a mosaic-type surface will be performed. By using the catalogue of existing remnants properties (shape, size, 
color, etc.), the tool will utilize mathematical models (AI algorithms) to optimise the usage of wood scraps, thus.  
State of the Art & Current Challenges (B):  Several different wood by-products with different characteristics are 
produced in -site along the value chain (e.g. sawdust, woodchips and wood scraps), currently considered 
underutilized. Efforts are being deployed towards more efficient recycling and cascading use of industrial wood -
based resources according to the quality of the residues and their potential to be valorised44. Attributes which make 
wood by-products good candidates for certain applications vary, i.e. wood element used (particles or fibers), moisture 
content, particle size and scrap shape. The potential applications invo lve particleboards, fiberboards, insulation 
boards, MDF and HDF panels, products with high interest in the building and construction sector. Adhesives used to 
bond the wood elements are usually petroleum-derived components (formaldehyde-based thermosetting adhesives), 
but focus has been made to substitution of those adhesives’ formulations by biobased, non -toxic sources such as 
tannins, starch or lignin, to boost the sustainability of the panels production 45,46.  
Progress beyond SoA (B):  This innovation co ncerns wood in -site by-products being transformed and upgraded 
towards higher added -value bio -based construction products (panels, boards and insulation foams). Within the 
project, higher quality applications are targeted by means of the identification and  classification of each material 
flow, in terms of key parameters such as moisture content, particle size and scrap shape. These three parameters 
would make a huge difference in the quality and performance of the by-products, as raw materials for the production 
of higher value wood-based products such as low formaldehyde emission particle boards, wood-plastic composites 
(WPC), high performance fiberboards (MDF, HDF, etc.), acoustic and thermal insulation panels and solid wooden 
surfaces.   
Tool / Technolog y 
/Activity  
Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
AI based wood by 
products characterization 
algorithms  
Digitalisation to enhance the correlation between the properties and characteristics of the 
secondary resources with the quality of the final products, TRL4TRL6  
Machine vision -based 
wood re-design toolkit  
Fast data acquisition of parameters needed for further steps  
Composition of the mosaic-like surface with small wood scraps, TRL4TRL6  

 
12  
  
Wood by products 
automated valorization 
flow selection   
Higher value products validation Development and characterizat ion of new high 
value products with sorted/classified by -products as secondary raw materials 
causing its value retention, TRL4TRL6  
Closed-loop supply chain solutions based on low emission value chains  
State of the Art & Current Challenges: Due to the increasing worldwide waste production, continuously growing 
costs and environmental impacts dictate a circular model of production and consump tion47. From business 
perspective, this trend  
  
44 Vis, M., Mantau, U., Allen B. Study on the optimised cascading use of wood (Eds.) No 394/PP/ENT/RCH/14/7689. Final report. Brussels. (2016).  
45 Antov, P., Krišt’ák, L., Réh, R. et al. Eco-Friendly Fiberboard Panels from Recycled Fibers Bonded with Calcium Lignosulfonate. Polymers, 13, 639 (2021).  
"https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13040639"  
46 Kariuki, S.W., Wachira, J., Kawira, M., et al. Formaldehyde Use and Alternative Biobased Binders for Particleboard Formulation: A Review. Journal of 
Chemistry, (2019). https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5256897   
47 Jauhari, W.A. et al. A closed-loop supply chain model with rework, waste disposal, and carbon emissions, Operations Research Perspectives, vol. 7 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orp.2020.100155   
is leading to closed -loop supply chain (CLSC) solutions, integrating both forward flows Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 (raw materials manufactured into  
products) and reverse flows (used products collected and remanufactured). The forward flow goes from the purchase 
of raw materials from suppliers, the design and manufacturing of the single components, the assembly of the final 
product up to the product distribution and sale. The reverse flow includes product and/or sub -product acquisition, 
component analysis, disposal or refurbish, and redistribution 48. In conventional supply chains, product demand can 
be foreseen with conventional forecasting techniques. In CLSC, the high level of unpredictability and uncertainty of 
returned products and components makes the forecast more challenging. Different methods and approaches, ranging 
from mathematical to operations research techniques, are proposed in literature for different parts of the management 
process. Game Theory (GT) approaches can be applied to model CLSCs and analyze the behavior of rational players, 
stakeholder choices, and the development of voluntary extended producer responsibility policies. Decision making 
can be focused on the pricing decisions, channel operational management, remanufacturing strategy and coordination 
mechanisms49.  
Progress beyond SoA: In this project, decision making mechanisms and AI approaches will be applied in order to 
optimise the CLSC management in the real use cases. The objectives are: (i)impro ve the production process 
introducing analytics mechanism for the evaluation of the data collected by the digital factory framework with 
respect to the recipe and the production machine behavior while there are using recycled plastic; (ii)define AI 
algorithms able to support the Supply Chain mechanism with specific reference to the usage of recycled plastic.  
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End TRL  
CLSC management toolkit 
optimization plastic recycling  
AI based optimization toolkit tackling the Supply chain management and the 
production processing, TRL4TRL6  
Online LCA computation tool   
State of the Art & Current Challenges: LCA methodology and circularity evaluation of circular value chains have 
been developed in several EU H2020 projects, e.g., CIRC -PACK, POLYNSPIRE, from a static point of view. The 
inclusion of dynamic process parameters (real -time data) in the environmental module leads a mult i-modular 
approach able to calculate the main environmental impacts caused by the inclusion of new technologies under 
different operating conditions. Therefore, the dynamic monitored data (operation variables), used to feed several 
KPIs, allows to evaluate the environmental impacts of the whole value chain under different operation scenarios.  
Progress beyond SoA: LCA algorithms will be integrated for a dynamic multi-criteria assessment that will support 
the optimization of the developed solutions considering the full value chain impacts. In addition, the tool will be 
used to provide automatic information for the Product Environmental Footprint under the value chain ap proach 
(decision making tool).  
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen EndTRL  
Online LCA computation tool   Dynamic multicriteria assessment with integrated PEF, TRL4TRL6  
VII. Up-cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies of secondary raw materials   
Protein recovery chemical processes  
State of the Art & Current Challenges:  Conventional processes for recovery of proteins from seeds biomass, 
include hydrolysis, enzymatic hydrolysis and solvent extraction. These technologies face challenges, such as low 
yielding, high cost, use of harsh solvents with great environmental impact.  It is important to find cost -effective 
sustainable technologies to maximize the recovery of high-value compounds from the secondary raw materials and 

 
13  
  
to overcome the difficult conditions for extraction, resulting from the complex matrix in which the prote ins are 
embedded 50.  
Progress beyond SoA : In the framework of DigInTraCE project, green and sustainable recovery techniques for 
secondary raw materials valorization will be used and developed, in order to overcome these challenges. Pressurized 
liquid extraction (PLE), Ultrasound (UAE) and Microwave assisted (MAE), in combination with green solvents, will 
be used for protein isolation, offering high yielding, selectivity and reproducibility (in min instead of h), leading to 
a simplified manipulation and wor k-up, as well as a reduced solvent and energy consumption. NTUA owns 
laboratory equipment for implementing the pre-mentioned protein recovery processes and NTUA team has already 
developed protocols for protein recovery from various natural sources and agri cultural by -products of similar 
composition 515253. These protocols are going to be tested and optimized using the by -products from oilseed crops 
(sunflower, rapeseed, cotton press cakes etc.). The project aims to validate the concept up to technical scale  (TRL 
5).   
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End SRL/TRL  
Protein recovery chemical processes  Recovery technologies for protein isolation TRL4TRL5  
  
48 Shekarian, E., A review of factors affecting closed-loop supply chain models, Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 253 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119823   
49 Zhang, X., Li, Q., Qi, G. Decision-Making of a Dual-Channel Closed-Loop Supply Chain in the Context Government Policy: A Dynamic Game Theory. 
Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/2313698   
50 Cravotto, G. et al. Improved extraction of vegetable oils under high-intensity ultrasound and/or microwaves. Ultrasonics sonochemistry, 15(5), pp.898 (2008). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2007.10.009   
51 S. Papadaki, V. Oikonomopoulou, D. Mavropanos, M. Krokida, Isolation of proteins and prebiotics from chickpeas using environmentally friendly methods, 
35th EFFoST International Conference 2021, 1-4 November 2021, Lausanne, Switzerland  
52 C. Tsaroucha, V. Oikonomopoulou, K. Kritsotakis, E. Topakas, M. Krokida, Isolation of proteins from by-products and residues of the brewing industry,  
CORFU 2022 9th International Conference on Sustainable Solid Waste Management, 15-18 June 2022, Corfu, Greece  
53 Liu, Y., et al., Ultrasonic-assisted extraction and functional properties of wampee seed protein. Food Science and Technology, 2018. 39.  
Bio-based adhesives development   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 State of the Art & 
Current Challenges:  Formaldehyde-based thermosetting adhesives (urea -formaldehyde (UF), melamine -
formaldehyde (MF), phenol-formaldehyde (PF), and their combinations) are the main binders used in the production of 
composite wood panels. Although they offer advantages like constant product  quality, their building blocks have 
petrochemical origin (non-renewable fossil resources like oil and natural gas). The environmental problems associated 
with petrochemicals, potential health risks from formaldehyde use, and reliance on importation of oil  have recently 
renewed industry interest in bio-based adhesives42. In wood-composites the most common types of bio-based adhesives 
are derived from protein, tannin, or lignin. The press cakes produced during the manufacture of oil from oilseed crops 
(sunflower, rapeseed and even cotton) are characterized by high content of protein and amino acids 43. Combinations 
with synthetic binders are currently the preferable option, and the degree of industrial application and market acceptance 
for bio -based adhesives is still low due to availability, technical performance, and renewable raw material costs, 
requiring further development and demonstration of successful formulations.  
Progress beyond SoA: In this project, CHIMAR which has successfully formulated protein-based adhesives at lab 
scale using various proteins derived from organic waste and by-products, will use protein samples from press cakes 
to replace part of the petrochemical phenol that is needed in the adhesive formulation at pilot scale and at a relevant 
environment. The highest phenol substitution level achieved so far is 40% when using proteins from rapeseed.  
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End SRL/TRL  
Bio-based adhesives process 
engineering  
Increase the phenol substitution levels in adhesives by 40% 
TRL4TRL6  
Upcycling of plastic  
State of the Art & Current Challenges: In order to insure a good product quality the quality of the recycled plastics 
need to be controlled. Current approaches can either explore a vast chemical space by high-resolution and trace-level 
off-line analytics from small spot samples or rely on avera ged low information inputs like NIR classification from 
automated sorting. Despite exhaustive publication on plastics recycling procedures, including automated sorting for 
industrial and waste management sorting is often done manually involving critical health and safety aspects, and to 
 
42 Lin et al. Study on preparation and properties of phenol-formaldehyde-chinese fir liquefaction copolymer resin, Ciencia y tecnología 16(2): 159-174 (2014).  
DOI:10.4067/S0718-221X2014005000013    
43 Yang, I., Kuo, M., Myers, D.J. et al. Comparison of protein-based adhesive resins for wood composites. J Wood Sci 52, 503–508 (2006).  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10086-006-0804-5   

 
14  
  
identify critical issues affecting material separation e.g. material mixing incompatibility impairing recycling 
performances or dismantling costs.  
Another aspect that is insufficiently monitored is the thermal and mechanica l stability of each recyclate. During 
service lifetime, polymers may suffer from degradation caused by thermal oxidation and photoxidation. During re -
processing of plastic waste, chain scission and/or crosslinking reactions occur for a range of polymers, l eading to 
polymeric structure alterations with consequent variations in crystallinity, opacity and deterioration of mechanical 
properties directing the recovered polymers to low -requirement applications. However, pure polymer waste can be 
efficiently recyc led into new added -value recyclates through adapted reprocessing - upcycling - consisting of 
maintenance and/or increase of the polymer waste quality (e.g. molecular weight, macromolecular structure, 
functionality through additivation).   
Progress beyond SoA: In the framework of DigInTraCE project, a high demanding textile case is foreseen whereby 
different polyester waste streams will be monitored over its life time so that critical processing steps can be 
determined. Models for lifetime prediction using available data from real-aged polymer products will be developed 
and validated by simulated labbased accelerated aging and prediction models, promoting the safe and sustainable 
use of recycles in added -value products, targeting for example high demanding te xtile sectors. The degradation 
degree of EoL plastics (input products) will be assessed as both input for the lifetime models, but also as input for 
the EoL processing and treatment (recycling/upcycling etc.).By using smart sensor techniques and where need ed 
additivation the quality of the materials will be improved leading to good quality recycled polyester making it 
possible to reprocess it in high tenacity textile fibers al TRL 6.   
Tool / Technology /Activity  Key Advantage & Progress – Start -> Foreseen End SRL/TRL  
Upcycling of plastic  Upcycling technologies for plastic TRL3TRL6  
  
1.2. Methodology  
1.2.1. Overall Concept and approach  
DigInTraCE contributes to circular and low emissions value chains of process through digitalization. Digital tools 
and information systems will be integrated forming a multifunctional and interoperable decentralized traceability 
platform based on blockchain technolog y. End-to-end digitalization of the value chains will be implemented, as 
online monitoring, tracking and tracing of streams will be established via novel sensing (e.g. HIS) and tracking 
techniques (e.g. QR, smart tags) for automatically obtaining real -time information. Enhancement of DPPs through 
dynamic update of product information, is one of the project’s main innovations. The specific innovations beyond 
SoA described in 1.1.3 will be clustered into the below 4 main modules and additional services that a re combined 
shaping the overall system.    
Decentralized Traceability platform – Dynamically Updated Digital Product Passport (contributing to all 
Objectives) Based on Decentralized Traceability Platform  and integrating the Dynamically updated DPP  
DigInTraCE expands currently applied traceability schemes, paying special focus to secondary raw materials and 
products and frequently neglected  
  
needs in existing practices. Thus, emphasis will be given on capturing information regarding secondary materials’ 
properties, Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
composition and origin, not only to enable quality assurance but also to ensure more efficient and sustainable 
transformation into products. Extracting all the secondary materials tra nsformation-associated data throughout the 
processing line and process them with the use data analysis and AI offers an opportunity to facilitate optimization of 
process efficiency, productivity and end -products’ recipes, and assist interested stakeholders ’ decision -making 
related to circularity, environmental impact and economic viability. The platform will assure secure and safe data 
exchange through intra- and inter-firm communication channels, by application of corresponding accessibility rights 
via open data/software/hardware and will operate as neutral data holder, thus supporting features that create value 
from data without exposing sensitive information. All the modules described below (sensing, sorting and data driven 
activities, certification and standardization schemes, additional financial and educational services) will be integrated 
into the platform, facilitating the optimization of secondary raw materials and forming the overall system. This 
optimization has been approached in an extensive way,  as illustrated in Figure 1, by deploying the concentrated 
digital technologies to enhance the chemical upgrade of secondary raw materials. At product and process level, 
optimization to efficiently valorise the materials and consume less energy, by applyin g novel digital technologies 
(e.g. data-driven optimization, novel sensing and sorting mechanisms) and chemical innovations for upcycling (e.g. 
protein recovery from rapeseed cake for bio-based resins development) to be employed.  

 
15  
  
  
Figure 1: DigInTraCE Overall Approach (modules' colors corresponding to sections in the text)   
Novel sensing, Smart Tags and Sorting Mechanisms  (contributing to Obj 1,3,4,5,6)  
DigInTraCE offers digital tools that facilitate automated and high accuracy identification of secondary resources 
quality properties, characteristics and environmental conditions, that will be integrated to the platform. Novel 
spectroscopy techniques & algorithms for  plastic waste & wood by -products: Online sensors that rely on 
spectroscopic techniques, involving novel functionalities customised in compliance with the key parameters that 
should be monitored within each process will be applied. Hyperspectral imaging assets will be utilized to detect and 
categorise polymers and contaminated components assisted with NIR technology. Some highlighted properties, based 
on which sorting will be performed, include (but are not limited to) size and shape of wood chips and scraps, moisture 
content, previous chemical treatment, etc. Realtime identification and classification according to all the requested 
characteristics in terms of quality, will be performed by industrial hyperspectral cameras utilising vision -based 
techniques. Sorting mechanisms will be designed based on the above relevant sensing techniques, to improve the 
quality of the feedstock for the upcycling processes. Automated Plastic Sorting system: robotic arms assisted by 
machine- or deep- learning techniques, will be used for the removal of the defective items and impurities resulting 
from waste assessment analysis, implemented in plastic based pilots (Belgium and Italy). Automated Wood Sorting 
system: categorisation according to size and the removal of defective pieces using robotics arms followed by sieving, 
manipulated in real-time using hyperspectral imaging assets assisted by machine - or deep- learning techniques and 
NIR technology. This sorting mechanism will enable reduction of waste and increased identificatio n accuracy and 
efficiency in recovery of high -quality secondary resources, designed for and installed in wood by -products cases 
(Greece and Spain). Smart tags for real time sensing  for real time sensing and delivering information to the 
decentralised platform will be utilized.    
Data-driven process optimization for increased uptake of secondary raw materials (contributing to Obj 1,5,6)  
Tools and AI based features will be included in the Decentralised Traceability Platform Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022for process and product optimizations  
and facilitate decision-making using real-time measurements and related data. Optimal control and AI package for 
recycled plastic: during injection moulding designed to also control the process, in terms of auto-adapting to improve 
the quality of second life materials. AI based wood by products optimization algorithms  will be developed, 
connecting materials characteristics’ and production process parameters, with final products’ properties. A wood by-
products automated valorisation flow selection based on data analysis will be developed, in order to minimize value 
decay. High speed data acquisition of parameters related to composition of small wood scraps will be exploited by 
the Machine vision-based wood re-design toolkit which will enable the arrangement of pieces to create a mosaic -
like surface. Stakeholders’ decision maki ng will be assisted in terms of supply chain management, planning and 
scheduling via the CLSC management toolkit optimization plastic recycling  whereas environmental impact and 

 
16  
  
sustainability of selected pathways for optimisation of secondary resources will be evaluated dynamically via the 
Online LCA computation tool based on Ex-Ante LCA.   
Up-cycling, reuse, and upgrade technologies of secondary raw materials (contributing to Obj 1,5,6)  
Project’s digital framework, transversal tools and data driven optimization described will be applied in 4 different 
value chains in relevant industrial fields combined with technologies for the upcycling, reuse and upgra de of 
secondary materials and replication potential. The value chains mainly involve wood-based industry and associated 
pulp & paper sector, as well as chemicals sector, in terms of plastic recycling and bio-based resin development. Bio-
based adhesives pro cess engineering: Regarding first wood -related chain (Greece) wood composites are 
manufactured for future furniture applications, by using underutilized, high -quality wood by -products and by 
utilizing agricultural by -products from oilseed crops, for develo pment of bio -based binders via Protein recovery 
chemical processes. In the other wood -related case (Spain) wood by -products are characterized and classified in 
compliance with quality parameters by means of digital technologies and transformed accordingly towards added-
value products (AI based wood by products optimization algorithms referred already). Regarding the plastic-relevant 
value chains, in first (Belgium) polyester recycling for textiles application will be introduced, highlighting the 
determination of ‘recycled content’ by detecting fingerprint molecules (Recycled content identification, certification 
scheme) while in the second (Italy) the target is to increase the polymers detection and recycling efficiency and 
reduce the amount of materials whi ch are incinerated, by optimizing the process of injection moulding of recycled 
plastic (via Optimal control and AI package for recycled plastic and CLSC management toolkit optimization plastic 
recycling).  
Additional Services (contributing to all Objectives)  
Material Characterization, Information Access and Security, Standardization and certification Schemes   
Combining several results already referred, Decentralized traceability platform captures real-time data via interfaces 
to detect both  object properties and changes through time and reactions to different environmental conditions. 
Additional data from the industrial stakeholders’ legacy systems will be also integrated. Data standards will be 
aligned to GS1 and other special standardization schemes. Blockchain and DLH will be used to provide decentralised, 
transparent, immutable and secure data structure for all the information gathered. End-to-end cybersecurity solutions 
for proper user and consent management, to ensure security, confidentiality and integrity of data will also be fostered. 
The automatic update of DPPs via a live update mechanism is contingent on digital models involving rules to create 
or retrieve information, either relying upon user actions or items’ state changes and rea ctions detected by human or 
digital sensors. This mechanism will support the real -time tracking and monitoring of materials and components 
throughout the value chain, while also provides interactive visualization and controlling functionalities of DDPs using 
Mixed reality (MR). Imperative information regarding the composition, quality characterization and categorization 
as well as safety data sheets and other standards will be recorded and displayed in the decentralized traceability 
platform, especially when addressing characterization and sorting technologies for the optimisation of the materials 
recycle. Certification schemes will be also integrated ( Recycled content identification, certification scheme).  
AIbased tools will be integrated for optimizing value chains, identifying hidden patterns and exploring new potential 
opportunities in terms of resources exchange, reuse and recycling of wastes and by -products between the same or 
multiple industries/factories. A proper ontology and data models shall be ado pted to support the complexity of the 
recycling and circular value chains, concerning the second (and so on) lives of materials.   
Financial services, smart contracting and business models    
In the circular economy actors are not trying to optimise their  own cost, quality and waste parameters in isolation, 
but rather their contribution to the overall ecosystem’s parameters. This may create misalignment between the risks 
and rewards when procuring materials and these may be distributed over a time scale. i.e. the circular optimum may 
require more capital expenditure by the primary actor in order to reduce the waste of a secondary actor five years 
later. Financial derivatives such as options, swaps and futures are widely used in commodity markets to move 
expense, risk and reward through time and between the actors, with financial traders providing liquidity, price 
discovery and capital flows. In the circular economy those same instruments can dissociate the capital and risk, for 
example the primary actor selling a future or option on the secondary raw material with an expiration date based on 
the primary object’s lifespan. Given that DigInTraCE intends to track and trace through a blockchain / DLT data 
structure, and that the same blockchain infrastructure can  manage tokenised financial derivatives, a testbed is 
provided to examine the potential of tying traceable secondary raw materials to rights enshrined in legal contracts 
(financial derivatives) represented by tokens. The financial traders purchasing of the se rights would use this 
instrument in their financial strategy before selling the option on to an industrial actor requiring the by-product, close 
to expiry.  The value of financial derivatives is highly understood and describable by mathematical equations. Such 

 
17  
  
derivatives are common today, but are used with standardized commodities such as wheat and wood where 
traceability is not required Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
(because they are widely available commodities). The mis sing step today is the ability to enforce the contract on 
materials that are not so abundant and standardized as to be a commodity, or even to non-fungible items, i.e. a specific 
object. (This is essentially a liquidity issue). However, by combining the financial instrument in the same blockchain 
as the track and trace of the underlying object, and even more so, through smart contacts tied to wallets containing 
monies in the form of cryptocurrency, potentially one can indeed enforce the validity of the cont ract. This 
achievement would solve imbalances in risk, reward and capex between the actors in a circular economy, supported 
by market makers. DigInTraCE will study and develop financial services to support stakeholders in the secondary 
raw materials market. This will include analysis of the viability of the above scenario from a financial perspective 
and enhanced by studying the capability of tokenisation and smart contracts to support such a solution by enshrining 
and enforcing the required instruments.   
Educational services, co-design material   
Educational services based on co-created training materials will be included in the DigInTraCE platform, contributing 
to the development of digitally skilled population and workforce. The main focus will be to ide ntify status quo of 
staff members’ digital competence and discover future requirements of the market, in order to provide tailor -made 
enlightenment, guidance, training and mentoring services for employees and citizens by internal and external experts, 
specialized into specific sectoral, regional or national social needs. Validation of the acquired skills and progress will 
be performed regularly through formal and informal channels. Workshops for validating and co-creating educational 
materials will be organized.  
1.2.2. Scientific Methodology  
DigInTraCE concept relies on the implementation of a circular approach for the whole lifecycle of secondary 
resources. Circularity principles require integration of the entire value chain, implementation of detailed monitoring 
and traceability systems and assurance of increased use of secondary materials, as well as the integration of secondary 
resources in the processes. These requirements imply the execution of a comprehensive methodology that follows an 
iterative multistep development approach, in which user requirements and corresponding solutions evolve through 
multiple iterative collaboration rounds involving all the stakeholders. The core of the methodology is agile approach, 
adaptive development and continuous i mprovement based on iterative rounds including the following 4 reciprocal 
phases given that knowledge increases over time through interactions between different phases and stakeholders.  
Phase 1: Data gathering, characterization and definition phase (M1 -M8) The first phase of the project 
sets the baseline for its execution. Α preliminary analysis of the secondary materials quality characterization 
for recycle, reuse and upgrade per value chain. The exploration of digital traceability methodologies for seco ndary 
materials across value chains will be initiated and all the related requirements regarding digital tracing, DPP, real -
time access to information and supplementary services for the development of a holistic Decentralized traceability 
platform will be gathered. Finally, an assessment of current situation of involved value chains in the demonstrators 
in terms of waste generated and uptake of secondary resource will be performed.   
This phase is performed the first 8 months of the project (M1-M8) and covers WP1 (all), WP2 (all), WP3 (all), WP3 
(T4.14.4), WP5 (all), WP6 (T6.1) and WP7 (T7.3-7.4).  
Phase 2: Design, development and testing phase (M9 -M24) Demo cases assessment is finali zed and 3 
parallel stages are established: P2.1: initial design and development of the new technological solutions in 
the Pulp & Paper and Chemical value chains ; testing in laboratory level of new processes and products; and the 
establishment of the holist ic digitalisation of circular value chains framework in the industrial ecosystems in the 4 
demo cases. P2.2: system specifications of the monitoring tools for digital tracing along the value chains defined; 
their deployment in the field along with the deve lopment of the live update mechanism for DPP, algorithms, smart 
tags, sensing and sorting technologies and the rest digital tools/services (T3.4, T3.5, T4.3, T4.4). P2.3: Based on the 
above progress, activities related to research for secondary materials’ certification and standardization; knowledge 
exchange, learning programmes  and training; replication and transferability across sectors; cooperation and 
clustering with other activities; business plans and exploitation activities will be planned, initiated and performed.  
This phase is performed during 16 months of the project (M9-M24) and covers WP1 (all), WP2 (all), WP3 (all), WP4 
(all), WP5 (T5.2-5.5), WP6 (T6.1-T6.3) and WP7 (all).   
Phase 3: Implementation Phase (M25 -M36) The demonstration of DigInTra CE solutions, technological 
and digital innovations will take place in this phase in 3 parallel stages: P3.1: The real environment 
implementation and operation of the technologies for secondary materials according to the particularities of each 
demo-site, industry and value chain will be demonstrated. P3.2: digital demonstration activities will begin, making 
sure that the most relevant information is monitored and tracked according to the baseline captured in the first phase 

 
18  
  
for each demo-site. The methodologies for digital tracing analysed will be utilized for the establishment and the real 
operation of the blockchain based decentralized traceability platform , the dynamically updated DPPs for all 
the involved value chains, along with the sensing techniques,  smart tags, AI algorithms and sorting systems. Also, 
the integration and testing of all the rest digital tools/services (CLSC, LCA, financial, MR) will be performed while 
system specifications and architecture will be enhanced and finalized. P3.2: The certification schemes will be 
applied and standardization, educational co-created and other transversal activities will be fed with real data and 
information.   
This phase is performed during 12 months of the project (M25 -M36) and covers WP1 (all), WP2 (T2.1,T2.3,T2.4), 
WP3 (all), WP4 (all), WP5 (T5.2-5.5), WP6 (T6.2-6.4) and WP7 (all).   
Phase 4: Integration, Solution Refinement and Knowledge Exchange (M37Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022-M48) The demonstrators are expected  
to op erate at TRL6 allowing the evaluation and validation of the results, in terms of performance and impact 
assessment for all the designed systems. The final version of all digital tools designed and tested will also be included 
within the final version of decentralized traceability platform. Final conclusions from standardization and certification 
activities will be drawn. Moreover, once the final results have been gathered together with feedback from main 
stakeholders, corresponding policy recommendations fi nal business models, enhanced learning programmes and 
exploitation strategy will be defined and a final exploitation meeting will be held with the consortium to set up the 
path for replication of the project results after the project’s end.   
This phase is performed during the last 12 months of the project (M37-M48) and covers WP1 (all),WP2 (T2.1, T2.3), 
WP3 (T3.5), WP4 (all), WP5 (T5.2-5.5), WP6 (T6.2-6.4) and WP7 (all).  
1.2.3. Demonstrators  
The value chains that the project implements and demonstrates the overall concept, are selected explicitly for 
belonging to industrial sectors highlighted by P4P roadmap, while also allowing the validation of closed loop supply 
chain solutions employing concepts as recycling, reuse and upgrade of materials by deploying optimized chemical 
processes.  
Sectors  Location  Partners involved and their role    
Chemicals  industry 
 (binders, biopolymers),  
Pulp & Paper and Wood industry  
(composite wood-based panels)  
Greece  
CHIMAR – Demo owner; NTUA – Demo Coordinator and Research 
partner; AGRST – supplier of secondary resources; MXS – supplier of 
secondary resources and receiver of end product; VTT - Research 
partner, smart tags and data management; ICCS – Technical 
contribution  
Demonstrator overview: The main value chains to be examined involve agricultural by -products from oilseed 
crops, supplied by AGRST (industry engaged in agribusiness), as well as wood by -products from MXS (furniture 
manufacturer). NTUA (research partner) performs extraction of proteins from the oilseed crops that are supplied to 
CHIMAR (industrial partner with c ompetitive R&D services in the field of chemicals and adhesives), to produce 
bio-based adhesives. Underutilized wood by-products of MXS are also supplied to CHIMAR. Various wood-based 
composites are manufactured, ultimately to be utilized by MXS for the pr oduction of furniture and other 
applications. VTT (research partner) develops methodologies for smart tags and their GAIA -X compatible data 
management and storage as well as strategy supporting end -of-life management. ICCS contributes to the 
demonstration site with the design of a wood sorter.  
Overall Concept of the activities to be implemented  

 
19  
  
Demo concept 
description: 
Phenol-
formaldehyde 
resins (phenolic 
resins) are 
synthetic polymers 
that are widely 
used as adhesives 
for bonding of 
plywood and other 
engineered wood 
products. These 
adhesives are of 
petrochemical 
origin, increasing 
environmental pollution and therefore, the need to replace them with natural bio-based products as substitutes for 
conventional wood resin adhesives is crucial. Proteins are a group of natural and renewable materials, suitable for 
use in wood adhesives. In DigInTraCE, proteins and amino acids will be recovered from oilseed crops 
(sunflower, rapeseed and cotton press cakes) and utilized as building blocks in phenolic bio-based resins by 
CHIMAR, using condensation polymerization, replacing part of the petroleum-based phenol material. The 
developed resins will be characterized in terms of  rheological properties,  
reactivity, free formaldehyde, and other properties needed to assess the resins behaviour and performance.   
The resins will be then mixed with a variety of additives, such as fillers, hardeners/catalysts, etc., to produce wood 
composite  
Figure 2: Greek Demonstrator  materials for construction and furniture applications, and specifically 
plywood panels. Furthermore, secondary raw materials from the wood industry  (wood residues provided by 
MXS), that are now mainly used for heat generation in wood-based panels factories, will be mixed with fresh wood 
chips to develop a wood composite material, called particleboard , by CHIMAR, using a conventional Urea -
Formaldehyde resin. The properties of both the  produced plywood and particleboards will be evaluated and 
compared with that of reference panels produced from conventional materials. DigInTraCE will, finally, lead to the 
production of two new wood -based composites, i) plywood produced with bio -based ad hesives and ii) 
particleboards produced with the addition of wood waste that will be evaluated by MXS in the furniture industry. 
The  
developed composites will be characterized by more sustainable bio -soAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 
10/11/2022urces of raw materials, improved health and safety during manufacture and end use, enhanced performance 
characteristics and improved environmental profile.   
Digital technologies to increase waste reduction: In this demonstrator, wood residues of MXS will be sorted with 
an automated wood sorting system,co,, designed by ICCS, and selected compounds will be sent to CHIMAR to be 
processed and used to develop wood composite materials (particleboards). Additionally, through the processing of 
the data regarding: (a) the properties of the proteins extracted by NTUA, (b) the production parameters and 
characteristics of the phenolformaldehyde resins synthesized therewith and (c) the final properties of the plywood 
panels produced by CHIMAR, the possibility of developing a digital model will be explored, in order to identify the 
characteristics of the protein raw materials as well as the resin and panel production process parameters, that could 
optimise the recipes and predict the final products’ properties and performance (for both the produced resins and 
panels). Item level tagging will be supported through durable smart tagging solutions ( i.e. printed, unique 2D 
barcodes, potentially RFID) developed by VTT. Tagging solutions will include the means for identifying the data 
items as well tailoring of functional tagging for sensing and authentication as feasible, as an example humidity 
monitoring tagging solutions can be targeted. The data from the various processes will be combined and introduced 
into a data management system and through application of IT tools (artificial intelligence, machine learning etc.) 
knowledge will be extracted related to the optimum processes and conditions, which can then be promoted for market 
application. GaiaX compatible data structure/architecture to support data collection will be designed (VTT). 
Simulations and mock -ups apps to engage stakeholders to more effic ient use/ re -use/ re -cycle/sorting (dynamic 

 
20  
  
updating of item information) as well as piloting customer/end -user data collecting and connecting the data in the 
platform will be carried out. The project aims to validate the concept up to TRL 5 or 6.  
Valorization of use of secondary raw materials in the value chain: In this demonstrator, conventional hydrolysis, 
enzymatic hydrolysis, as well as green extraction processes (UAE, MAE, PLE) using friendly solvents, will be used 
and optimized by NTUA, concerning various process parameters (time, power, solid to solvent ratio, temperature, 
etc.), for efficient isolation of proteins. Proteins will be recovered based on protocols that have already been 
developed in TRL4 in laboratory environment and will be applied in prototype systems, reaching a TRL5.  
Other important activities: A standardisation system will be carried out based on the results obtained and the 
technical data process developed (considering the specific requirements needed for plywood and particleboards). 
CHIMAR will characterize the features of the final wood-based composites, based on European Standards (Bonding 
quality-EN:314, formaldehyde release -EN ISO 12460 -3, tensile strength -EN:319, thickness swelling after 
immersion in water -EN:317, modulus of elasticity -EN:310). Standardisation aspects are going to be addre ssed 
aiming to improve the development of the composites and to reduce relevant costs, considering different recipes. 
Co-design and replication activities will be included as part of the whole project.   
KPIs  
Increase of secondary raw materials use:  >80 %  
Waste reduction:   >50 %  
GHG emissions reduction:   20 %  
Number of up-cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies of secondary raw materials 
implemented:   
at least 3  
By-products value increase  30 %  
  
Sectors  Location  Partners involved and their role    
Pulp & Paper and Wood industry 
(composite wood-based panels)  Spain, Azpeitia   ASTI – Demo owner; TECNL – Demo leader; 
ICCS – Technical partner   
Demonstrator overview: ASTI is a Spanish company that comprises the whole value chain of the wood sector, as 
it includes the initial processing of tree trunks originating from the forest and 1 st transformation of logs (in the 
sawmill), and up to their final product, i.e., solid wood furniture with the claim of hard -wearing and decorative 
products.  
Overall Concept of the activities to be implemented  
 
21  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 
10/11/2022Demo concept description: The overall objective of this demo is value retention and upgrading of wood -
based by-products by the use of digital technologies. At the permises of ASTI, along the whole  wood processing 
including furniture production line, different types of by -products might be produced. Those residual side streams 
include bark, sawdust, wood chips, wood scraps, sanding dust and broken and defective pieces. The aim of the demo 
is to identify, characterise, quantify and separate the classified by-products by means of digital technologies developed 
by ICCS. This classification and collected data will allow to trace all produced materials towards the next slab in the 
furniture value chain an d to move into a different sector (such as construction, pulp&paper, packaging). Proper 
classification of the by -products will allow for new, added -value products to be manufactured by TECNL, such as 
high-value wood-based boards, insulation foams, and new wooden surfaces, as illustrated in the Figure 3. The success 
of the demo will allow the value retention of the by -products and, thus, the market value per m 3 (or Ton) of the by -
products will remain comparable with the current end product.  
Digital technologies to increase waste reduction: Digital technologies introduced in the wood value chain 
byproducts classification and with a well -defined and traceable quality. In this demonstrator, industrial wood by -
products of ASTI will be sorted with  a wood sorter, designed by ICCS, and selected side streams and pieces will 
be valorized accordingly by TECNL, in order to facilitate increased waste reduction, upgrade of the materials and 
enhanced retention of value throughout the chain. The critical par ameters to be examined, according to which the 
residual sidestreams are categorized and sorted, include the size, shape, moisture content etc. DigInTraCE platform 
will enable traceability of the by-products and the final products, as data from all stages will be collected regarding 
quality attributes (e.g. properties, composition, origin etc.). Besides, Artificial Intelligence and Computer Vision 
for optimization of the wood scraps by-products will be used. By using those digital technologies, the scraps (that 
normally are crushed into smaller pieces, losing value) will be used to create mosaic-like self-supporting functional 
surfaces for furniture and cladding. Result will be its value retention.  
Optimisation of use of secondary raw materials in the value  chain: will be realized after the appropriate 
separation of wood by -products. As a result of sorting by size and by quality requirements (moisture content), 
application into the demonstrator processes, the energetic valorization (through pellets manufacture) will be reduced 
and eventually eliminated. Small wood particles (<1mm) are normally mixed with particles of higher sizes to 
manufacture pellets or boards. However, the particles of that size is very valuable for other applications such as 
wood plastic composites. Novel wood-based products manufactured include a) particle boards containing small -
sized bark chips (with low formaldehyde emission); b) highquality MDF and HDF panels (manufactured with small 
fiber sizes); c) wood insulation products (manufact ured with small fiber sizes) and d) wooden self-supporting 
surfaces (made out of scraps for furniture and cladding).  
KPIs  
Increase of secondary raw materials use:   30 %  
Waste reduction:   30 %  
GHG emissions reduction:   20 %  
Number of up-cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies of secondary raw materials 
implemented:   
4  
Figure  
3 
  
Spanish Demonstrator 
  

 
22  
  
By-products value increase  200%  
  
Sectors  Location  Partners involved and their role    
Chemicals process industry 
(polymers, textiles)  Belgium  
CTB – lab-scale, coordinator; SIOEN – PET textile producer; CIRCE – 
value chain mapping; IRIS – Development of monitoring systems, VTT - 
Research partner, smart tags and data management  
Demonstrator overview: Polyester is the most widely used material for textiles, both for clothing and technical 
applications. Although polyester recycling is already advanced for some aplications like bottles, the use of recycled 
polyester for high demandi ng textile applications is still limited. In this demo, polyester decontamination and 
upcycling will be tested for end -of-life thermoplastics polyester. Processing of polyester will be performed on 
labscale by CTB. The produced recycled polyester will be provided to SIOEN, where PET textile will be produced. 
SIOEN is a vertically integrated company and a large convertor of polyester (20kTon / year), of the standard quality 
(e.g. for non wovens) and of the high tenacity (HT) polyester (e.g. for techncial applications). CIRCE will support 
this pilot in the form of value chain mapping and CTB as demo coordinator will be responsible for the lab -scale 
PET  
 
recycling and characterisation of the recycled materials. Supply of secondary raw materials will be provided by 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
EREMA, an entity that has ensured its support via a letter of support, although not joining the cosnortium.   
Overall Concept of the activities to be implemented  
Demo concept description: The main target of this demo is to focus on the qualities of PET resulting from polyester 
recycling, in order to fit textile applications. The potential waste streams to be used are end -of-life plastics and 
textiles. Two types of recycled polyester qualities for textiles applications are identified, normal PET (standard  
quality) and high tenacity (HT) PET. Ultimately, the goal is to utilise recycled normal PET for fibre -to-fibre PET 
recycling, however, one of the main challenges that hampers its wide uptake is that decontamination of suitable 
streams and thermoplastic re cycling of the material is required . In this demonstrator, two relevant waste streams 
are considered: (i) polyester textile waste, where monitoring of the fingerprints of degradation molecules will be 
performed in order to monitor the impact of its use life on the properties of the recycled polyester and (ii) polyester 
packaging materials having a relatively short lifetime (e.g. bottles, trays,etc.), where ratios of polymers will be 
monitored. The bottlenecks are situated at several levels, e.g. sorting (where the digital tracking/DPP can help) but 
also dealing with the contaminations present in the sorted out ‘monostreams’ and being able to recycle and upcycle 
the PET material in a cost efficient way, by processing it an a innovative recycling line combined  with polymer 
upgrading using additives. Overall the concept of the demonstrator is illustrated in Figure 4. The recycled polyester 
pellets will be characterized in terms of rheological properties, molecular weight, crystallisation behaviour, and 
other properties needed to assess the polymer behaviour and performance. The upcycled pellets will be processed 
on a textile extrusion line by CTB and upscaled by SIOEN.  The properties of both the produced fibers and the final 
textile products will be evaluated an d compared with that of reference conventional materials. DigInTraCE will, 
finally, lead to the production of a new polyester textile with maximum recycled content. Life Cycle Assessment 
(LCA) will continuously be applied for the evaluation of the environmental performance of the developed textiles.  
Digital technologies to increase waste reduction: In this demonstrator, textile and plastic materials will be sorted 
and further processed. A smart detection of ratio of polymers, moisture content (IRIS) and fingerprint of degradation 
molecules (CTB) will be installed. Through the processing of data regar ding: (a) the properties of the recycled 
polymer pellets (b) the production parameters and characteristics of the polyester fibers and (c) the final properties 
of the textile by SIOEN, the possibility of developing a digital model will be explored, in orde r to identify the 
characteristics of the recycled polyester resin raw material as well as the textile process parameters.  

 
23  
  
The data from the various 
processes will be combined and 
introduced into a data management 
system and through application of 
IT tools (AI,  
ML  etc.)  knowledge 
 will  be extracted 
related to the optimum processes 
 and  conditions.  
Moreover, the use of functional 
tags for  sensing  humidity 
 and temperature will be 
tested by VTT on  packaging 
 materials.  
Simulations of different storages 
conditions will be tested and linked with the processing into textiles making it possible to collect  
relevant date on the history of the recycled polyester to predict their re -use in high demanding textile application 
and predict the needed reprocessing. The project aims to validate the concept up to technical scale (TRL 6).  
Optimisation of use of secondary raw materials in the value chain: will be realised after the appropriate sorting 
and screening of both textile wasts streams and packaging waste streams. As a result of sorting by quality 
requirements, application into the demonstrator processes, the re -use of textile and plastic waste will be reduced 
and, eventually, eliminated. Within the project, CTB will use a innovative recycling line combined with additional 
upgrading steps to guarantee the qualitty of the raw materials to enable the processing of PET waste and process it 
back into a secondary raw material suitable for fibre extrusion. This will require adaptation of the equipment to 
include a cleaning step and to enable upcycling the material so that it has again an Intrinsic Viscosity (IV) fitted for 
filament extrusion. Further, this might be helped by using additives like chain extenders. Lab -scale tests for the 
recycling and for the subsequent filament extrusion will be performed at the lines of CTB, results can be upscaled 
at SIOEN (for extrusion).    
Standardization and Certification Determining ‘recycled content’ is important for various types of materials in 
the textile sector.  In the project we will focus on polyester, the most used synthetic polymer for textil e products. 
The recycled content will be evaluated by fingerprint molecules. These can be either degradation molecules or 
combinations of additives that are not used in these combinations in virgin polymers. A good fingerprint exists of 
at least one very specific degradation product or a specific combination of non -compatible additives. The novelty 
in this project exists in determining those markers which  
have a high specificity, since this is needed for its use as detection method of recycled content. An overview of Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 standardization efforts and a liaison to the most relevant committees in CEN and 
ISO will be made, e.g., CEN/TC248 WG39 ‘Circular Textiles Chain’ (which is chaired by CTB) and the CEN SABE 
workgroup mapping standards influencing Circular Economy. We will contribute to the ongoing and future standards 
developments in specific topics, promoting the inclusion of the findings of the project in future new or revised standards 
that can be used by the European or international industry. Depending on the maturity of the standardization sector, 
this can involve providing information, submitting technical proposals and even promote the elaboration of new 
standard documents/deliverables. We will investigate how the digital tracing explored within the project can be useful 
for certification activities. CTB is involved in PolyCertEurope, currently mainly based on a mass-balance system. The 
digital tracking combined with the fingerprinting should allow to also do a certification based on actual measurements 
of the recycled content of the end product. We will investigate how this can be integrated to extend the existing 
PolyCertEurope certification scheme. Within the project we will focus on PET for t he actual tests but the concept 
developed will also be applicable for other polymers.  
KPIs  
Increase of secondary raw materials use:   >50 %  
Waste reduction:   30 %  
GHG emissions reduction:   20 %  
Number of up-cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies of secondary raw materials implemented:   at least 2  
By-products value increase  50 %  
Figure  
4 
  
Belgian Demonstrator 
  

 
24  
  
  
Sectors  Location  Partners involved and their role    
Process industry producing plastic 
components for the automotive 
market  
Italy  
SIGIT – Demo owner; DGS – Demo Coordinator; UVQ – Demo 
research partner; IRIS – Development of monitoring systems; 
ICCS  
– Development of sorting systems  
Demonstrator overview: The Italian demonstrator aims to improve the efficiency of a circular economy flow of 
recycled polymeric materials for injection moulding. The flow consists of heavy and contaminated plastics with a 
capacity of processing up to 2000kg/h of flakes. The aim of this demonstrator is to increase its polymers detection 
efficiency, enable polymeric compounds detection and recycling and reduce the amount of materials which are 
incinerated.   
Overall Concept of the activities to be implemented  
Demo concept description:  The pilot covers all the steps of the plastics value chain: purchase of raw materials, 
transformation, moulding and finished product release, supported by sales planning and scheduling, with the aim 
of tracking and tracing circular practices to increase th e use of recycled materials. On the raw materials side, by 
tracing the recipes it is possible to maximize the use of recycled materials. A more effective management of BOMs 
in plastic moulding cycles will increase the quality of produced materials and enable the reduction of raw material 
waste, increasing the reuse of recycled materials. Moreover, tracking of production waste associated with the BOMs 
of raw materials allows to maximize the  
recycling of unsold products. The n -level 
BOM including the list o f all components, 
subassemblies, semi -finished products and 
raw materials necessary to make a product, 
provides information about origin of 
materials (first choice, second choice, 
recycling): these data allow to track and trace 
all required materials and c omponents 
information like origin, reusing, first or 
second choices and so on. The circularity 
aspects will be realized managing the reuse of 
waste materials depending on different nature 
of the recycled material or component: 
upcycling (an unused component is reused in 
another product without any transformation) 
or downcycling (unused components are transformed and  
Figure 5: Italian Demonstrator  reused in production).  
Digital technologies to increase waste reduction and Optimisation of use of secondary  raw materials in the 
value chain: Sensing technologies will be used for identification of heavy and contaminated plastics and target 
polymers identification. IRIS will develop a monitoring system based on the combination of HSI technology (for 
plastic identification) and LIBS technology (for heavy metals detection, bromine and phosphate detection, among 
other compounds), which will be implemented in the recycling process. The goal is to increase polymers detection 
efficiency by enabling polymeric compounds  detection and afterwards to implement separation of defective 
compounds, in order to boost recycling procedures and reduce materials to incinerator. The sorting mechanism will 
be designed and developed by ICCS, utilizing the real -time identification and c lassification provided by IRIS 
system. The categorization according to plastic flake size and the removal of defective pieces will be succeed using 
robotics arms, manipulated in real -time utilizing vision -based techniques. This sorting mechanism will enabl e 
reduction of waste, increased identification accuracy and efficiency in recovery of high-quality secondary resources. 
Data driven AI algorithm will be implemented in the existing infrastructure to enhance the existing supply chain 
software. That software , in the manufacturing execution system (MES) layer implements a recipe management 
system. The implementation of the AI algorithm will allow the plastic components producer to get understanding 
on the mistakes that originate from recycled materials or from process related mistakes  

 
25  
  
(pressure, temperature, etc.). Implementation of the AI algorithm, which will be deployed in the existing software 
used by Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
SIGIT, will allow for optimisation of the process of plastic components production from secondary raw materials. 
Through anticipation of mistakes during production process and more efficient use of the secondary raw materials 
significant increased waste reduction will be obtained and improve the quality of the goods produced with recycled 
materials. Moreover, quantification of recycled content and level of plastic degradation, as well as optimisation of 
the material composition will be allowed. Additionally, sensing technologies (near-infrared hyperspectral imaging) 
will be used to predict the particle size44 and preliminary support the algorithm.   
Standardization and Certification: EUPC will support the certification and standardization activities related to 
the plastics produced in the demonstrator. The plastics converting industry is committed to incorporate 
sustainability as a key aspect of the production process, and will further contribute in this direction with a focus on 
recycled materials and the processing needed in order to uptake their usage. Certification proposals for recycled 
plastics will be produced, as part of the activities of the demonstrator.   
KPIs  
Increase of secondary raw materials use:   >15 %  
Waste reduction:   >8 %  
GHG emissions reduction:   20 %  
Number of up -cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies of secondary raw materials 
implemented:  
 5 polymers   
By-products value increase  >15 %  
1.2.4. Synergies with other National or International Projects  
The following list describes the projects that DigInTraCE is aiming to be based upon and upscale, ensuring its 
scalability and its impact. Added knowledge is complemented by relevant research projects.  
Table 1 Links to other national or international projects.  
Relevant Objectives  Added Value in DigInTraCE  
Commercial blockchain traceability solution, UST  
Design, build and delivery of a commercial farm-to-fork 
blockchain traceability solution for Walmart, providing 
track & trace capability across multiple product lines. 
Rollout of Santander’s OnePay Fx.  
UST is a recognized market leader in blockchain 
services (Nelson Hall, 2021) with ample experience in 
commercial traceability and also blockchain payments 
and financial products (Santander Bank). UST builds on 
and combines this experience in the fields of circularity.  
TRINEFLEX, (Horizon Europe) ICCS, DGS  
Provide an end -to-end service to manage the plant 
digital lifecycle and transition to flexible and 
sustainable operation, by advanced and green data 
acquisition, big data, process analysis, model 
development and digital twins with integrated multi -
agent decision support systems.   
DGS is responsible for energy consumption data 
collection and process optimisation for the glass demo 
case. DGS will use this expertise, know -how and 
methodologies for digitalization and in process 
optimization in supply chain management (e.g. for the 
CLSC tool).  
ACCELWATER (H2020) ICCS, NTUA  
Offers a holistic food and beverage production 
framework in industries (to contribute to the reduction 
of the use of freshwater in the food and beverage 
industry resulting in a reduced and more cost -effective 
use of resources (water, raw materials, energy), lower 
waste and environmental impacts.  
NTUA is involved in protein recovery from waste and 
byproducts, and application development, also supports 
LCA of process developments as well as techno -
economic feasibility analysis. It will use knowledge for 
circular resources valorization, protein recov ery while 
ICCS will bring knowledge on novel digital monitoring 
systems for IS facilitation.   
PRO-ENRICH (H2020) CHIMAR  
 
44 Pieszczek, Ł., Daszykowski, M. Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging for polymer particle size estimation. Measurement, Vol. 186, art. no. 110201, s. 1-10.  
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2021.110201   

 
26  
  
Development of novel functional proteins and bioactive 
ingredients from rapeseed and other fruit side streams. 
CHIMAR developed bio-based adhesives for composite 
wood panels using the non -edible protein and phenolic 
fractions derived therein.  
Knowledge for circular resources valorisation and 
development of bio -based adhesives for composite 
wood panels using recovered proteins  
CORALIS (H2020) CIRCE, ICCS  
Pathways creation for resource decarbonization in 
energy intensive sector through implementation of 
viable industrial symbiosis approaches.  
CIRCE, ICCS will use knowledge for circular resources 
valorization, monitoring systems and IS data sharing 
and management.   
TagItSmart (H2020) VTT  
A Smart Tags driven service platform for enabling ecosystems of VTT’s experience in developing 
monitoring technologies for use con nected objects, VTT’s role was to develop Smart Tags and cases from 
e.g. food industry, will offer expertise for development digital identity concepts.  of functional tagging 
solutions for sensing and item level  
authentication (Smart Tags).  
BASAJAUN (H2020) TECNL  
  
Building A SustainAble Joint between rural and Urban 
Areas Through Circular and Innovative Wood 
Construction Value Chains, focusing on optimal 
utilisation of wood forest resources for construction 
value chain   
Knowledge of different wood Associated with d ocument Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022-based by -products generated and 
analysis of possible uses with value retention afterwards.  
POLYNSPIRE (H2020)  CIRCE, Dansk Standard  
Demonstrate innovative, cost-effective and sustainable 
technologies for energy and resource efficiency of 
postconsumer/industrial plastic recycling, targeting 
100% waste streams containing at least 80% of plastic 
materials.  
Knowledge, know -how and expertise for circular 
resources valorization, innovations and standardization 
in plastic based value chains and related resources.  
C.R.AB.-Composites Researc h Abruzzo (H2020) SIGIT, UVQ  
R&D of automotive market applications with 
thermoplastic and recyclable composites/ compounds 
and zero-waste hybrid processes. Focus on innovative 
products with new materials to reduce overall 
ecological footprint, using LCA/LCC, recycled 
polymers and fillers.  
Enhancing the use of recyclable composites materials in 
the supply chain towards zero-waste processes.  
1.2.5. Interdisciplinary approach  
In order to promote overall sustainability, new circular solutions for secondary materials and waste management, as 
well as value chains digitalization and traceability, have to consider many different aspects thus require the joint 
involvement of differen t scientific domains. DigInTraCE works in a strong inter -disciplinary field, as it involves 
expertise and methods from various disciplines including natural and applied disciplines such as chemistry and 
chemical engineering, physics, ICT, data science, ele ctrical and mechanical engineering together with regional and 
social sciences (psychology, sociology, economics, political science, ethics, law, business, communications, 
knowledge exchange, training and learning, governance, management). These are interwoven within the DigInTraCE 
activities and will be brought together and integrated in pursuit of the project objectives forming inter - and trans-
disciplinary conditions, used to develop innovations in different fields such as novel traceability, sensing and sorting 
techniques; data -driven optimisation and AI based algorithms for secondary raw materials; decision making 
mechanisms and LCA analysis; technologies including chemical processes for the up-cycling, reuse and upgrade of 
secondary raw materials; as well as support other activities related to e.g. standardization, business cases, exploitation 
and learning programs promoting new digital skills. DigInTraCE also uses the knowledge of to end user of the 
secondary materials thru his industrial partners, to consider the complex requirement of the specific markets in term 
standardization, norms constraints, performances. The project recognizes the difficulties of a trans -disciplinary 
collaboration (e.g. different language, terminology among different disciplines and methods of work, different levels 

 
27  
  
of scientific understanding and cognitive structures etc.)45 and adopts a proactive approach towards them by planning 
to follow the fundamentals of the Methodology in Interdisciplinary Research (MIR) framework46. Also, at WP levels, 
the consortium will employ a quality assurance process (supported in WP1) to ensure that all trans -disciplinary 
aspects are integrated in the developed solutions, thus creating a meta-knowledge about all these different disciplines, 
methods and epistemologies, and purposefully and reflectively integrate and synthesize different perspectives, to 
better understanding and contribute to the proper monitoring and modelling of the environmental processes.  
1.2.6. Integration of Social Sciences and Humanities  
In the framework of its interdisciplinary approach, DigInTraCE will combine knowledge from SSH to explore how 
to better contribute to policy making, to enhance public understanding on cumulative impacts of climate change and 
the contribution of circular economy in dealing with them, how European governments and research institutes deal 
with diverse truth claims about the adverse effects of new digital enablers and how to offer perspectives for innovation 
forms of action. There are many di fferent opportunities on how to use technologies depending on human behavior, 
needs and objectives and governance structures. DigInTraCE will study the special sectoral, social and regional needs 
and urgencies in the demo cases, the value chains and across different stakeholders upon creating the new solutions 
and the related training activities and lifelong learning programmes on digital skills. In order to boost innovations’ 
impact the training activities will be co-created and codesigned based on the fact that people can develop new ideas 
and innovations based on the new technologies. The process of co -creation would be based on the Responsible 
Research and Innovation (RRI) principles: i)anticipation increasing resilience with holistic approaches of expec ted 
social risks, gaps and  potentials of recycle  technologies and traceability ii)reflexivity and continuous re-examination 
of positions, activities and assumptions iii)inclusion giving space to currently unheard voices to mitigate concerns 
and iv)responsiveness building capacities to adapt to changing technological and societal conditions.  
1.2.7. Sex and Gender Analysis   
DigInTraCE will overcome sex and gender bias by disaggregating socioeconomic and biological differences between 
man, woman or other gender identities, contributing to a more inclusive research and innovation by integrating related 
activities inspired from gendered innovations proposed by EC 59. Project management will be engaged to gender 
issues including them in the reporting period’s reports. To overcome gaps (considering both occupational and social 
status of genders) a draft study  
  
will be performed resulting in DigInTraCE Gender Equality Analysis with potential actions, Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022as an integrated part of project  
activities. Study will be based on Gender Situation Analysis and Needs Assessment (GSANA, T1.3) to ensure 
gendersensitive project objectives, results, activities, partners assessment, management, indicators for monitoring 
and resource allocation. Project’s motivation to perform these activities are both equality and the release of special 
creativity and abilities of all genders and individuals, creating added value for research, innovation and society. 
Proportionality and balance in research: equal participation of women, men and other genders at all project levels 
will be ensured, promoted already from the early stages of the project conceptualization. All partners are encouraged 
to increase women's and other genders’ participation in activities including management, research, conceptualization, 
analysis, networking etc. to assure equal opportunities, recruitment and working arrangements. In addition, there is 
gender balance in the core project management activities and in t he principal investigator per partner. All partners 
provide equal opportunities on employment and participation in research multinational projects, with special care to 
contributing lessening the disparities being a result of COVID -19 pandemic 47 (e.g. off ering flexible working 
schedules to parents of all genders according to their special needs). Scientific and Linguistic bias: Addressing in 
texts and material (e.g., personas) written in English will follow gender-neutral language48, ensuring data, algorithms, 
digital tools, technologies and visuals are free of gender bias and stereotypes. In all studies and surveys, gender 
dimension will be considered. Focus groups dedicated to diversity and gender issues will be included in co-creation 
activities. Collection of gender statistics employing AI and use of related metadata is also encouraged to identify 
challenges and include in policy-making, internal monitoring and to better understand gender-specific needs, issues 
and gaps. Annotating source data for sex and gender will be ensured. Special biological and other factors limiting or 
exposing to special dangers and gender-specific risk (e.g. specific professions and activities) will considered. Gender 
 
45 MacLeod, M. What makes interdisciplinarity difficult? (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1236-4   
46 Tobi, H., Kampen, J.K. Research design: the methodology for interdisciplinary research framework. (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0513-8  
59European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, (2013) Gendered innovations: how gender analysis contributes to research: report of 
the expert group 'Innovation through gender'. Publications Office. DOI:10.2777/11868  
47 European Parliament News, Understanding Covid-19's impact on women (infographics), (2021)  
48 Papadimoulis D., GENDER-NEUTRAL LANGUAGE in the European Parliament, (2018)   

 
28  
  
participation and real influence will be studied upon the ope ration and the decision -making in the governance 
structures of DigInTraCE as well as in the variety of entities and sectors involved. Equal projects’ results: 
DigInTraCE ensures that new solutions usage (technologies, business models, processes, digital tools etc.), access to 
resources and services and the related trainings, foster the involvement of women and other gender identities scientists 
and engineers in the future landscape. Equal dissemination:  Dissemination (quotations, visibility in publications  
and patents), communication in general public though releases and press, industry and business stakeholders, policy 
recommendations and institutional regulations, business and project’s results should be addressed to all genders 
equally and adjusted to their needs. Connection with established gender activities and expertise: DigInTraCE will 
seek connection with EU organizations and institutes, academia studying gender, national gender equality bodies etc. 
for knowledge sharing, participation in activities and provision of data and tracking in EU gender statistic database49, 
policy-making or studies. Εxisting tools will be considered to ensure the integration of gender analysis into the project 
such as gender specific questionnaires, checklists (i.e.  Yellow  Window, IGAR tool, Eige) guidelines and research 
methodologies. Gender equality promoting: project is rooted in industry environment, so it focuses on gender 
equality to be oriented on the participating partners making difference within their workspaces. In line with this and 
to assure full integration of the gender dimension, a dedicated session will be shared in each demo site, where general 
topic knowledge, all necessary information and guidelines (incl. gender-neutral language guidance) related to project 
will be held for the partners and possibly other participants at the beginning of the project. Partners will be encouraged 
and supported to implement their own gender equality plans, based on the knowledge gained during the project.  
1.2.8. Open science actions  
DigInTraCE will establish open science principles as an integral part of its methodology and its management, fully 
aligned with the ambition of the European Open Science Cloud as a trusted environment for hosting and processing 
research data to support EU science in its global leading role; aligned to Open Innovation 2.0 paradigm and supporting 
the principle 'as open as possible’ in the goals of the Open Science Policy under Horizon Europe. Appropriate open 
science practices will be implemented supported by WP1 in terms of coordination, monitoring and management and 
WP7 included in dissemination, communication replication, learning activities etc. Specifically, the contributions are 
expected to be:  
Research output management and impact to the industry:  DigInTraCE research outputs will be made available to 
dedicated target groups aiming to allow the community to leverage from the project results and ensure replicability.  
Research Outputs  Target Group  Means of management and Impact to 
the industry  
Technological and Digital 
Innovations, Traceability  
Industry and businesses, SMEs, 
Scientific and research community, 
industrial, sectoral, recycle, product and 
material associations (e.g. Orgalim, EIT 
RawMaterials, Circular Plastics  
Alliance, EUPC and members)   
The communication and dissemination 
plan, (D1.2) will be made available to the 
public.  A public version is to be produced 
even for deliverables that contain sensitive 
content.    
Standardization and  
certification results,   
Policy Recommendations  
Industry, businesses, European and 
international associations and 
organizations (e.g., SPIRE, P4P, DGs, 
SPI, Orgalim, EIT RawMaterials, 
Circular Plastics Alliance, European 
Plastic  
The communication and dissemination 
plan, the open science handbook and the 
data management plan along with WP1 
and WP7 will ensure that related results 
reach the target group on time and  
  
 Convertors association, other recycle, 
materials associations, CEN & CENELEC, 
National  
Standardization Bodies,  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 
10/11/2022according to the prescribed procedure.   
Technologies, 
innovations, other 
resources (education, 
training materials etc.)  
SPIRE stakeholders (through the beta 
version of search Outputs from SPIRE 
Projects platform)  
Support the effort of the SPIRE and P4P 
community to document the results of 
related projects   
 
49 European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE), Gender Statistics Database  

 
29  
  
Early and open sharing of research results and data: DigInTraCE aims to provide 4 case studies publications in Open 
Research Europe, one for each of the value chains demonstrated. The first versions will be published upon completion 
of development phase (M24, WP6) and continuously updated till the end of project.  
Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: The strong commitment for providing standardization 
deliverables of secondary materials, the harmonisation of data as well as the decentralized based digital activities 
involving and coordinating different actors of the value chains with different information, will ensure that research 
outputs follow common standards and support mainstream and widespread reporting and documentation 
methodologies.    
Providing open access to research outputs and Participation in open peer-review: DigInTraCE consortium partners 
are committed to use the Open Research Europe scholarly fully open access publishing service for Horizon Europe 
to enable rapid publication times and publication outputs that support research integrity, reproducibility, transparency 
and enable open science practices. The project has dedicated part of its budget to cover the fees associated with open-
access publication to facilitate dissemination and reuse of the project’s results. Project participants, for various 
reasons, may need to submit articles to journals (or proceedings) that only offer a lower level of open access, requiring 
either parallel publication or an embargo period. In this case, Green Open Access and Gold Open Access will be 
chosen depending on each publication. For green open access, deve lopers will deposit the final peer -reviewed 
manuscript in a public repository of their choice, ensuring open access to the publication within the embargo period 
of six-months maximum.  
1.2.9. Data management and research outputs  
DigInTraCE is expected to collect data in the scope of the project activities and the value chains to assess the 
technologies and effectiveness of the proposed solutions in real life conditions of the supply chains. All the data made 
available directly by the partners involved or research results like models, algorithms, scripts, code and analysis will 
be aggregated and anonymized according to their desired visibility and security level defined. As for experimental 
measurements and data sets (raw, processed , logs etc.) regarding the materials and the products during the real 
traceability demonstration of the value chains, will be anonymized, safe and secured in the blockchain DigInTraCE 
platform. The exact protocols and data types will be defined according t o the specific needs. The necessity of 
publishing all the data generated in the project, if it does not affect exploitation of results or competitiveness, is 
aligned with ethic issues and protects the privacy of data. This, aligned with Open science, DigIn TraCE will make 
data not only “as open as possible: but also “as closed as necessary” to encourage collaboration across disciplines for 
solving today’s complex societal challenges. So, with respect in confidentiality, most of research data generated by 
the project will be made open and will be offered to the Open Research Data Pilot (Open AIRE). DigInTraCE will 
generate research outputs and data which will be managed in line with the FAIR principles. Data and research results 
will be Findable: with open science research described, proper identifiers e.g. DOIs and standards used; Accessible: 
integrated to databases -created by initiatives such as these in 1.2.8- and continuously expanding; Interoperable and 
Reusable: standardized, harmonised using common vocabularies, open standards and sharing principles to be easily 
adjusted and used in further research in several fields. Open science guidelines and exact data management plan will 
be created by M6 as parts of D1.1, D1.2 respectively. The data within project’s work space will be maintained after 
the conclusion of the project for at least 2 years, so that the knowledge management will abide by the principles of 
discoverability, accessibility, intelligibility and availability also beyond the end of the project. An indicative list of 
created data and research outputs and their relation to FAIR management is provided hereafter:  
Data/Research Output  Size  Findability  Accessibility  Interoperability  Reusability  Curation  
Case Study 
publications for each 
Value Chain (one per 
demo case)  
4   
Publications  
OpenResearch  
Europe  
OpenAccess  n/a  n/a  NTUA  
Case  studies  per  
Technology  
10 Case OpenResearch  Studies 
Europe  
published  
TDB  Per  
Technology  
n/a  n/a  NTUA, 
UST  
Data sets of 
monitoring of 
parameters at the 
pilots  
*per Pilot  Zenodo for 
sample. Full 
dataset upon  
request  
Not disclosed 
Anonymized  
data  
JSON-LD files   Under 
Licence  
IRIS  
 
30  
  
Optimisation 
algorithms for wood 
and plastics   
1 algorithm  Zenodo  OpenAccess  n/a  OpenData  ICCS,  
TECNL,  
UVQ, DGS  
1.2.10. The “Do not harm Principle”      
DigInTraCE will ensure that it is fully compliant with the Do No Significant Harm (DNSH) Principle since its 
activities as well as the expected life cycle impact of the innovations at a commercialization stage, substantially 
contribute in a positive way and/or do not significantly harm any of the six environmental objectives set out in Art. 
9 and 17 of the EU Sustainable Finance Taxonomy Regulation (EU) 2020/852. DigInTraCE will apply a lifeAssociated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022-cycle oriented approach (validated through the  
utilization of relevant LCA tool when possible) to ensure that proposed solutions are sustainable and consisting of 3 
steps: i) Identification of actual and potential adverse impacts during the life cycle of the project activities ii) 
Prevention or mitigation of adverse impacts iii) Accounting for how adverse impacts are addressed by tracking 
performance and communicating results. This also applies for the proposed ICT technologies which will be validated 
with Green ICT principles. Especially, an LCA analysis is to be performed for energy intensive technologies like 
blockchain. DigInTraCE activities are expected to have a direct positive impact to the environmental objectives 
defined: Climate Change Mitigation by reducing GHG emissions (use Recommendation 2013/179/EU or ETSI ES 
203 199 63, ISO 14067:2018 or ISO 14064 -2:2019 to calculate lifecycle GHG and net emissions), to Pollution 
prevention and control through waste reduction and identifying harmless substances and contaminants in each pilot, 
to Transition to Circular Economy through the establishment of symbiotic and circular flows within same or different 
industries for materials and wastes whereas is not expected any negative impact to the sustainable use and protection 
of water and marine resources , protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems and  the Climate Change 
adaptation.  
2. Impact   
2.1. Pathways towards Impacts   
In this section, an overview is provided on how the DigInTraCE results generate Outcomes and Wider Impacts. A 
summary of project results in relation to research outputs and target groups in presented in Table 2. Following target 
groups have been identified for the DigInTraCE: I.P4P stakeholders, II. Industrial stakeholders (including other than 
P4P) III. Partnerships, Associations, Initiatives IV. Policy makers and financing institutions V. Academia and 
research community and VI. Citizens and general public.   
Table 2 Results and their research outputs in relation to relevant objectives and demonstrator, at which they are validated and target groups.  
Results, Outcome and Lead Partner   Partner  Research outputs  Obj  Demo  Group  
 Platform and Services    
Decentralized Traceability Platform   UST  Publ.(methodology,  results, 
All agg. Data)   
All  I-II,V  
Dynamically updated DPP  ICCS  Publ.(methodology, 
 results, agg. Data)   
All  All  I-II,V  
Online LCA computation tool based on Ex-Ante LCA  
 CIRCE  
Algorithms, aggregated 
data  
1,5,6  All  I-II,V  
Recycled content identification, certification scheme  
 CTB  
Certification scheme  2,5,6  All  I-VI  
Algorithms and Prototypes     
AI based wood by products optimization algorithms  CHIMAR/Algorithms, aggregated 
data  
ICCS  
1,5,6  GR  I-II,V  
CLSC management toolkit optimization plastic recycling DGS Algorithms, aggregated 
data  
1,5,6  IT  I-II,V  
Machine vision-based wood re-design toolkit   TECNL  Algorithms, aggregate data  1,5,6  ES  I-II,V  
Smart tags for real time sensing   VTT  Prototype  1,4,5,6  GR, BE   I-II,V  
Novel spectroscopy techniques and algorithms for plastic IRIS/ ICCS Prototype, 
Algorithms waste and wood by-products   
1,3,5,6  IT,GR, 
ES   
I-II,V  

 
31  
  
Automated Plastic Sorting system   IRIS/ ICCS Prototype, Algorithms  1,3,5,6  IT  I-II,V  
Automated Wood Sorting system  ICCS  Prototype, Algorithms  1,3,5,6  GR, ES  I-II,V  
Optimal control and AI package for recycled plastic UVQ  Algorithms, aggregated 
data  
1,5,6  IT  I-II,V  
Protein recovery chemical processes   NTUA  Prototype,  Process, 1,5,6  
publications  
GR  I-II,V  
Bio-based adhesives process engineering   CHIMAR  Prototype,  Process, 1,5,6  
publications  
GR  I-II,V  
  
2.1.1. Scientific, Economic/Technological, Societal Outcomes of DigInTraCE  
Topic Outcome 1: Demonstrate an increase in the waste reduction by application of digital technologies   
DigInTraCE develops a number of digital technologies, and explores and verifies how their application and 
employment contributes comprehensively to a significant reduction of waste along the value chains in crucial 
sectors of process industries such as Pulp & Paper (wood value chain) and Chemicals (plastics and textiles). A Set 
of demo-specific sensing and sorting technologies will be applied on the by-products and wastes transported via 
conveyor belts, thus ensuring maximum uptake of potentially exploitable secondary materials and directly 
contributing to the minimisation of generated waste and overall waste reduction, an activity with associated 
environmental, social and economic impact. Moreover, data-driven solutions, such as case-specific algorithms, 
process and recipes optimisation, are expected to provide increased productivity and process efficiency, ultimately 
leading to mitigation of energy demands, decline of the produced residual side streams via effective classification 
and distribution of secondary plastics and wood residues for the most  
  
63 Final draft ETSI ES 203 199 V1.3.0 (2014-12)  
 
relevant uses based on their characteristics. The horizontal traceability techn Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 
10/11/2022ologies to be applied across all demos, including the decentralized traceability platform based on  
blockchain technology is expected to assure extended use of the secondary materials across own and other industries, 
thus also contributing to  creation of new knowledge across and within disciplines. Additionally, Smart Tag 
technology for real time sensing will be applied i n Greek demonstrator, expanding traceability of products and 
materials related to storage and transportation conditions, which indicates potential hot spots to be assessed for waste 
reduction. An online LCA computation tool that enables the evaluation of products’ environmental footprint will be 
developed and integrated in the overall platform, in order to feed the dynamically updated DPP with environmental 
information, thus raising consumer awareness related to “green choices”. Usage of such emerging techn ologies in 
business level as well is envisioned to enable the advent of novel products, services and circular business models to 
the market. Moreover, for exhaustive waste reduction, the whole supply chain shall be examined, therefore a CLSC 
management toolkit for optimization of plastic recycling will be designed and developed, as a decision making tool 
utilising AI algorithms, supporting the overall decrease of generated waste in the supply chain. Altogether, the 
decentralized traceability platform integrating all the  transparent information systems will facilitate closing the 
loops and therefore significantly strengthen the efforts to increase the waste reduction in line with EU long term goals, 
as described in CEAP, GD and SPI.  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI 1.1: Number of active users in the platform  100  
KPI 1.2: Possibility to handle different type of users with access rights to the DPP  At least 10 user 
types  
KPI 1.3: Integrated supply chain management between virgin/secondary raw materials and 
BOMs contributing to the increase of secondary raw materials usage  By 10 %  
KPI 1.4: Online LCA integrated in the platform and providing an output within seconds   <20 seconds  
KPI 1.5: Percentage increase of secondary raw materials in new BOMs and recipes developed   By 10 %  
KPI 1.6: Increase the application of wood by-products in higher-value flows   at least 30%  
KPI 1.7 Min. number of batches monitored using SmartTags  1000  
KPI 1.8 Number of parameters (temperature, humidity etc.)  monitored by SmartTags  At least 2  

 
32  
  
KPI 1.9 Real time identification of materials parameters not covered with conventional 
techniques   
at least 5 parameters  
KPI 1.10 Classification accuracy (wood, plastic)  bigger than 93 %  
KPI 1.11 Sorting accuracy (wood, plastic)  min. 90 %  
KPI 1.12 Reduce of total waste in the plastic moulding process   20% reduction  
Target Groups  Scale  Significance  
ALL  4 Demonstrators   20% Waste 
reduction 
Topic Outcome 2: Demonstrate optimisation of use of secondary raw materials in the value chains  
Optimisation of the use of secondary raw materials in DigInTraCE has been approached in an extensive way by 
deploying digital technologies to enhance their chemical upgrade. At product and process level, optimisation in 
order to efficiently valorise the materials and consume less energy, by applying novel digital techno logies (e.g. 
data driven optimisation, sensing and sorting mechanisms) and chemical innovations for upcycling (e.g. protein 
recovery from rapeseed cake for the development of bio -based resins) is to be employed. A set of demo -specific 
sensing and sorting technologies will be applied on the materials transported via conveyor belts to ensure their 
suitability to particular valorisation routes and contribute directly on the optimisation of secondary materials, while 
also unlock economic opportunities. Contributions to specific scientific advances are expected to be enhanced by 
relevant project’s results. In particular, the secondary resources optimisation of use approaches will be 
demonstrated within the Pulp & Paper and Plastics sectors. Recipes will be optimi sed based on the properties, 
quality and quantity of the secondary materials, an activity supporting the design and development of added value 
end products. As a part of this data -driven recipe optimization, investigation for correlating reused secondary 
materials properties with quality of the final product will be performed, in order to determine the optimal use of 
by-products. The horizontal use of DPPs offers a possibility to examine how transparency through digital 
traceability may assist, not only the  improvement of use of the specific secondary materials, but also the 
reinforcement and optimisation of methodologies for tracking materials and products across and within different 
value chains. The expected outcome is to create new knowledge, new procedures and services, as well as to build 
on and contribute to standards’ setting efforts regarding secondary materials. Finally, the dynamic LCA analysis 
tool as well as the AI -based CLSC facilitate the identification of possible opportunities for by -products 
optimisation of use and are designed in such manner in order to boost decision -making procedures for relevant 
stakeholders.  
Expected Outcomes KPIs  Target  
KPI 2.1: Number of closed loops within the analyzed and participating value chain  10  
KPI 2.2: Number of cross-sectoral collaborations achieved between the participating entities   5  
KPI 2.3: Number of real time parameters (data types) integrated in the DPP  10  
KPI 2.4: Number of ex ANTE LCA Models developed for the online LCA tool and validated    At least 20  
KPI 2.5: Number of certification schemes (or methodologies) based on the markers for the 
recycled content  
at least 1  
KPI 2.6: Reduce the cost of secondary plastic identification and certification with a new 
methodology  
20% cost reduction  
 
KPI 2.7 Number of optimized recipes for pulp and paper sector   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 at least 2  
KPI 2.8 Increase in recycled plastic use for moulding  20% increase  
KPI 2.9 Number of sustainable recovery technologies for proteins validated at TRL 5  3  
KPI 2.10 Protein extraction yield  above 40%  
KPI 2.11 Increase in the phenol substitution level in adhesives  up to 40 %  
Target Groups  Scale  Significance  
ALL  4 Demonstrators  50% Increased use of secondary 
materials   
2.1.2. Wider Impacts  
Resilient, sustainable, and secure (critical) raw materials value chains for EU industrial ecosystems, in support of 
the twin green and digital transformation  

 
33  
  
The DigInTraCE solutions are demonstrated in 4 different EU industrial ecosystems of Greece, Spain, Belgium and 
Italy. DigInTraCE is aiming to establish digital traceability on holistically optimized circular and low emission 
value chains operating at TRL6 at the end of the project and reaching TRL9 by 2030 through continuous research 
and innovation. DigInTraCE activities will contribute to the twin, green and digital transition by offering novel 
technologies automated by facilitating access to composition and origin of data (dynamically updated DPP, 
decentralized traceability platform, smart tags) operating on low waste an d emissions value chains optimized by 
means of technologies (automated sorting systems, AI algorithms, CLSC and LCA tools, etc.)  and chemical 
upgrade (bio-based adhesives, protein recovery, etc.). Innovative products and technologies exploitation strategies, 
business cases, innovative financial solutions for circular economy, educational services for employees based on 
co-designed resources and certification and standardization schemes of secondary raw materials, novel products 
and technologies, that will be integrated into digital tools will be a coherent part of DigInTraCE activities. Proposed 
solutions are in line with GD, and CEAP contributing to resilient, sustainable and secure value chains of pulp and 
paper and plastics and chemicals sectors. Both sectors are approached in the context of complete value chains and 
demonstrated in different parts of Europe to obtain possibly most complete picture per value chain/demonstrator to 
gain full understanding of all the regional and sectoral specificities. That approach will assure wider impact through 
smooth replication and transferability to other sectors with priority of those highlighted in P4P roadmap.  
New sustainable-by-design materials with enhanced functionalities and applications in a wide range of industrial 
processes and consumer products.  
On the material design level DigInTraCE will develop recipe optimizing algorithms recipe’s optimisation based on 
material properties together with more sustainable use of by -products will lead to products and materials with 
upgraded functionalities and improved applications. The DigInTraCE materials and products and related processes 
will be designed with the aim to substitute existing ones and to be used long beyond the project duration at the pilot 
sites, but also to be replicated and transferred to other sites, value chains and sectors (with P4P sectors prioritized) 
. The issue of contamination will be also addressed by employing sensing technologies, that will assure that materials 
are pollutant and contamination free with the composition information available in the dynamically updated DPPs 
and tracing technologies. Particular wider impact of the project is especially expressed  by the contribution to 
standardization and certification of the materials integrated in the digital tools and through setting sustainability 
criteria and benchmarks.  
Leadership in producing materials that provide solutions for clean, toxic/pollutant free environment, decarbonizing 
industry, and safeguarding civil infrastructures.  
DigInTraCE method to material tracing using digital tools in combination with novel sensing and sorting techniques 
offers all-level approach to clean, toxic/pollutant free environment and at the same time contributing to 
reduction of GHG emissions though enhanced use of secondary raw materials (and therefore waste reduction). 
Starting from substitution of toxic and petroleum-derived components followed by contamination detection (sensing 
technologies) through enhanced control facilitated by availability of continuously updated information (DPPs) and 
finally by assuring safety through standardization and certification, DigInTraCE will offer safe solutions available 
beyond project duration. Leadership will be assured through cross -disciplinary cooperation of experts of different 
fields to obtain toxic free material cycles supported by transparent information system. Networks of experts created 
as a part of DigInTraCE activities, supported by business cases, innovative financial solutions and educational 
services for employees and certification and standardization schemes of secondary raw materials , novel products 
and technologies are offered to assure long-term leadership.    
Leadership in circular economy that strengthens cross-sectorial cooperation along the value chain and enable SMEs 
to transform their activities and business models.  
The fundamental aspect of circularity is efficient cooperation of actors to assure that waste of one process becomes 
resource of the other. In those settings the availability and access to reliable information is crucial for efficient cross-
sectoral cooperation and overall waste reduction. On the other hand, digitalisation and digital technologies, the CE 
enablers, have the potential to facilitate greatly cross-sectoral collaboration, offering ways to exchange information 
and data in efficient and secure way. In line with that, DigInTraCE provides advanced transparent information 
system with central point DPP, that contains information about material’s characterization, quality, categorization, 
composition and history supported by live update mechanism and standardization and certification schemes , 
that assure impact maximization. The system is supported by access control to assure that the thin line between 
 
34  
  
information accessibility and confidentiality is not crossed. In the long run obtaining DPPs for the value chains of 
crucial process sectors, expanded by replication activities will be the  
significant contribution to the leadership in CE. Special focus of DigInTraCE on cross Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022-sectoral collaboration an important aspect of DigInTraCE demos, with the aim to establish and 
further expand the collaborations between actors from different industries. This will lead to wider impact in a form of 
business models with new economic opportunities addressing the needs of all business partners with special attention 
to SMEs. Special facilitating func tion will be offered by smart contracts, of special interest for SMEs trying to find 
solutions for novel circular economy settings.  
Increased adoption of key digital and enabling technologies in industrial value chains and strategic sectors, paying 
particular attention to SMEs and start-ups.  
DigInTraCE focuses on industrial sectors, for which digital treatability importance has been highlighted by P4P 
roadmap. To assure increased adoption of key digital and enabling technologies and to be in line with EU digital 
compass to empower citizens and businesses for prosperous digital future DigInTraCE will undertake a number of 
high-level educational activities and provide financial services especially suitable for circular economy context. In 
the wider sense those DigInTraCE activities linked to replication and  exploitation activities will contribute to 
increased adoption of novel technologies and enhancement of the digital skills of workforce and citizens. As a result, 
DigInTraCE will play an active role in the successful digital transformation in Europe by 2030, as proposed in the 
Communication ‘Digital Compass: The European Way for the Digital Decade’. Also, in relation to that document, 
preliminary business innovation plan, cost -benefit analysis, financial plans and cost revenue models will also 
contribute to increased adoption of the technologies especially by SMEs and start-ups.  
Significance: DigInTraCE will establish digital traceability and upgrades on circular and low emission value chains 
at TRL6 at the end of the project and TRL9 by 2030  
Overall, significance of DigInTraCE to its wider impacts can be related to 3 streams of actions of EU’s digital 
strategy 1) creating technology for people (societal impact), 2) contributing to fair and competitive digital economy 
(economic impact) and 3) e nabling sustainable, open society (environmental, scientific impact). Societal: 
DigInTraCE aims at contributing to successful digital transformation in Europe by 2030. It is expected that 
DigInTraCE educational services (including co -designed materials ava ilable beyond the project) will reach over 
1000 users by 2030, contributing to the European Commission targets in the European skills agenda and the digital 
education action plan, like the one to to ensure 70% of adults having basic digital skills by 2025.  It is expected that 
DigInTraCE standardization deliverables will reach stakeholders in all EU and EFTA countries (measured in 
number of NSBs that have implemented the standard deliverables nationally), while DigInTraCE decentralized 
traceability platform is expected to reach 1000 registered users. DigInTraCE services will contribute to long term 
impacts on the society as described in GD and CEAP. Environmental: DigInTraCE will provide crucial digital 
technologies, having direct impact on the waste and emi ssions reduction (contribution to overall potential of 
emissions reduction of 7 times and reduce global emissions by 15 %50), and therefore contributing to EU becoming 
climate neutral by 2050, as set by EGD. At least 5 tracing technologies and 3 sorting technologies, which will reach 
TRL 9 by 2030 and will expand to at least 5 additional sectors of P4P. DigInTraCE solutions will contribute to 
increase in the decision-making capacity towards improved use of secondary raw materials. Economic: DigInTraCE 
will provide solutions that facilitate functioning of companies (especially SMEs) throughout the circular transition 
by providing solutions matching new economic landscape. DigInTraCE through its dissemination and exploitation 
activities will contribute to the following elements of the level of ambition set by the Digital Compass i) 75 % of 
European enterprises have engaged in cloud computing services, big data and AI, ii) 90 % of European SMEs reach 
the basic level of digital intensity. Scientific: DigInTraCE findings (including research outputs on 5 services and 9 
 
50 European Union, 2020, “Supporting the Green Transition. Shaping Europe’s Digital Future”.  

 
35  
  
prototypes) will be available to the community for further research and all consortium members are dedicated to 
follow up actions for circular value chains.  
2.1.3. Potential Barriers and Mitigation Measures  
Technology and process barriers  
Managing the complexity of value chains, products, materials, substances and different technologies and 
innovation is a great challenge. The traceability of the secondary materials, should be examined sector wise and 
requires interoperability and related s oftware/hardware infrastructures. Also, individual barriers related to 
DigInTraCE technologies and processes for recycle, reuse and upgrade of materials are possible to appear during 
research activities.  
Mitigation measures: DigInTraCE intends to involve all the actors of supply chain, from suppliers of primary 
materials to producers and recyclers, to achieve a coherent and holistic solution, supported by proper managerial 
and coordination structures and procedures. An effort was made up on proposal to assess current trends using 
different technical and business criteria to ensure a huge potential for the selected technologies and innovations. 
All needs, technical capacities and knowhow of companies across supply chains will be combined, as well as the 
diversity of profile of supply chain actors should be taken into account from the very beginning of the development 
to assure mitigation of possible technology and process barriers. The high scientific and technical expertise and 
experience of the consortium is expected to contribute to the mitigation of the possible barriers in line with general 
sustainability, resilience, circular economy and DNSH principles.  
Data and information related barriers  
  
Difficulty on access and acquisition of reliable, relevant and standardized data (even if comprehensive product 
information Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 is already available); competition, IPR, security concerns, 
lack of data transparency and trust between stakeholders along value chains, finding the balance between sharing and 
securing information; are important barriers for data and information exchange along the supply chain thus for the 
update of digitalization and the traceability in the supply chains.   
Mitigation measures: Approaches for data and standards included in the dynamically updated DPP will be fully 
defined, based on existing product information systems/regulations/initiatives on technological and content level, 
from multiple sources along the value chain. This multidimensional information flow will ensure data availability. 
Blockchain Decentralized traceability platform will ensure data reliability, integrity, security, proper management 
and safety of confide ntial information, accessible accordingly to different user groups. Also, DigInTraCE will 
ensure IPR Protection and will focus business cases promoting the cooperation toward sustainability, and 
degrading competitive culture.  
Public Acceptance and Increased prices of recycled materials   

 
36  
  
Potential barriers related to public acceptance of novel technologies and methodologies might be related to lack of 
awareness, lack of digital skills, scepticism on using recycled materials and to increased prices of the recycled 
materials. Industry acceptance might be also affected by the feedstock availability and price stability, as well as 
occurrence of competing materials. Potential high costs for collection, sensing, sorting, upgrade and recycling 
processes and infrastructure of multiple technologies compilation might affect the final price of products posing a 
barrier of wider implementation of project’s solutions.   
Mitigation measures: Dissemination and communication activities will ensure the promotion of the benefits, 
results, best practice and p erformances obtained, providing training, educational activities and awareness and 
engagement raising though their co -creation. Means such as tutorials, webinars, workshops, use of specialized 
social media (i.e. Xing, LinkedIn) or tools will be explored. P roject will aim to engage industry community by 
interacting and networking with industry and workers associations. All those activities will contribute to increase 
in public acceptance of the DigInTraCe solutions. It is expected that high level of transpar ency provided by the 
DPPs will help mitigate the remaining barriers related to lack of awareness and scepticism of end users. Mitigation 
of possible poor acceptance will be further supported by DigInTraCE standardization system as a tool for 
dissemination of the project results and interaction with the market stakeholders. AI and Blockchain 
standardization activities are expected to facilitate the launch of the new solutions to the market. Standardization 
as transparent and formal process has the potential to enhance the trust building and to act as a catalyst. The 
mitigation measures related to industrial acceptance (e.g. feedstock availability) in DigInTraCE are focused on the 
establishment of well -functioning cross sectoral collaborations and closing the loops. DigInTraCE implements 
enhanced financial services (including smart contracts) and will generate strategies against secondary raw material 
price fluctuation possibility facilitating mitigation of  the risk related to increased price of recycled mater ials. 
Market needs will be analysed in terms of pricing decision support. Additionally, services will be provided 
allowing visualization of historic prices and trends on secondary and virgin material prices supported by prediction, 
fluctuation risk assessm ent/protection (hedging) services. Financial services in combination with DPPs 
transparency, are the mitigation measures to barriers arising from possible occurrence of competing materials, 
through increasing the credibility of DigInTraCE materials.   
Legal and institutional barriers  
DigInTraCE involves different activities and sectors related to secondary materials, wastes, chemical and plastics, 
wood and pulp & paper, digitalization, traceability, data etc. As a result, there are multiple and overla pping 
regulations that have to be taken into consideration. Those regulations might often be conflicting, inconsistent or 
unclear. Additionally, in some cases, national strategies might not be aligned with the relevant European 
documents, contributing with different materials classifications or waste management institutional obligations (e.g. 
local mandatory management). Also, the evolution of EU standards and regulations is expected to be more 
restrictive and setting highly demanding implementation targets . (e.g. on quality or in the presence of unknown 
dangerous substances that are no longer allowed). All these may cause obstacles to adopt innovations and best 
practices or obtain approvals for project activities.  
Mitigation measures: DigInTraCE will collect, analyse, follow and plan its actions accordingly with all the related 
EU strategies already referred and regulations (e.g. waste framework directive 2008/98/EC, Regulation (EC) No 
1013/2006 of end -of-waste criteria, Ecodesign Directive 2009/125/EC, GD PR, IRP protection, Cybersecurity 
directives 2016/1148/EC, 2019/881/EC etc.), national laws and regional/local particular practices and institutions’ 
regulations. DigInTraCE consortium consists of multi-disciplinary group of partners including partners with digital 
and industrial expertise, standardization and certification bodies, all with wide experience and knowledge on the 
above practices and regulations that will ensure the required effort. Finally, project will aim to engage member 
States representatives involved at local level to properly address the challenges by interacting and networking with 
the relevant ministries and associations, regional and local authorities assuring the mitigation of legal and 
institutional barriers.  
2.2. Measures to maximize impact   
2.2.1. Dissemination, exploitation, and communication   
2.2.1.1. DigInTraCE Dissemination Strategy  
While focused on Awareness, Interest, Desire and Action (AIDA) activities, the project's dissemination measures 
will follow a multi -actor, multi-step and multi -channel approach. Table 3 identifies the target audiences, specific 
dissemination objectives and target values, tailored to the needs and profile of each target audience.  
 
37  
  
Table 3 Dissemination Plan – Measures, Target Audience and Target Values   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
Scientific 
Publications  
Key Decision Influencers, Decision-making Actors, National Ministries of Energy, Industrial 
Associations, Environmental Agencies, Academia and Researchers, relevant Consortia.   
Scientific Conferences (examples): International Conference on Distributed Ledger Technology and Blockchain, 
Recycling Congress; 3rd International Conference on Waste Recycling and Management, International Conference 
on Clothing Sustainability and Textile Processing , International Conference on Textile Exchange Sustainability , 
International Conference on Wood Biology and Wood Technology, etc.   
Peer-Review Open-access Journals (preselected): Digital Communications and Networks, Recycling, Resources 
conservation and recycling , Journal of Materials Processing Technology , Polymer, Composites Science and  
Technology, Sustainability, Waste management, Wood science and technology  
Target Values: Publishing in Peer-reviewed Journals: > 15; Presenting in Scientific Conferences > 20.   
Technical 
Publications  
European Commission Relevant Offices, European Environment Agency, Public and Private 
Actors.   
DigInTraCE will publish and contribute to technical blog posts, articles, position/white papers, catalogues, books 
or any other reference from technology providers (bottom -up), as well as references related to the application 
scenarios domains under consideration. Excellent examples of this kind of contribution are the upcoming editions 
of Institute of Environment and Development Blog  and SPIRE database of the outputs from projects of SPIRE 
portfolio.  
Target Values: Publishing Technical Publications: >25; Participation in Industrial Exhibitions with Booths: > 10.   
Source Code 
Repository  
Ecosystem of Open-Source Developers, Incubators, Associations and Digital Innovation 
Hubs, Data Spaces for smart agriculture, ICT SMEs, Researchers, relevant Consortia.  
Encouraging a transparent and open-source culture, DigInTraCE will make accessible its software repositories 
through well-known distributed source code platforms. Well-established repositories are GitHub and Bitbucket.  
Target Values: Number of Publicly Available Deliverables: 20; Source code: publish to >2 different repositories.   
Q&A Platform  Public Authorities, Associations, Open-source Developers, NGOs, SMEs, relevant Hubs.  
Conversations about the project repository would be concentrated in reference sites. The selected Q&A platform 
developed as a part of project website will be the Stack Overflow, the largest, most trusted online community for 
developers to learn and share knowledge.  
Target Values: No. of Scientific Conversations to Participate/Contribute: > 25.   
Workshops and 
Trainings  
Industrial organizations, SPIRE Associations, Authorities, Potential Investors, Funding 
Organisations, ICT SMEs, Academia.    
Special focus will be given to co -design of training activities and lifelong learning programmes to assure that 
DigInTraCE contributes to establishing digitally skilled population as foreseen by task 7.2.   
Target Values: Technical Workshops: >10 in 7 different countries; Online Training Tutorials: >8; Webinars: >12.   
Joint Activities 
with relevant  
Initiatives  
All Stakeholders with special focus on Advanced Manufacturing, , Policy- and 
Decisionmaking Actors, Key Environmental Influencing Organisations, relevant Public 
Bodies.   
To further amplify and maximise the impact and outreach of the project’s results and  to feed them into related 
international work streams, joint dissemination activities will be contracted. DigInTraCE will explore synergies 
with other projects and initiatives and organize/participate in events promoting knowledge exchange as described 
in T7.4  
Target Values: Symposiums/ Fairs to Participate: >9; Banners in each event: 3; Procures to be Distributed: >300.   
Standards and 
Policy 
Contribution 
Standards Developing Organisations, Certification Committees, Open-Source Communities,  
Policy Makers, Relevant Public Bodies, Local Agencies.  
DigInTraCE will support secondary material, AI and blockchain standardization. Collaboration with relevant 
standardization Technical Committee (s) will be established to assure that integration into current and future 
standardization developments. DigInTraCE contribution will be included in the new or revised standards through 
one of following channels i) providing information to standardization Technical Committees, ii) mutual knowledge 
sharing iii) technical proposals, iv) promoting the elaboration of new standard documents depending on the maturity 

 
38  
  
of specific solution as foreseen by T7.1 and will be available for use by industry. Two policy briefs, each for 
DigInTraCE sector of analysis (pulp and paper, chemicals and plastics) will be developed as a part of T7.4.  
Target Values: Standards Contributions (new or revised): >5; Policy Briefs: >2  
2.2.2. DigInTraCE Communication Strategy  
DigInTraCE’s communication strategy is built upon the Promotion Mix, the 4th element of the Marketing Mix, 
focuses on creating awareness and persuading the audience to initiate the engagement, as outlined in Table 4.  
Table 4 Communication Plan – Communication Channels/Target Audience/Timeline and Target Values  
Project Website  ALL End-users.  From M03 to 3y after  
A project website allowing easy retrieval of main action data with few clicks while acting as the core source of Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 information about the project’s objectives and activities. The first version will 
be online by M03, and will be constantly maintained and updated regularly, running also for 3years after project end 
- ICCS leads the task.  
 Target Values: Online by: M03; Unique Visitors from M12: >1,500; Unique Visitors from M36: 
>5,500. 
  
Social Media   ALL End-users.  From M03 to M48  
DigInTraCE will build and maintain actively its online presence in several social media channels, using Twitter 
and LinkedIn when interacting with research and innovation communities spreading out new publications, while 
Facebook, TikTok and Podcasts will be used for wide community engagement, - ICCS leads the task.  
 Target Values: Size of online community (by M36): >5,000; No. of impressions (monthly average): 
>500. 
  
e-Newsletters and 
Email Campaigns  ALL End-users.  Quarterly Issues 
starting from M04  
E-newsletters will provide a snapshot of main activities and achievements of DigInTraCE, whereas broadcasting 
messages to a target pool of contact points via email is a highly effective measure of engagement, especially when 
promoting events and outcome among different domains. Professional marketing platforms (i.e. Sendinblue and 
Mailchimp) will be used to automate the distribution among contact points - ICCS leads the task.  
Target Values: e-Newsletters contributed/released: 9; Total Mailing List Contact Points: >2,000.  
Policy Fora and 
Debate Hubs  
Societal Actors, Debaters, Data Management, Materials and 
Recycle Operations, Environmental and sustainable product 
Organisations, workers' associations, Climate Alliances,  
From M23 to M48  
With main objective the Science -Policy dialogue, DigInTraCE will contribute to discussions and make 
recommendations on how the developed solutions could enhance the sustainable, balanced and inclusive 
development of secondary material and waste management on different industry sectors and products. DigInTraCE 
envisions to contribute and support actions of related hubs and forums such as World Economic Forum, IUCN 
forum, Science Policy Forum, LCM International Conference, EIT RawMaterials Expert Forum, GS1 r elated to 
DPP fora etc.  
 Target Values: Number of Fora and Hubs to interact: >7; Contributions to Policy Fora/ Debate Hubs: 
>15. 
  
Blogs  Digital Innovation Hubs, Relevant Associations, Academia.  From M18 to M48  
DigInTraCE will connect and execute periodic broad promotion activities in open communities, DIHs, blogs, 
nonprofit organisations and channels such as: Gitter Communities, related subjects in Nature.com EIT 
RawMaterials Innovation Hubs, etc. - ICCS leads the task.  
 Target Values: Unique Publications/Contributions to Blogs: >15; Different Blogs to Post: 
>8. 
  
Printed Material  ALL End-users attending physical events.  From M03 to M48  

 
39  
  
The project will develop a distinct visual identity (logo, key visuals) and reference promotional instrument when 
participating in events, including brochures, catalogues, posters and any other laid out paper-based resource. Most 
of the material will be available as e-documents and printing will occur as required. - ICCS leads the task.  
 Target Values: No. of hard copies (i.e., brochures, flyers, posters, etc.) distributed: >1,500; Roll -up Banners: 
>6. 
  
Multimedia  ALL End-users focusing on Regional Actors and Local Authorities.  From M09 to M48  
The project will produce multimedia material to have a self -explanatory and appealing presentation of the project, 
leveraging available distribution channels of promotion (e.g., YouTube, Vimeo). Also, a set of video interviews, 
both from scientific partners, to collect inputs, taking advantage of plenary meetings and events of relevance will be 
implemented in close collaboration with the DigInTraCE capacity building activities - ICCS leads the task. 
Target Values: No. of short videos and interviews produce d (in total): 7; Number of views: 
>10,000 
  
2.2.3. Exploitation Strategy for the Uptake of DigInTraCE Results  
Preliminary Market Analysis:  Within the framework of circular economy, digital ecosystems consisting of 
emerging market networks will enable hybrid forms of cooperation and competition. Meanwhile, technology, 
demographics and government policies are rapidly re -shaping industries. To i mprove supply chain’s performance, 
agility, cost, and inventory levels in this transformative era, companies have identified the need to restructure their 
supply chains and operations integrating the latest digital technologies. B2B business entities addressing these needs 
are expanding their services offering suites of proprietary asset -backed solutions increasingly enabled by such 
technologies. Solutions extend from end-to-end supply chain strategy, strategic architecture, operational excellence, 
and supp ly chain resilience. Subsequently the global digital supply chain market size is rather fragmented with 
solutions spanning from custom manufacturing traceability software to Manufacturing Execution systems which are 
increasingly integrated with various oth er solutions, such as ERP, supply chain management (SCM) or warehouse 
management system (WMS). Post COVID-19, the global digital supply chain market size was valued at $3,918.00 
million in 2020, and is projected to reach $13,679.00 million by 2030, registe ring a CAGR of 13.2% 51. The 
current estimation of 2030 is projected to be higher than pre -COVID-19 estimates. COVID -19 pandemic has 
significantly fostered growth rate of the market owing to the increased shift towards digitization. Major growth 
drivers of the market include rise in demand for reliable,  
  
fast, and effective order execution; surge in need for cloud -based supply chain management solutions; and increased 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
use of industrial-grade digital technology. In the EU context, the market size for supply chain analytics in Europe 
reached USD 1000 million in 2020 and is projected to grow at a rate of 10% through 2027 owing to extensive 
digitization and internet penetration across the world .52 Furthermore, new legislation is expected to be a game 
changer in Europe, gradually enforcing over the next decade a more holistic transformation towards increased 
industrial traceability and circularity. More specifically, falling under the European Commission’s new Circular 
Economy Action Plan (CEAP) – a key building block of the European Green Deal – the Sustainable Products 
Initiative (SPI) is a framework regulation com prised of a set of legislative files that aims to boost the circularity of 
the EU’s single market. In contrast to traditional circular economy measures that focus on the end-of-life phase (e.g., 
returning products to the supply chain instead of the landfil l), the SPI aims at building in sustainability throughout 
the entire product lifecycle, starting at the design phase. Drawing on the success of the 2009 Ecodesign Directive, 
the SPI will extend minimum sustainability requirements beyond energy -related products to a whole new array of 
sectors such as electronics & ICT equipment, textiles, furniture, steel, cement & chemicals. These rules will ensure 
that products on the EU market are designed to not only be energy-efficient, but also repairable, durable, recyclable 
and free of hazardous chemicals. In addition to product design, the SPI also foresees the introduction of digital 
product passports, which shall contain information on each product’s composition, including material and chemical 
properties, as well as information on their circularity, such as guidance for reuse and repair operators. In this context, 
the technologies developed during the project have clear potential to address future market needs that are expected 
to emerge in EU states as circular ec onomy directives become transposed in national legislation. As the project 
progresses, relevant market needs and size for the various project technologies shall be constantly evaluated in order 
to contribute to the maturation of the finally proposed individual and joint exploitation plans.  
 
51 Αllied market research, Global Digital Supply Chain Market 2020-2030  
52 Europe Supply Chain Analytics Market Forecast 2027  

 
40  
  
  
A preliminary identification of the foreseen business cases and their adjacent exploitation strategy is provided here.  
More specifically a categorization of the various individual results to certain preliminary Key Exploitable Result 
(KERs) bundles was made based on the identified markets and customer needs. KERs are single or multiple result 
solutions with clear target market, addressing cost effectively specific customer needs through identified competitive 
advantages. Given the low to medium TRL level of the under -development tools, KER characteristics and 
exploitation routes are to be constantly evaluated and updated as project progresses and engagement with stakeholders 
provide necessary feedback to the consortium regarding exploitation characteristics and potential.  
  
Traceability Platform and add on services : This is the core offering of the project constituting the main 
technological solution to be tested and optimized in all 4 demonstrators of the project and  jointly exploited by the 
involved partner organizations.   It includes the Decentralized Traceabilit y Platform, the Dynamically updated 
DPPs, the online LCA computational tool and a recycled content identification and certification scheme. These 
technologies  and services are bundled under this KER to deliver its holistic approach of a cross sectoral 
digitalization solution to increase waste reduction and improve use of secondary raw materials. These results will 
be validated in all four demonstrators. Combining tokenized financial products associated with the blockchain-traced 
items in the same platform is a novel approach towards a truly circular economy paradigm. In this regard exploitation 
of the solution shall require subsequent identification of equally innovative business models combining subscription 
based SaaS together with technical consulting and hardware installation services.   
After validation during the project demo phase, work towards commercial exploitation of the DigInTraCE integrated 
solution will be initiated through a joint venture (JV) involving at least the key consortium partners that are necessary 
for the successful continuous development, marketization and commercialization of the system 
(UST,ICCS,CTB,CIRCE).As project results are targeting a TRL6 at the end of the project, further maturisation and 
development shall be required towa rds  validation of an initial marketable version of the integrated solution and 
valueadding services. To support this, a preliminary version of a technology maturisation plan shall be developed 
during the project and reported in D7.7. Scope shall be to identify all the necessary technological development steps 
as well as resources needed towards increasing TRL to level 9 thus a closer to market state. In the report, a minimum 
viable product version may also be described for which development will be less resource intensive. This will permit 
the DigInTraCE JV to project towards a more short term product development and deployment cycle for which 
specific and more predictable revenues can be anticipated therefore rendering the venture more appealing for 
investors. Further funding needs will be reported together with an initial mapping of available funding schemes and 
alternatives that the venture may target after the project ends. The minimum viable product or products of the venture 
shall be formed based on ex tensive market and competition analysis implemented during the project as well as on 
the validation and impact assessment procedures that will have taken place in all 4 project demos.  Furthermore, 
based on the exploitation activities implemented during th e project, a comprehensive understanding of the 
solution/service benefits for all relevant stakeholders will be available . In any case,,the mixture of revenue sources 
is envisaged to spread the financial  
  
burden to various types of stakeholders, to he dge the risks of certain stakeholders' failure and to share, among the 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
involved partners, common development, commercial deployment, marketing and other costs. Commercial 
operations may even be initiated with pilot partners that shall be charged licensing fees for implementing DigInTraCE 
results plus ongoing software and hardware tool customization and maintenance/consulting and/or training fees. 
Based on the technology maturisation plan and the anticipated time-to-market of the developed solutions (2-5 years 
after the project end) an initial financial projections and estimations shall be provided in the final version of the 
exploitation and business innovation plan that will be delivered at the al so in D7.7 (M48). This plan shall consider 
all the development and operational costs of the venture, the anticipated revenues based on minimum viable product 
sales projections taking into consideration various market, policy, environment and other positive  and negative 
externalities. This preliminary business plan consolidated by the end of the project shall support the venture in 
approaching investors and presenting a unique investment opportunity.  
  
Apart from the above mentioned cross sectoral tool suite validated in all demos, certain industry and process specific 
prototypes and algorithms  shall also be developed during the project which constitute separate KERs and their 
exploitation shall follow the individual exploitation plans of the developing partner organizations. These are:   

 
41  
  
  
Wood process and sorting toolkit, Plastic process and sorting toolkit:  Although DigInTraCE industry specific 
datadriven solutions and demo -specific sensing and sorting technologies have the potential to be integrated in th e 
traceability platform, they can still be considered as distinct KERs addressing specific needs of the wood based panel 
and plastic processing industry. As such, involved partners may independently exploit these solutions addressing 
clear market needs wit h the demonstrated and validated competitive advantages of their developed technologies. 
Exploitation may be implemented either directly or through licensing or selling of the IP rights of the technologies 
to third parties. Protection of the technologies m ay be implemented by patenting the solutions. Regarding the 
relevant market sizes, the global wood based panel market size is estimated to reach USD 247.23 billion by 
2027, exhibiting a revenue-based CAGR of 6.9%53 during the forecast period. . Of that, European market size 
accounts for approximately 25%. Rising demand for these panels to manufacture residential and home furniture, 
Ready-to-Assemble (RTA) products, and small accent pieces is anticipated to positively impact the growth. Similarly, 
the global Textile Chemicals Market is projected to reach USD 33.1 billion by 2026, at a CAGR of 4.6%54 from 
2021 to 2026. Driving factor for the Textile Chemicals market is the growing demand for technical textile as well as 
low VOC and biodegradable materials for textile manufacturing. Further exploitation aspects to be validated during 
the project is the marketization of the novel wood-based products as well as extruded plastic filaments. This can be 
implemented either by patenting and licensing the developed manufacturing processes or direct marketization of the 
novel products by the relevant pilot partners supported by the technology developing entities.   
Chemical processes for wood valorisation: Similarly to the previous two KERs, these processes have clear tar get 
groups and their exploitation shall be targeted via direct industrial use to improve efficiency and environmental 
targets or by the development and marketization of novel products.   
Training material for digitalization: Skilled workers with digital abilities are necessary to implement, maintain and 
replicate usage of the digital tools after the project ends. To this end, development of high quality co -designed 
learning resources has been foreseen within the project. Training methodology and content is considered another Key 
Exploitable Result for which a relevant exploitation route shall be determined.  
Exploitation plans of individual results: In addition to the identified KERs, project partners shall make sure to 
concentrate on the commercial exploitation of their individual solutions/results produced during the project in order 
to contribute equally to the achievement of their individual research or business goals and the mid -/long-term goals 
of the project. Following the IPR management and protection principles of the project as described in the CA signed 
by project partners, each partner may plan and pursue individual exploitation routes for the developed technologies. 
These routes can include commercial or further research purposes.  
2.2.4. Management of Intellectual property  
IPR strategy and exploitation management will be handled in the CA, as well as in a dedicated task (T7.3) in line 
with Horizon Europe IPR recommendations. The IPR strategy of the project is considered as an integral par t of the 
project exploitation plan. Abiding to CA rules, the consortium will establish a knowledge portfolio management, able 
to identify relevant background, to collect information on Results that have a potential commercial exploitation, to 
generate IPRs  related with the new knowledge and to update the knowledge portfolio in accordance with the 
DigInTraCE dissemination and exploitation plans. Ownership: each participant will own the foreground/ results it 
generates. Background will be clearly identified within the consortium agreement and when applicable, granting of 
access rights will be clearly specified. Joint ownership: when results are generated jointly, participants will seek to  
  
reach relevant agreements. The CA will define these rules. Research partners will Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 
- 10/11/2022be granted a fair compensation in the  
form of royalties by partners exploiting the results in which the research partners have contributed; they will also be 
entitled to create spi n-offs for the commercialization of their results. Protection, use and dissemination : Results 
capable of industrial or commercial application must be protected considering legitimate interests. Prior notice of 
dissemination must be given to other participants. Access rights: Partners may define the background needed in any 
manner, and may exclude specific background. At a preliminary stage, partners shall agree on open access publishing. 
However, in the future, partners may opt for gold or green access to p eer- reviewed scientific publications, which 
might result from the project, depending on the type of information to be published. Each partner shall make available 
 
53 Wood Based Panel Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report by Product (Plywood, MDF, HDF, OSB, Particleboard, Hardboard), by Application (Furniture, 
Construction), by Region, and Segment Forecasts, 2020 - 2027  
54 Textile Chemicals Market by Fiber (Natural, Synthetic), Product Type (Coating & Sizing, Colorants & Auxiliaries, Finishing Ag ents, Desizing Agents,  
Surfactants), Application (Apparel, Home Textile, Technical Textile) & Region - Global Forecast to 2026  

 
42  
  
its results on a royaltyfree basis, unless otherwise agreed to other contractors to the exte nt that such information is 
necessary for them to produce their own results within DigInTraCE.  
 
 
2.3. Summary   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
SPECIFIC NEEDS    EXPECTED RESULTS  D & E & C MEASURES  
  Improved use of secondary raw materials  
  Reduction of waste generation   
  Reduction of GHG emissions  
  Availability and access to material data 
alon the whole value chain in real time   
  Cutting edge technological innovation fo 
tracing solutions with integrated DPPs an 
certification schemes  
  Novel sustainable and toxic free 
materials   
  Holistic solutions towards circular 
economy  
  Enhanced cross-sectoral collaborations   
  Enhance adoption of key digital 
technologies 
  Business models embracing novel 
circular solutions  
  Decentralized Traceability Platform   
  Dynamically updated DPP  
  CLSC management toolkit optimization plastic 
recycling g  Online LCA computation tool  
  Recycled content identification, certification scheme  
  AI based wood by products optimization algorithms 
d  Machine vision-based wood re-design toolkit  
  Smart tags for real time sensing  
  Novel spectroscopy techniques and algorithms for 
plastic   waste and wood by-products  
  Automated Sorting systems (for wood and plastic)  
  Optimal control and AI package for recycled plastic  
  Protein recovery chemical processes  
  Bio-based adhesives process engineering  
Dissemination (D): Peer-review Journals >15; Scientific 
Conferences >20; Technical Publications >25; Participation in 
Industrial  
Exhibitions with booths>10; Technical workshops >10; Webinars 
>12; Online training tutorials>8, Symposiums/ Fairs to 
Participate: >9 Policy briefs for sectors of focus = 2  
Communication (C):  logo and visual identity, online channels 
creating and updating  (e.g., social media, newsletters, press 
releases), short videos produced, press media, project 
promotional material, cooperation with other projects and 
networking, final event organization, publications in magazines.  
Exploitation (E):  DigInTraCE joint v enture (JV) of the key 
consortium partners, individual exploitation roadmaps, 
exploitation and business innovation plan  
TARGET GROUPS  OUTCOMES  IMPACTS  

 
 
  P4P stakeholders,   
  Industrial stakeholders (other than 
P4P; (producers, process industries, 
manufacturers, intermediates, recyclers, 
etc.)  
  Partnerships, Associations, Initiatives 
(e,g, Circular Plastics Alliance, 
European Plastic Convertors 
Association, European  
(e.g. Euro pean Committee for 
Standardisation) and  National 
standardization bodies,   
  Policy makers and financing 
institutions  
  Academia and research community    
  Citizens and general public  
   
  
Secondary raw materials use: ↑15- >80 
%, Waste↓: 8-50%, GHG ↓: 20 %,  by-
product value ↑: 15-200 %  
Traceability Platform: 100 active users, ≥10 user types with 
different access rights to DPP  
CLSC toolkit: ↑ secondary raw material use by 10 %  
LCA tool: output in < 20 sec  
Secondary raw materials in new BOMs and recipes: ↑ 10%  
Wood by -products application for higher -value flows: ↑ ≥ 
30%   
SmartTags monitoring: ≥1000 batches; ≥2 parameters   
≥5 material parameters real time identification  
Sorting of wood and Plastic accuracy: >90 %  
10 loops closed and more than 5 cross-sectoral 
collaborations   
Min. 10 real time parameters integrated in DPP  
Certification scheme for recycled content: min. 1  
Secondary plastic identification and certification cost: ↓20% 
min. 2 optimized recipes in P&P sector  
20% increase in recycled plastic use for moulding   
3 sustainable recovery technologies extraction yield: >40%  
Adhesives: increase up to 40% phenol substitution   
Environmental: i) 5 tracing & 3 sorting technologies (TRL 9 by 
2030) expansion to ≥5 sectors of P4P, ii) contribution to overall 
potential of emissions reduction (7 times and reduce global 
emissions by 15 % 55) and to EU becoming climate neutral by 
2050 iii) ↑ decision-making capacity for improved use of 
secondary raw materials.   
Societal: i) educational services (incl. co -designed materials): ≥ 
1000 users (2030) ii) decentralized traceability platform:1000 
registered users iii) standardization deliverables to reach 
stakeholders in all EU and EFTA countries,  iv) contribution to 
digital transformation in EU by 2030, to EC targets (European 
skills agenda and the digital education action plan): 70% adults 
with basic digital skills by 2025  Scientific: 5 services & 9 
prototypes with research documentation availab le to scientific 
community for further enhancements of concepts, scaling and 
transferability   
Economic: i) facilitate functioning of companies (esp. SMEs) in 
circular transition ii) contribute to level of ambition (Digital 
Compass): 75 % Eu enterprises en gaged in cloud computing 
services, big data and AI, 90 % of Eu SMEs with basic level of 
digital intensity  
  
 
55 European Union, 2020, “Supporting the Green Transition. Shaping Europe’s Digital Future”.  
34  
  
 
45  
  
  
  
3. Quality and Efficiency of the Implementation   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
3.1. Work Plan and Resource   
DigInTraCE’s 
implementation is realised 
through a set of seven work 
packages (WPs). Planned 
duration of the project is 48 
Months as presented in the 
Gantt chart in Figure 7. 
Research  and 
 innovation actions of 
DigInTraCE are organized 
around the 4 largescale 
 pilots  serving  as 
demonstration of all these 
activities. This is reflected in 
the structure of the WPs and 
their interrelations as 
presented in Figure 6.  
  
  
Figure 6 DigInTraCE pert chart  

 
46  
  
 
Figure 7 DigInTraCE Gantt chart  
 3.2. Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 DigInTraCE consortium includes 22 organisations (21 
partners, 1 affiliated entity) from 6 EU members and 1 Associated country, that 
together form a complete group uniting and utilizing the necessary expertise, skills, 
interdisciplinary knowledge and resources to constitute representative value chains 
and capable to achieve objectives and project goals. The consortium is 
multidisciplinary including (based on their main role in the project): 8 Academic 
and Research Technology Organisations, 6 Industrial partners, 3 novel digital 
technology providers, 1 Standardization, 2 certification (association & affiliated 
body) and 2 pioneer SMEs. Partners have been carefully selected to provide 
complementary skills and competences, which adequately cover and fully deliver all the project objectives and 
activities, starting from ideas to co-design needs and specifications, to implementation, system integration, validation, 
piloting and  
demonstration, performance evaluation, social acceptance, capacity building and standardisation, impact 
maximisation through wide dissemination and communication, exploitation and policy outreach. Past collaborations 
and related experience were also considered upon selection. The consortium will address the objectives as indicated: 

 
47  
  
Objective 1:  requires experts in up -cycling, reuse and upgrade technologies for secondary materials and waste 
reduction (NTUA, TECNL, CTB) as well as experien ce in digital traceability, DDPs (UST, ICCS, UBRUN) and 
data-driven and AI algorithms -supporting sensing and sorting - innovations (IRIS, ICCS, DGS, UVQ). Obj2: 
requires strong experience in the concepts of traceability and DDPs (UBRUN) and in blockchain based decentralized, 
data exchange and digital platforms (UST, ICCS) as well as experts in certification (CTB, TNLCERT) and 
standardization (DS). Obj3: requires experts in sensing and sorting innovations (IRIS, ICCS). Obj4: requires strong 
experience in Sma rtTags (VTT), Smart Contracts (UST) and financial services (HTECH) and open software and 
hardware (ICCS, UST, CIRCE). Obj5: requires industry and stakeholders of the 4 value chains (CHIMAR, MXS, 
AGRIST, ASTI, SIGIT), research activities experts (NTUA, TECN L, CTB, UST, ICCS, UBRUN, IRIS), wide 
experienced partners to validation, performance and impact evaluation (CIRCE) as well as standardization, 
certification and exploitation experts (DS, CTB, TNLCERT, MERIT, EUPC). Obj6: requires partners experienced 
in c o-design, knowledge transfer, learning, educational and dissemination activities (UBRUN, ICCS, CIRCE, 
EUPC). All partners have been allocated with adequate resources based on their expertise and capacity to successfully 
fulfil their obligations.  
Consortium composition and the exact role, individual contributions and access to infrastructure are presented in 
Table 5. The Internal Management Structure to be established will be complemented by external Advisory Board 
managed in WP1.  
Table 5 DigInTraCE Consortium Complentarity.  HORIZONTAL PARTNERS or Partners with horizontal activities  
ICCS: Coordinator, in charge of 
project management, dissemination & 
communication, platform and ICT 
development. It has access to state -of-theart 
ICT equipment within its premises and will 
exploit the platform for Industry 4.0 and 
Circular solutions. Responsible partner for all 
sorting mechanisms and techniques.   
  NTUA: Scientific & technical 
manager, will be  responsible for 
organizing and planning of technical 
activities. As experts in physical processes 
and 
 life cycle assessment, NTUA will exploit 
research for  creation of educational 
material & potentially a spinoff company 
regarding novel protein recovery 
processes.  
 IRIS:  Experts  in  real-
time  
 monitoring techniques 
and industrial AI  solutions for 
improved process quality and  
control. They will be in charge of 
all the plastic  components 
identification and characterisation 
by utilisation of spectroscopy -
based analyzers. 
 HTECH: Research performer, 
in 
charge of design, development, and 
testing of the financial services toolkit 
to be integrated into the decentralized 
traceability platform.  
 UBRUN: Research performer & 
technology  developer, will be in 
charge of defining  methodologies to clea rly 
define unit of material for tracing, while also 
will be in charge of training activities.   
VTT: Specialists in Smart 
Tags, will  
 provide related research expertise, 
technology  infrastructure and  
methodologies for the detection of 
environment conditions’ shifts.    
CIRCE:  Research 
performer, 
responsible for 
design, testing & validation of 
LCA tool to be integrated into 
DPP and decentralized 
traceability platform. 
Performance evaluation & 
assessments.  
 MERIT: Exploitation strategy, UST:  Blockchain DS: the official national  business 
plan and technology market leaders, in standardization organization in 
 transfer experts, responsible for co-definitioncharge of blockchain work and Denmark, will 
contribute to materials and  of market needs and IPR management. DLT technologies. 
technologies standardization activities.  
 TNLCERT: affiliated entity of TECNL 
offering certification services, will contribute 
to certification schemes.  
EUPC: association of vertical 
plastics’ certification and engagement of 
EU plastic converting stakeholders.  
Wood-based value chains  Chemicals-based value chains  
Greek Demonstrator  Belgian Demonstrator   
 
 
NTUA is leader & main responsible for 
R&I activities . AGRST and MXS are 
suppliers of by -products (oilseedcake and 
wood), NTUA performs extraction of 
proteins from the oilseed crops that are 
supplied to CHIMAR (industrial partner 
with in -house R&D services), to pro duce 
bio-based adhesives and wood composites, 
ultimately provided to MXS for 
commercial applications.  
  
  
 
  
CTB is the  coordinator and main accountable for  R&I 
activities, while also providing lab facilities for 
fingerprinting and PET upcycling and t extile extrusion, as 
well as refinement of certification schemes of recycled 
content. SIOEN allows for testing and valiation of upscaling 
the processes and for textile production in its premises.  
CIRCE supports this pilot in the form of value chain 
mapping.   Supplier of secondary materials will be EREMA, 
an entity that has ensured its support via a letter of support, 
although not joining the consortium.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
48  
  
Spanish Demonstrator   Italian Demonstrator  
  
ASTI is the supplier of secondary raw 
materials and provides its processing facilities 
for demonstration. TECNL is the main 
responsible for R&I activities and valorization 
pathways.  
   
   
SIGIT provides the secondary raw materials and the 
required recycling process infrastructure for experimental 
try-out and lab for chemical analysis, whereas DGS is the 
leader & main responsible for R&I activities and 
demonstrating prototypes. UVQ, as research pe rforming 
partner, will test and  validate the developed algorithms for 
process optimisation.   
  
  
  
4. Ethics Self-Assessment   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2022)7761208 - 10/11/2022 
The consortium confirms compliance with the ethical principles an d the applicable EU, international, and national 
laws for the ethics issues identified in the Ethics Summary Report and any additional ethics issues that may emerge 
in the course of the grant, will be ensured. The Consortium also confirms that for any appl icable ethics issue, the 
guidance provided in the European Commission Ethics Self-Assessment Guidelines will be rigorously followed.  
4.1. Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact  
Each member of the DigInTraCE leading or participating in research task that involves human participants will ensure 
the respect for people and for human dignity, fair distribution of the benefits and burden of research, and the 
protection of the values, rights and interests of the research participants. Ethical standards and guidelines will be 
rigorously followed and applied, irrespectively of the country in which the research is carried o ut. The necessary 
ethics approvals must be obtained, if required, as well as free and fully informed consent of the research participants. 
It is the responsibility of each member of the consortium leading an activity to obtain the relevant approvals and to  
ensure that their research complies with the laws and regulations in all the EU Member States in which the research 
takes place. Human participants will be required to provide information e.g. via interviews, online forms and 
questionnaires that will be u sed for user engagement, stakeholder’s identification, definition of scenarios, and 
gathering inputs and feedback for the project and the new solutions and technologies to be developed. Participation 
is voluntary and before any relevant research activity t hat involves humans, each individual will signify their 
agreement to participate with a clear affirmative act, DigInTraCE will apply clear informed consent procedures with 
a dedicated consent form. Although no adverse side effects are expected, a plan for collecting, reporting, and 
managing solicited and spontaneously reported adverse events and other unintended effects of projects' interventions 
will be undertaken. All partners are fully aware of this Charter and Directive and have abided by these regulations in 
past and on-going research projects and any individual partners belonging to professional bodies will abide by the 
ethics rules and regulations of these bodies. DigInTraCE consortium will keep a record of all potential ethical issues 
that arise as project is developed and evaluated, and through discussion with the stakeholders. Ethics approval for the 
project will be sought from all necessary and applicable review panels and relevant committees in all partner countries 
undertaking any work. Consortium will examine the following aspects in every related activity:  
•Composition, roles, and responsibilities of the partners in charge;  
•Description of research questions, specific objectives and justification for undertaking the study or analysis;  
•Description of study design, including type, settings and sites where data will be collected;  
•Inclusion and exclusion criteria for participants;  
•Time schedule of enrolment and assessments;  
•Estimated number of participants needed to achieve study objectives and how these were determined;  
•Plans for assessment and collection of outcome, baseline, and other trial data and study instruments;  
•Who will obtain informed consent or assent from potential trial participants or authorized surrogates, and how;  
•How personal information about potential and enrolled participants will be collected, shared, erased/anonymized if 
necessary and maintained;  
4.2.  Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations  
All the local legislations for virgin raw or secondary materials, waste treatment and digitization will be analyzed and 
respected in collaboration with the local authorities and Environmental or other relevant Ministries, in harmony with 
the respective European directives and regulations. DigInTraCE will ensure that it is fully compliant with the Do No 
Significant Harm (DNSH) Principle since its activities as well as the expected life cycle impact of the innovations at 
a commercialization stage, substantially contribute in a positive way and/or do not significantly harm any of the six 

 
49  
  
environmental objectives set out in Art. 9 and 17 of the EU Sustainable Finance Taxonomy Regulation (EU) 
2020/852. DigInTraCE will apply a life -cycle oriented approach (validated through the utilization of relevant LCA 
tool when possible) to ensure that proposed solutions are sustainable and consisting of 3 steps:  
i)Identification of actual and potential adverse imp acts during the life cycle of the project activities  
ii)Prevention or mitigation of adverse impacts  
iii)Accounting for how adverse impacts are addressed by tracking performance and communicating results. 
DigInTraCE activities are expected to have a direct positive impact to the environmental objectives defined: Climate 
Change Mitigation by reducing GHG emissions (use Recommendation 2013/179/EU or ETSI ES 203 199,ISO 
14067:2018 or ISO 14064-2:2019 to calculate lifecycle GHG and net emissions), to Pollution  prevention & control 
through waste reduction and identifying harmless substances and contaminants in each pilot, to Transition to Circular 
Economy through the establishment of symbiotic and circular flows within same or different industries for materials 
and wastes whereas is not expected any negative impact to the sustainable use and protection of water and marine 
resources, protection and restoration of biodiversity & ecosystems and the Climate Change adaptation.  
Specifically, DigInTraCE will make sure that the related DNSH criteria (on Climate Adaption; climate adaptation; 
water; circular economy; pollution prevention and biodiversity) from the EU Taxonomy Compass will be applied for 
the below project related activities:  
-Data processing, hosting and related activities  
-Data-driven ICT solutions for GHG emissions reduction  
 
 
-Computer programming, consultancy and related 
activities -Close to market research, development and 
innovation And if applicable in the below as well:  
-Manufacture of aluminium  
-Manufacture of iron and steel  
-Manufacture of organic basic chemicals  
-Manufacture of plastics in primary form  
-Engineering activities and related technical consultancy dedicated to adaptation to climate change 
-Any other activity that may arise during the project.