3.2 Management structure and procedures  
Organisational structure and the decision -making: We have chosen a clear and comprehensive 
project management structure that will enable us to efficiently monitor performance; manage risk and 
ensure that deliverables are achieved on time and within budget. The project w ill be governed by the 
Project Board comprised of a representative from each consortium member. The main decision-making 
responsibilities will lie within the participating partners ensuring they remain in control of the project 
direction and benefits. Each partner will have a vote and decisions will be made by majority voting . 
This will ensure that one partner cannot influence project decisions against the will of others.  Figure 
3.2 illustrates the DIY4U project management structure and reporting lines.  
  
Figure 3.2 Management Structure and Reporting Lines  
The responsibilities of each role shown in the project management structure (figure 3.2) is outlined 
below:   
Project Management Board (PMB):  The Project Management Board will comprise one delegate 
(Senior Representative) from each partner of the Consortium. It will be chaired by Dr Chandana 
Ratnayake as Project Coordinator. The PMB will be responsible for the overall success of the project 
and will therefore be the ultimate escalation point for any pro ject issues. The PMB will approve the 
commencement of individual work packages based on the progress of specific milestones. The PMB 
will closely monitor milestones and critical stop/go decision points in accordance with the risk 
contingency plan. The PMB will also be solely responsible for resolving any administrative or 
contractual issues with the EC or within the consortium. The PMB will meet biannually (along with 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    55  
  
project meetings when possible). Extraordinary PMB meetings will also be held when requested by the 
Project Manager.  
Project Coordinator: The Project Coordinator will be the sole point of contact with the EC, and will 
oversee all project activities and collate the deliverables and milestone reports. He will also be 
responsible for: Legal, contractual, ethical, financial and administrative management of the consortium; 
Making sure the project consortium agreement is updated and managed when required; Organizing 
Project Steering Committee, Project Management, and Dissemination and Exploitation me etings; 
Collation of all costs statements and audit certificates and coordination of payments and distribution to 
relevant consortium members; Facilitating audits and overall liaison with the EC.  
The DIY4U consortium has selected Dr Chandana Ratnayake from STEF to represent the consortium 
as Project Coordinator. He has over 15 years’ experience in coordinating large projects including several 
European projects. His skills in team and strategy manag ement and all other aspects of the technical 
project progression will be the key for this demanding project. He currently manages several large 
collaborative projects including H2020 at STEF. To appropriately manage the workload and allow the 
Project Coordinator to focus on the overall management of the project, we have created separate roles 
for the daily management of technical project issues.  
Management Support Team:  The Management Support Team comprises of the Technical Manager 
and Exploitation & Dissemination Manager, who's roles are defined below.  
Project Technical Manager:  The Project Technical Manager will be responsible for the direct 
management of technical project activities, monitoring technical progress and coordinating activities 
between Work Package Leaders. This will also involve maintaining the risk log and milestone progress 
reports forwarded to the Project Coordinator. The Project Technical Manager will therefore also be 
acting as Project Risk Manager. If a technical goal is to be dropped  from the project the EC Scientific 
Officer will be informed of the recommendation or decision.  Given that this role requires experience in 
international project management, we have elected Dr Mark Taylor (Manager of High Throughput 
and Informatics at CPI ) for this role. Mark has 25 years’ experience on working on development 
projects and delivery of work on a variety of innovative projects.  
Exploitation and Dissemination Manager:  The Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication 
Manager will report to th e Project Coordinator and will be responsible for further developing the 
dissemination, exploitation and communication strategies. His responsibilities include: creation of the 
exploitation strategy, dissemination plan and communication policy; identificat ion of future funding 
routes; approval of dissemination materials; identification of IPR and protection strategies. We have 
selected Ken Andre Myhra Kihle (CEO at Cody)  for this role. Ken has 6 years of experience in 
bringing products to the market. He has expertise in IPR protection and exploiting research results. He 
will be closely supported by the IP and Marketing functions at CPI and other partner organisations.  
Executive Board: Chaired by the Coordinator, the Executive Board (EB) will be responsible for the 
proper execution and implementation of the decisions of the Project Management Board. It will monitor 
the effective and efficient implementation of the Project. The EB member s’ appointment will be 
validated by the members of the PMB, and includes one representative per partner, including WP 
leaders. The EB will meet physically at least every 6 months. Additional meetings by teleconference 
will be organised when needed/requested.  
  
WP Leaders: The WP Leaders are responsible for managing the Work Packages (WP) and all work 
conducted by participants in each WP. The WP Leaders establish, in coordination with the Project 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    56  
  
Technical Manager, the detailed schedule of the WP and the wo rk in progress. The Work Package 
leaders will be appointed within the organization leading each work packages.  
Task Leaders: Task Leaders are responsible for managing the defined tasks within a WP, and all work 
conducted by participants in their tasks. The Task Leaders establish, in coordination with the WP Leader, 
the detailed schedule of the WP and the work in progress. Details of partners coordinating each task is 
included in the WP description. Task leaders will be appointed within the organization lea ding each 
task.  
Advisory Board (AB): The Advisory Board will comprise leading experts from around the EU. They 
will be invited on the basis of their extensive knowledge of the systems and processes which will be 
impacted upon by the outcomes of DIY4U. Advisory Board members will be drawn from a wide range 
of related disciplines, thus covering all of the strategic guidance requirements of the project. Advisory 
Board members will not bear an executive responsibility but will be in regular contact with the Pr oject 
Management Board and will meet with the Project Management Board annually. Members of the 
Advisory Board will receive briefings on the progress of the project and will make recommendations. 
Advisory Board members will be paid travel and subsistence c osts to attend meetings of the project as 
required. We will select technical advisor from relevant FMCG manufacturer and ingredient suppliers, 
equipment manufacturers (e.g. HTP equipment, robotics, control system, etc) and FMCG 
retailers/supermarkets. The Project Coordinator will nominate Advisory Board members in 
collaboration with consortium partners. Each partner will be expected to suggest a relevant Advisory 
Board member.   
To carter for the open innovation competitions, the following additional structures will be implemented:   
Evaluation Committee Function: Committee responsible of selecting the best proposals in a 
‘Consensus Meeting’. Composition: It will be coordinated by PIC and composed by ‘Project Board’ 
plus 3 External Evaluators.   
Selection Committee Function: Committee responsible of selecting the best proposals in the Jury Day 
and in the Review of Milestones during the open innovation program implementation. Compos ition: It 
will be coordinated by STEF and composed by ‘Project Board’ plus Advisory Board.   
Mentoring Committee Function: Committee in charge of monitoring and validating the performance 
of the funded open innovation projects in the Interims and Final Rev iew. Composition: It will be 
coordinated by  
STEF/CPI and composed by the Technical Mentor and Business Mentor.                                                                                
Ethical Committee Function: Committee in charge of monitoring and validating the ethical aspects of 
the proposals submitted. Composition: It will be coordinated by STEF and composed of the PMB and 
AB.  
Effective Innovation Management: The management of knowledge and foreground IP created through 
the work carried out during the project will be the responsibility of the Exploitation Manager, Ken Andre 
Myhra Kihle. DIY4U will use a DESCA model consortium agreement. Within this consortium 
agreement the intended allocation of IPR will be defined which will be agreed by all participants in the 
project and will cover the IPR issues including ownership of knowledge, protection of that knowledge 
and access rights.  Results generated in the project will be assessed in terms of IPR and whether 
necessary protection of the result is required. Further information on IP and IP management is described 
in section 2.2. We will commit the maximum effort to exploit the innovation outcome of the DIY4U 
project. WP11 has a dedicated task to develop a commercialization plan where we will carry ou t 
extensive research to find out the market opportunity and develop strategy to exploit it. For the 
successful outcome of the project we have included key liaisons with market users through the AB.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    57  
  
Risk Management and mitigation measure: As a project of novel technical objectives featuring 
complex and specialized technologies, DIY4U includes inherent risks towards delivering the 
expected results and achieving its goals. However, the project partners feel confident enough that 
these technical hazards can be well controlled and overcome, as a result of their expertise and the 
careful risk management approach. Each work package leader is required to maintain a risk log, 
which contains potential risks and a record of the occurred events. This information will be used 
to identify any issues and future risks that may arise.