2.2 Measures to maximise impact   
Draft ‘plan for the dissemination and exploitation of the project's results’  
Dissemination, exploitation and communication of DIY4U approach and project outputs are critical for 
achieving the expected impacts highlighted in section 2.1, hence 30 person months in project 
implementation has been dedicated to dissemination, exploitation and communication activities.  
2.2a Dissemination and exploitation of results  
This section gives an overview of the key exploitable results (KER) and presents a draft plan for 
exploitation and dissemination of results which will be complemented by communication activities 
(section 2.2b) to promote the project, its achievem ents and commercialisation of its outputs. An initial 
plan for joint exploitation is provided, covering the business model for DIY4U and the underlying 
financial model.   
Key exploitable results (KERs) of DIY4U: DIY4U’s main KER is the establishment of the  DIY4U 
ecosystem, which will be a self-governed and self-sustained organisation with representatives from the 
consortium. Three types of individual KERs are identified and shown in table 2.2a.1.   
  
  
  
  
Table 2.2a.1 Key exploitable results in DIY4U  
No.  KER  Partners   WP  
KER1  DIY4U Digital Platform for 
creating new customised or 
personalised FMCG  
All DIY4U partners   WPs 2-5, 8 &9  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    38  
  
KER2  DIY4U Fablab  MDFs for 
small-scale manufacture of 
making customised or  
personalised FMCG   
STEF, CPI, CTM, CDY, P&G, PICOM, VTT, and 
value chain end -users signed up via the DIY4U 
platform  
 WPs 6-10  
  
KER3  New customised or 
personalised detergent and 
soaps   
FMCG value chain stakeholders (including 
entrepreneurs, start -ups, SMEs and consumers) 
signed up via the DIY4U platform and supported by 
DIY4U partners  
 WPs 8 & 9  
  
  
Joint exploitation strategy: During the project (2019 to 2022), the DIY4U digital platform and fablab 
technology components will reach TRL6. In addition to each partner’s individual exploitation strategy 
(section 2.2a.2), the consortium will develop and implement a joint strategy for transitioning the 
platform and fablab to marketreadiness (TRL9) and for commercialising the DIY4U platform and fablab 
to meet the expected impact and ensure the long -term sustainability of DIY4U. The business plan 
presented in section 2.2a.1 demonstrates the selfsustainability of the DIY4U ecosystem. We expect the 
joint exploitation of the platform to commence within a year from the completion of the project – the 
DIY4U platform will offer DIY digital design and performance simulation services to any non -expert 
wishing to create a new formulated detergent and soap product. STEF and CPI individual exploitation 
strategy for the MDFs will complement the joint exploitation of the DIY4U platform by providing open 
access DIY manufacturing facilities for platform u sers to manufacture the products designed on the 
platform. The joint exploitation strategy for the fablab will focus on transitioning it from TRL6 to TRL9 
within 2 years of completing this project. We expect to deploy DIY4U fablabs across the EU market by 
the end of 2024, working in partnership with supermarkets and/or innovative SMEs wishing to offer 
DIY4U small-scale manufacturing service.  
The project’s exploitation will be governed by DESCA 2020 Model Consortium Agreement detailing 
background knowledge/IP, foreground IP, rights, obligations and relationships between them.   
2.2-a.1 Business plan  
This subsection analyses the relevant market segments, provides a preliminary business model canvas, 
performs SWOT and competition analysis and provides a revenue forecast for the DIY4U ecosystem.  
DIY4U target markets: Although DIY4U is potentially targeted at the whole soft matter FMCG market 
(including detergent and soap, cosmetics, food, gym supplements, agrochemicals, polymer gels, pastes, 
foams, coatings, adhesives, etc), the immediate target market is the detergents and soaps market. The 
global detergents and soaps market was worth €86.21 billion in 2016 14 and expected to reach €180.55 
billion by 2025,15 driven by increasing health awareness, rising disposable income and growing sales of 
washing machines in both developing and developed regions 16. Product innovation and new product 
launch (a key priority of DIY4U) is also a major factor expected to drive the market growth. Vendors 
are expanding their businesses  by building manufacturing facilities in developing economies such as 
China and India. Some of the key players catering the market growth are Ecolab Inc.; Unilever; Church 
& Dwight Co.; Procter & Gamble (consortium partner); Henkel AG & Co. KGaA;  
Colgate-Palmolive Company; Lion Corp.; Reckitt Benckiser Group PLC; The Clorox Company; and 
Amway. The  
 
14 Grand View Research, Global Soap and Detergent Market Size, Industry Rep ort, 2018-2025, January 2018,  
Report ID: GVR-2-68038-299-0  
15 https://www.giiresearch.com/report/grvi615535-soap-detergent-market-size-report-by-product.html  
16 Grand View Research, Global Soap and Detergent Market Size, Industry Report, 2018-2025, January 2018, 
Report ID: GVR-2-68038-299-0  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    39  
  
  
market is witnessing globalization, with global vendors branching out to increase market share. North 
America dominates the market with the highest revenue share whilst Asia Pacific is expected to witness 
the highest growth to 2025. Although the European market is projected to grow at a significant rate to 
2025, the European sector needs to adopt disruptive approaches (like DIY4U) to outperform North 
American and Asian competitors and to reshore manufacturing in the EU. The competitive advantages 
and the collaboration/business generation capability provided by DIY4U to EU FMGC stakeholders will 
enable them to capture additional 5-10% share of the soft matter global FMCG market within 10 years 
(by 2035) from DIY4U launch, generating tens of billions€ in annual revenues.  
Initial business model canvas for DIY4U: The economic sustainability of DIY4U is established by the 
Business Model Canvas analysis presented in the table below. It analyses the main parameters affecting 
DIY4U’s financial performance including the key partners, activities, and resources, the value 
proposition to its customers, customer relationship and distribution channels, customer segmen ts, the 
cost structure, and the revenue streams. The Business Model Canvas can be applied to DIY4U as a 
whole, or to individual services within DIY4U (i.e. digital platform or fablab MDFs). Table 2.2a.2 shows 
our preliminary Business Model Canvas for the D IY4U ecosystem; further analysis of individual 
services will be developed during the project.  Table 2.2a.2 DIY4U Preliminary business model canvas  
  
The Business Model Canvas designed for DIY4U v.1.0  
KEY  
PARTNERS  
- Partner R&D 
organisations   
- SME 
technology developers  
- Particulate 
and liquid FMCG 
value chain  
including ingredient 
suppliers, 
manufacturers, 
distributors/retai 
lers  and 
consumers  
- Governmental 
agencies  
- Networking 
partners  
- Investors and 
seed funds  
- European  
Commission  
KEY ACTIVITIES  
- Research  and  
development   
- Testing and 
validation - Customer 
tailored workflow 
development - 
Technology and  
market analysis - 
Access to finance  
- Business 
development - 
Technical support on 
DIY design and 
smallscale 
manufacturing - 
Community building - 
Learning and sharing 
best practices  
- Training  
- Workshops 
 and  
seminars  
VALUE PROPOSITION  
- Mitigation of R&D 
costs and risks for 
personalised FMCG product 
development and small -scale 
manufacturing of customised 
products  
- Access to state -of-
the-art digital infrastructure 
and smallscale manufacturing 
equipment - Access to open 
source product data exchange 
and standard representations 
of products and processes that 
ensure the compatibility of 
modelling and simulation 
with different process 
information systems  
- Enabling sharing and 
analysis of relevant data and 
demands from users  
- Enabling 
collaborative engineering in 
CUSTOMER  
RELATIONSHIP  
-Web-based  DIY4U 
platform   
National/regional 
 DIY4U contact 
points  
- Personal relationships  
- Newsletters   
- Project follow-up  
- Workshops  
- Dissemination material   
CUSTOMER SEGMENTS  
- Innovative SMEs 
and large firms in the 
particulate and liquid 
FMCG sectors.  - 
Entrepreneurs and start-ups 
with no technical know-
how  
- FMCG retailers  
- FMCG Consumers  
- Knowledge 
transfer and business 
consulting  
companies  
- Industries within 
material science   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    40  
  
KEY RESOURCES  
- Expert 
personnel  
- Infrastructures 
(fablab  
MDFs)   
- Knowledge 
and IP  
- The DIY4U 
platform   
- Network of 
experts - 
Professional/scientific 
societies  
- Outreach 
activities  
the production network, 
allowing all actors to propose 
innovations  
- Enabling ‘plug and 
produce’ of personalised/ 
customized FMCG    
- Access to knowhow 
and highly skilled personnel   
- Improving efficiency 
and effectiveness of product 
development, customisation 
& small-scale manufacturing  
-Increasing product variety 
and personalisation for higher 
customer satisfaction and 
loyalty  
- Early access to R&D 
activities and trends  
- Identifying 
technological and market 
gaps  
- Vision creation   
- Professional 
networking  
- Creating pan -EU 
cooperation  
CHANNELS  
- The DIY4U 
web-based platform  
- Cascade network  
- Partner’s 
networks  
-Affiliated organisations  
COST STRUCTURE  
- Infrastructure (purchase, maintenance, 
depreciation)  
- Fixed costs (rent, utilities, etc.)  
- Staff (technical, administrative, business 
development)  
- Events organisation   
- Networking  
REVENUE STREAMS  
- DIY digital design services  
- MDF services  
- Fablab replication (DIY small-scale manufacturing services)   
- Private and public funding for future R&D projects at MDFs  
DIY4U SWOT Analysis: DIY4U aims to penetrate the target markets highlighted earlier by promoting 
the value proposition (table 2.2a.2) of the cost -effective and readily available state -of-the-art DIY4U 
platform and fablab MDFs. DIY4U will benefit European industry, particularly SMEs lacking adequate 
knowhow and design/manufacturing infrastructure. EU SMEs and large companies can take advantage 
of the technical/business insights and capabilities provided by DIY4U to innovate and enhance their 
competitiveness in the target global FMCG market segments.  
The analysis of the overall strategic position of the DIY4U ecosystem/business and its environment is provided in 
a SWOT analysis (table 2.2a.3). The SWOT analysis aims to identify the strategies that will create a DIY4U 
specific business model that will best align its resources and capabilities to the requirements of the environment 
in which the DIY4U ecosystem/joint venture company will operate.  
Table 2.2a.3 DIY4U SWOT analysis  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    41  
  
Competitor Analysis: There is currently no open innovation digital platform and fablab offering the 
proposed DIY4U services and value proposition. The nearest competing offering (detailed in section 
1.4) is only applicable to paints rather than to all soft matter FMCG as for DIY4U. Paint customization 
services fall short of the capabilities (e.g. DIY formulation design, DIY automated small -scale 
manufacturing, open innovation, training, real-time demand tracking and respond, etc) afforded by the 
DIY4U holistic approach.   
DIY4U turnover capacity: To ensure the continuity and the autonomy of DIY4U post -project, the 
DIY4U platform will generate revenues based on the following four main profitable activities:   
Fablab implementation:  DIY4U joint venture will found its own Fablabs in order to manufacture and 
sell products without intermediate to the finale costumer (B2B solution).  
The Fablab replication and the Platform visibility will help to increase gradually the Fablabs customers. 
The consortium used the fol lowing assumptions to evaluate the evolution of the profits per year. The 
initial number of DIY4U consortium Fablabs are 10 dispatched in whole EU. The Fablabs customers 
number is percentage of EU households which is considered 128 million with a total con sumption of 
8€/month for shampoo, detergent and soap products. This percentage will start from 0.1% the first year 
to 1% the fifth year. The Figure 2.2a.1. Shows the Fablabs incomes against theirs fees. The Fablabs 
number will increase according to the Fablabs incomes and customers number.  
Pay Per Click (PPC)-Advertising: model of web marketing in which advertisers (e.g. Google Adsense) 
pay a fee each time one of their ads is clicked. Essentially, it’s a way of buying visits to the DIY4U 
platform.   
Strengths  
Strong consortium with an existing commercial presence in the FMCG target markets – P&G is amongst the top 
5 global FMCG companies with a strong network of retailers and customer base that will provide the initia 
customer base for DIY4U; leading French retailers accessed via PICOM’s retail innova tion hub; strong 
commercialisation and go-to-market capabilities; and unique digital platform and fablab with strong user value 
propositions (table 2.2-a.2).  
Weaknesses    
DIY4U platform and fablab services are not known in the market yet. This will be addressed by development and 
promotion of DIY4U brand via digital marketing and other channels (section 2.2a.3); and by leveraging the strong 
network of industrial consortium partners to promote DIY4U visibility in the target market.  
Opportunities  
Competing regions could develop and bring similar platforms and fablabs to market over time. DIY4U will benefi 
from early-entrant advantage, capturing and consolidating a considerable customer base ahead of competitors, and 
innovative DLT-based community governance. Continuous improvement of the platform’s capabilities, products 
and services based on real-time user feedback and integration of new innovations developed by EU SMEs, RTOs 
and universities will allow DIY4U to remain competitive. Lack of standards for digital DIY formulation design 
and DIY small-scale formulation manufacturing standards could represent a major barrier. This will be addressed 
by engaging regulatory bodies and using their input together with input from relevant industry stakeholders to 
develop software mechanism for ensuring designed and manufactured products are compliant with relevant safety 
and regulatory standards.  
Threats  
The main threats are the resistance to change and the fear of unknown DIY products. Also, the difficulty to 
certificate customised/personalised products (e.g. CE labelling) and the lack of rules and regulation that manage 
and supervise to the DIY sectors a re important challenges for this project. The analysis of data in a wrong way 
can damage the reputation of fablabs. There is a distinct possibility that blockchain -based value transfer will be 
outlawed or heavily taxed by G20 nations to protect the banking sector, thus abolishing the opportunity of using 
this technology for automating international exchange of goods -for-payments. Finally, cyberattacks agains 
participants and the platform still remain a serious risk for the stored private data.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    42  
  
DIY4U cloud-based services : the DIY4U platform will propose simulation tools to design and test 
formulations. These web services will be based on upselling method and recommend three offers (basic, 
silver and gold categories) for validated customers.  
Extra commissions:  For each order placed and delivered via the DIY4U platform, a conservative 5% 
commission will be added to the total amount of the order.  
Fablab replication:  DIY4U joint venture will manufacture and sell or lease equipment to supermarkets 
and SMEs in return for a percentage of sales of products manufactured using Fablabs.  
The turnover estimation strategy is based essentially on the number of visitors. The consortium used the 
following assumptions to evaluate the evolution of the profits per quarter:  
- The initial number of visitors per day of the DIY4U platform is 150  
- For each relevant 1000 visitors, it will be assumed to provide 20 significant clicks generating 
approximately 2€. The growth average of the platform views per year is 50%  
- It is assumed that 0,1% of the visitors will validate their subscription of formulat ion services 
which the average costs is 20€ per month.  
- The consortium supposes that 20% of formulation simulation will be concluded by new orders 
and the average amount of the commissions is about 100€.   
  
Figure 2.2a.1: Estimation of revenues during 5 years  
Figure 2.2a.1 illustrates that the fablab replication services of formulation represent the most important 
source of revenue. Therefore, this project will accord particular importance to develop these services. 
Table 2.2a.4 shows the estimated turnover for 5 years post-launch. In year 5, the DIY4U platform will 
generate ~7.27M€, creating 36 direct durable jobs (1 job = 200K€ revenue) and training students in the 
IT and digital manufacturing field.   
  
Table 2.2a.4 the turnover estimation in 5 years  
Turnover estimation  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Benefits  1,313,313.95 €  1,611,007.56 €  2,340,406.45 €  4,894,390.28 €  1,3105,774.36 €  
Costs  1,555,067.14 €  1,771,432.08 €  2,114,950.47 €  2,914,089.19 €  5,835,371.44 €  
Results  -241,753.2 €  -160,424.52 €  225,455.97 €  1,980,301.09 €  7,270,402.92 €  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    43  
  
Cumulative profit  -241,753.2 €  -402, 177.72 €  -176,721.75 €  1,803,579.35 €  9,073,982.26 €  
Figure 2.2a.2 shows the evolution of the benefits, costs and the economic results of the DIY4U platform 
during 5 years. The figure shows that DIY4U will be viable, with profit of 225K€ in year 3 and the 
break-even point after 4 years (cumulative gross profit of 1,8M€ by the end of year 4).  
  
Figure 2.2a.2 turnover and direct job creation estimation  
In addition to these monetised results, the DIY4U will create non -monetary benefits and indirect 
outcomes such as skilled training, quality assurance, protection of environment and health safety.   
2.2-a.2 Individual exploitation strategy   
Partner exploitation plans are aligned with the principles of the DIY4U business plan presented in the 
previous section. All individual exploitation plans will be continually monitored by the Exploitation 
Leader. Table 2.2a.4 summarises the individual exploitation plans of the DIY4U consortium partners  
Table 2.2a.4 Exploitation plan for DIY4U consortium partners   
Partner  Exploitation plan  
SME Partner  SME partners will enhance their competitiveness and growth by developing and exploiting innovative 
components of DIY4U as detailed below:  
●  IRIS will gain knowhow relating to the decentralized architecture of the platform and 
implementation of hybrid blockchain technologies that foster private and public collaboration. In 
addition IRIS will diversify its portfolio of digital services to the industry by becoming a key player 
FMCG collaborative production industries of the future, fostering the company’s growth.  
EFF will gain knowhow relating to the decentralized architecture of the platform and 
implementation of hybrid blockchain technologies that foster private and public collaboration. This 
will enable EFF to enhance its competitiveness as well as become a key player in the FMCG 
collaborative production industries of the future, fostering the company’s growth.  
 
●  
 
●  RDI will acquire new skills in data analytics related to FMCG sector and improve its know-how in  
 knowledge base elaboration, enabling it to become a key player in the future collaborative  
  production industries. RDI will enhance its capacities to develop industrial open technologies for  
the FMCG sector and other sectors.     
●  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    44  
  
 complete p 
future growth.  
CDY will be at the centre of fablab replication highlighted in th and 
become a key stakeholder in the FMCG industries of the future. 
DSC will improve its knowledge on the detergent/surfactant and FMCG industries to provide a 
ortfolio of services in the areas of process engineering. DSC will gain additional  
knowledge on complimentary services to the prior industries which would foster the company’s  
e joint exploitation strategy earlier  
captured. DIY4U will create a new business opportunity for CDY, allowing it to grow its business  
  
●  
 
FMCG  
Industry 
partners  
Industrial partner (P&G) will increase its market competitiveness in the FMGC sector by ensuring 
defined activities as follows:   
●   Supplying base materials for DIY4U manufacture worldwide  
Applying learnings (technological and business model) from the projects to other innovation 
programmes within the company  
Upskilling staff on small scale digital manufacture  
●  
 
●  
RTOs  RTOs expect to contribute in the development and manufacture of a variety of new innovative   
● STEF will apply the knowledge developed through the project in other business sectors; Feed 
pellets production, fertiliser formulations, etc. STEF will use Fablab facilities to create new 
industrial and public funded projects. The fablab facilities will be useful in STEF’s activities 
within digitalisation of process industries.  
● CPI will develop digital formulation design know -how and small scale formulation 
manufacturing capability, enabling it to expand its service offerings to include small -scale 
automated capabilities for the wider materials formulation and manufacturing community.  
● Digital Catapult (DCC) will apply the resulting DLT technologies in other R&D 
manufacturing programmes, specifically looking at connected supply chains. Digital 
Catapult will be able to capture real -world data from DIY4U and showcase to traditional 
industry to prove the value proposition of this technology and this will enable the growth of 
DLT Field Labs programme . The experience gained in this project will also contribute to 
further develop consulting services to educate start -ups and scale ups understand business 
models and user experience with distributed systems.  
● PICOM will gain better knowledge of customisation business models and will be able to 
transfer this knowledge to other types of goods; helping retailers and brands understand the 
opportunity and feasibility of such new business.  
● CTM will improve their knowledge in the development of fabl abs and open innovation 
technologies that will be transferred to local stakeholders of the FMCG sector through the 
dissemination program, which will contribute to improve the innovative capacity and 
competitiveness of the region. Furthermore, this project will open the possibility to make 
new contacts and develop a networking with other European partners around the results of 
the project and for taking advantage of them for other synergistic projects.  
● VTT will apply the PAT know-how created in DIY4U to different application areas, such as 
pharmaceutical industry and food industry but also to develop concepts for consumer-based 
chemical analysis. VTT will use the results to prepare new industrial and public -funded 
projects.  
● STL will  further build on its knowhow in legal data privacy requirements analysis and GDPR  
 compliance for such collaborative design and production, enhancing its service offering to a  
wider industry base.   
  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    45  
  
  
2.2-a.3 Dissemination and exploitation of results  
 DIY4U initial plan for exploitation and dissemination of results (PEDR) has been developed and will 
be regularly updated during the project. The updated PEDR will be included in the project’s semi-annual 
periodic progress reports. The plan sets out details  of activities to be undertaken, focusing on the 
following target stakeholder groups:  
Group 1:  Detergent and soap end -users: e.g. consumers, cleaning service providers and cleaning 
solution developers (e.g. Deb Ltd, Kiehl Group, Laboratoires Ceetal, Mareva)   
Group 2: EU Innovators (SMEs and Entrepreneurs) of detergent and soaps and other soft matter FMCG 
products: e.g. Reckitt Benckiser, People Against Dirty, AGMA, Wolf Formulations,   
Group 3:  EU Manufacturers of detergents and soaps and other soft matter FMCG:  e.g. Unilever, 
ReAgent, Amega Sciences, Autosmart, Christeyns, Ecochem Srl, Jabones Pardo S.A.,   
Group 4: EU detergent and soap Ingredient Suppliers: Grupo Industrial Crimidesa. BASF, AlindaVelco 
S.A., CP Kelco, Solvay, EVONIK, PQ Corporation, Kmira, INEOS, Dow Chemicals, Novozymes, 
GENeco, SMEs developing novel ingredients (e.g. Microcapture, Filda London)   
Group 5 : Distributors and Re tailers of FMCG:  e.g. Lidl, Asda, Tesco, Aldi, Sainsbury, Auchan, 
Carrefour, Netto,  
Hyper U, SPAR, Coop Mega, Meny, Kesko  
Group 6: EU ICT solution developers & other fablab developers: e.g. Fablab Valencia, FabLab Pavia  
Group 7: Primary influential bodies/industry associations: e.g. FoodDrinkEurope, Independent Retail 
Europe, European Commission, European Environment Agency, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP, The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and policy makers etc.  
Group 8:  Regulatory/standardisation/legal counsel:  e.g. AISE, SGS, IP law firms, digital 
transformation and AI advisors, cybersecurity auditors, consultants for privacy, identity management 
and blockchain, etc.  
Group 9: Investors: Banks, venture capitalist, public and regional fund providers  
Group 10: Other: Academia and public  
Dissemination strategy and measures: Our dissemination strategy will focus on raising awareness of 
DIY4U and its user benefits. This will be achieved by the development and publishing of case studies; 
newsletters; magazine articles and video/animation material. Our approach for disseminating the results 
of DIY4U will cover: (1) Publishing scientific and technical results from WPs in journals and at 
conferences. This activity will allow the scientific community to benefit from outputs that have potential 
to inspire and lead to future scientific research. (2) Trade press and trade fair dissemination to increase 
awareness of DIY4U amongst our target user base. This will include press releases to European 
environment agencies and relevant regulatory bodies.  
We have planned to publish at least 5 pa pers within the project lifespan. These papers will focus on 
topics including: cost, resource and energy efficient potential of the DIY4U approach. Transferrable 
outputs relating to formulation modelling and simulation, and AI/big data.   
We aim to achieve 100,000 viewers of the project website by using digital marketing strategies such as 
search engine optimisation (SEO) and quarterly reviewing/fine-tuning our strategies.   
The European Commission will also be a key dissemination route for DIY4U. The promotion of further 
collaborative Research and Innovation Action (in addition to the technology developed) is crucial in 
gaining the optimum value from pan-EU collaborative projects such as DIY4U. We will provide the EC 
with progress updates suitable for use in promoting Research and Innovation Action to European 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    46  
  
companies. We will also share experience with other EU programme members and potential members 
whenever possible (e.g. at EFFRA events). A list all dissemination measures to be completed within the 
project to reach all DIY4U ‘Target Audiences’ is provided in Table 2.2a.5.  
 
Table 2.2a.5 Dissemination objectives and roles of partners  
Target  Dissemination Activities  Partner  
Responsible  
Dissemination objectives  
All 
 targe
t 
Stakeholder 
s  
Group 1 to  
Group 10  
Project Website  STEF  Ready in Month 1, updated bi -monthly, 100,000 visitors 
during the project.  
Project videos  CTM  One presentation and one video to disseminate the platform 
and fablab MDFs to end-users.  
Brochures, posters  PIC/CPI/ 
 STEF/ VTT  
Communication templates; brochure & poster  
Facebook,  Twitter, 
LinkedIn Groups  
ALL  Over 500 Twitter followers, over 500 likes on Facebook; 
over 250 LinkedIn members.  
DIY4U newsletters  PIC/CPI/  
STEF/IRIS/DCC  
One newsletter every 6 months  
DIY4U community  P&G/PIC/DCC  At least 50 external organisations engaged by project end.  
Press releases  ALL  1 press release per Milestone to be distributed by all 
partners  
Media appearances  ALL  1 newspaper article or media appearance on national 
channels per partner  
Scientific Conferences  ALL  1 conference per technical partner to present results; Active 
distribution of at least 250 leaflets  
Scientific Journals   STEF/CPI/CTM/V 
TT/DCC  
1 Article and publication per technical partner.  
Users  of  
DIY4U  
platform and 
fablab 
MDFs  
Group 1 to  
Group 6  
Dissemination through Events, Workshops, etc  
Open  Innovation  
Competition  
DCC/PIC  Identification and engagement with EU ecosystem of 
SMEs that want to collaborate and underpin business 
opportunities  
EU/National events in 
Manufacturing Domain  
PIC/CPI/VTT/ 
STEF  
Attend 10 EU/National events to promote the DIY4U 
Platform and fablab MDFs.  
Events  CPI/STEF  Promote platform and MDFs at these events. Each 
technical partner will have a target to present DIY4U in at 
least one presentation slot at one event.  
Workshops, Events set by 
consortium  
ALL  
Collaboration with national or European Networks or Initiatives  
EFFRA  ALL  At least one talk at EFFRA.   
euRobotics    CTM/CDY  At least one presentation at euRobotics  
EU  Platforms  like  
EuMAT,  
ManuFUTURE,   
IRIS/DCC/EFF/ 
RDI’UP/DSC  
Disseminate projects results in those Platforms   
EU Initiatives, e.g., 
TagItSmart,AceForm 4.0  
PIC/CPI/ALL  Disseminate projects results within these  Initiatives   
Exploitation plan, strategy and measures:  The consortium will seek to protect the overall DIY4U 
approach by patenting the DIY4U platform as a unique combination of hardware, algorithms and 
software and DIY4U fablab as a novel smart/digital small-scale manufacturing machine for soft matter 
formulated products.  The consortium has followed the EC’s “Horizon 2020 - A Guide to IP 
Management” and prepared a draft consortium agreement encompassing ownership and exploitation 
rights. The intellectual property rights (IPR) arising from this project will be the property of the 
consortium member that has created it. DIY4U’s novel platform and fablab for creating and 
manufacturing formulated products will be protected via patents (DIY4U approach), design rights 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    47  
  
(digital platform, fablab), trademark (digital pla tform and fablab), trade secrets (knowhow) and 
copyright (software integrated in both platform and fablab). The consortium agreement will include 
terms for managing ownership and access to key knowledge (IPR, research data, etc.), allowing the 
partners to collectively and individually pursue market opportunities arising from the project's results. 
The consortium will leverage STEF and CPI extensive knowhow and experience in innovation 
management together with STL’s legal expertise to support third -party in optimally protecting and 
exploiting third-party IPR created during the project. DIY4U draft exploitation plan  covers the ten 
years period beginning from the project implementation phase. The DIY4U exploitation strategy has 
been divided into two major phases:  
Years 1-3 (2019-2022) DIY4U project implementation: This phase will cover the development of the 
DIY4U technology components to TRL6. Alongside the technology development, we will also focus 
on: IP -protecting the exploitable outcomes of the project; po licy and strategy development and 
awareness build-up activities so that we can achieve the target DIY4U membership community. We 
anticipate that at least 1,000 potential users of DIY4U platform and fablab MDFs from stakeholder 
groups 1-6 will participate in the creation and making of customized detergents and soaps.  
Years 1 -7 (2022 -2029): During this phase, we will spin out a company named ‘DIY4U Ltd’ to 
commercialise DIY4U platform and fablab. We aim to achieve a 5,000 -strong DIY4U membership 
community and to drive 510% of global formulation and sales of customised FMCG through DIY4U 
fablabs and platform by 2035. To achieve this, we will continue R&D, dissemination and marketing 
activities. We plan to spend 10% and 20% of revenue generated from the platfor m on marketing and 
R&D activities, respectively. We will employ the following DIY4U branding strategy during marketing.  
Table 2.2a.6 DIY4U Branding Strategy  
DIY4U Vision  
Open innovation digital platform and small-scale manufacturing machines that support customer-driven production all around 
Europe; enabling experimentation to respond to rapid demand changes and shorter time to market - improvement of the 
codesign and co-development capabilities towards a reduction of development costs of new products and services; increasing 
product variety and personalisation for higher customer satisfaction and loyalty;  boosting European competitiveness and 
market share in FMCG sector.  
DIY4U Purpose  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    48  
  
Help EU FMCG sector to adopt open innovation and fablab approaches that will lead to new products with new functionalities 
and shorter time to market; enabling the creation of collaborative production liaising companies, including especially SMEs, 
that will use these new approaches to unroll a wide range of entirely new business opportunities for the benefit of consumers. 
DIY4U will develop and commercialise an open innovation digital platform and small-scale digitally-enabled manufacturing 
machines (fablabs) for the creation and making of customised or persona lised FMCG (particulates and liquids).  
The DIY4U digital platform brings together the EU soft matter FMCG value chain, including manufacturers, suppliers and 
consumers, and provides them with tools to rapidly and collaboratively design and simulate the pe rformance of new 
consumer-centric products. It helps users create personalised/customised products matching their needs and selects the right 
processing conditions for makers, hence streamlining product development time and cost. The platform will enable:  
● Capturing of knowledge and ideas of design and engineering coming from different and even new actors; allowing 
all actors to propose innovative solutions;  
● Sharing and real -time analyses of relevant data and demands from FMCG consumers to inform product d esign. 
Customer feedback, real-time use feedback (anonymised) and associated options;  
● ‘Plug and produce’ formulation creation facilitated by open source product data exchange and standard 
representations of products and processes that ensure the compatibi lity of modelling and simulation with different 
process information systems.  
● Scalability with respect to technological development and soft matter manufacturing application domains;  
● Checking of product compliance to industry/safety standards and regulatory compliance, as well as 
security requirements.  
Fablabs will be used for rapidly making and characterising products designed via the digital platform. The integration of PAT 
and relevant automation into the fablabs will ensure ‘right first time manufacturing', limiting failures/downtime, enhancing 
energy efficiency, reducing operation cost and increasing productivity. MDFs (hosting the developed fablabs) will provide 
open access trial, allowing industry to build confidence in the approach and hence de -risking the adoption and replication of 
DIY4U fablab.  
DIY4U Values  
High quality, reliability and customer satisfaction based on reliable performance  
Brand implementation  
✓ Build consistent brand to reinforce DIY4U image including logo, marketing materials and style guides  
✓ Reflect DIY4U aims and vision in hiring and training staff  
✓ Develop DIY4U platform and fablab support and customer relations to implement DIY4U vision   
✓ Reinforce awareness of DIY4U brand via promotion and marketing material including targeted digital 
marketing campaigns  
2.2-a.4 Strategy for management of research data and knowledge management  
  
2.2-a.4.1 Project data management  
A data management plan (DMP) will be developed to handle data (both exploitable and non -
confidential) generated during the project. The DMP will outline the principles and processes for data 
collection, organisation, management, storage, security, analysis  and sharing during the project. The 
DMP will be essential in ensuring data protection and confidentiality where relevant. A first draft will 
be created by M6 and updated periodically during the project. We will comply with the ISO standard 
ISO 15489 -1:2001 Information and documentation -- Records management and EU General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR). Data created within the project will be treated as confidential. 
Confidential data (designs, specifications, test methods, results, regulatory/standards , product and 
process documentation) will be shared and used on the DIY4U platform only through authorization from 
the owners of the data. Suppliers of products/services on the platform will be asked to provide consent 
for such data to be used for the purpose for which the platform is designed during sign up and provision 
of the information. The use of blockchain/DLT will ensure security, attestation, and granular 
transparency in the base messaging/data passing layer.   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    49  
  
DIY4U will use DLT -based records to c ryptographically prove to its users that data provided has not 
been tampered with, intentionally or accidentally. This will be applied in DIY4U to provide trustworthy 
information about product and service delivery. Non-confidential information generated by the DIY4U 
consortium will be shared more widely via dissemination and communication activities detailed in this 
section. Provided/stored data will only be used for the purpose(s) for which the data was provided. 
DIY4U cost for curation and preservation of  data generated by the partners during the project will be 
covered as part of the grant received, data preservation costs beyond the lifespan of the project will be 
covered by the consortium partners with part of the revenue generated by the platform and fablab MDFs.   
Data Storage: Research Data Storage Facility (RDSF) will be used to store software and training data 
during the development phase of the project. We will ensure Backup procedures are robust (overnight 
backup, copies held remotely on server (local and cloud)) and secured access is in place. Once live, the 
distributed architecture of the DIY4U system provides its own guarantees for redundancy, backup and 
security of the software and data within the system.  
Metadata: No special metadata/cataloguing difficulty is expected during the project. Simple file/folder 
naming will be used to locate each piece of data as it is needed. A spreadsheet will be used to log details. 
Extra documentation will be created for dissemination purposes. In addition to serving as a data storage 
facility for the duration of the project, IRIS will undertake to preserve each of the digital outputs 
mentioned above, for three years beyond the end of the project on the Research Data Storage Facility, 
undertaking refreshment of storage media as required. These materials will be available on request. In 
order to make the data easily discoverable, digital object identifier will be used. The data generated will 
be under license protection and will be made available freely for educati on purpose. Enough data will 
be provided so that peers can validate the authenticity of the data and results. The data will be made 
usable beyond the original purpose if deemed necessary. The data format will be such that it can be 
easily converted to othe r formats so that interoperability is ensured. Once live, the distributed 
architecture of DIY4U will provide its own guarantees for the security, persistence, interoperability and 
discoverability of metadata.  
2.2-a.4.2 Knowledge management and open access strategy  
To ensure that all new knowledge and intellectual property generated by the project is managed properly 
and adequately protected, the consortium has developed a preliminary IPR strategy. This strateg y will 
be further developed in an intellectual property rights agreement to complement the relevant articles of 
the Consortium Agreement which will be used as the starting point for the establishment of the entity to 
operate the DIY4U platform and fablab c ommercialisation after the project. The partners will adopt a 
proactive policy pursuing all possible patents and licensing opportunities arising from this project. 
Licensing of the technology to third parties outside the consortium will be considered by the Exploitation 
& Dissemination Manager. There are no existing or future commercial agreements between any of the 
partners that will impose limitations on the patenting and exploitation of results. All the foregoing 
clauses will be stated and formalized in the Collaboration Agreement (CA). The background (prior 
contract) IPR will remain the property of the originating organisation but will where appropriate be 
made available for use by the consortium during the project to further develop DIY4U technology 
components. During the project implementation period, to enhance the credibility and acceptability of 
the project results, we will follow the relevant standards related to the development of DIY4U platform 
and fablab.   
A draft IPR agreement that comprehensiv ely addresses the IPR issues in the project will be produced 
and agreed by consortium members. The IPR framework for the operation of the DIY4U platform and 
fablab MDFs with external users will also be agreed by the consortium and adapted according to the 
needs of the users. IPR agreement will be the responsibility of the Exploitation & Dissemination 
Manager. The agreement will be a combined plan with a clear, reliable and robust policy regarding the 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    50  
  
protection of IP, including the mechanisms for policing and defence of any patents and other IPR. The 
following tasks will be led by the appointed Exploitation & Dissemination Manager, with support from 
the rest of the consortium.  
● A thorough worldwide patent search to identify any prior disclosures, complementa ry IPR or 
other relevant data, assessing novelty and patentability (an update of the work performed during 
the proposal preparation).  
● Peer review of the knowledge or technology both within the consortium and (under the terms of 
a concluded confidentiality agreement) from key-opinion leaders in the relevant fields, assessing 
novel and inventiveness.  
● Drafting and filing of a robust patent application to establish a priority date.  
● Development of content and claims of the patent application, along with ongoi ng reviews of 
any other work in the same/similar fields, to ensure uniqueness and maximum coverage.  
● Periodic review of the patent application by the consortium to ensure relevance, value and 
commitment to defend.  
● Where appropriate, filing of a full patent application and pursuit to grant of the patent.  
The overall strategy for IPR will be coordinated at a Steering Committee level by the Exploitation & 
Dissemination Manager who will report his or her activities on a six -monthly basis unless a matter of 
urgency arises. This will include specific provisions for ownership of the IPR by the consortium 
members and the granting of licenses.   
The consortium will also set the framework for the generation, use and protection of IPR belonging to 
the users of the DI Y platform and fablab. It is anticipated that each use case will have to be evaluated 
individually to find the right IPR solution, for example there may be particular expectations with regard 
to IPR depending on the source of finance. The basic principle will be that the results are owned by the 
entity generating them. Under commercial operation, alternative arrangements may be agreed. To the 
extent that end-users are supported by European funds then the results will be owned by the beneficiary 
generating them and will be exploited and disseminated for the benefit of the EU.   
2.2-b Communication activities  
The project's communication activities will follow a cohesive line built around an easy -identifiable 
digital identity, centred around the project's web site and the digital platform in connection with relevant 
existing initiatives and projects through social media mainly: Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Newsletters 
and Press releases.   
A Media attention will be sought at all levels and will include the printed press, radio, television, 
specialised press magazines and the digital press. Moreover, project brochures, flyers, webinars, virtual 
info-days and electronic newsletter will be deployed on a regular frequency to inform news and updates 
about the project and clusters activities.  
Within this cohesive communication framework, three aspects will receive spec ific attention. First, it 
creates a common purpose between the project members and the target people who participate at the 
trainings and the workshops; thus, also contributing to the homogenization of the various activities that 
are carried out in WP11. Second, it is also a means to let the project be widely known and attractive.  
Based on a participatory approach, the project's communication strategy is focused on optimizing the 
communication means between consumers, makers and other actors, to facilitate  the circulation of 
information, discussion rooms of mutual interest topics, knowledge exchange and opportunities for 
innovative DIY4U products. Communication is a fundamental element in the process of understanding, 
knowledge sharing and innovation creation.  
Finally, any communication activity related to this project (including in electronic form, via social 
media, website etc.) and major results funded by the grant will:  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    51  
  
- Display clearly the European Commission (EC) and DIY4U logos,  
- Include the following mention: "This project has received funding from the European Union’s 
Horizon  
2020 under grant agreement No 870148"  
Table 2.2b List of communication strategy and KPIs for each  
Communication 
strategy  
Target 
group  
Means  of 
communication  
 Communicat 
ion level  When  Responsi 
ble  Performance indicators  
Objectives and 
basic information 
on project, public 
deliverables  
FMCG  
 Industry, 
Policy  
 Makers,   Consumers  
and 
stakeholders  
DIY4U website  International  M1-M24  SINTEF  
5000 visits and 100 
downloads per public 
deliverable one year after 
the project’s end  
Project’s activities  DIY4U Users 
Newsletter, social 
media (Facebook  
page, linked -in 
groups, twitter 
hashtag)  
   
 International  
  M1-M30  All 
partners  
300 registered mails, 500 
likes on Facebook page, 
12 linked -in posts and 24 
twitter tweets per year  
Achievements  
General  
Public,  
Investors  
Two  YouTube 
promotional 
videos, leaflets  
  
Europe  M3, M30  CTM  250 views per video in 12 
months from release  
Lessons learnt  Advisors  Best  practices 
handbook  
 Europe  M30  
P&G,  
CDY  & 
PIC  
 50after the project’s end  
downloads in one year  
Publications  
Researchers,  
Research  
Centres  
High impact 
journals (at least 
one publication 
from each WPs; 3, 
4, 5, 6 and 8)  
  
  
 International  
  
M10, 
M20, M24 
and M34  
 All 
partners  
5  publications  and  5 
citations in three years  
3. Implementation