2.1 Expected impacts   
2.1.1 Expected impact as set out in the work plan, under DT-FOF-05  
DIY4U will contribute to the expected impact of DT-FOF-05-2019 as detailed in this subsection.  
Establish Open-Innovation networks for manufacturing that support customer-driven production all 
around Europe: DIY4U Open Innovation B2B/B2C digital platform will connect consumers with the 
European value chain for particulate/liquid FMCG, providing them with digital tools and resources that 
allow all actors in the innovation ecosystem (including consumers) to participate in the co -design and 
co-development of new products addressing real -time consumer needs. This European knowledge 
management and design platform will facilitate the sharing of knowledg e (e.g. ingredient information 
including regulatory compliance and safety data, process information) and enhance the ability of non -
formulation experts (e.g. consumers) to digitally design and simulate the performance of new 
personalised or customized particulate/liquid FMCG. The platform’s open source product data exchange 
and standard representations of products and processes, coupled with formulation modelling and 
simulation tools, will enable a ‘plug and produce’ design approach, allowing the European supply chain 
to collaboratively and rapidly respond to customer needs. Real -time analysis of feedback and demand 
from consumers (using integrated AI/data analytics tools) and sharing of such data on the highly visible 
and transparent platform will enable th e European FMCG innovation ecosystem to efficiently 
collaborate on the design and development FMCG addressing the real -time customer needs/demand. 
The developed MDF will provide open access DIY4U fablab capabilities to European FMCG 
stakeholders (including  SMEs, new actors and consumers), allowing them to manufacture the 
personalised/customized FMCG designed on the DIY4U platform. This will de -risk small -scale 
manufacture of personalised/customised FMCG, promoting the wider adoption of the DIY4U Open 
Innovation and customer-driven production approach across the European FMCG sector.   
Creation of specific business models for the engineering of customised solutions, particularly for 
SMEs, rapid demand changes and shorter time to market:  The project will develop business models 
that allow the European FMCG sector to adopt the DIY4U platform and fablabs for on -demand co-
design and co -manufacture of personalised/customised products. The total perceived value of 
customisation can be described by:   
(1) Mass-customized product value, which is reflected in three dimensions: utilitarian, uniqueness 
and selfexpressiveness value, and   
(2) Experiential co -design value, which is reflected in two dimensions: hedonic and creative 
achievement value. Studies show customers are willing to pay more for customised products: +30% for 
t-shirts, +200% for watches.  
Within the business value chain, we c onsider 12 main activities (Understand and animate market, 
Develop ecosystem of (formulation) designers, Develop ecosystem of fablabs, Sell ingredients, Develop 
customers audience, Co-create/co-design formula, Sell formulation, Manufacture formulation, Del iver 
formulation, Use formulation, Recycle container) that drive to two realistic business models. In the first 
one, the brand leads (online) sales and delivery while in the second the retailer leads (in-store) sales and 
delivery for specific customers and/or micro-segments of customers.  
Some specific stakeholders may be considered like   
1) Designer, for formulation configuration and selling;  
2) Service provider for using formulation (e.g. detergents for clothes washing or cosmetics for providing 
make-up services);   
3) Recycler for reuse or recycling of out-of-spec formulations and containers.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    32  
  
  
 
Improvement of the co -design and co-development capabilities towards a reduction of development 
costs of new products and services: The DIY4U platform and fablab MDFs will facilitate co-design and 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    33  
  
co-development of particulate/liquid FMCG, reducing development costs and time to market for new 
personalised/customised FMCG and associated services. The block -chain enabled digital platform 
streamlines co-design and codevelopment of new products whilst fablabs together with the platform 
make small-scale manufacture of personalised/customized products economically viable.  
Increase of product variety and personalisation for higher customer satisfaction and loyalty:  The 
DIY4U digital platform will be furnished with user -friendly capabilities and information that allows 
anyone to design and simulate the performance of particulate/liquid FMCG meeting their individual 
needs. This will facilitate product personalisation and increase product variety due to the participation 
of new actors in product design. DIY4U fablabs will make small -scale/on-demand manufacture of 
personalised/customised products practical and costefficient. Studies (Merle 2008) show that sales of 
customised products depend both on product perceived value and customer experience perceived value. 
Thus, the targeted co-design experience will provide high experience.  
Improving the value proposition and governance models for DLT -based systems as part of the 
European Blockchain Services Infrastructure: DLT has been a topic of great interest across the EU 
due to its promise of creating new trust networks betw een sectors of the economy, as shown by the 
signing of the European Blockchain Partnership agreement by 27 EU national leaders in April 2018. 
DIY4U’s DLT-based solution is part of improving the European Blockchain Services Infrastructure. 
The platform is intended to be open, permissive for other parties to extend and innovate upon, will enable 
secure data exchange related to FMCG, and increase the overall knowledge base of DLT across the EU. 
It will be one of the few at -scale deployments of DLT by the end o f the project, proving the value 
proposition of this technology and therefore improving the business opportunities for hundreds of DLT 
SMEs across the EU who currently have to ‘hard sell’ to every new customer.  
2.1.2 Improving innovation capacity, integration of new knowledge and EU competitiveness  
DIY4U will enhance the innovation capacity of the European FMCG sector by providing it with the 
digital infrastructures and transformative business models required to pioneer the shift from large-scale 
manufacturing to industrial companies of DIY, fablabs and makers. A successful DIY4U project will 
give the European industry the confidence to further develop and commercialise the Open Innovation 
and fablab/DIY approaches after the completion of the project. Tech nical skills relating to the new 
disruptive design/manufacturing technologies and new approach to manufacture and supply will be 
transferable (within the consortium and externally). The DIY4U platform and open access fablab MDFs 
will serve as fertile grounds for strengthening the EU’s IP base in particulate/liquid FMCG development 
and manufacture, through further development of background IP from partners and the generation of 
foreground IP within the platform and MDFs.  Wider European adoption of the trans formative DIY4U 
approaches will enhance the competitiveness of the European FMCG sector. Real -time analysis of 
consumer feedback and demand via the DIY4U platform will enable the European sector to respond in 
real-time to evolving customer demand and needs  ahead of competing nations and regions (e.g. USA 
and Asia). The DIY4U digital platform will allow the generation and use of new knowledge and 
formulation design ideas coming from different and even new European stakeholders. This will lead to 
the creation of a wide variety of new innovative products for European and global markets. The new 
MDFs will offer fablab training and provide open access facilities for European FMCG stakeholders 
(especially SMEs) to manufacture and test new personalised or customise d products. The digital 
platform and fablab MDFs will de-risk new product design and development and reduce time to market, 
hence enhancing the competitiveness of European stakeholders. Increased product variety and 
personalisation for higher customer sati sfaction and loyalty (achieved thanks to DIY4U), will further 
enhance the competitiveness of the European sector.   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    34  
  
DIY4U open access model and collaborative platform will allow for cross-fertilisation and exchange of 
knowledge in a pre -competitive high-risk innovation space. Its dedicated training programmes/events 
(student placements, apprenticeships, workshops, conferences, and equipment training) and use of 
DIY4U platform digital tools will help ups kill the current and future EU workforce for academia, 
regulatory bodies and industry, further enhancing EU competitiveness.   
The generic nature of technologies (e.g. multi -party process engineering DLT, plug in features, 
interoperability of modules and scalability of the KB) integrated in the DIY4U digital platform allows 
for easy transfer of the platform to other European industrial sectors; this will only require a replacement 
of product/process information and relevant models. The fablab generic approach (highlighted in section 
1.3.1) will allow it to be applied to a wide range FMCG as well as soft matter products in other industrial 
sectors.  
2.1.2.1 Creating new market opportunities for European equipment manufacturers and DIY4U users: 
The industrial adoption of fablabs in the FMCG sector will create a major new business opportunity for 
European process equipment manufacturers such as consortium partner, CDY – a robotic and 
automation solution provider. Access to DIY4U digital platform and fablabs will unroll a wide range of 
entirely new business opportunities for European particulate/liquid FMCG stakeholders (i.e. 
manufacturers, ingredient suppliers, innovation SMEs and entrepreneurs) to the benefit of consumers. 
DIY4U will facilitate the integration o f new functionalities into their existing products as well as the 
creation of entirely new products driven by real -time analysis of customer needs/demand. Beyond the 
project, the DLT -enabled DIY4U platform will also allow the signing of digitised legal con tracts 
between stakeholders with automated execution of terms; this will facilitate collaboration and hence 
drive innovation.  
2.1.2.2 Strengthening economic growth and competitiveness of European industry: Although Europe 
is the world’s largest economic bloc, with a GDP >€14 trillion in 2014, its growth has been progressively 
declining.10 This is particularly true for the European manufacturing sector (responsible for over 80% 
EU exports and 80% of private research and innovation) which reach a low of 15.3%  in 201411. The 
European Commission estimates11 that the digital revolution could generate an “additional 2.1% of GDP 
growth over the baseline. Digitising the European FMCG sector via adoption of DIY4U digital platform 
and fablabs will help in reviving the FMCG manufacturing sector, creating new jobs and safeguarding 
existing jobs. We estimate (section 2.2-a.1) that DIY4U will stimulate the creation of at l east 36 direct 
jobs and over 200 indirect jobs in the EU FMCG sector within 7 years after the completion of the project. 
For every new manufacturing job created, 1.5-2 jobs will be created in other sectors.7  
2.1.3 Environmental, social and other impacts of DIY4U  
Reduced waste, improved resource efficiency and enhanced customer satisfaction:  On-demand 
production of customer -centric products will reduce waste, improve resource efficiency and enhance 
customer satisfaction as consumers would be more likely to  maximise the use of products tailored to 
their individual needs. For example, detergent formulations can be tailored to the specific season of the 
year – in the summer months having a formulation better able to tackle ‘outdoor’ stains such as grass 
may be  attractive to a family with young children etc. Likewise, the formulation could be tweaked 
between winter and summer to reflect that people are wearing warmer clothes and hence different types 
of fabrics. The ‘just in time’ product manufacturing will relax the requirements for product stability and 
 
10 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/03/the-digital-transformation-of-europe/ 11 R. Davies, 
Industry 4.0 Digitalisation for productivity and growth, European Parliamentary Research Services, 2015.  
11 Dimitri Lorenzani, Janos Varga, European Commission, The Economic Impact of Digital Structural Reforms,  
European Economy. Economic Papers 529. September 2014. doi: 10.2765/70944  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    35  
  
stabilisers which are traditionally built into products such that they can reasonably be expected to sit in 
a warehouse or distribution centre for many months at elevated temperature and humidity, etc. For 
powders, this may result in reducing the addition of anti-agents etc. whilst for liquids, it may lead to the 
easier addition of environmentally benign components with stability issues such as enzymes. Better 
performing detergents developed via the DIY4U platfor m and fablab can lead to a reduced wash time 
and hence less fabric going down the drain. ~700,000 fibres currently end up in water per domestic 
wash12.  Better performing detergents will also reduce both wash temperature and water consumption.  
Fablabs will allow consumers packaging choice to reduce plastics waste, enabling consumers to make 
ecologically driven choices at a local level. The DIY4U approach will lead to more agile response to 
changes in demand, further benefiting consumers and the society.   
Small-scale production industries lend themselves to fewer employees per company – making 
management easy and economical. Closer relationships between employers and workers in small-scale 
industries will cause employers to look after the well-being of their employees whilst employees, on the 
other hand, would consider their work as theirs, leading to dispute -free and seamless operations. New 
DIY4U industries will also benefit from  
  
the existing external economies (e.g. transport, electricity and communication facilities, banking and 
insurance services. etc) of large-scale production companies, making their operations cost-competitive.  
Create employment: DIY4U will deliver digital de sign, innovation and manufacturing infrastructure 
which are currently not readily available for most entrepreneurs, start -ups and SMEs. The DIY4U 
approach will allow smaller companies with niche or innovative products to obtain a foothold in their 
respective markets in the high volume/low margin sectors where success is traditionally dependent on 
obtaining ‘shelf space’ for your products in large retailers/supermarkets. Small -scale production could 
be started by anyone with a small capital. This will boost the ability of new actors to become involved 
in the creation, making and commercialization of innovative products, creating employment. Many 
unemployed EU citizens would become employed in the newly developed small-scale industries.    
Political and Digita l Single Market impact:  A key priority of EU governments is to promote the 
development and adoption of manufacturing and value chain innovations that enhance the 
competitiveness and productivity of European industries, increasing exports, reducing imports and 
assuring national and regional supplies. DIY4U fits this priority and will help EU governments to realise 
the digital transformation vision. “The industrial revolution of our time is digital. … As companies aim 
to scale up across the Single Market, public e-services should also meet today's needs: be digital, open 
and cross-border by design. The EU is the right scale for the digital times  
― Andrus Ansip, Vice -President for the Digital Single Market” The digital transformation of EU 
business and society offers a massive growth potential for Europe. European industry can build on its 
strengths in advanced digital technologies and its strong presence in traditional sectors such as FMCG 
to capitalise on the broad range of opportunities that technologies suc h as advanced manufacturing, 
robotics, IOT, big data, artificial intelligence and DLT/blockchain offer. However, EU businesses are 
not yet taking full advantage of these advanced technologies or innovative business models offered by 
the collaborative economy.13 DIY4U will strengthen the digital capacity of EU FMCG sector, enabling 
EU stakeholders to capture a considerable share in the emerging markets for the products and services 
of the future.  
 
12 https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-45770358  
13 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/digital-transformation_en  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    36  
  
Legal impact: The use of blockchain/DLT-based messaging system and process automation with ‘smart 
contracts’ will facilitate compliance with contractual agreements. To enable audit and reporting, DIY4U 
will include a reporting module that will extract messaging data from the ledger in a format that can be 
analyzed from a legal perspective (e.g. time sequenced communications between the designer, pulling 
in ingredient IP from a third party, testing this virtually using machine intelligence, and passing the final 
mixture to the fablab for preparation). Blockchain/DLT wi ll also ensure consistency of transactions 
between parties collaborating on the creation and making of new products, tracking liability and helping 
to avoid IP conflicts. Moreover, using a GDPR -compliant architecture for digital security, data 
protection and privacy by design will contribute to better protection of consumers’ privacy and personal 
data.  
2.1.4 Barriers to achieving the expected impacts and consortium strategy:  
We expect DIY4U outputs (digital platform and fablab MDFs) to be ready for market deployment shortly 
after the end of this project, hence minimal post-project financing will be required prior to market launch. 
Follow-up steps (operation, maintenance and continuous improvements of both the platform and fablab) 
will be funded from early revenue generated by the platform. We expect the eventual volume 
manufacture and deployment of fablab machines in supermarkets, homes or dedicated small -scale 
factories to be funded by a joint venture from relevant DIY4U partners and private investment fro m 
industry. This project will effectively de-risk such private investment by demonstrating both the demand 
for and practicality of the proposed DIY4U approach. The main foreseeable barriers, obstacles or 
framework conditions that may determine whether and to what extent the expected impacts will be 
achieved are summarised in table 2.1.  
  
  
  
  
  
Table 2.1 Main Barriers to achieving DIY4U expected impacts  
Barrier, obstacle or framework 
condition 
DIY4U consortium strategy  
Fears around breach of confidentiality 
and IP rights: Industry stakeholders might 
be opposed to using the open innovation 
platform due to fear of breach of 
confidentiality or disclosure of trade 
secrets. Barriers may therefore result from 
the legal framework such as the General 
Data Protection Regulation 2016/679/EU 
(GDPR) and the European Charter of 
Fundamental Rights.  
 GDPR compliance measures integrated in the design and  
development of the platform will ensure the security of users’ data  and 
intellectual property (IP). These will be addressed by analysing  the 
legal obligations and monitoring practices in regulation  (European 
Data Protection Board, former ARTICLE 29 Working  Party)  and 
standardisation (ISO, IEC, CEN, CENELEC, etc.) in  support of those 
obligations, in the project’s data protection and  privacy requirements 
definition and compliance monitoring.   
 Use of Blockchain/DLT will ensure data security and transparency, 
allowing data and information to be shared without being copied. A 
blockchain cyberattack requires simultaneously attack of all copies 
of the same shared database. We will proactively disseminate the 
integrated data security and IP protection measures of the platform.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    37  
  
Industry’s reluctance to adopt 
disruptive business models: Large FMCG 
manufacturers and their suppliers might be 
reluctant to adopt business models that 
pose a major threat to their current business 
 DIY4U is bringing the relevant value chain to gether to develop  
innovative business models that will represent a win for all  
stakeholders in the innovation and manufacturing ecosystem.  
Increasing demand for customization/personalisation is pushing the  
large companies to embrace DIY4U-type approaches as differentiators 
to deliver greater customer satisfaction and enhance their 
competitiveness. Our consortium benefits from the support of a top 5 
global FMCG company (P&G).   
Lack of customers involvement in the 
codesign and manufacturing process  
The use cases definition process will benchmark customers role in 
3D-printed products design and manufacturing  
Regulatory and standard requirements: 
The lack of standards for the re formulated 
products might present a major product 
safety challenge  
 The consortium will engage regulatory authorities (e.g. AISE) and  
use input from FMCG ingredient suppliers/manufacturers (e.g. P&G)  
to ensure its developments comply with relevant standards and 
regulations (e.g. Regulation (EC) No 648/2004). Only ingredients that 
have previously been approved to meet industry and regulator y 
standards will be used. The standard and regulatory information for 
ingredients and processing options will be displayed on the highly 
visible and transparent platform. The digital design and performance 
simulation tools will ensure that only intrinsical ly safe formulations 
can be designed and tested prior to manufacture.