4. Fossen, M., Schümann, H. Experimental Study of the Relative Effect of Pressure Drop and Flow 
Rate on the Droplet Size Downstream a Pipe Restriction. Journal of Dispersion Science and 
Technology (2016).  
5. Panjwani, B., Amiri, A., Mo, S., Fossen, M., Linga, H., Pauchard, V. Dense Packed Layer  
Modeling in Oil-Water Dispersions: Model Description, Experimental Verification, and Code  
Demonstration, Journal of Dispersion Science and Technology 36 (10), 2015, 1527-1537.  
Relevant Projects   
1. Intensified by Design® for the intensification of proces ses involving solids handling funded under 
the call H2020-SPIRE-2015 (SPIRE-08-2015 - Solids handling for intensified process technology).   
2. Effective Handling of Bulk Solids with Focus on Reduction of Erosion and Scale Formation; funded 
by Norwegian Research Council under BIA and various industrial partners   
3. Improving Efficiency of Offshore Drill-cuttings Handling Process; funded by Norwegian Research 
Council under PETROMAKS II and AkerBP ASA   
4. "B-SMART: Brain -specific, Modular and Active RNA Therapeutics", H2020, NMBP -10-2016, 
20172021 (https://b-smart-project.eu/)  
5. "Smartfish Nutridrug: Efficient oral drug delivery system for the treatment of cancer and infectious 
diseases", RCN Nano2021 Innovation project, 2016-2019  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Dr Chandana Ratnayake Gender: 
Male  
Chandana Ratnayake got his bachelor degree (BSc Eng - Hons) in Mechanical Engineering from 
University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. He possesses MSc in Process Technology from Telemark 
University College, Porsgrunn and PhD in Powder Technology from Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim. Chandana joined Tel -Tek (later became SINTEF Tel -Tek), in 
1999 as a PhD student and after completion of Doctorate, he has been working in different positions in 
POSTEC. He has been involving in many industrial projects, NFR and EU funded projects, covering 
different aspects of powder technology; bulk material storage, transport and processing. Chandana has 
published his R&D contributions in many international refereed journals, conferences and seminars. 
He also works as a reviewer of international journals and fund application assessment panels. He is the 
Norwegian representative of the Working Party on Mechanics of Particulate Solids in EFCE (European 
Federation of Chemical Engineering). Chandana has an Adjunct position i n University College of 
Southeast Norway, as a Professor II in Powder Technology. Chandana has over 15 years’ experience 
in collaborative R&D project management. He has acted as Technical lead and Project Manager for 
several national and EU projects at SIN TEF. Chandana will act as the Coordinator for the DIY4U 
project.  
Name: Dr Jana Chladek Gender: 
Female  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    60  
  
Jana Chladek, senior scientist, has worked in the powder technology group at SINTEF for more than 
10 years. She has a Ms. degree from the Institute of Chemical Technology in Prague, Czech Republic 
(2003) and a PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Waterloo, Canada (2007). 
She has worked in various projects, both research and industrial, related to powder handling and 
pneumatic transport. She has experience as project manager from national and EU funded research 
projects.  
Name: Dr Wilhelm Robert Glomm  
Gender: Male  
Wilhelm Robert Glomm obtained is Cand Scient degree at University of Bergen in 2000 and his PhD 
degree at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) in 2004. He worked as RCN 
Postdoctoral Fellow at Dept. of Chemical Engineering, NTNU (2004 -2006) and thereafter as a 
Professor in Polymer Science and Nanotechnology at the Dept. of Chemical Engineering, NTNU 
(2006-2016). From 2013, Dr. Glomm works as a Senior Research Scientist in the group pf Polymer 
Particles and Surface Chemistry, Dept. of Biotechnology and Nanomedicine at SINTEF Industry. Dr. 
Glomm has extensive competence in fabrication of hybrid organic -inorganic nanogels for controlled 
drug release; characterization of plasmonic nanomaterials; characterization of protein/polymer 
nanoparticle interactions, tailored encapsulation of release of active compounds in specific 
physicochemical environments. Dr. Glomm has authored or co -authored 86 peer -reviewed scientific 
papers (h-index = 22, 2775 total citations), and three book chapters. He has r eceived the Akzo Nobel 
Nordic Researcher Award within surface - and colloid chemistry in 2009 and the SEBM Best Paper 
Award for 2011 in the Experimental Biology category, for the article in Experimental Biology and 
Medicine, 2011, 236, 1342-1350 (co-authorship).  
Name: Dr Akhilesh Kumar Srivastava  
Gender: Male  
Akhilesh Kumar Srivastava obtained a Ph.D. degree in the area of materials science and engineering 
from NTU (Singapore) in 2009. He is currently working as a senior scientist in the Department of 
SINTEF TelTek where he is managing the activities of SINTEF TelTek in a Centre for 
Environmentfriendly Energy Research (FME), HighEff, which is a consortium of 14 research and 37 
industrial partners.   
Prior to joining SINTEF Tel-Tek in 2013, he worked at Risø DTU National Laboratory for Sustainable 
Energy (Denmark) and Miljøbil Grenland (Norway). He has several years’ R&D experience in the area 
of powders processing and characterization for various applications. He has previously worked with 
two EU 7th framework programmes (METSOFC and eFuture) , one H2020 -SPIRE-2015 project IbD 
and several other industrial consultancy and nationally funded projects. He has several international 
patent applications to his credit. He has also published several articles in various international journals, 
book and conference proceedings. He was included in “expert pool” for one of the call topics in Horizon 
2020. He is also a reviewer of various international journals.   
Name: Dr Martin Fossen Gender: 
Male  
Martin Fossen obtained his BSc degree in Chemical Engineering, University College of Telemark 
(2000), his MSc degree (2004) and PhD degree (2007) in Chemical Engineering at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology (NTNU). He worked as a Research Scientist at SINTEF 
Petroleum AS in 2007 -2017 and from 2018, he works as a Senior Research Scientist at SINTEF 
Industry (SINTEF AS). Dr. Fossen has extensive research experience in characterization of crude oils, 
flow assurance, gas hydrates, emulsions, fluid chemistry , surface and colloid chemistry, molecular 
modelling.  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    61  
  
N 
o.  
Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
2  Procter  &  Gamble  
Technical Centres Ltd  
P&G  Industry   UK  
  
Organisation Description:  
Procter & Gamble (P&G) is a global leader in the fast-moving consumer goods industry, focused on 
providing branded consumer packaged goods of superior quality and value to improve the lives of our 
consumers around the world.  Today our products are sold in more than 180 countries and territories 
and we have on the ground operations in approximately 70 countries.  The company is engaged in the 
development and commercialisation of a wide range of daily-use products, examples of such include 
Ariel, Lenor, Flash, Swiffer, Pampers, Always, Pantene, Herbal Essences, Oral B and Gillette. We use 
our research and development and consumer insights to provide superior products and packaging to 
meet the needs and improve the lives of our consumers.  Newcastle Innovation Centres (NIC) has 
global responsibility for the development of P&G’s Fabric Care dry laundry detergent products for 
both the consumer market & the professional cleaning sector. NIC also leads Hygiene work across 
multiple P&G product categories and is also the company’s centre of excellence in cleaning 
technology & enzyme research.  
Relevant Publications:  
1. R&D and process development for major P&G brands   
2. Development of laundry detergent flexible pilot plant   
3. Numerous powder processing and practical development publications linked with previous bid  
Chariot   
Relevant Projects:  
• P&G UK led a Chariot  UK AMSCI £18Million, powder processing grant  
• Spray drying tower – Innovateuk  
• P&G UK was involved in the FP7 Marie Curie ITN project PARDEM & TMAPP, hosting 1 ESR.   
• P&G UK contributed through many Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC) (UK) and Technology Strategy Board projects on granular material characterisation, 
agglomeration, spray drying, encapsulation and development of modelling & simulation 
techniques.  
Infrastructure/Equipment:   
The following facilities are available:  
• Characterisation expertise in flow, porosimetry, density, microscopy, particle strength and thermal 
analysis as well as rheology of complex fluids.   
• Expertise in running pilot plant and large scale spray dryers, agglomerators, mixers, bins, hoppers 
and feeders.   
• Modelling and Simulation expertise of bulk powder flow and related issues.   
• Dedicated support and licensing of software/open-source codes related to CFD, DEM, FEM. 
Namely: ANSYS, Fluent, COMSOL, Abaqus, PFC3D, DigiPac, LIGGGHTS. High performance 
computing facilities of over 10,000 cores for running large scale simulations.  
• Design of Experiments, statistical analysis software, and digital image analysis tools.   
   

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    62  
  
  
  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Mr Paul Gould Gender: 
Male  
Background: Mr P Gould is a senior technologist & project manager with over 20 years experience & 
a successful track record of delivering over 50+ technically challenging R&D projects totalling 
£100MM+, both internally for P&G and externally with P&G’s supplychain partners (e.g. BASF, 
Clariant, DOW Chemicals, etc.). The vast majority of these projects have resulted in significant 
supply chain market value creation for P&G. During this 20 years’ experience, Paul has worked in 
China 6 years & has a deep understanding of the barriers preventing low cost supply of particle 
products into low income markets. Most recently Paul was the program leader for the Chariot 
consortium – a UK funded consortium across several university and SME partners – which has been 
successful in inventing new process technologies to enable supply chain projects. Relevant 
Experience:  
• Currently responsible for the P&G’s Powder Detergent R&D manufacturing and technical support 
across Greater Europe factories.  
• Project leader for 18MM£ UK funded Chariot consortium with 8 partners and 40 individuals 
involved.  
• Named inventor in 30+ patents for powder processes and detergent formulations  
• 7 years leading ‘Front End Innovation’ department for future & breakthrough powder detergent 
formulations and processes  
• Experience leading teams and projects across factories in Europe, Russia, Middle East & Africa, 
Latin America & Asia, with 6 years based in China.  
Education:  
• Master of Chemical Engineering with Environmental management University of Birmingham, UK  
Name: Stefan Egan Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Stefan is Senior Engineer with Procter & Gamble at the Newcastle Innovation Centre in the UK, with 
14 years of experience in R&D for FMCG formulated products. He has specialized in scale-up of 
particle making processes (emulsification, extrusion, spray drying), and has experience in UK open 
innovation (collaboration with UK universities, Associate Member of EPSRC Peer Review College), 
with prior experience in participating on grant funded projects.   
His current research areas are on scale-up strategies and digital technology integration (sensors, 
models and process control) for laundry detergent spray dryers.  Relevant Experience:  
1. R&D and process development for major P&G brands   
2. Development of laundry detergent flexible pilot plant  Education:  
Stefan holds an MSc in Chemical and Process Engineering from the University of Strathclyde   
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    63  
  
N 
o.  
Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
3  The Centre for Process 
Innovation  
https://www.ukcpi.com/  
CPI  RTO  UK  
  
Organisation Description:  
The Centre for Process Innovation is a UK based Technology Innovation Centre and the process arm 
of the High Value Manufacturing Catapult. Established to support the UK process manufacturing 
industry, CPI collaborates with universities, SMEs and large corporates to help overcome innovation 
challenges and develop next generation products and processes. Operating a cross a broad range of 
technologies and markets (including FMCG, Healthcare, Agriculture, Electronics, Energy, 
Transportation and Construction), we support our partners at every step from concept to market; 
business support to technology development; and from scale up to supply chain intervention.  
CPI supports a sector which currently exports almost £50bn a year with a contribution of over £15bn a 
year to the UK’s Gross Domestic Product 1. CPI leverages its assets, providing significant return on 
investment which nurtures and supports innovation in this sector. This is imperative if we are to 
compete in a global market place. However, operating within this innovation space is not without risk, 
both micro and macro.  
At CPI we understand the risks involved and have developed the CPI Innovation Integrator® model to 
support businesses and projects; identifying challenges and opportunities whilst supporting on risk 
mitigation to prove that new products and processes are viable before moving onto full scale production. 
CPI has over £160m open access development and prototyping facilities and host four dedicated 
national innovation centres (Biologics, Formulation, Industrial Biotechnology and Biorefining, and 
Printable Electronics) which underpin major markets such as FMCG, healthcare, electronics, aerospace, 
automotive, materials, and energy. These state -of-the-art, digitally-enabled open access facilities are 
available for CPI’s partners to utilize in the proofing, development and commercialization of their new 
products or processes. Companies, working with CPI, are able to use CPI’s facilities and work with 
CPI’s highly skilled team to demonstrate their products or processes before investing substantial 
amounts of money in capital equipment and training.   
A combination of CPI’s innovation processes and outstanding scientific and business expertise enables 
its partners to de-risk their projects and get more products to market faster and cheaper. CPI has helped 
over 1,000 companies to develop new products and  processes; delivering ~1,100 projects worth 
>£415m, with ~4,000 SME engagements across the UK, EU and the world. Since 2012, CPI delivered 
>1,800 business support activities with private sector clients (mostly SMEs), helping to generate £2bn 
additional GDP.   
CPI uses its strong networks, as a Catapult Centre, to bring together a range of partners in the delivery 
of innovation projects. CPI, alongside Calysta USA and Otto Simon Ltd (OSL), won the Team Award 
at the prestigious Institution of Chemical Engine ers (IChemE) Global Awards 2017 for the project 
‘From Pipe Dream to Pilot Plant,’ following the successful delivery of a new biotechnology plant in 
Teesside, UK.  In September 2017, CPI hosted a Strategic Training Awards for Research (STAR) Skills 
Schools aimed at early career researchers, such as PhD students or early -stage post docs, in the 
biopharmaceutical industry.  
Relevant Publications:  
•  Nicola E. Farthing, Rachel C. Findlay, Jan F. Jikeli, Pegine B. Walrad, Martin A. Bees, and 
Laurence G. Wilson, "Simultaneous two-color imaging in digital holographic microscopy," Opt. 
Express 25, 28489-28500 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.25.028489  
 
1 UK Chemical and Pharmaceutical Industry Facts and Figures, Chemical Industries Association, 2015  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    64  
  
  
 
• Katie L. Thornton, Rachel C. Findlay, Pegine B. Walrad, Laurence G. Wilson, "Investigating the 
Swimming of Microbial Pathogens Using Digital Holography," Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., 915: 17-32  
(2016)  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32189-9_3  
• Mauro Vaccaro, Anju Deepali Massey Brooker, Nigel Patrick Somerville-Roberts, Alan Thomas 
Brooker, Eric San Jose Robles, Melissa Cuthbertson, Lynn Donlon, US 10005992, “Gel comprising 
a lamellar phase composition comprising a glycerol and dipropyleneglycol solvent”, (2016)  
• Mauro Vaccaro, Anju Deepali Massey Brooker, Nigel Patrick Somerville-Roberts, Alan Thomas 
Brooker, Eric San Jose Robles, Melissa Cuthbertson, Lynn Donlon, US 9957471 “Liquid laundry 
detergent composition comprising a particle and a gel dispersed therein”, (2016)  
Relevant Projects:  
• AceForm4.0 – Value Chain in Formulation Manufacturing: H2020-CSA (Contract No. 723045)  – 
Aims to facilitate the exchange of non -competitive know -how in formulation technologies 
between stakeholders operating in key sectors that are dependent upon innovations in 
formulation technologies and associated automation and digital tools.  
• ADDoPT  – advanced digital design transforming pharmaceutical development and 
manufacture: InnovateUK – Developing and implementing advanc ed digital design techniques 
that eliminate non-viable drug candidate formulations as early as possible, streamlining design, 
development and manufacturing processes.  
• PROSPECT-CL:  Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in collaborati on 
with UK industry  – Development of complex liquid mixing scale up rig with advanced process 
analytics and advanced process control  
• PROSPECT-CP :  Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in collaboration 
with UK industry  – Implementation of PAT and Advanced Process Control on Twin Screw Wet 
Granulator for pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical applications  
• PROSPECT-P&F: Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in collaboration 
with UK industry – Implementation of flexible rig for studying powder flow and packing  
• ModelsMPP: Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in collaboration with 
UK industry – Transferring innovations in particle modelling into industrial practice - Methodology 
and framework to accelerate innovation in formulation developme nt and manufacture 
crosssector   
Infrastructure/Equipment:   
CPI’s capabilities for supporting DIY4U include: £28m National Formulation Centre and Business 
Development and Technology Commercialization Resources/capabilities including CPI Innovation 
Integrator®.   
Opened in 2017, the National Formulation Centre possesses a number of state -of-the-art laboratories 
including high-throughput and automation, complex liquid and powder technology, and dispersions 
that will be invaluable for ensuring technical delivery to the highest possible standard.  
CPI has created a national open-access facility that actively supports companies in the manufacturing 
of liquid formulated products.  
 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    65  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
 
  
  
  

 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    66  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
 
  
  
  
 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    67  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
 
  
  
The complex particles facility at CPI represents a world-class, powder handling facility that can deal  
with both high throughput powder processing at scales over 1000 kg/h, to high precision solids  
manufacturing and process scale-up. A dedicated containmen 
t room within the laboratory incorporates  
a number options for powder processing that can be further contained within flexible film isolators, this  
gives the facility the potential to handle powders and materials considered to be highly hazardous such  
as potent active pharmaceutical ingredients.  
The laboratory is designed as a flexible, open- 
 access facility and has process analytical technology  
( 
PAT) embedded within it that can be used to monitor the various operations. Shown below is an  
example of a custom made PAT interface that can be attached to a device such as a granulator, the PAT  
are able to monitor key quality parameters associated with the product in real time as it is produced,  
hence, by using the implemented control strategies associated with the  
 equipment, model predictive  
control to manufacturing can be used to ensure optimum product properties.  

 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    68  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
 
  
Underpinning the PAT contained within the lab is a sophisticated data capturing and human machine  
interfaces (HMI) network that facil 
itates communication between equipment and the ability to store  
data within the cloud to allow rapid insight generations and sharing. These systems have been  
specifically developed by CPI to manage the large amounts of information that is generated from such  
PAT.  
  
CPI also has high-throughput capability designed to be modular and highly flexible to enable rapid  
and facile reconfiguration to support projects across a range of industrial sectors. The Chemspeed  
Formax platform,  
Error! Reference source not found. 
, has particular emphasis on applicability to  
lubricant blending and testing.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    69  
  
 
  
Chemspeed Formax Robotic Platform  
The Formax is equipped with a wide range of tools to enable dispense and mixing of most materials, 
and subsequent inline characterisation using a variety of integrated analytical techniques, shown 
below.   
 
Overview of dispense, mixing and integrated screening/analytical capability of the Chemspeed Robotic 
platforms and offline stability apparatus  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Dr Graeme Cruickshank Gender: 
Male  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    70  
  
Background:  
Graeme is Director of CPI’s National Formulation Centre. Graeme’s focus is on the establishment and 
management of CPI’s National Formulation Centre which enables the UK’s ecosystem of academics, 
SMEs and large companies to de-risk the development and scale-up to manufacture of their complex, 
high-value, formulated products (with applications spanning foods to pharmaceuticals, paints to 
detergents, inks to composite materials).   
Relevant Experience:  
 
Graeme joined CPI in 2015 from Procter and Gamble where he spent 20 years in a range of product 
design and technology innovation roles across a range of FMCGs (e.g. Fairy Automatic Dishwashing 
products) and in Corporate R&D developing new product categorie s e.g. Sleep -care and Water 
purification.  Most recently he was Global Associate Director for Strategic Alliances where he worked 
in partnership with appliance manufacturers to ensure domestic appliances and detergents innovate 
together to ensure consumers  got ideal end results, with sustainability built -in by reducing water and 
energy use.  In parallel he also led the Global Methods Team bringing robust and more consumer 
predictive methods for product evaluation which is key in accelerating innovation, all owing faster 
decision making i.e. direct productivity enabler.  
Graeme’s passion for technical capability development through people saw him lead various 
community of practice groups to accelerate knowledge transfer and spark idea re -application to add 
business value quickly.    
He brings an impressive track record in leading innovation and delivering value from strategic alliances 
across the globe so is well placed to lead CPI’s National Formulation Centre as an open access 
innovation enabler here in the EU.   Education:  
• Ph.D. in Preparation, Characterisation and Catalytic Properties of Gallium Loaded Zeolites from the 
University of Edinburgh.  
Name: Dr John Carroll Gender: 
Male  
Background:  
Dr John Carroll (Technology Strategy Director) John has over 30 years industrial experience in the 
chemical industry with technical leadership roles in the UK, US and China with ICI and then 
Akzonobel.  This has covered Product Characterisation & Process Measurement, Engineering Plastics 
Formulation, High Throughput Formulation, Experimental Design & Modelling and Materials Science.   
This involved working in a diverse range of industrial sectors from Chemical Products and Advanced 
Materials to Foods & Fragrances and Coatings. John is currently Technical Strategy Director at CPI’s 
NetPark Facility that houses the UK National Formulation Centre.  
Name: Mona Gayle-Jinadu Gender: 
Female  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    71  
  
Background:  
Mona has over 15 years industrial experience working for ICI and AkzoNobel.  Mona’s particular 
expertise is in chemical safety and process safety. Mona is the CPI expert for REACh, Chemical Hazard 
Assessment and COSHH.  She is also experienced in colloid science, rheology, microwave technology, 
printing techniques, patents and intellectual property. After joining CPI in 2016, Mona was instrumental 
in developing an open access continuous flow pilot line for a Horizon 2020 project called 
Nanofacturing, scaling up glycan-coated gold nanoparticles.  Mona has assessed and improved CPI’s 
chemical safety systems and assesses chemical safety for new processes within Formulation.  
Education:  
• BEng (Hons) in Chemical Engineering   
• MSc in Engineering Management  
Name: Joanna Newton Gender: 
Female  
Background:  
 
Joanna is a Chartered Chemical Engineer and has 29 years’ operations and research experience within 
the petrochemical, fine chemicals and FMCG industries. She has led the technical delivery of 
multimillion pound fast-track projects and has a broad knowledg e of process safety gained at top tier 
COMAH sites.  
Name: Dr Mark Taylor (Manager High Throughput and Informatics) Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Dr Mark Taylor (Manager High Throughput and Informatics) is responsible for developing and 
delivering CPI’s High Throughput Formulation programme and underpinning Informatics and data 
analysis capability. Originally trained as a physicist, Mark has 25 years of R&D experience across 
academia, SME and corporate R&D, straddling a wide variety of technical areas including soft matter, 
semiconductors, coatings, High-Throughput Experimentation and data management. Relevant 
Experience:  
• Working in SMEs developing novel equipment and instrumentation   
• Nearly two decades involvement in high throughput experimentation – technology scouting, 
system development, workflow prototyping and development, HT lab design.  
• Data management of colour data for global coatings company, enabling seamless transfer of data 
and formulation recipes from dev lab to factory and use of colour data for predictive design of 
colour formulation direct in factory.  
• Developing informatics infrastructure in Formulation platform of CPI including ELN, workflow 
management software, structured data capture, visualisation and model-based advanced process 
control Education:  
• BSc (Hons) Physics and Chemistry, University of Manchester, 1988  
• PhD – Photochromic Liquid Crystals, Dept of Physics, University of Manchester, 1993  
Name: Dr Lynn Donlon (Senior Research Scientist, High Throughput Formulation) Gender: 
Female  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    72  
  
Background:   
Dr Lynn Donlon (Senior Research Scientist – High Throughput Formulation) is responsible for the 
technical design and delivery of High Throughput Programmes at CPI. She is a polymer chemist with 
many years of formulation experience working in both academia and industry, including the Surface 
Science and Modification Team at Procter and Gamble. Relevant Experience:  
• Design and delivery of HTE aspects of collaborative (Innovate UK, Horizon 2020) and commercial 
projects across a diverse range of formulation sectors, including coatings, lubricants, home and 
personal care, inks, adhesives and battery materials.  
  
• Development of homecare technology to achieve 10x improvement in deposition of actives, 
delivering breakthrough consumer feel benefit. Technical leadership to reapply learnings across 
multiple areas of the business, including perfume delivery. Deposition of surface modification 
polymers to prevent adhesion of complex organic soils.  
Education:  
• First class MChem Chemistry (Industrial), Durham University - 2006  
• PhD Polymer Chemistry, Dept of Chemistry, Durham University - 2009  
 
Name: Rachel Findlay Gender: 
Female  
Background:   
Data Scientist at CPI using predictive modelling and developing efficient, reproducible and controlled 
methods for data analysis. Has an interdisciplinary background with involvement in various 
mathematics, physics and biology academic research projects including collaborations with 
GlaxoSmithKline, Boulby Potash Mine and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.  
Relevant Experience:  
Has relevant experience of using imaging technology and applying numerical processing and 
mathematical analysis for corresponding image analysis. Also has experience of using 
mathematical modelling to allow prediction, optimisation and efficiency of experiments as well as 
using a diverse range of approaches to interpret and analyse data. Education:  
• PhD (Swim like your lifecycle depends on it. Investigating Motility of Leishmania Mexicana; its 
Impact on Parasite Lifecycle Progression and Infectivity.) – Combatting Infectious Disease: 
Computational Approaches in Translational Science Doctoral Training Programme, University of 
York  
• First class BSc (Hons) Mathematical Biology – University of Dundee  
Name: Dr Timothy Addison Gender: 
Male  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    73  
  
Background:   
Principal Engineer within the complex particles team, he is responsible for the technical delivery of 
particle technology projects and programmes at the national formulation centre of CPI. Has a diverse 
background in academia and industry spanning many aspects of formulation, new process 
development, and scale-up    Relevant Experience:  
• Work-package (dispersion optimisation) leader on the Framework 7 ‘Addnano’ project while 
working for BHR Group. The purpose of project was the formulation of lubricious nanoparticles in 
to crankcase lubricants and industrial bearing greases to reduce wear and improve fuel efficiency   
• Technical lead on CPI’s strategic project for integration of process analytics technology within wet 
granulation for improving quality within medicines manufacture via model predictive control 
strategies.  
• Programme manager for CPI’s cross industry consortium, investigating the two-way coupling of 
DEM and population balance modelling for the prediction of powder processing unit operation 
performance.  
Education:  
• MEng in Chemical Engineering from University of Leeds -  2005  
• PhD in encapsulation and stimulus-responsive release systems for application in detergent 
products - 2009  
• Chartered chemical engineer (CEng) - 2016  
Name: Mr Dave Parmley Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Senior Research Engineer within the complex particles team. Dave is responsible for the technical 
design and delivery of work programmes covering powder, particle and process development both 
internally and on collaborative projects with GSK, AZ and Syngenta.  Dave has over 30 years R&D 
experience within Procter & Gamble. Relevant Experience:  
• Over 30 years R&D experience working in Fabric & Homecare sector of P&G.  
• Significant experience in powder, particle and process development, in particular in powder 
mixing/blending, spray drying, agglomeration, particle layering and bulk power handling.  
• Designed and executed multiple global technical work programmes across scales – from 
prototyping to manufacturing.  
• Delivered projects both internally as well as collaboratively with external partners. 
Education:  
A Levels in Maths/Chemistry  
  
  
  
  
No.  Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
4  Teknologian  
Tutkimuskeskus VTT Oy 
https://www.vtt.fi/  
VTT  RTO  Finland  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    74  
  
Organisation Description:  
VTT is a state owned and controlled non-profit limited liability company established by law. The 
Ministry of Employment and the Economy is responsible for state ownership steering. As an impartial 
non-profit Research and Technology Organisation (RTO) and with the national mandate and mission to 
support economic competitiveness, societal development and innovation, VTT carries out research and 
innovation activities for the needs of industry and knowledge-based society.  
In 2016, VTT’s net turnover was €162,6M, operational income was €86,4M and total personnel was 
2128. VTT receives approximately one third of its total income directly from the Finnish government. 
This allows VTT to carry out the high-risk strategic research and to invest in research and technology 
infrastructures, which are necessary to generate the knowledge and know-how required for fulfilling 
VTT’s public mandate.   
VTT’s contribution to the targets and priorities of Europe 2020 strategy is channeled through close 
collaboration with the Finnish Ministry of Employment and the Economy, with regional innovation 
networks throughout Finland and with numerous European platforms and partnerships. Within Horizon  
2020, VTT aims at renewal of European industrial value chains and strengthening of dynamic ecosystems 
addressing Societal Challenges.   
VTT is organized around three main areas: knowledge intensive products and services, smart industry 
and energy systems, and Solutions for natural resources and environment. However, all VTT activities 
are characterized by genuine trans-disciplinary and cross-sectoral approaches and the daily project work 
is planned and implemented within multi-year, coordinated programs.   
VTT has a long and vast experience in EU projects under different funding programs and other 
frameworks (also PPPs, EITs, EIPs, etc.). On average, the share of industry partners was 48% in those 
consortia where VTT was engaged in FP7. In 2016, VTT was involved in 385 EU-funded research 
projects (111 within H2020). Ranked among the leading European RTOs, VTT is committed to 
responsible collaboration for achieving the Europe 2020 goals by networking with Finnish and 
European actors in the global context.   
 
VTT’s Research area “Sensing and Integration” has about 210 staff and a successful track record of 
about 30 years in the field of measurement technologies for industrial applications. The focus is on 
demanding on-line applications. The main measurement principles used are machine vision and optical 
spectroscopy, in all wavelength ranges (UV, VIS, NIR, IR, Raman, Fluorescence, LIBS etc.), X-ray 
fluorescence and transmission and other electromagnetic measurements. VTT is experienced in process 
analytical technology (PAT) solution development e.g. for the mineral and pharmaceutical sectors. In 
addition, VTT has expertise in developing chemometric models and advanced data analytics for 
analytical instruments (such as Raman and LIBS spectroscopy). Cloud services for PAT instruments 
have been studied and developed during the recent years.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    75  
  
Relevant Publications:  
• S. Uusitalo, J. Hiltunen, P. Karioja, S. Siitonen, V. Kontturi,  R. Myllylä, M. Kinnunen and I. Meglinski. 
2015. Performance and flow dynamics studies of polymeric optofluidic SERS Sensors, Journal of 
European Optics Society: Rapid Publications, Vol. 10, Article 15043.  
• J. Kostamovaara, J. Tenhunen, M. Kögler, I. Nissinen, J. Nissinen, and P. Keränen. 2013.   
Fluorescence suppression in Raman spectroscopy using a time-gated CMOS SPAD, Optics Express 
21:31632-31645.  
• Vanarase, M. Jarvinen, J. Paaso, F. Muzzio. Development of a methodology to estimate error in the 
on-line measurements of blend uniformity in a continuous powder mixing process. Powder 
Technology 241, pp. 263 – 271 (2013).  
• M. Järvinen, J. Paaso, M. Paavola, K. Leiviskä, M. Juuti, F. Muzzio, K. Järvinen. Continuous direct 
tablet compression: effects of impeller rotation rate, total feed rate and drug content on the tablet 
properties and drug release. Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy, 39(11), pp. 18021808 
(2013).  
• Kauppinen, M. Toiviainen, O. Korhonen, K. Aaltonen, K. Järvinen, J. Paaso, M. Juuti, J. Ketolainen. 
In-Line Multipoint Near-Infrared Spectroscopy for Moisture Content Quantification during 
FreezeDrying. Anal Chem, 85: 2377-2384 (2013).  
Relevant Projects:  
• IbD [EU]: This Horizon 2020 project focused on the intensification of processes involving solids 
handling. VTT developed PAT techniques for the intensified processes, as well as the PAT tools for 
the IbD platform. (01/09/2015 – 31/08/2018). http://ibd-project.eu  
• Terävä [National]: This Finnish nationally funded project was coordinated by VTT. The project dealt 
with new measurement techniques for the paper industry and plastic and rubber industry. Raman 
and NIR spectroscopy techniques were developed in the project for on -line applications. 
(01/09/2015 - 31/12/2018).  
Infrastructure/Equipment:   
Optics and sensing research facility and laboratories. VTT has a large selection of PAT  
instruments, including X-ray, ultraviolet, visible, near-infrared, mid-infrared, Raman and fluorescence 
spectrometers, 3D flash imaging particle sizer and other camera systems and electromagnetic sensors. 
There are also many probes and measurement heads suitable for in-line / on-line use together with the 
PAT instruments.   
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Dr Janne Paaso (Senior Scientist) Gender: 
Male  
Background: Dr. Paaso did his MSc in theoretical physics and his PhD in optoelectronics and 
measurement technology, both in the University of Oulu, Finland. He joined VTT in 1999, and has also 
worked at Rutgers University, NJ, USA. His research interests include measurement physics,  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    76  
  
measurement data analysis and system design of instruments and systems. He has coordinated several 
national projects, multitude of contact research projects, and contributes to several EU projects. He has 
published 15 peer reviewed papers and frequently contributes to optical measurement technology and 
physics conferences. Relevant Experience:  
• Near-infrared, mid-infrared and Raman spectroscopy and their industrial applications  
• Camera-based measurement methods and machine vision and their industrial applications  
• Data analysis and statistical calibration methods in industrial measurement applications  
• Experience on applying optical measurement methods and system in pulp & paper, 
pharmaceutical, mining and steel industry  
• Experience in preparation and management of national and H2020 research projects, as well as on 
commission projects for the industry Education:  
• MSc Theoretical Physics, University of Oulu, 1997  
• PhD – Optoelectronics and Measurement Technology, Dept of Electrical Engineering, University of 
Oulu, 2007  
Name: Mr Pekka Suopajärvi (Senior Scientist) Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Mr Pekka Suopajärvi (Senior Scientist) has a M.Sc in Technology from University of Oulu. He has over 
15 years expertise in optical design, instrument design and spectroscopy. The main applications have 
been building on-line instruments for paper industry. In 2005-2006, he was placed in GlaxoSmithKline, 
UK, where he was studying on-line PAT technologies in pharmaceutical industry. At present, he is a 
senior scientist in an optical measurements team in VTT’s Intelligent sensor systems research area. 
Relevant Experience:  
• Extensive experience of optical design for industrial sensing applications and for quality inspection 
applications  
• Near-infrared and mid-infrared spectroscopy and their industrial applications  
• Camera-based measurement methods and machine vision and their industrial applications  
• Experience on applying optical measurement methods and system in pulp & paper, 
pharmaceutical and defence industry  
• Experience in leading customer projects Education:  
• MSc Optoelectronics and Measurement Technology, University of Oulu  - 1994  
  
  
  
  
No.  Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
5  Technology Centre of 
Metal-mechanical and 
Transport  
http://www.cetemet.es/  
CETEMET  RTO  ES  
 
 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    77  
  
Organisation Description:  
The Technology Centre of Metal-mechanical and Transport (CETEMET) was founded in 2007 as a non 
for profit foundation. The centre is managed by a private foundation made up by 20 entities including 
companies in the metal-mechanical and transport sectors, public bodies, savings banks, universities and 
business associations. Our mission is to strengthen our role as a technology, smart business and advance 
infrastructure centre, performing as an accelerator within competitive sectors in the metal -mechanical 
and transport industries in Andalusia.  
CETEMET aims at fostering economic development in Andalusia by means of promoting and improving 
innovation in companies within the metal -mechanical and transport industries (a paramount sector in 
Andalusia). The centre focuses on promotion and technology development in two core ideas: technology 
services and R&D&i projects.  
The centre has focused on Industry 4.0 for Metalmechanic and Transport sectors through these 4 
technological areas:  
• Industrial automation. We use computerized and electro-mechanical components  to control 
machines or industrial processes, greatly increasing the profitability of production process  
• Visual Computing: VR/AR/MxR. Allows you to create immersive virtual environments for 
experience, train, testing or validate any type of work setting, without the investment cost of a 
involved reality. The main working lines in CETEMET are focused to its application in the 
industrial environment.  
• Processes control. We have to the latest technological advances that allow us to identify and 
inspect objects. We implemented the lean methodology for the analysis and control of process 
improvement quality and costs  
• Process and Product Engineering. Our aims to develop a product that meets with functional and 
performance requirements of a customer, satisfying also both legal and regulatory requirements 
applicable to it. We make from the product eased by the customer to meet some certain features to 
its manufacturing, until obtaining all the necessary information to make the final prototype by 3D 
printing, machining, etc.   
Headquarters office in Linares                            Labs in Linares                                   Offices in 
Córdoba 
 
Cetemet staff is composed of engineers and doctors specialized in those areas with a wide experience in 
private and public projects, in Metal mechanic and Transport sectors.  
Our main contribution to the project is related to the application of our experti se in Product Design and 
Simulation, Mechanical Engineering and Visual Computing (VR/AR) in order to develop, design, 
prototyping and installation the Manufacturing Demonstration Facilities (MDF) and Fablab, and deploy 
Virtual and Augmented Reality tools f or integrating them into the DIY4Y platform and Fablab, and to 
simulate the performance of new formulation designs from soft matter modelling and simulation. 
Likewise, CETEMET has experience in various types of fluid dynamics simulations, among them has 
carried out flow simulations with solid particles. In this sense, it possess finite element software with the 
ability to perform particle flow simulations using the techniques Dense Discrete Phase Model (DDPM) 
and Discrete Element Method (DEM), so that it could support the simulation of soft matter by simulating 
it at the macroscopic level and correlate the results obtained at a microscopic level.  
 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    78  
  
Relevant Publications:  
• Inventors, Device and method for laying cables, Europe, Patent, No. EP 3273449 A1, 2018-01-24  
• Inventors, Device and method for processing electrical cables, Europe, Patent, No. EP 3327879 A1, 
2018-01-25  
• Inventors, Knot-tying head, Europe, Patent, No. EP 3360832 A1, 2018-08-15?   
• R. González-Merino, A. D. Fraile, J. A. Pérez, E.M. Sánchez -López. “Validation of photogrammetry 
techniques performed on two lead ingots assigned to Linares Historical Heritage”. Procedia 
Manufacturing 13 (2017) 1405–1412  
• Cañamero, J. (2017). “Econtainer project to optimize reefer container efficiency”. Cadena de 
Suministro (September 2017) 46-47  
Relevant Projects:  
• CLARAVISION – Development of a software and hardware system for  scanning users to get a 3D 
model of them and fit customized glasses for 3D printing  
• ODISEO – Development of a modular prototype of automatic processing of electrical cables and 
development of a demonstrator for automatic braiding of aeronautical wiring  
• VIRTUAL REALITY APP FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE  – Design and development of a virtual reality 
application for vehicle personalization based on real design data  
• COFFEE MACHINE MECHANICAL SYSTEM – Modelling and simulation of milk powder product with 
CFD software to study its behaviour in the vapor aspiration unit of the coffee machine  
• HAM CUTTING MACHINE – Development of a machine to automate the cut and packaging of ham  
     
 Device for processing electrical cables designed  Particle simulation of milk powder product  
   by Cetemet  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    79  
  
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
CETEMET possesses a Visual computing lab, Metrology lab, Climate tests lab, and design, modelling, 
programming and FEM software.  
The equipment of Visual computing labs comprises 3D scanners, cams, and devices for VR/AR such as 
glasses, tablets, etc. This equipment allows to perform a wide range of activities, such as presentation 
and product customization, simulation of industrial environment, workers training, guiding to 
manufacturing processes and industrial maintenance, connectivity worker-factory, work safety, etc.  
The Metrology lab is composed of a high accuracy 3D laser scanner, torque wrenches calibration unit, 
dial gauge calibration units, linear, angle and flatness gauge blocks, roundness tester measuring 
shapesposition and other specialized metrology instruments. This equipment allows to perform services 
like 3D digitizing for dimensional control and reverse engineering, devices calibrations, comprehensive 
management of measuring devices, study on metrology needs, specific calibration plans set up, purchase 
of equipment assistance, measuring systems design, quality costs optimisation, and initial sampling 
testing and certifications.  
The Climate testing equipment and facilities comprise climate simulation chamber, climate chambers, 
thermographic camera, HFM. In the Climate test lab of large dimensions, many services can be carried 
out such as calculation of heat transfer coefficient in vehicles (trucks, trains) and products, determination  
 
of thermal conductivity in insulating materials and concrete, thermographic studies, performance of 
climate systems in vehicles, study on condensation in components, railway and aeronautics sectors, 
aerodynamic behaviour of car deflectors, structures behav iour under extreme conditions, tents wind 
resistance, etc.  
  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Juan Torres Moreno Gender: 
Male  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    80  
  
Background:   
Juan Torres is CETEMET´s R&D and Programmes Director. He has been a researcher in private and 
public projects, within the metalworking and transport sector (aeronautics, rail, automotive and naval). 
Relevant Experience:  
• Manager of R&D projects for new technologies focused on Cetemet's current market 
(aeronautics, rail, agriculture and automobile), prototype tracking to the industrialization and patents.   
• Sectorial presentations about the experience obtained in research and development processes  
Education:  
• Industrial Management Engineer  
• Technical Engineer in Energy Resources  
• Master in Innovation at the EOI  
Name: Ramón González Merino Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Ramón González is CETEMET´s Visual Computing Responsible at CETEMET´s R&D Department. He 
has performed research and development tasks in numerous private and public projects, within the 
metalworking and industrial sector. He has extensive experience in pro jects in the field of Visual 
Computing and development of customized solutions. Relevant Experience:  
• As a research engineer he collaborates with different departments of the University of Córdoba.  
• Mixed Reality (V&AR) app development, 3D protyping scan, Photogrammetric works, etc.  
• Professor of the Master of Connected Industry of the University of Jaén and collaborates in the 
Master's Degree in Representation and Design in Engineering and Architecture of the University of 
Córdoba.  
Education:  
• Technical Industrial Engineer (mechanical specialty)  
 
 •  Master in Representation and Design in Engineering and Architecture  
Name: Héctor Tejada Hidalgo Gender: 
Male  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    81  
  
Background:   
• Héctor Tejada is CETEMET´s Automation and Robotics Responsible at CETEMET´s R&D Department. 
After several years of experience with the start -up and development of state -of-the-art industrial 
machinery, in which it has been able to complete more than 35 pro jects, and has acquired the 
capacity to detect the problems and solutions that exist in a factory that automates its processes, 
especially with robots, since in recent projects it has had the opportunity to design solutions from 0 
Relevant Experience:  
• I + D + i engineer developing private and public projects, within the metalworking and transport 
sector (aeronautics, rail, automotive and naval).  
• Engineering and Remote Control.  System integrator with Siemens PLC, Router GPRS EWON, SCADA 
Wonderware and Labview, Design of synoptics with Scketchup and participation in the start -up of 
EDAR installation.  
Education:  
• Technical Industrial Engineer (Industrial Electronics specialty)  
Name: Dr Jesús Rodero Pérez Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
• Jesús Rodero is Project Manager in CETEMET´s R&D Department. PhD in Geological Sciences from 
the University of Granada since July 1999. Participant in various national and international projects 
in relation to geophysics and stratigraphy of seabed. Author in various publications of national and 
international journals. Relevant Experience:  
• Director of several oceanographic campaigns carried out in the waters of the Gulf of Cádiz and Mar 
de Alborán.  
• Expert in topography and high resolution planimetry using 3D digitalization and geophysical 
equipment, and in high detail 3D documentation using high resolution scanners and 
photogrammetric methods.    
• Expert in Industrial Design and reverse engineering   
• Superior Technician in Prevention of Occupational Risks in  the specialties of: ergonomics, health in 
the workplace and industrial safety.  
• Teacher in various courses and seminars in relation to industrial design and prototyping from 3D 
digitization.  
Education:  
• PhD in Geological Sciences   
• International H2020 Expert by CDTI-SOST-Brussels and UPM  
Name: Javier Cañamero Torres Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    82  
  
Javier Cañamero is Calculation and Simulations Responsible at CETEMET´s R&D Department. He has 
completed a Master in Mechanical Engineering where he has acquired advanced knowledge in modelling 
and simulation with finite elements and has extensive experien ce in mechanical and CFD simulations. 
Relevant Experience:  
• As a research engineer he has participated with CETEMET in proposals of R+D+i projects on 
renewable energies in the sea with Navantia, and in numerous other projects within the 
Metalworking and Transportation sectors, carrying out design and simulation activities.   
Education:  
• Industrial Engineer (mechanical specialty)  
• Master in Mechanical Engineering  
Name: Alberto Pérez Barthelemy Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Alberto Pérez is Project Manager in CETEMET´s R&D Department. He has performed research and 
development tasks in numerous private and public projects, within within the metalworking and transport 
sector (aeronautics, rail, automotive and naval).  Relevant Experience:  
• Extensive experience in design and development of mechanical parts and electrical wiring, as well 
as in performing mechanical, electrical and automation projects in several industrial sectors, 
especially aeroespecial and automotion.   
• As a research engineer he has participated in various R&D projects of calls like INNPACTO, 
INNTERCONECTA, etc.  
Education:  
• Technical Industrial Engineer (Electricity specialty)  
• Master in innovation management  
  
  
  
  
No.  Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
6  IRIS  Technology  
Solutions S.L.    
https://www.iris.cat/  
IRIS  SME  ES  
 
 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    83  
  
Organisation Description: IRIS Technology Group is an advanced engineering Group that was 
established in Barcelona in 
2007.  
Since 2011, it also operates 
from  Dublin  (Ireland) 
whereas  the 
 Barcelona office is 
referred to as IRIS 
Technology Solutions S.L. 
It  specialises  in 
 the manufacture 
 and integration  of 
 Process Analytical 
 Technology 
(PAT)-based  real-time 
quality  monitoring 
solutions for the process 
industries and IoT systems 
for smart manufacturing, 
predominantly targeted at 
the food, pharmaceutical  
and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state -of-the-art IR analysers 
for at-line and in-line process monitoring.   
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics in the fields of MEMs, 
Near Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, 
whereby we apply Machine learning, Artificial Intelligence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and 
active control, as well as for decision support systems. In additi on to photonics-based analysers, we also 
work with IoT sensors for enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning 
industry to the Industry4.0 paradigm. Our solutions are cloud -based for mobility, remote monitoring and 
multi-site applications.   
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, 
and an Innovation Unit for managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic 
lines, for shaping the Factory of the Future:  
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation  
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms)  
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation  
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects 
with industry partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D 
projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and partners), principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. 
The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is 
equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and 
an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNEEN-
ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as 
a provider of technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IR IS is a member of the following 
sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE and SECPHO, in addition to regional industrial collectives such as Smart 
Space (association of companies and organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry).  
Relevant Publications and/or Products:  
1. Sapenta ® : Software-As-A-Service product developed and commercialized by IRIS 
www.sapenta.com.  
2. Workdeck  ®  :  Software-As-A-Service  product  developed  and 
 commercialized  by  IRIS www.workdeck.com.   
 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    84  
  
3. Development of several cloud -based software solutions for real -time monitoring and control of key 
quality parameters in industrial silos, delivered in the context of IRIS’ end-to-end turnkey monitoring 
solutions. B2B (private contracts).  
Relevant Projects:  
1. IbD - Intensified by Design® for the intensification of processes involving solids handlings (Grant 
Agreement no: 680565, Funding programme: H2020 -SPIRE-08-2015, ended on August 2018). IRIS 
was in charge of the overall architecture and development of a  software platform integrating 
multiple collaborative engineering design and simulation tools.  
2. SHAREBOX - Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources (Grant Agreement no: 
680843, Funding programme: H2020-SPIRE-06-2015, ending on August 2019). IRIS is in charge of the 
overall architecture and development of a B2B online platform integrating multiple analytical tools 
for identifying opportunities and facilitating trade of wastes and by-products between companies.  
3. AgriMax - Agri & food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks biorefinery 
processing technologies for new high added value applications, (Grant Agreement no: 720719, 
Funding programme: H2020 -BBI-PPP-2015-2-1). IRIS is in charge of the overall  architecture and 
development of a B2B online marketplace for organic waste and upgraded bio-products.  
Infrastructure/Equipment:   
Electronics workshops, sprint room for scrum sprints, server room and IT infrastructure.  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: MARTA JURADO VILAR  
Gender: Female  
BSc in Telecommunications Engineering (2011) from Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC). Prior to 
joining the Sapenta group at IRIS, she gained 5 years experience in web applications development. She has 
experience with a wide range of technologies, including Maven, JSP, Ajax, jQuery, JSON and Axis2. She 
has also experience with non -relational databases and systems, which she gained using MongoDB and 
NodeJS. Furthermore, she adquired experience in the linux env ironment while performing the system 
administration for one of her last projects. She is currently working as a developer in IRIS, where she 
collaborates in the development and improvement of the SaaS Sapenta.  
Name: DIANA GALILEA  
Gender: Female  
Holds a Bachelor’s degree in Industrial Engineering with specialty in Industrial electronics from the 
Universidad of La Rioja. Her professional background comprises technical experience in the areas of 
embedded microcontrollers programming for wireless communications working with different range of 
sensors. Her software expertise includes Matlab, Visual Studio, Autocad, Protel DXP. Her programming 
skills include C++, C#, .NET among others. She is working currently as software engineer in IRIS, 
developing software for chemo-metric analysis, translating chemo-metric algorithms from researchers 
source code as could be R or Matlab to c++ or C# in order to integrate it with a user interface that carries 
out the analysis, as well as controls the system. She also has been working in monitoring systems where 
information about sensors and actuators are displayed on the user interface.  
Name: IVAN PAQUICO RODRIGUEZ  
Gender: Male  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    85  
  
Scrum Master. Telecommunications Degree from University Polytechnic of Catalonia and a Joint Degree 
in Multimedia Development from LUAS (Finland). Final thesis, 'Augmented Reality Chess and 
Application to Detect Chess Moves', implemented by using Computer Vision, Augmented Reality and 
Artificial Intelligence techniques, has won several awards: Best Final Thesis of the UPC and Best Final 
Thesis of Spain (received from Vodafone Spain and Universia foundation). Professional Scrum Master 
certified by Scrum.org, and an official iOS and Android Developer since 2010. Since then he has created 
numerous social network Apps for Mobile Platforms with experience programming with iOS SDK from 
Apple, Couchbase database technology, and using different programming languages  such as C, C++, 
Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time systems. He has expertise in multimedia methodologies 
ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D modelling software such as OpenGL, 
Quest3D, Autodesk Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe Photoshop. He is currently working as a Scrum 
Master in IRIS, and is leading a number of software scrum teams working in internal, commercial and 
collaborative R&D projects in the development of the software for advanced monitoring systems, sen sor 
integration, wireless sensor networks, among others.  
Name: MANEL SANCHEZ VELANDO  
Gender: Male  
Software developer at IRIS. Degree in Informatics Engineering and Diploma in Computer Systems from 
"Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya". English conversation level (B2). Having worked over 20 years in 
the field of information technology in different companies he has reported both organizational and 
management experience. He has great experience in analysis of customer needs and project management. 
Unix and Windows system administrator for 10 years. As a software engineer, he has done many projects 
using several languages: C, C++, C#, ASP, ASP.NET, PHP, Java, Javascript, SQL. Starting MEAN stack. 
He uses design patterns like: MVC, subject-observer, status, representative, factory, facade, etc. GUI 
design experience in both desktop and web (responsive) and in conformance to web content accessibility 
levels. UML design. Great experience in MS SQL Server and Mysql databases. He has experience in 
CAD/CAM and artificial vision control quality systems too. He enjoys analyzing projects with both 
customers and team members in order to get the best solution. He likes to listen and learn from everyone 
around him and share his knowledge with them. Team results are the most important for him.  
Name: JUAN MANUEL GÓMEZ I RAMOS  
Gender: Male  
Full-Stack Web Developer. B.Sc. in Computer Science from University of Havana, Cuba, with over a 
decade experience as a software developer and 7 years of specialized experience in Web Development, 
including back-end and front-end technologies. For his final degree project he implemented a  
transportation resources optimization algorithm based on discrete applied mathematics techniques, using  
Delphi 5 (Pascal language) Suite. Has professional training in PHP, Python, C#.Net, MySQL,  
PostgreSQL, SQL Server, SQL Sybase Anywhere and an extensive knowledge of HTML5, CSS3, 
Javascript, JQuery, AJAX, KnockoutJS, and object-oriented programming (OOP). Extensive experience 
in the use of agile technologies as well as version control systems such as SVN or Git. Familiar with all 
major IDE tools including NetBeans, PyCharm and Visual Studio.Net. Currently working as a Web 
Developer in IRIS, participating in a number of software scrum teams working on internal, commercial 
and collaborative R&D projects in the development of software for advanced monitoring systems, 
Cloudbased ERP systems (Sapenta), among others.  
  
No.  Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    86  
  
7  DIGITAL CATAPULT  
https://www.digicatap 
ult.org.uk   
(DCC)  RTO  UK  
    
Organisation Description:  
Digital Catapult drives the early adoption of advanced digital technologies in the UK. We are unique in 
the strength of our relationships with the leading edge digital startups and high growth potential companies 
that shape the future of the UK economy. As  the interface between industry and the advanced digital 
technology ecosystem, we ensure that the products and services of these innovative companies go beyond 
the hype and meet the demands and needs of industry. We do this through three ambitious technolo gy 
focused programmes:    
• Artificial Intelligence: AI & Machine Learning   
• Future Networks: 5G, Low Powered Wide Area Networks & Internet of Things   
• Immersive: Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality and Haptics   
• Emerging: Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technologies  
Digital Catapult has an existing track record of delivering over 40 collaborative R&D projects looking to 
advance the adoption of advanced digital technologies, across H2020, EIT Digital, Research Councils and 
Innovate UK. Our team has a wide expertise and experience in the development of R&D partnerships both 
with national and international partners. Digital Catapult expertise and commercial partnerships developed 
in the delivery of multiple acceleration programmes such as Augmentor, Cyber 101 and the Machine 
Intelligence Garage.   
Digital Catapult’s neutral position as a Research and Technological Organisation (RTO) has enabled it to 
work with all stakeholders for the greater good of strengthening the digital economy. It’s reputable position 
has generated a vast network of stakeholders who regard it as driver for growth, as a result of its successful 
innovation programmes. We believe that ou r networks and our expertise, will ensure top -of-the-range 
engagement.   
Digital Catapult is a private non -profit research organization, a national centre set up to help SMEs to 
innovate at speed and with reduced risk, so new digital products and services can be accelerated to market. 
We work with SMEs to help them grow and scale faster by connecting their solutions with larger 
corporates need to achieve digital transformation. We do this through programmes of collaboration and 
open innovation, aiming to fa cilitate also technology transfer of academic leading -edge expertise and 
solutions into real life scenarios and well-identified business cases and needs.  Key tasks and matching 
competences  
As part of WP2, DCC’s user experience team will contribute to the  understanding of user needs and 
requirements to then lead on the platform arquitecture design in WP3, having into account both the 
centralised and decentralised elements of the solution. In WP 4, DCC will have an advisory role and 
overview of the developm ent process of the platform, making sure the design proposed is being met. 
Moreover, DC will support the dissemination and exploitation actions in WP11 and will run the FMCG 
Open Innovation Community with the purpose to bring relevant stakeholders together  and find research 
and business opportunities. Also as part of WP11, Digital Catapult will run workshops to identify new 
business models emerging for start -ups and collaborators and will produce reports from the results for 
knowledge sharing and to raise awareness.  
With its focus on emerging technologies such as Blockchain and DLT, DCC has dedicated in -house 
resources to understand what the market and technical barriers are, including the regulatory landscape. It 
has been tasked from UK government to help speed up DLT innovation with developing innovation 
programmes. Furthermore, we will have technical resources to coach the practical experiments to ensure 
that they are delivering technically solid outputs. Other projects that are relevant to this project a re listed 
below.  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    87  
  
 
Relevant Projects, publications and achievements:  
Digital Catapult has engaged and successfully delivered a variety of collaborative research projects under 
the H2020 programme. Most relevant to this project are those in the domain of DLT technologies. In the 
following a brief description will be provided.  
Field Labs (2018) (UK) These are UK virtual centres for collaboration on proof -of-concept 
blockchain/DLT systems, pulling in groups of SMEs, corporates, universities, lawyers, and banks around 
single topic areas within the Manufacturing and Creative Industries to develop and explore solutions over 
the next 2-3 years from end of 2018.   
SynchroniCity (H2020) is a EU large scale pilot on IoT aiming to create a single digital market for IoT 
enabled urban services. Digital Catapult has developed a IoT data marketplace based on DLTs that 
provides trusted exchange of data between unknown providers and consumers, considering appropriate 
license models, reputation and SLA self-enforcement. The outcomes of this initial work will serve as key 
starting point for further R&I activities in this project.  
CPN (H2020)  
CPN is an H2020 funded open platform which will allow both large and small news media companies to 
work towards a user-centric enhanced personal news offer. DIGICAT is responsible for the development 
of a DLT-based system that allows tracking of media content usage (e.g. blogs, articles, videos) and 
automatically re-distributes generated value (e.g. through advertising) to the producers of the content.  
Blokur (UK) is a collaboration between Blokur, The Digital Catapult and the UK Games Fund  funded 
by Innovate UK,which looks at developing blockchain -based technologies to facilitate low friction 
interactions between creators and their customer and unlock new value in the creative ecosystem.  
Smart Contracts for IP Assembly (UK) is a project of the Digital Catapult with the UK Games Fund to 
encourage talented individuals to work outside of their circles of trust and create new intellectual 
property (IP). The project creates Ethereum based smart contracts, which formalises the process of 
fractionalising IP ownership and revenue sharing to ultimately help drive democratised and creative 
teamwork.  
FInterop (2016- 2018) (H2020)  
An H2020 RIA to accelerate emerging technolo gies from research to standardization and market launch 
through online and remote interoperability and performance testing tools. We are cascade funding 
coordinators and platform providers in this project.   
International Presentations on Blockchain/DLT by Dr. Robert Learney: 2016 Impact CEE/Fintech 
(Wroclaw, Poland), 2017 KPMG (Frankfurt), 2017 Swiss eHealth Summit (Lausanne), 2017 GITEX  
(Dubai)  
Digital Catapult (2018) Blockchain in Action: State of the UK Market  
https://www.digicatapult.org.uk/news-and-views/publication/blockchain-in-action-state-of-the-ukmarket/  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Dr Robert Learney (male) – Blockchain Technologist Gender: 
male  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    88  
  
Background:   
Dr Robert Learney (male) – Blockchain Technologist  
Dr Robert M. Learney is the Lead Technologist in Blockchain & Distributed Ledger Technology. He is 
involved in developing new programmes to help groups from multiple sectors explore the potential of this 
technology to unlock economic growth. Prior to joining the Catapult, Rob co-founded the Imperial College 
Centre for Cryptocurrency Research and Engineering in 2014, aiming to create a cross-disciplinary  
 
academic focal point for blockchain research in London, and has been following developments across this 
sector ever since. He is an active member of the UK Government’s Community of Interest in the subject, 
and has been invited to speak on the transformati ve potential of blockchain and distributed ledger 
technology at multiple international events such as Impact CEE/Fintech 2016 in Poland, the Swiss eHealth 
Summit 2017, and GITEX 2017 in Dubai. Dr Learney’s background is in medicine, having qualified as a 
doctor in 2003 with degrees from Oxford University and Imperial College. He returned to academia after 
6 years of clinical practice, and recently completed his PhD in Biomedical Engineering at Imperial College, 
funded by the James Dyson Fellowship.   
Name: Dr Nick Wright (male) – Digital Manufacturing Sector Lead Gender: 
male  
Background:   
Dr Nick Wright (male) – Digital Manufacturing Sector Lead  
With an industrial background in technology and engineering, Nick is an Engineering Doctorate sponsored 
by Jaguar Land Rover and  Ford in  ultrasonic  welding of  aluminium,  which  progressed into  a successful 
spell working across body and trim applications within Research and Development at Jaguar Land Rover. 
Following this he made the switch to Aerospace at B/E Aerospace where he worked as an Engineering 
Manager on the Airbus A350XWN programme delivering the galleys. Experience in Aerospace allowed 
a role at Accenture as  a  Management  Consulting  Manager  within  Aerospace  and  Defence  for  Product 
Lifecycle service applications.  
Name: Elmer Zinkhann (male) - Lead Experience Designer Gender: 
male  
Background:   
Elmer Zinkhann (male) - Lead Experience Designer  
Elmer is Lead Experience Designer at Digital Catapult and is an advocate of human-centred design across 
internal and client projects and programmes. Working on the cusp of technology and design, he consults 
and collaborates with others  in order to increase their understanding of barriers to adoption and explore 
opportunities for growth. He and his team combine strategy, research and design to surface the needs and 
motivations of end -users and stakeholders and translate them into desirab le and impactful solutions for 
people and businesses. Elmer has worked in the digital sector for over fifteen years in various roles, 
delivering novel and game-changing products and services for a range of public and private sector clients, 
including; Transport for London, The Metropolitan Police, Archant, Three, INQ Mobile, Maxis, Eurostar, 
Universal Music. His background is in Industrial Design Engineering, having studied at the University of  
Technology   
Name: Maria Nelson (female) - Senior Head of Open Innovation Gender: 
female  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    89  
  
Background:   
Maria Nelson (female) - Senior Head of Open Innovation  
With a background is in innovation management, programme management and strategic communications, 
Dr. Maria Nelson leads the Open Innovation team, which develops and delivers Innovation Services for 
commercial clients and Innovation Programmes for technolo gy startups and scaleups. The team also 
supports businesses large and small in co-innovating, accelerating the adoption of disruptive technologies 
to create efficiencies in existing business areas, as well as uncovering new markets and business models. 
Previously, Maria was Innovation Programme Manager at Cisco CREATE, its Internet of Everything 
Innovation Centre in London; where her projects included intelligent lighting, smart stations and connected 
healthcare.  
Name: Maria Prokopi (female) (MSc, CEng) is the Head of Programme Delivery Gender: 
female  
Background:   
Maria Prokopi (F) (MSc, CEng) is the Head of Programme Delivery at the Digital Catapult   
In her role Maria is overseeing a diverse portfolio of National, European CR&D and commercial projects 
in Future Networks, AI&ML and Immersive Technologies. Aiming to accelerate economic growth and 
productivity, Maria manages the academia, technology and business experts to help SMEs to scale faster 
and tackle large scale digital challenges. Maria has previously led multidisciplinary public and private 
sector R&D programmes in the Telecommunications and IS industries. Over her 20 years of experience 
Maria led advanced technology projects and contributions to the product line of the France Telecom group, 
filed patents, authored positioning and white papers, published articles and presented in international 
conferences and exhibitions. Maria holds a degree in Telecommunication Engineering, MSc in 
Telecommunications and MSc in Management Sciences and is a certified PRINCE 2 practitioner.  
  
No.  Name  Short 
Name  
Type  Country  Logo  
8  Pôle  des  Industries  du  
Commerce (PICOM)  
https://www.picom.fr  
PIC  RTO  FR  
 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    90  
  
Pôle des Industries du Commerce (called PICOM) is an innovation cluster dedicated to retail in France 
since 2006. PICOM owns offices in Lille and Paris, France. It is funded by public authorities and fees from 
140 members (merchants, SMEs, research labs). PICOM service offering includes: 1) forecasting services 
to detect, decrypt, analyze and understand retail trends; 2) SME sourcing and open calls management to 
connect retailers issues and SMEs expertises and solutions; 3) project engineering to foster and  organize 
cooperation between large -scale retailers, SMEs and research laboratories, within the frame of various 
kinds of innovation projects, from POC to R&D; 4) startup acceleration through an incubation process. In 
2015, as a result of a project funded by the French government, PICOM launched a private company called 
Shopping Innovation Lab (SILAB). SILAB (website: http://www.si-lab.fr/) strengthens innovation 
projects by delivering co-design services and methodology at various steps of the project process (design 
phase as well as evaluation phase). PICOM and SILAB work closely whenever workshops animations 
need co-design methodology.  
Since 2006, PICOM has engineered, found funding and launched dizains of R&D projects and for most of 
them, market analysis, business needs definition, value chain definition and communication at high level 
was at the hearth of the work done with consortia partners. More recently, PICOM was involved in H2020  
(TagItSmart!, https://www.tagitsmart.eu/) and EIT Digital (AR4OMNISALES, 
https://www.eitdigital.eu/newsroom/news/article/ar4omnisales-augmented-reality-and-machine-
visiontechnology-for-smart-retailers/) projects for use cases definition, market analysis, business canvas 
definition, open calls management, dissemination activities, detection of business opportunities. Thus, 
within DIY4U PICOM is in charge of WP2 (Definitio n of use cases and business models) as WP leader, 
Task 2.1 (Market Analysis) as contributor, Task 2.2 (Use cases & Requirements) as task leader and Task 
2.3 (Business Models) as task leader. During the last years and under our brand “New Shopping 
Experience” (see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YeSLIrG3_tc for a 2018 example), PICOM has 
managed 14 open calls in order to 1) connect re tailers business needs and SMEs capabilities; 2) launch 
100+ prototypes and 3) promote projects results in various in French and international exhibitions 
(Euroshop Dusseldorf, RBTE London, CES Las Vegas, Paris Retail Week). Thus, in WP9 “Open 
Innovation C ompetitions (OICs) and Open Innovation Projects”, PICOM is in charge of Task 9.1. 
(Preparatory Tasks and OIC launch) as task leader and Task 9.2 “Evaluation of proposals” as task leader. 
PICOM will also be involved in Task 11.2 Dissemination and Communication activities, Marketing Plan 
as contributor.  
 
Relevant Publications:  
• Sharing economy, 2016 with PIPAME (https://www.entreprises.gouv.fr/etudes-et-
statistiques/quest-que-pipame)   
• Sustainable service economy in 2050, with ADEME (https://www.ademe.fr/)   
Relevant Projects:  
• TagItSmart! - A Smart Tags driven service platform for enabling ecosystems of connected objects 
(https://www.tagitsmart.eu/) – The project includes 3 types of end -users: brands/ manufacturers 
(Unilever), retailers (Leroy Merlin, Univerexport) and service providers (Dondelotiro). PICOM is 
involved in use case definition, tests follow -up, showroom creation, dissemination wo rkshops, 
exhibitions, standardization and open call management.  
• Several Proof of Concept on product customization : chocolate 3D printing with Intermarché, 
colorchanging shoes with Eram, customized 3D printed heels with Eram, tailor -made furniture with 
Leroy Merlin.  
Infrastructure/Equipment:  
N/A  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    91  
  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Pierre Blanc Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Mr Pierre Blanc is Key Accounts innovation manager at PICOM. Since 2011, he 1) animates ecosystems  
of retailers, SMEs and research labs; 2) manages open calls; 3) develops innovative projects and 
consortia; 4) searches for funding solutions; 5) participates to design phases; 6) participates to  
dissemination activities. Previously, he spent most of his career in business and IT consulting companies 
(e.g.Capgemini consulting). Relevant Experience:  
Pierre initiated, engineered and obtained funding for 30+ R&D projects at PICOM, ranging from 1M€ to 
6M€. He managed or currently manages PICOM operational activities in European projects: TagItSmart!  
(H2020 – IoT platform), AR4OMNISALES (EIT Digital – AR/VR for customer engagement), LMAD 
(EIT Digital – autonomous vehicles for last mile delivery).  
Education:  
Pierre graduated in 1985 from Centrale Lille, France, a well-ranked engineering school.  
Name: Renan Sobaga Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Mr Renan Sobaga is in charge of expanding PICOM in the Paris region. He animates ecosystems of 
retailers, SMEs and research labs; manages open calls; develops innovative projects and consortia; 
searches for funding solutions; participates to dissemination activities. He is also managing the French 
Tech retail network at national level, including 6 clusters and 900 SMEs providing solutions for the retail 
industry.  
During 25 years, he led innovation activities in various sectors : sustainable development, chemistry, 
materials and industrial processes, creation & design, hardware and digital.  
 
Relevant Experience:  
Renan initiated, engineered and obtained funding for 10+ R&D projects at PICOM. From 2016 to 2018, 
he managed a series of 4 open calls involving 120 SMEs and 10 retailers.  
Education:  
Renan graduated from a Chemistry Engineering School in France  
Name: Jean-Michel Flamant Gender: 
Male  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    92  
  
Background:   
Jean-Michel entered as a developer, project manager then project manager in the company Archimed, 
publisher of software for libraries and museums. He met the retail world 5 years later as an Intranet 
manager at Kiloutou. He created Idées-3com, a company specializing in virtual reality and augmented 
reality in 2006, and in 2015 became director of the development of the Shopping Innovation Lab.  
Main Skills : Design thinking methods (customer listening, creativity, prototyping and evaluation 
processes), Emerging Technologies (Retail Tech) for Trade and Customer Relations, Support of start up, 
Management of innovation in larger companies. Sectors: Retail, VAD, Convenience Store, Fashion 
Relevant Experience:  
• Auchan Retail International: Strategic roadmap on the role of hypermarkets, identification of new 
business models and new management methods  
• Institut du Commerce: Conceptualization of the store of the future, from the perspective of the 
alternative consumption, via workshops of collective intelligence gathering distributors (Auchan, 
Casino, Carrefour, Cora ...) and brands (PepsiCo, Danone, Unilever, Triballat, L'Oreal, Fleury Michon  
...)  
• Boulanger : Accompaniment in the implementation of Comptoirs Boulanger (local trade)  
• Breal, Promod, Happychic: Design of new point of sale, small formats  
• Grain of Malice: Roadmap customer experience "phygitale"  
• Ducatillon: Identification of new business models and new modes of contact points for their 
customers Education:  
Ingénieur Maître IUP GMI (1994)  
No.  Name  Short 
Name  
Type  Country  Logo  
9  Cody AS 
www.cody.no  
Cody  SME  NO  
  
Organisation Description:  
Cody is an engineering company that develops, designs and builds custom tailored production 
equipment, machinery and prototypes. Codys core competences are mechanical and electrical design, 
robotics, cybernetics, automation, industrial IT and complex system integrations.  
Codys greatest asset is the experience in developing solutions for a wide range of industries, e.g. 
pharmaceutical, radiopharmaceuticals, transport, defence and oil and gas. Cody also has long experience 
with product development of e.g. instruments for particle analysis.  
As a total supplier of machineries Cody is thinking mechanical construction, automation and user 
friendliness simultaneously. In Cody, we like to come up with new ideas resulting in more machine 
functionality in less space.  
Cody has developed a software called TITAAN for handling recipes and logging data from machines.  
 
Relevant Projects:  
• Inspection and Packa ging Line for radiopharmaceuticals. Recipe handling, data logging, electronic 
signatures and reporting with TITAAN software.  
• Product test station for testing high -voltage equipment. Automatic test execution by retrieving test 
recipes from external database using software developed by Cody (TITAAN).  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    93  
  
Relevant Product:  
  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    94  
  
 
 
  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    95  
  
  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Ken Andre Myhra Kihle (primary) Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Four years as project engineer for Kongsberg Maritime. Two years working with software development, 
automation and industrial IT at Cody. Now CEO of Cody.   Relevant Experience:  
Responsible for development of TITAAN software which handles recipes, electronic signatures, logging 
of production data and reports from custom production machines.  Education:  
 •  MSc Engineering Cybernetics from Norwegian University of Science and Technology.  
Name: Magnus Skoglund Larsen Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Background in technical drawing and automation. Currently working with sales, product compliance and 
project management.  
Relevant Experience:  
Product compliance and project management.  
Name: Steffen Vangen Gender: 
Male  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    96  
  
Background:   
 
Project engineer for Kongsberg Maritime. Two years working with software development, automation 
and industrial IT at Cody.  
Relevant Experience:  
Development of TITAAN software which handles recipes, electronic signatures, logging of production 
data and reports from custom production machines. PLC and HMI programming. Automation. 
Education:  
 •  MSc Mechatronics.  
Name: Jared Hansen Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Four years working with software development, automation, mechanical design, project management and 
industrial IT at Cody.  
Relevant Experience:  
Development of TITAAN software which handles recipes, electronic signatures, logging of production 
data and reports from custom production machines. PLC and HMI programming. Automation.  
Mechanical design. Project management. Education:  
 •  MSc Mechatronics.  
Name: Tom Henriksen Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
More than 30 years of experience in development of products and production equipment. Relevant 
Experience:  
Product development, design  
Name: Bjørn Haugseter Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
Product development in the pharmaceutical industry.   
Relevant Experience: Product 
development, design 
Education:  
 •  Machine engineer  
Name: Tom Einar Buer Gender: 
Male  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    97  
  
Background:   
30 years of experience with automation and instrumentation.  
Relevant Experience:  
Automation and instrumentation.  
  
No.  Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
10  RDIUP  RDIUP  SME  FR  
  
Organisation Description:  
RDI’UP is an innovative French SME localized in Paris area, created in 2017 and composed of an 
ambitious team of 5 PhDs and engineers, specialized in the sectors of innovative systems (Healthcare, 
transport, energy, and cobotics). RDI’UP promotes Research-Development and Innovation actions (RDI). 
RDIUP develops connected systems, web-based data analytics solutions and implements deep learning to 
elaborate knowledge base for cognitive systems. RDIUP has big experience in sensing, data transfer and 
collection. We propose novel approaches in order to capitalize information and data.  
Moreover, RDIUP exploits new technologies (Big data analytics, IA, IoT and Wearables) in order to create 
industrial proof of concept and viable projects. RDI’UP develops a tailored  business model, anticipates 
quickly future changes, maximizes the expected results and the socio-economic impacts of projects.   
Relevant Publications:  
• Habib NASSER - Kouider nacer M'SIRDI - Aziz NAAMANE "Wireless Sensor Network for monitoring, 
diagnosis and supervision" , in : MECHATRONICS REM, Mechatronics (MECATRONICS) , 2012 9th 
France-Japan & 7th Europe -Asia Congress on and Research and Education in Mechatronics (REM), 
2012 13th Int'l Workshop on, IEEE, Vol. 2012   
• Habib NASSER - Kouider Nacer M'SIRDI - Aziz NAAMANE "Inboard observers and sensors for an 
electrical and autonomous kart", International conference on Sciences and Techniques of Automatic 
Control & computer engineering, STA 2008, Vol. 2008, dec 2008.  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    98  
  
Relevant Projects:  
• Development of intelligent web-based applications for manufacturing and the design of ergonomic 
and user -friendly interfaces (Dashboard) for the visualization and the confi guration. Based on 
Machine Learning, these applications detect non -trivial behaviors and predict risks (downtime, 
unplanned maintenance and bad performances). Through historic data analytics, these tools allow 
detecting the cause of the accident (RCA).  
  
Example of software interfaces  
• For energy, RDIUP developed Python API solution based on hybrid algorithms (KNN, OPTICS …) in 
order to predict the profiles of the energy power plant production. This solution takes into 
consideration the weather, behavior of consumers and other aspects (weekend, holidays …). RDIUP 
uses almost open source HW and SW solutions (TensorFlow, OpenCV, Ogre, RStudio, Shiny, Freebase, 
pygame, Eagle …..) to create desktop or cloud-based applications for our large customers.   
 
  
Connected systems developed by our Team  
• RDIUP develops innovative and connected systems. For example, the analysis of human acceptance and 
big data from smart connected clothing and bracelet is a suitable experience for this project. For this 
experience, RDIUP has participated in design, development and testing of the different modules.  
Infrastructure/Equipment:   
RDIUP is equipped with a mini -FABLAB: 3D printers, 3D scanner, robots, machines, drones, different 
electronic boards and tools of signal analysis.   
Profile of Main Persons  
   

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    99  
  
Name: Habib NASSER (Main Researcher) Gender: 
Male  
He is specialist in smart technologies development. At Lis -Lab Habib has developed algorithms and 
mechatronic system for autonomous car based on the analysis of mutli -sensors. He was previously a 
scientific research at Symme Lab to realize an advanced simulator for infant and analyse the problems of 
bronchitis. He has equipped the body with flexible sensors and a web -based application to clean and 
analyse the different information. At Ecosteering, he has developed a patented connected occupational 
clothing to detect postures in real time, especially to promote active aging. The human acceptance of this 
new connected system has been evaluated by the deployment of focus. At Strane innovation, he was a 
project manager and was involved in three H2020 projects (EPO S, SCALER, SIM4NEXUS) which aim 
to create a big database for synergy building between industrial companies and develop new systemic 
approach in order to model the causality and the interconnections between different systems. Habib was 
in charge to develop a new startup Plant Angels that optimizes global industrial performance by using 
smart data analytics. At RDI’UP, Habib is interested in IOT field and data analytics. Habib is fluent in 
French, English and Arabic, and notions of German. He holds 3 high deg rees as mechatronic engineer, 
Master in information technology and Ph.D. in complex systems. He is Laureate of MeetAfrica project 
funded by EUROPEAN Commission and has authored several papers on innovative mechatronic systems.  
Name: Pierre-Gilles Euzen  Gender: 
Male  
Pierre-Gilles Euzen (M) is an innovation project manager. Pierre -Gilles held various positions in 
innovative projects in different industry sectors always with the objective to meet market’s expectations 
in terms of costs, deadlines, and quality. At CEA-Leti, Pierre-Gilles worked as a research and development 
engineer. He studied the behavior of metallic nano -crystals for applications to nonvolatile memories by 
realizing thermo-dynamical simulations and experimentations in clean room environments. At  
Ecosteering, an engineering company, he worked as a responsible for the prototyping and industrialization 
successively of a hybrid light commercial vehicle and a multifunction seat for ambulatory medicine. 
Purchased items were study and development services and components like batteries and electronic control 
systems. At HiPay, a payment service provider for e -commerce, he worked as the product owner in a 
development team and managed projects using the agile method Scrum. These projects were banking 
reconciliation and fraud analysis. He particularly worked on the optimization of a fraud -fighting risk 
management solution powered by machine learning technology. At RDI’UP, Pierre-Gilles is in charge of 
creating startups with industrial partners. Pierre -Gilles i s fluent in English and French and has an 
intermediate level of German. He graduated from INSA Rennes (Institut National des Sciences appliquées) 
in microelectronics and semiconductor devices engineering and obtained CNAM certifications in agile 
project management and KCP method for collective creative design.  
  
  
  
N 
o.  
Name  Short Name  Type  Country  Logo  
1 
1  
Stelar Security  
Technology Law  
Research UG  
STL  RTO  DE  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    100  
  
Organisation Description:  
Stelar Security Technology Law Research UG   
-(haftungsbeschränkt) is an organisation established in Hamburg (Germany) that aims to promote 
education and research through the implementation of scientific courses and research projects and the 
award of research contracts. In particular, the organisation is specialised in the “Privacy-by-Design” 
approach to new security technologies. Stelar was founded as a spin-off of an integrated project funded 
by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Science (BMBF) within its Framework Programme 
Research for Civil Security.   
Stelar’s main researcher presented a first draft of a Privacy-by-Design method to the EC on the occasion 
of its draft GDPR that sets up a technical committee on Privacy by Design (Article 23 paragraph 4 of 
COM(2012)11 final). The efforts of legal scholars to incorporate the law into technology and the lack of 
development of Privacy by Design in the EC’s policymaking led the researcher to create his own SME.  
In this project Stelar will lead and coordinate legal data protection and privacy requirements analysis and 
compliance monitoring. Stelar has extensive expertise in legislation, GDPR, data protection, privacy and 
fundamental rights management in European innovation projects and research projects on ICT and digital 
transformation (leadership in H2020 OPERANDO (DS-01-2014 ‘Privacy’), H2020 SHiELD (DS-
032016), FP7 eWALL (ICT-2013.5.1)) as well as the experience of its main researcher with the European 
consumer organisation for technical standardisation (ANEC) and the European Standardization 
Organizations CEN, CENELEC and ETSI and the International Standardization Organization ISO 
concerning security, data protection, privacy and eHealth standardisation.  
Relevant Publications:  
• Matthias Pocs “Will the European Commission be able to standardise legal technology design without 
a legal method?” Computer Law & Security Review 28 (2012) 641 -650, overview of publications at 
www.matthiaspocs.de   
• As a representative of ANEC The European consumer voice in standardisation (www.anec.eu), 
Stelar’s main  researcher contributed to the European Commission’s so -called Standardisation 
Request M/530 addressed to the European Standardization Organizations to develop a European 
Standard (EN) on privacy and data protection by design for the security industry,  AN EC-ICT-2014-
G020final, April 2014.  
• Sofoklis Kyrizakos, Matthias Pocs et al., “eWALL: An Open-Source Cloud-based eHealth Platform for 
creating Home Caring Environments for Older Adults living with Chronic Diseases or Frailty”, Wireless  
 
Personal Communications, Special Issue ‘Mobile IoT: Enabling Technologies and Trends’, Springer 
2017.   
• Standing document on GDPR impact, European Committee for Standardization (CEN), Technical 
Committee 8 Privacy management in products and services July 2017 Berlin (Germany).  
• Working draft of International  Standard on privacy management in personal health information, 
International Standardization Organization (ISO), Technical Committee 215 Working Group 4 Safety, 
security, privacy, April 2017 Hangzhou (China).  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    101  
  
Relevant Projects:  
• SHiELD. H2020 research and innovation project “SHiELD - European Security in Health Data 
Exchange” (727301) , DS -03-2016, 2017 -2019, ca. EUR 4m, http://www.project -shield.eu/, Stelar 
leads legal work package  
• OPERANDO. H2020 innovation project “OPERANDO - Online Privacy Enforcement, Rights 
Assurance and Optimization” (653253) , DS -01-2014 ‘Privacy’, 2015 –2018, ca. EUR 4.5m, 
http://www.operando.eu, Stelar leads legal work package  
• Privacy-by-Design standard.  European standardisation project and creation of CEN -CENELEC 
Technical Committee 8, under European Commission’s Standardisation Request M/530 for an EU 
Privacy-by-Design standard for security technologies and services, 2014 –2018, 
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/mandates/index.cfm?fuseaction=refSearch.search#, 
Stelar’s main researcher leads delegation of ANEC The European consumer voice in standardisation 
(www.anec.eu) to TC 8  
• ‘Data protection by design’ in eHealth products and services. European standardisation body CEN 
Technical Committee 251 ‘Health informatics’, Working Group I (http://www.ehealth-standards.eu/, 
https://standards.cen.eu/dyn/www/f?p=CENWEB:7:0::::FSP_ORG_ID:7691&cs=11E35EF5C244410A 
E6A FCECCBDCB5C337), as “convenor” Stelar’s main researcher chairs CEN/TC 251/WGI and initiates 
a standardisation project on ‘data protection by design’  
• eWALL. FP7 research project “eWALL – Electronic Wall for Active Long Living” (610658) , under 
FP7ICT-2013-10 call, 2013–2016, ca. EUR 9m, Stelar leads privacy and Privacy-by-Design tasks  
Infrastructure/Equipment:   
N/A  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Matthias Pocs (Main Researcher) Gender: 
Male  
Matthias Pocs, LL.M. (male) is a researcher specialised in privacy and data protection law. He is a 
workpackage leader concerning the legal approach of privacy and data protection by design in H2020 
projects OPERANDO (DS-01-2014 ‘Privacy’) and SHiELD (DS-03-2016 on secure health data) and 
tasks leader in FP7 project eWALL (ICT-2013.5.1 on active ageing).  
Apart from that, he participates in standards bodies as a chair of CEN/TC 251/WG I, as a member of 
ETSI/TC CYBER and as a partner of both CEN-CENELEC/JTC 8 and ISO/TC 215/WG 4, liaison officer 
of CEN/TC 391 and member of the DIN mirror group for CEN-CENELEC/JTC 13 concerning data 
protection, privacy, eHealth, societal security and cybersecurity. He is project leader of ISO/AWI 22697 
on privacy management in health data and the CEN/TC 251 standing document on GDPR and action 
proposer of the EU 2018 Rolling Plan on ICT Standardisation concerning data protection by design in 
eHealth products and services.  
He represents ANEC The European Consumer Voice in Standardisation, where he contributed to the  
European Commission Decision concerning a privacy management system for security industry (M/530).  
As data protection expert, he also represents the German DIN Consumer Council. He is an expert of the  
ENISA study group on privacy standards gap analysis as well as Frontex, JRC and FP7-SEC FastPass 
project.  
Before that, he worked at a German legal research centre working on the draft Federal Data Protection  
Act, a European institution (European Data Protection Supervisor), the Cyberspace Law and Policy  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    102  
  
Centre in Sydney. He wrote numerous peer-reviewed publications, after legal studies in Hamburg 
(Business law), Scotland (European business law), and Oslo/Hanover (LL.M. ICT law including data 
protection law).  
  
  
No.  Name  Short 
Name  
Type  Country  Logo  
12  Effective Decisions SRL 
http://www.effectivedecisions.ro/  
EFF  SME  RO  
 
Organisation Description:  
Effective Decisions SRL is a SME from Romania, started into 2004 with a long history of business-driven 
research and development activities. Online, Effective Decisions SRL is presented as Transylvania Labs 
(https://www.transylvanialabs.com/). Transylvania Labs is a virtual identity(trademark) of Effective 
Decisions SRL.  
  
The main office is in Sibiu Romania and the area of expertise covers the following verticals:   
• Enterprise architectures  
• Blockchain  
• Applied Artificial Intelligence  
• Next generation internet product  
• Fuzzy Logic Systems  
  
The business model relies completely on delivering consultancy, research and development services for 
corporate clients.  
  
The people in this team have experience with blockchain architectures for research and development 
projects since early 2015. Their experience involves ground -up protocol projects, cryptography, 
cybersecurity, scalability concepts and others.   
Currently the portfolio contains more than 10 completed and delivered products that are using blockchain 
technologies from m the following categories:   
• Food Analytics – Supply Chain  
• Swarm of medical devices on a blockchain architecture  
• Decentralized Air traffic coordination  
• Land ownership •  Decentralized loans  
  
Relevant Publications and materials:  
•  Butean A., Kim H., Turesson H., Laskowski M, Algorithmic game theory solutions for hybrid 
blockchains, SAGT 2018, the 11th International Symposium on Algorithmic Game Theory, 
Beijing (China), 2018  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    103  
  
• Butean A. Towards understanding blockchain security from an analytical perspective, 
Cybersecurity Romania Congress 5’th edition, Sibiu (Romania) 2018  
• Butean A., Tara A., Security on Blockchain as a critical infrastructure in the near future, 
INFOSEC UAB “18, Alba Iulia (Romania), 2018  
• Butean A., Tara A., Major contributions to Elrond Network concept, whitepaper and initial 
prototype https://elrond.network/files/Elrond_Whitepaper_EN.pdf   
• Butean A., Tara A., Contributions to INS Ecosystem Blockchain https://ins.world/ internal and 
public documents after the expansion to https://www.insolar.io/  
• Andrei Tara, Kirill Ivkushkin, Alexandru Butean, Hjalmar Turesson, The evolution of blockchain 
virtual machine architecture towards an enterprise usage perspective, 2019 (UnpublishedAccepted 
at CSOC2019)  
• Andrei Tara, Alexandru Butean, Hands-On Machine Learning for Blockchain - book, Packt 
Publishing House (Ongoing work – Estimated to be completed in September 2019)  
Relevant Projects and Activities  
• Consultancy Services for Elrond Network https://elrond.com/ : concept, architecture and 
software prototype  
• Consultancy Services for Insolar Network https://www.insolar.io/  : concept, virtual machine 
architecture and use-case generations  
• Product Development , digital identity solution for Helix https://blockchain-helix.com/   
• Product Development, land ownership solution for Maxonrow https://mxw.one/   
• 5 completed national and international research projects ( non related to blockchain)  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Dr Alexandru Butean (Head of Research) Gender: 
Male  
Alex has a PhD in Computer Science at Polytechnica University of Bucharest since 2015 and he works as 
a Senior Lecturer Professor at Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu since 2012. In the last decade he gathered 
imperative knowledge while dealing with heterogeneous complex systems, enterprise architectures and 
international research projects. After relevant experience with smart agent ecosystems he started to 
contribute naturally to blockchain since 2015. In early 2016, he co-founded Blockchain Society, a 
decentralized cyber-social ecosystem that unleashes the power of the people to achieve fairness in an 
unfair society.  He is the Head of Research at Effective Decisions.   
Public profile: https://www.linkedin.com/in/alexandrubutean/   
Name: Andrei Tara (Lead Software Architect) Gender: 
Male  
Andrei is an experienced Software Architect, language agnostic Senior Developer and PhD Student with a 
focus on Scalability Optimizations for Enterprise Blockchains at Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu. He 
has more than 10 years hands-on experience on high-level enterprise software architectures and 
development of complex, scalable and data intensive systems. He worked for companies like Siemens, 
ALV, NXP, Zeis and Volkswagen where he developed prediction and classification systems. He is the 
Lead Architect at Effective Decisions.  
Public profile: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andreitara/   
  
No.  Name  Short 
Name  
Type  Country  Logo  
 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    104  
  
13   Dynamic  &  
Security  
Computations S.L.  
www.analisisdsc.com  
ADSC  SME  ES  
  
Organisation Description:  
The company is known commercially as ANALISIS-DSC is a SME engineering company specialized in 
mechanical engineering and process engineering in applications related to fluid mechanics, heat transfer, 
bulk materials using CAE tools such as CFD, FEA, etc.  
The company was founded in the year 2002 in Madrid, Spain. The company has a high specialization in  
the analysis of complex industrial processes 
involving fluids in tasks of:  
• Basic Engineering  
• Failure Engineering  
• Analysis, Optimization and Scale-up of Industrial 
Processes.  
ANALISIS-DSC usually works for customers in 
the  
Iberian Peninsula and subcontracted to other 
international customers which might need our 
specialized engineering services when they face 
operational or design problems. ANALISIS-DSC 
is a horizontal engineering company with 
references in most of the main economic sectors 
such as energy, civil, hydraulics, chemistry, etc.  
Relevant Publications:  
• H2020-SPIRE-2015, SPIRE -08-2015 “Intensified by Design for the intensification of processes 
involving solids handling”. www.ibd-project.eu. (EU Project: 680565) Usage of CAE tools to analyse, 
optimized and scale-up different processes related to fluids and particles.  
• Modelization for the Biotechnology production of Carothenoids and Cephalosporins, IDI20100445). 
Internal R&D project financed by CDTI (Center Development and Technology and Industry), 
www.cdti.es. The analysis of biomass growth from lab scale to industrial scale using CFD tools.  
• Modelization of Processes for Biotechnology Production (FIT -010000-2007-74). Internal R&D 
project financed by the Spanish Ministry of Industry, 2007 -2008, for the analysis, scale -up of 
pharmaceutical biomass using CFD tools.  
• A.Iranzo,Univ. Sevilla, R. Barbero ANALISIS-DSC, J. Domingo ANALISIS-DSC, D. Cuadra ANALISIS-DSC, 
J. Costa Antibioticos, J.F. Martín, INBIOTEC, R. Vicente INBIOTEC, J.L. Barredo, Antibioticos, 
”Numerical Investigation of the effect of Impeller Design Parameters on the Performance of A. 
Multiphase Baffled -Stirred Reactor” , Chemical Engineering & Technology 2011, No 34,pp: 
12711280”  
• M. Elena Díaz, Alfredo Iranzo, Daniel Cuadra, Rubén Barbero. "CFD Simulation of the Gas-Liquid Flow 
in a Laboratory Scale Bubble Column. Influence of Bubble Size Distributions and Non Drag Forces". 
Chemical Engineering Journal (2007).  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    105  
  
Relevant Projects:  
• DSM/CPQ Ingenieros: Analysis of the agitation system in 3 polymers production tanks.  Analysis 
of three polymer mixing tanks, in the 15 minutes filling up process, comparing the prepolymer 
distribution for the proposed mixing system for the mixing tanks.  
 
• E Bachiller B: Study using finite elements analysis of an agitated reactor cyclically pressure and 
temperature working type A.  
Checking that the reactor meets the criterion of safe life, according to EN 13445, for welded and 
nonwelded parts.  
• E. Bachiller B: Fatigue calculation according to EN-13445 reactor of a type B.  
Study by finite element technique agitated reactor, cyclically working pressure and temperature versus 
standard EN-13445.  
• E. Bachiller B: Fatigue calculation according to EN-13445 reactor of a type C.  
Study by finite element technique agitated reactor, cyclically working pressure and temperature versus 
standard EN-13445.  
• Kao Corp.: Thermal and fluid-dynamics analysis of a tensoactive agent production process.  
This study evaluates using fluid dynamics computational (CFD) tools, the behavior of three in -line 
devices for a tensoactive production process. The equipment are: EKATO´s mixing reactor and two 
heat exchangers.   
• Kao Corp.: Optimization of a reactor vessel and a heat exchanger for KAO Corporation.   
The aim of the project is to optimize the product ion of a surfactant, using the detailed analysis of the 
mass and heat transfer processes, in an EKATO type reactor vessel and a tube heat exchanger. The 
analysis using fluid dynamics tools, allows obtaining different equipment arrangements for its optimal 
working condition.  
• Kao Corp.: Batch reactor analysis.  
Analysis of stirred reactor batch type, in which a residual reaction coming up is avoided, using fluid 
dynamics optimization (CFD), and making proposals for improving efficiency.  
• Persan (Henkel): Safe Life Design of a Mixing Vessel for detergent production.  
Safe life design of a mixing vessel for detergent (non-newtonian material) production in Seville.  
Infrastructure/Equipment:   
ANALISIS-DSC has a wide variety of cluster of computers to use with the proper CAE tool depending of 
the application.  
Profile of Main Persons  
Name: Dr Ruben Barbero Gender: 
Male  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    106  
  
Background:  
• Analysis and optimization of different process equipment using CFD tools to develop the 
corresponding process “virtual twin”.  
• Relevant Experience:  
• Project Manager of the different projects in the detergent sector with companies such as Kao 
Corporation and Persan (Henkel).  
Education:  
• Doctor of Renewable Energies (UNED, Spain) on Thermosolar energy.   
• Industrial Engineer specialized in Energy Techniques from ETSII-Universidad Politécnica de Madrid.  
Name: Jeronimo Domingo (Senior Engineer)  
Gender: Male  
Background:   
• Analysis and optimization of different process equipment using CFD tools to develop the 
corresponding process “virtual twin”. Relevant Experience:  
• Project Technical Manager of the DSC contribution to the IbD project (EU Project: 680565).  
• Project Technical manager of 2 internal R&D projects financed by CDTI and Ministry of Industry on 
pharmaceutical biomass analysis and scale-up from lab scale to industrial scale.  
Education:  
• Phd Naval Engineer at the Helsinki University of Technology. Fin land (Research area: Energy and 
Environment. Thesis: “Numerical Simulation of Diesel Engine Particle Deposition on WHR-boilers.”).  
• Naval Engineer from the ETSIN- Universidad Politécnica de Madrid.  
Name: Juan Enriquez  Gender: 
Male  
Background:   
• CEO and founder of the company ANALISIS-DSC with over 20 years of working experience on CFD 
tools coordination projects in different areas of engineering.  
Relevant Experience:  
• Before the ANALISIS-DSC foundation, he worked at VTT-Energia carrying process engineering using 
CFD tools in the chemical and pharmaceutical sector. ANALISIS-DSC has been both engineering 
consultancy company on CFD-FEA-DEM services and distributor of CAE tools such as Ansys CFX, 
Ansys ICEM-CFD, Gridgen (Pointwise).  
Education:  
• MBA at Instituto de Empresa, Madrid, Spain  
• MSc in Aerospace Engineering from University of Cincinnati, USA  
• BSc in Aerospace Engineering from SUNY Buffalo, USA  
Name: Laura Torres Gender: 
Female  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    107  
  
Background:   
• Business Development and Marketing Manager in the area of consultancy work. Relevant 
Experience:  
• She has worked for over 10 years in the areas of business development and strategy to provide 
technical solutions that can answer the end-user needs.  
Education:  
• MBA at Instituto de Empresa, Madrid, Spain  
• Msc in Business Administration from University of Carlos III, Madrid, Spain  
  
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources)  
Participant No 1: SINTEF AS  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks?  Yes  
To promote SME participation and unlock new business opportunities for SMEs based on the  
DIY4U approach, we plan to run two Open Innovation Competitions (OIC), one launched around 
M18 and the second around M28, to enable gradual and iterative expansion of DIY4U platform, and 
to promote the use of the DIY4U to create new business opportunities for SMEs. The amount of 
500 kEuro reported under 'Direct Cost of Subcontracting' will be used to fund up to 16 SMEs via 
two OICs. The subcontracting cost refers to the real costs of the planned OICs. The funding 
received will be used to deliver OIPs that will extend the functionalities of DIY4U or Trial the 
Integrated DIY4U approach to generate new business opportunities for these SMEs as earlier 
explained in section 1.3 and further detailed in WP9 (dedicated WP for OICs and OIP)s.  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third 
parties  
No  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third 
parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
No  
  
Participant No 2: Procter & Gamble Technical Centres Ltd  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks?  No  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third 
parties  
No  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third 
parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
Yes  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    108  
  
Procter & Gamble Technical Centres Limited (PGUK) will be supported in their activities under this 
agreement by their Affiliated P&G International Operations SA, Route de Saint Georges 47, Geneva, 
1213 Petit Lancy, Switzerland (PGIO).  P&G International Operations, in conjunction with its 
affiliated Procter & Gamble companies facilitates and manages the administrative, financial and 
organization flows amongst the European Procter & Gamble partners through its own internal 
administrative structure. This role is performed by PGIO and PGIO is not going to claim any 
personnel cost for it. While the participation of the other Legal entity would indeed be free of 
charge, it is not possible to estimate the costs of this in-kind contribution. Procter & Gamble 
Technical Centres Limited (PGUK) performs all R&D tasks and activities associated with this 
project.  Procter & Gamble Technical Centres Limited (PGUK) intends to assign its Foreground IP 
to P&G International Operations, pursuant to clause 8.3 of this agreement.  
5. Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics   
There are no ethical issues to indicate in the administrative proposal forms.
5.2 Security   
The project will not be involved in activities or results that will raise security issues. It will also not be 
involved with the use of any EU-classified information as background or results.   
Please indicate if your project will involve:  
• Activities or results raising security issues: NO  
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO  
   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    109  
  
6. Letters of Support  
  
  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    110  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    111  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    112  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    113