1.4 Ambition  
DIY4U will bring to bear a truly “Disruptive Business Model” that the FMCG companies fear and want 
at the same time. It requires digital developments that ultimately enable materials supply to be more 
distributed than today and in a more open innovati on format that allows consumers to design and 
customise their own products. This will deliver an unprecedented scale of “designed for me” and 
“Sustainability” in the FMCG sector, with less waste/transport/CO2 emission and improved efficiency. 
DIY4U digital  platform combined with its fablab services will be the first integrated digital 
infrastructure available for non -FMCP experts or consumers to design and manufacture their own 
particulate/liquid FMCG based on their individual preferences. The nearest current stateof-the-art to our 
DIY4U approach are Function of Beauty that  has built a software platform to determine precise formulas 
for both shampoo and conditioner for every customer and Proven that uses data from the world’s largest 
beauty database and machine learning algorithms to personalize skincare products. Also, paint 
customization services are offered by manufacturers (e.g. AkzoNobel), supply chain stakeholders (e.g. 
Riolett Custom Aerosols) and retailers (e.g. B&Q, Halfords). DIY4U surpasses the paint and the beauty 
customization approaches for the following reasons:  
● Paint customisation services are only really to customise colour and it is not possible to request 
other features such as a custom sheen (gloss) level. Moreover, paint customization services only 
apply to a limited product range (essentially broad wall emulsions). DIY4U will provide 
unrivalled customization/personalization for a wider range of soft matter FMCG.  
● DIY4U provides open source tools (via its digital platform) that allow anyone without FMCG 
formulation expertise to digitally design and test the performance of personalised/customized 
formulations. Paint and beauty formulation k nowledge is currently locked in proprietary 
manufacturers’ formulation modelling capabilities or databases that are not necessarily suited 
for use by non -experts or consumers. DIY4U will provide a user -friendly digital knowledge 
management open access resource that displays relevant formulation ingredient information and 
ensures compatibility of modelling and simulation with different process information systems, 
enabling anyone to formulate new safe and environmentally benign products.  
● The DIY4U platform capability that allows manufacturers to plug -in their models (e.g. soft 
matter, process, LCA/LCCA) for consumers, DIYers and SMEs to use for creating bespoke 
formulations is a key differentiator of DIY4U. Formulation computational modelling including 
a series of numerical methods will forecast how the formulation will perform in the consumer 
home, reducing the testing procedures and avoiding a bad experience to the consumer. 
Formulation process digital twin will virtually create products, mimicking the real  equipment 
performance. The digital twin will take advantage of CFD tools to digitally analyse and optimize 
the formulation processes.  
● DIY4U’s big data analytics/AI capability would allow for real -time tracking and innovation 
respond to trends in consumer habits and associated stress/strain on upstream supply chain.  
● Fablabs will be designed such that it can be operated in home, in shop or in small factories by 
anyone, unlike specialist machines used for paint customisation by trained technicians. 
Furthermore, the connectivity between DIY4U digital platform and fablabs will e nsure real-
time analysis of consumers’ demands and facilitate rapid production of particulate/liquid FMCG 
tailored to meet changing consumers’ needs. This will create business opportunities for new 
actors, especially SMEs, in the FMCG sector.  
Data Analytics Innovation Character: The main innovation of the data analytics module is the strong 
consideration of the human factors such as perception, culture, ontology, semantics and cognitive 
aspects. The DIY4U project will take into account all these complex pa rameters to define a “systemic 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    29  
  
design”8. Moreover, a smart mix of algorithms and methods will be proposed while keeping the 
application fast and effective. The developed human-centred application will understand the needs, have 
the capacity to analyse and extract valuable information from any kind of data (image, text, video, 
process, thinking and audio …) and support the change of demands in order to ensure sustainability and 
scalability of the DIY4U project.   
Modelling and Simulation Innovation Character : DIY4U will deliver innovation of DIY design by 
implementing the predictive simulation techniques (feed forward) based on multivariate analysis to 
predict flow, structural and thermal features, and the behaviour of ingredients in the formulation process 
at each process step. Currently, process systems in formulation fail to generate real -time data sets that 
enable predictive design, i.e current process optimisation models are not fit for on-demand customization 
(feedback optimisation only). DIY4U will use Finite Element Analysis (FEA) and Computational Fluid 
Dynamics (CFD) to provide structural, thermal and fluid analysis of the formulation supported by a 
digital reproduction of the physical process to optimise cost and environmental performance, taking 
customer preferences and behaviour change into account. The fablab digital twin (a key innovation 
feature of DIY4U) will make use of the fablab prototype equipment to ensure the virtual twin is correctly 
validated with the actual equipment. The developed DIY4 U open source LCA/LCCA modelling 
capability could be used with any soft matter FMCG to help consumers and SMEs make informed  
  
choice based on environmental performance. This is a new innovation to the market that is hoped to 
positively influence human b ehaviour before committing to the manufacture of goods, by increasing 
awareness of a product’s sustainability performance, which may drive a change in consumer purchasing 
habits.  
Blockchain Innovation Character:  DIY4U will be the first publicly demonstrab le application of 
blockchain within the formulation/FMCG manufacturing industry and value chain. According to 
Venture capitalist William Mougayar, blockchain is “the second significant overlay on the internet, just 
as the web was the first layer back in 1990”. Within the DIY4U platform, blockchain will enable 
managed access to valuable assets, such as intellectual property, new FMCG formulation inn ovations 
and payments, without the need for intermediaries such as IP Attorneys/Lawyers. Blockchain/DLT 
provides an irreversible, secure and time -stamped record, enabling the DIY4U platform to be used for 
managing access to data and IP provided by multiple  parties in a granular fashion. It can also provide 
evidence of use of company or individual IP (e.g. formulations, algorithms) and enforce IP licences 
through smart contracts.   
DIY4U will also pay close attention to the financial regulations emerging in the EU and G20 around the 
peer-topeer transfer of value through blockchain. Whilst information currently travels instantly around 
the globe, the same cannot be said about business transactions and exchange of value. A typical 
international payment takes 3- 
5 days to settle, with ≥5% error rate and average cost of €37; €158.34 trillion worth of international 
payments are made annually at a combined cost of over €1.5 trillion p.a. If EU regulations change during 
the project to allow this functionality, and ba nks permit API integration with their services, payments 
for DIY4U could be automatically facilitated by ‘smart contracts’ 9 - code executed on a blockchain - 
and completed instantly, allowing FMCG value to move globally just like information.  
 
8 Jones, P. “Systemic design principles for complex social systems” volume 1 of the Translational Systems 
Science Series, pp 91-128, 2014, Springer Japan.  
9 https://ripple.com/insights/the-internet-of-value-what-it-means-and-how-it-benefits-everyone/  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    30  
  
Fablab Innovation Character: The fablab is in essence an automated liquid or powder mixing and 
dispensing system that demonstrates self -cleaning and quality assurance. The novelty of such an 
approach will be embedded in advancing the limits of miniaturisation in  terms of feeding, blending, 
dosing, and process analytics. While inline product testing using process analytical technology is itself 
not a new concept, achieving it within an interlinked complex formulation network around a 
geometrically constrained manu facturing space, combined with a limited analysis time will require 
innovative approaches. The integration of real -time process monitoring, complemented by decision 
making algorithms and self-learning neural networks will allow the fablab to provide unriva lled ‘right 
first time’ small-scale manufacturing machines for soft matter FMCG.  
Patent/IP Search: A patent and IP landscape review performed by IP experts at STEF and STL suggest 
that DIY4U digital platform and fablab are novel and patentable; and will h ave no freedom to operate 
issues. The closest recent patents identified are:  
- Customized fast -moving consumer goods production system (WO2017014696A1): is the 
nearest patent to the DIY4U solution but it does not propose a collaborative platform or smart 
algorithms for formulas.  
- Custom cosmetic blending machine (US8564778B1): is only devoted to specific cosmetic 
products and cannot be deployed for wider FMCG or other sectors. It also requires operation by 
experts.  
- Additive manufacturing for beauty products  (WO2015132734A1): is an innovative system 
proposed by L'Oréal, however it is dedicated only for 3D printed nails.  
This IP analysis proves that there is no system that proposes a large collaborative solution for DIY design 
and production based on open technologies.  
IP held by the consortium: Digital Catapult holds IP on methodologies for reducing smart contract 
computation costs on the public Ethereum blockchain. IRIS holds IP on the IBD® and SHAREBOX 
platforms that will be adapted and used for DIY4U. EFF  holds IP for methods on decentralized smart 
agents. RDI hold IP for connected clothes and patent pending for connected medical device. DSC brings 
extensive knowhow on material and process modelling and simulation. CDY holds IP and knowhow on 
formulation m anufacturing and related machines and related software. VTT holds IP on relevant 
miniaturised PAT spectrometers (e.g. NIR). P&G holds IP on detergent and soap/other FMGC 
manufacturing processes, machines and related modelling and simulation packages. STEF and CPI bring 
IP and knowhow on operation of small-scale automated equipment for diverse formulation applications. 
CETEMET hold patents for device and method for laying cables, device and method for processing 
electrical cables, and knot-tying head.   
  
2. Impact  
DIY4U is a highly impact-driven project, with potential to revolutionise the European FMCG sector and 
other industries. The project will accelerate and de -risk the development and adoption of open 
innovation and fablab approaches for the collaborative design and manufacture of customised or 
personalised products. DIY4U will directly contribute to the expected impacts as set out in the Horizon 
2020 Work Programme 2018 – 2020 under the work topic DT -FOF-05-205: Open Innovation for 
collaborative production engineering (IA). DIY4U will ultimately contribute in enhancing European 
innovation capacity and competitiveness, creating new market opportunities for EU companies and 
catalysing their growth, leading to socially important impacts (jobs creation and retention). DIY4U will 
deliver further social and environmental benefits elaborated in this section.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    31