1.1 Objectives  
The main objective of DIY4U is to develop and promote the adoption of collaborative production engineering 
approaches (Open Innovation B2B/B2C digital platform and fablabs) in the FMCG sector. This will spur the rapid 
production and commercialisation of new/innovative personalised or customised soft matter FMCG for the benefit 
of consumers. To realise the ambition and main objective of DIY4U, the consortium will work along strategic  
objectives (SO) measured against quantifiable Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), as follows: Strategic 
objectives   
  
make-your-own-enzymatic-laundry-detergent;  
https://www.bing.com/videos/search?q=DIY+detergents&view=detail&mid=842E8E1E1184166993BF842E8E1E1  
184166993BF&FORM=VIRE;  
https://www.bing.com/videos/search?q=DIY+detergents&view=detail&mid=0FE6D1F0E8F2B183BC6D0FE6D1F  
0E8F2B183BC6D&FORM=VIRE  
 
SO1: Development of an open innovation B2B/B2C digital platform: As digitalization is not a goal in itsel f, the 
DIY4U digital platform aims to establish and propose clear and transparent links between professionals, 
consumers and other stakeholders. Open innovation technologies will be deployed and adapted to first design and 
then realize the digital interfaces. This open access platform will challenge and validate DIY formulations related 
to the European FMCG sector, focusing initially on soft matter detergent and soap products. The platform will 
have the capability for industry users/manufacturers to ‘plug-in’ models for any soft matter products and protect 
the IP that any model would have. Another objective of this innovative solution is to identify new potential 
personalized products based on the know-how of creative makers and foster actors to share relevant skills.  
 
4 https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/soap-detergent-market  
5 https://www.giiresearch.com/report/grvi615535-soap-detergent-market-size-report-by-product.html  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    4  
  
KPIs: Feedback from up to 20 SMEs and stakeholders using the platform; >10 new customized products 
identified. 
SO2: Development of a knowledge base (KB) and open innovation technologies: SO2 success will be achieved by:   
a) Developing data management plan (DMP) enabling the end to end use of disparate collated data, 
allowingdifferent actors to interoperate seamlessly.  
b) Designing an evolving knowledge base; capable of easily representing information including the needs, 
userexperience and the data for a given customised formulated product.  
c) Developing and integrate a Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) and Parametric Life Cost C alculation Analysis 
(LCCA) models to support transparent analysis of ingredient and final product features.  
d) Plug-in, developing and adapting relevant soft matter modelling and simulation tools to digitally explore 
the performance of new formulations.  
e) Developing and plugging in digital twin of small-scale formulation process machine (fablab)  
f) Defining common security and privacy requirements based on European monitoring frameworks to allow 
thecollection and analyses of private data.  
g) Evaluating the proposed solution in terms of the execution requirements.   
KPIs: 1 application built on micro services or other API based services, at least 2 applied Machine Learning 
algorithm, soft matter modelling and simulation tools, LCA/LCCA algorithms, fablab digital tw in, performance 
testing report for all digital components.  
SO3: Ensuring secure open data exchange and cybersecurity: This SO aims to secure the data exchange and share 
skills between designers, makers, users, communities, manufacturers and other actors in an effective and 
transparent way on the DIY4U platform. Distributed ledger technology (DLT)/blockchain will be deployed to 
enhance data sharing and transparency, and to track liability and ownership. It is essential to strengthen the ability 
to detect, mitigate and recover from risks and cyberattacks to enable a secure operational and tactical DIY4U 
infrastructure.  
KPIs: 3partners securely transferring data via the platform, DLT consensus mechanisms auto detecting and 
responding to cyberattacks attempting to amend records and submit false data.  
SO4: Development of Manufacturing Demonstration Facilities (MDF) and DIY4U Training: After analysing user 
demands and needs, initial small -scale manufacturing trials of the early personalised/customized f ormulations 
designed on the platform will be produced and characterized at MDFs (STEF and CPI) using existing 
highthroughput and other complex liquid/particle processing equipment. Learning from these trial runs will feed 
into the requirements specificatio n and design of fablab machines for automated production of powdered and 
liquid FMCG. Subsequently, we will demonstrate the feasibility of DIY4U manufacturing by building  2 fablab 
prototypes (1 powdered and 1 liquid) and using them to provide open access c ollaborative production. These 
prototypes will be transitioned to commercial design and replicated after the project’s completion. To ensure 
smooth adoption by consumers, SME users and wider industry, DIY4U platform and fablab training will be 
developed and delivered to stakeholders including future EU industry workforce via dedicated workshops and 
apprenticeships at MDFs.  
KPIs: 2 Fablab prototypes, Demonstration Reports covering >100 products to check the operability and >10 
products to check fablab performance in delivering critical quality attributes. DIY4U Training manuals, At least 
4 training sessions delivered to >100 attendees/non -consortium stakeholders, at least 10 students/apprentice 
trained on DIY4U.  
SO5: Empowering different actors to be more involved in the DIY growth and increasing the DIY product 
acceptance: DIY4U will increase involvement of makers, customers and stakeholders by:  
a) Enhancing public and end-user awareness on the DIY creativity aspects by providing modern tools, such 
as serious games and interactive tools on both the digital platform and fablabs.  
b) Identifying and understanding the needs, behaviours  and demands of consumers, makers and 
manufacturers through data collation via cloud-based tools.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    5  
  
c) Running open innovation competitions (OICs) to encourage non-consortium SMEs to build additional 
functionality atop the DIY4U platform or to develop new innovative/customized FMCG using the DIY4U 
platform and fablab MDFs.  
d) Facilitating the Open Access of the interested stakeholders and widely communicating the positive 
impacts ofcreativity and DIY4U services and products.   
KPIs: 1 fablab application note for customizing products, 1 open serious game, 2 animated video to promote 
DIY4U, >150 FMCG supply chain companies signed up to DIY4U platform, 2 OICs (>120 SME applicants; 16 
Funded); at least 1 non-consortium SME tool integrated into platform, at least 16 new FMCG bespoke products 
developed by SME via the Open Innovation Projects (OIPs).  
SO6: Developmen t of tailored business models to support the sustainability and commercialisation DIY4U 
outputs: Market development and exploitation of DIY4Y services will be addressed by using agile and 
demanddriven product development approaches (e.g. Real Time Release) . DIY4U will link proven approaches 
with new strategies to deliver customized products, support the marketing of open innovation/fablab and identify 
new business opportunities. Market segments, target customers, tailored business strategy and exploitation plan 
for the transfer of outputs to other FMCG domains and other consumer product manufacturing sectors will be 
defined. The consortium aims to get the confirmation of the willingness to pay for DIY4U services (platform and 
fablabs). A post -project business plan and business model for development of the digital platform and fablabs 
from TRL6 to TRL9 and sustainable DIY4U business operation will be defined.  
KPIs: Scalability of the DIY4U platform, number of novel profitable services: Target > 3 smart services, at least 
16 SMEs using DIY4U services to manufacture customised products: Target > 200 new long -term and skilled 
jobs in fablabs and IT sector.