3.3 Consortium as a whole  
The consortium consists of 13 complementary members including research institutes, SMEs and 
a leading FMCG company. For effective management of the project and to listen to everyone’s 
voice, formation of a high -level board consisting representative of each  member of the 
consortium is a must. Hence, a Project Board is appropriate for such a big consortium. As this is 
a high-level board and senior officials from each partner organisation are involved, twice a year 
meeting is quite appropriate for this board.  The creation of role of a Project Coordinator, who 
will chair the project board is very vital for successful implementation of such a project. The 
responsibility of this position is to coordinate between the consortium and the fund provider, EC. 
This position is important as the consortium must have to submit several reports regularly to the 
EC. They will also have to inform important decision taken in the project board meeting to the 
EC. For these regular and some critical jobs such a position is very cru cial. Two other key 
management positions i.e. Project Technical Manager and Project Exploitation, Dissemination 
and Communication manager are very crucial as their roles have been discussed previously. 
Finally, the WP leaders’ roles are vital as they will work in the grassroots level and they are 
responsible for delivering the actual deliverables of the project.  
Partner  Role in the Project  
STEF  SINTEF (Leading Norwegian RTO with extensive capabilities in soft matter processing and 
modelling & simulation) will be be the project coordinator for DIY4U project. STEF, along with CPI, 
 
 will lead WP8 (Demonstration of Fablab and Integrated DIY4U Services), acting as MDF for the one 
of the two fablabs to be developed. STEF will provide crucial end -user input (WP2) that will feed 
into platform and fablab design/development (WPs 3 -6) and support DSC and CTM in the 
development of relevant soft matter modelling and process simulation capabilities for DIY4U.  
P&G  
P&G (Leading global manufacturer of FMCGs including detergents and soaps) will guide the projects 
technical developments (WP3 -WP8), ensuring that it remains industry -relevant and commercially 
viable. P&G will lead the manufacture and supply of base formulations (WP7) that will be customised 
in the MDFs (WP8). As a key exploitation partner, P&G will work with PIC and the other partners 
to develop the DIY4U business model and commercialization plan.  
CPI  
CPI  (Part of the UK’s High Value Manufacturing Catap ult, hosting the National Formulation Centre with 
capabilities in the processing of complex particle, complex liquids and other material formulations, as well as 
capabilities in modelling and process engineering) will, similarly to STEF, lead WP8 ( Demonstration of 
Fablab and Integrated DIY4U Services), acting as MDF for the one of the two fablabs to be 
developed, and  provide crucial end -user input (WP2) that will feed into platform and fablab 
design/development (WPs 3 -6). CPI will additionally employ a com bination of its formulation, process 
engineering and modelling & simulation capabilities to lead the development of the LCA/LCCA model 
subplatform (WP4) and support DSC and CTM in the development of soft matter modelling & simulation 
capabilities and digital twin.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    58  
  
VTT  
VTT (Leading European RTO with PAT, data analytics and automation expertise and capabilities) 
will act as the leader of PAT activities in the project, developing integrated, miniaturised and lowcost 
PAT methods and devices for the Fablabs based on near -infrared spectroscopy, camera -based 
measurements and other techniques. VTT will also develop calibration methods and data analysis for 
the PAT devices.  
CTM  
Cetemet (robotic and automation expert, with process modelling expertise) will co-lead the extension 
of platform functionalities and testing, developing a digital twin and deploying a soft matter 
modelling and simulation for using it to provide an open access collaborative production. Cetemet 
will enhance the simulation of soft matter by simulating it at the macroscopic level and correlate the 
results obtained at a microscopic level and analysing its interaction with the equipment that contains 
it. For this, it will carry out flow simulations with fluid particles to analyze their behavior and 
interaction with the structure through which the flow circulates by means of structural and fluid 
dynamics simulations with finite elements. The results will be implemented in the virtual twin in the 
platform and will contribute to the testing of the same. In addition , Cetemet will support the design 
and development of the fablab prototypes, using 3D CAD systems to obtain 3D models and drawings 
according to the requirements that will contribute to the development of the system. This activity will 
also involve the use of FE simulations for the assurance of the material resistance and the structural 
stability of the prototype.  
IRIS  
IRIS will function as the main software developer of the consortium, responsible for the programming 
and deployment of the KMC platform which will act as core controller and provide the backend and 
frontend for the whole DIY4U platform. IRIS will therefore be also responsible for the integration of 
the various advanced tools in the form of modules of the platform. IRIS will collaborate closely with 
EFF and DCC and the partners developing the extension functionalities/modules as well as fablab 
users (STEF and CPI) and the rest of the consortium.  
DCC  
Digital Catapult, as the blockchain expert of the consortium, will contribute to the understanding of 
user needs and requirements to then lead on the platform architecture design, having into account 
both the c entralised and decentralised elements of the solution to enable efficient and trusted 
relationships between the different stakeholders involved in the fabrication of detergents. DCC will 
also have an advisory role during the development process of the plat form, making sure the design 
proposed is being met. Moreover, DCC will support the dissemination and exploitation actions 
(specially with the blockchain and manufacturing communities) and will run the FMCG Open 
Innovation Community with the purpose to brin g relevant stakeholders together and find research 
and business opportunities. Moreover, DCC will run workshops to identify new business models 
emerging for start -ups and collaborators and will produce reports from the results for knowledge 
sharing and to raise awareness of DIY4U.  
PIC  
PICOM (French innovation cluster working for the retail industry) will lead use case definition and 
business model definition as well as evaluation, ensuring that they address both customers, brands, 
retailers, services providers and technology providers' needs. PICOM will also provide strong support 
 to open calls management and dissemination.  
CDY  
Cody (robotic and automation solution provider with expertise in manufacturing automated 
equipment) will lead the Fablab design and development. Cody will contribute with their knowledge 
within machine development, product development, machine safety, operator interface and interface 
between machines and platform. Cody will also lead the Fablab replication and DIY4U training.  
RDI  
RDI will analyse  Market and segment sectors related to the DIY4U. Ensure data repository and 
analytics in order to valuable information and non-trivial correlation between parameters, assess the 
human behaviour and needs. Also, RDI will create Machine Learning to evaluate  created formulas 
and make decisions.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    59  
  
STL  Stelar (“Privacy -by-Design” experts with legal background) will contribute legal data privacy 
requirements analysis and GDPR/other regulations compliance support monitoring, ensuring that 
DIY4U complies with relevant regulations.  
EFF  Effective Decisions, actively involved in the blockchain space in the last 4 years, will contribute 
with high-level architecture perspective and development expertise for the decentralized modules, 
distributed ledger technologies and privacy preserving features of the DIY4U platform.  
DSC  DSC (soft matter modelling and process simulation experts) will lead the development of relevant 
soft matter models and support CTM with the development of the Fablab digital Twin, working in 
close collaboration with STEF, CPI and the rest of the consortium.