1.2 Relation to the DT-FOF-05 work plan  
Fit to the ‘Specific Challenge’ of the call (Topic identifier: DT-FOF-05-2019)  
DIY4U aims to stimulate the transfer from large-scale manufacturing to industrial companies of the Do It Yourself 
(DIY), fablabs, micro-factories and makers approaches  in the FMCG sector for powdered and liquid products. 
The DIY4U approach will lead to new machines (fablabs) and digital services (OI B2B/B2C digital platform 
services) that will facilitate value chain collaborations and consumer involvement  in the design and rapi d 
manufacture of customer-centric personalised and customized  powdered/liquid FMCG. The DIY4U approach 
will reduce time to market  for new personalised/customised FMCG, creating new business opportunities 
especially for SME and new actors in the powdered/liquid FMCG innovation ecosystem. Demonstrating DIY4U 
OI digital platform and fablabs with the relevant FMCG supply chain and consumers will raise awareness and 
confidence in the approach, allowing industry to widely adopt these innovative approaches to engage consumers 
and respond to societal needs, taking individual preferences of women and men into account.  
Fit to the ‘Scope’ of the call (Topic identifier: DT-FOF-05-2019)  
DIY4U focuses on a key consumer -goods sector (FMCG). The OI B2B/B2C digital platform and fablabs will 
couple design, creativity and knowledge sharing with a customer -driven production approach. The DIY4U 
approach allows for the involvement of customers and the entire value chain in the co-creation of products. DIY4U 
will develop and promote the adoption of collaborative production engineering approaches (OI B2B/B2C digital 
platform and fablabs) in the FMCG sector. This will spur the rapid production and com mercialisation of 
new/innovative customised FMCG for the benefit of consumers. DIY4U covers the following areas highlighted 
in scope:  
Novel approaches to capitalise on the knowledge and ideas of design and engineering coming from different and 
even new ac tors: The Open Innovation B2B/B2C digital platform is a knowledge sharing and knowledge 
management platform integrated with digital and business process modelling tools (formulation design, 
formulation modelling and performance simulation and advanced data analytics including cognitive, ontological, 
social, multi parametric analysis, etc) that allow the whole value chain including consumers and new actors to 
digitally design and simulate the performance of new formulated powdered/liquid products.  
Design of new strategies based on creative and agile methodologies for analysis:  Corroboration of formulation 
performance against simulation data with in-process and final product characterization data from fablabs/MDFs 
will be used to optimise the formulation models and develop fablab process digital twin. This will progressively 
enhance the robustness and performance of the digital platform. Real-time analysis of demand and feedback from 
consumers and visibility of such data across the value chain will facilitate agile responses from the innovation 
ecosystem in meeting the customers’ evolving needs. Consumer feedback will help stakeholders to design high 
quality ‘customized/personalised products. Analytical data tools such as heat mapping and a/b testing will be used 
for real-time analysis of User Experience and to determine the most effective. Real-time user feedback and 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    6  
  
 
satisfaction ratings on the features of DIY4U platform and fablab will be used to optimise the digital platform and 
fablab.  
Development of open source product data exchange and standard representations of products and processes that 
ensure the compatibility of modelling and simulation with different process information systems: Information on 
formulation ingredients/products an d processes will be curated and displayed in a consistent digital format, 
allowing compatibility of modelling  and simulation with different process information systems. The DIY4U 
platform will have the ability to ‘plug -in’ users’ models and protect the re lated IP.  Simulation of new 
customized/personalised formulated product capabilities will allow validation of compliance to safety and 
regulatory standards [e.g. EU Detergents Regulation (EC) No 648/2004]. The project will comply with EU 
General Data Protec tion Regulation (GDPR) to ensure the security of users’ data and use tools developed by 
project partners to ensure the same. Adequate IP and business models will be implemented to ensure no conflicts 
arise between manufacturers and suppliers providing comp onents for a ‘plug & produce’ DIY4U platform and 
fablab. An open platform based upon a DLT/blockchain -secured data exchange layer will allow manufacturers, 
suppliers, new FMCG sector actors (e.g. entrepreneurs, SMEs, start -ups) and consumers to collaborate in a way 
that makes their transactions secure, trustworthy and transparent. For very sensitive information such as prices, 
partial homomorphic encryption techniques will be used to perform transparent verifications without disclosing 
the records. Moreover , the deployment of open source tools will promote the open exchange, collaborative 
participation, and transparency.   
Development of new Manufacturing Demonstration Facilities (MDFs), where companies will test new 
technologies in cooperation with fablabs and makers in order to develop real industrial products and where 
training is offered: STEF and CPI will host the developed fablabs and act as open access MDFs, offering fablab 
manufacturing services to individuals and companies (especially SMEs) using the  DIY4U digital platform to 
design new customised/personalised products. The MDFs will also offer training to companies and individuals 
looking to adopt the new DIY formulation design and manufacturing approach.  
Integration of Social Science and Humanities  (SSH) aspects regarding creativity:  SSH aspects regarding 
creativity are at the heart of DIY4U as it aims to empower consumers and new actors to participate in the creation 
and manufacture of new customised/personalised FMCG addressing societal needs.  We  will analyse the (wide 
public) human-DIY processes acceptance and define best practices to increase awareness about positive impacts 
of the DIY products and creativity. Examples of societal drivers for DIY and personalisation/customisation 
include cost reduction, health reasons, preference for natural ingredients, reduced chemical use and environmental 
protection. Moreover, legal expertise is involved in the consortium to tackle issues of digital security, data 
protection and privacy by design.   
Facilitating cooperation with other projects: This will be achieved by leveraging partners’ involvement in other 
national and international research and innovation activities linked to DIY4U (section 1.3.5). Cooperation with 
other projects not involving any consortium partner will be achieved via Outreach activities (section 2.2) such as 
the EFFRA events.  
Enhancing user involvement: via OI digital platform and open access MDFs; upselling and willingness business 
strategies; creation of an open community & multilingual platform; and royalties for the best shared formulations. 
Ensuring the accessibility and reusability of data produced during the project: Defined in Data Management 
Plan, use of DLT-based records and Research Data Storage Facility (section 2.2a.4)  
TRL: Activities will start at TRL4 and achieve TRL6 at the end of the project (section 1.3.3).  
Project cost: The project is requesting EC contribution of 5,986,276€ is in the range specified in the scope.  
Fit to the ‘Expected Impact’ of the call (Topic identifier: DT-FOF-05-2019)  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    7  
  
 Establish Open-Innovation networks for manufacturing that support customer-driven production all around 
Europe: delivered by DIY4U digital platform and open access fablab MDFs  
Creation of specific business models for the engineering of customised solutions, particularly for SMEs, rapid 
demand changes and shorter time to market: The development of specific business models for DIY4U outputs is 
a key objective of this project (sections 1.1 and 3.1) and will be delivered in WP2 (section 3).  
Improvement of the co-design and co-development capabilities towards a reduction of development costs of new 
products and services:  DIY4U’s co -design and co -development digital platform and fabla b MDFs for new 
customized/personalised FMCG will reduce development time/cost and make small - scale manufacture of 
customized/personalised FMCG economically attractive.  
Increase of product variety and personalisation for higher customer satisfaction and loyalty: The digital platform 
and fablab will allow ‘plug and play’/DIY design and rapid manufacture of new personalised/customized 
formulations meeting individual consumer preferences.