1.3 Concept and approach  
1.3.1 Concept  
DIY4U concept is to promote the adoption of Open Innovation and DIY/fablab/makers approaches to drive 
ondemand production of new customer -centric products in the European soft matter FMCG sector. It addresses 
the key barriers (lack of relevant infrastructures and business mod els) limiting collaborative small -scale 
manufacture of personalised/customized FMCG. Our development and trial of an OI B2B/B2C digital platform 
and fablab MDFs will de-risk the implementation of the DIY4U approach for the co -design and co-manufacture 
of s mallscale personalised/customized FMCG. Figure 1.3a shows a schematic representation of the DIY4U 
concept including relevant technologies and stakeholders.  
The key components of the DIY4U concept are summarised below:  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    8  
  
Figure 1.3a Visual representation of the DIY4U concept  
 
  

 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    9  
  
The Open Innovation B2B/B2C digital platform will be a highly visible and transparent platform that brings 
supply chain stakeholders (product & technology developers, ingredient suppliers and manufacturers) and 
consumers together and enables them to seamlessly collaborate on the efficient creation of new particulate/liquid  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    10  
  
FMCG. Integrated digital tools across the product/process/supply chain (molecular modelling & simulation, 
process simulation & digital twin, cost and environmental modelling, and AI/data analytics) will be used in 
conjunction with product and process information from ingredient suppliers and manufacturers to digitally 
design high performance new customised/personalised products. The digital platform will allow all actors 
(including consumers) to propose and design new products. Tracking individual/corporate IP and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.3b DIY4U Platform architecture interactions between 
partners on the platform will be possible through integration of 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and distributed ledger 
technology (DLT)/blockchain. A consistent integrated data 
structure will facilitate open source product data exchange and 
standard representations of products and processes from design to 
consumer. Blockchain allows digital information (e.g. 
product/processes information including information on 
standards and regulatory compliance) to be distributed, shared, 
persistent and immutable. The ledger will ensure that rights and 
permissions are respected, allowing industry stakeholders and 
consumers to co-design and codevelop new 
customised/personalised products. It is important to note that the 
DLT/blockchain platform envisaged will not use the same 
energy-intensive consensus process of bitcoin or other 
cryptocurrencies (mining) and will instead use an efficient 
Lamport-type consensus algorithm such as PBFT.  
Through engagement with the simulation tools and the serious game, consumers and users will benefit 
by being involved in the design and manufacturing process and seeing how their formulation choices 
will impact product performance, environmental and social  aspects. Blockchain will also enable the 
sharing of personalised formulations.   
Modelling & simulation tools (e.g. Computational Fluid Dynamics - CFD, LCC/LCCA models, and 
process models) will be developed as modules to be plugged into the platform to en able users to 
simulate/optimize the performance and impact of the created formulations prior to making them and to 
device the optimal processing route.   

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    11  
  
Big data technologies, integrated in the DIY4U digital platform, will be used to track real-time consumer 
demand changes and to generate optimised formulations for the consumer. While there is some societal 
push-back against using people’s data, it is logical that such information is employed (whilst complying 
with GDPR) to provide products of improved per formance to the consumer, should they wish. For a 
laundry detergent exemplar (for instance), big data could leverage the following information to optimise 
the formulation.  
● Family composition, ages of any children, occupation of parents to predict the clea ning 
requirements of the family and hence deliver an optimised surfactant package.  
● Shopping habits, the material and colour of fabrics purchased by the consumer to tailor the 
formulation towards optimised cleaning, reducing fabric wear and minimising colour fade.  
● The fragrance profiles of the products (e.g. deodorants & personal care purchased) purchased 
to customise the perfume additions to the detergent to synergise with these.  
● The location of the consumer’s home address such that the ‘builder’ package of the detergent 
can be optimised to the water profile of the consumer’s tap water, i.e. soft vs hard water.  
● Time of the year, to decide how to alter the formulation. For example, stain profiles will change 
regionally and could be more tailored towards r emoving grass stains in the summer, while 
being tailored towards mud in the winter. Moreover, the formulation could be customised 
based on the colour palette of the clothes worn by the consumer as a function of the time of 
year, e.g. lighter clothes in the summer and darker clothes in the winter.  
Through the methods/technologies integrated, the platform will promote social inclusion and diversity 
by empowering all consumers/users, irrespective of age, socioeconomic status or gender, to contribute 
in the codesign of innovative products meeting their needs. This will ultimately increase product variety 
and personalisation and deliver higher customer satisfaction and loyalty.   
Data analysis: The proposed concept for data analysis will improve both the customized formulation 
and the process in order to define an optimal formulation by taking into account all parameters (costs, 
time, LC, QbD, colour, composition, health, process …). This will en sure a real-time interaction with 
end-users to predict their needs, demands, perceptions and behaviours. Figure 1.3c shows the different 
parts of the DIY4U data analysis concept.  
The data analysis process aims to capitalise collaborative Knowledge Base. To reach goal, DIY4U 
proposes a specific methodology (see figure 1.3c). The elaborated KB will be updated only when a new 
formulation is created, rejected or improved. 
The end -users can share knowledge or solicit  
the DIY4U platform to evaluate a novel 
formulation.        
DIY4U Platform Graphical User Interface 
(GUI): The DIY4U project will develop 
userfriendly GUI interfaces based on consistent 
and intuitive  design.  Visual  and 
 functional consistencies  are  one 
 of  the  strongest contributors to 
enhance the usability and learnability. This 
project will define methods to measure the user 
satisfaction indicator to improve the user 
experience through iterative design and 
usability measurements. The DIY4U platform 
   
Figure 1.3c Data analysis process 
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    12  
  
will ensure user interaction with information by manipulating efficiently visual widgets and respecting 
the following principles:  
- Reduce the number of actions from the user to achieve the task;  
- Ensure that users never lose their information;  
- Use clear and meaningful words that help users understand the concept more easily;  
- Assure the accessibility and the visibility of the system status;  
- Make the platform more comfortable for a user to interact with a product; -  Take into 
account the perception of users.  
- Use of smart tools simulations for creation of formulations and awareness assessment.  
DIY4U Platform Scalability: The platform’s scalability is a main goal for this project. To ensure this 
important property, the DIY4U platform will deploy open source tools, implement evolutive schema 
database and apply design patterns principles and the best practices. Moreover, to guarantee the integrity 
of new industrial domains, the DIY4U project will integrate scalability at several layers:  
- Performance: At the beginning, the DIY4U project will ensure a high performance to support 
many new users and the need to add more capacities.  
- Availability (CAP 6): the DIY4U platform’s data layer will be based upon DLT/blockchain 
which automatically ensures consistency and redundancy across multiple distributed replicas in 
order to ensure that clients have uninterrupted service. Data stores for larger ‘off-chain’ digital 
assets will also be replicated across multiple sites to ensure local availability and redundancy 
for loss-prevention.  
- Costs: Open source solutions will help identify community members that will make great 
progress. This will reduce the total cost of development and facilitate growth of applications.  
Furthermore, DIY4U will, early on, take into account the extensibility of the platform by identifying 
similarities between domains and generalize as possible the GUI interfaces.     
How DIY4U platform would work (figure 1.3d)  
Step 1 Sign up: Register for an individual or company account on the DIY4U platform. Watch the virtual 
tours or tutorials to become ready to formulate in the cloud.  
Step 2 Create, test & recommend:  Use the DIY4U platform to create customised or personalised 
candidate formulations, digitally assess the performance of the created formulation (e.g. using plugged-
in models incorporating CFD) and simulate the manufacturing of the formulation using the pro cessing 
digital twin. DIY4U algorithms will automatically compute users’ desired observables and recommend 
the best formulation as well as the most efficient and accurate processing approach.   
  
Step 3 send results to fablab MDF: With a single click, share results of users’ optimal formulation and 
optimal processing conditions with DIY4U Fablab/MDF. Then, the users have the possibility to create 
another formulation or to quit after filling the satisfaction form. The DIY4U platform will propose a 
specific interface for manufacturers/makers to receive orders and exchange information with users.  
 
6 CAP theorem   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    13  
  
 
The Manufacturing Demonstration Facilities (MDFs) developed at STEF and CPI will act as fablab 
demonstrators, offering open access facilities and resources for entrepreneurs, SMEs and anyone to 
rapidly and cheaply make personalised/customized soft matter FMCG. The MDFs will be furnished with 
small-scale digitallyenabled machine (fablab) for rapid manufacture and high speed QA testing of 
innovative products designed on the DIY4U platform. The fablab will be integrated with high speed 
labelling capabilities and will address the inefficiency barriers of small batch/customized products (i.e. 
process efficiency, inventory costs and changeover/downtime). The MDFs will also provide  DIY4U 
training to industry stakeholders and individuals willing to trial the DIY4U approach to inform 
investment decisions (businesses) or foster knowledge (students).   
Visualisation method would also be applied in the design of facilities that would be purported to house 
the fablab; enabling distribution groups to see how the fablabs would incorporate into their businesses 
and consumer flow patterns with minimum disruption and maximal usage. Quality visualisation will 
also enable fast efficient staff training, in such areas as materials refill, to enable safe, effective products 
without the need of skilled formulators at site constantly. This will safe effective upskilling of a broader 
workforce with the potential for offsite real -time monitoring. The coalition of these applications will 
mean that efficient customisation and small -scale manufacturing can be applied across product ranges  
and differing applications.  
Figure 1.3e shows a conceptual diagram of a fablab for manufacture of powdered laundry detergents. 
Feedstocks for creating the personalised formulations are all either powder feedstocks or pre -formed 
powder composites. For example, the ‘top level’ surfactant package that defines the cleaning potential 
of the detergent have been preblended into typical filler compounds such as sulphates in order to aid 
with the flowability to facilitate easy incorporation into the detergent. In the same manner, components 
that are traditionally added in small quantities to the formulation such as enzymes are not added in their 
pure form and are instead pre -blended into a baseline powder. This approach affords the platform a 
number of advantages i n the case of powdered laundry detergents: Firstly, it increase the precision to 
which the small additions can be added to the formulation, facilitating the creation of small quantities 
for the consumer; secondly, it negates (to a large extent) issues rela ting to powder blend mixing and 
  
Figure 1. 
3 
d Functionalities of the DIY4U platform for users 
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    14  
  
hence product homogeneity leading to better, more consistent products generated in quicker time;  
finally, it helps to constrain the overall formulation space provided by the fablab, preventing the 
consumer creating non-viable or poorly performing products. It is logical for detergent manufacturers 
like P&G to bridge the supply chain by providing such bulk intermediate powders, especially because it 
is envisaged that the fablab approach will facilitate the uptake of higher va lue component additions 
which can be difficult to incorporate in to non -personalised/customised detergents due to market cost 
drivers. This allows innovative SMEs developing such higher value components to be directly involved 
in the collaborative manufacturing approach.  
A powder processing framework might be required at the back. Such a framework needs to be 
incorporated at the  
 
point of sale and be sufficiently attractive to the retailer or SME manufacturer who owns the floor space 
where the fablab will be placed. Moreover, it will be necessary to ensure that the replenishing of the 
constituent powders can be accomplished using e xisting staff and infrastructure and without requiring 
addition of any engineering controls or containment to handle powder transfer.  
The powdered detergent fablab exemplar has been used to demonstrate the concept of fablab as opposed 
to serving a realistic demonstration of the formulation space for a powder laundry detergent. In order to 
showcase how the approach is universal to multiple FMCG, the same approach has been demonstrated 
in figure 1.3f for manufacturing of gym supplements at a sports facility or gymnasium. In this iteration, 
the fablab would be creating customised macro and micro -nutrient sports drinks for users of the gym 
which they could then form into a nutritional beverage via the addition of milk or water. It can be seen 
from inspection of figure 1.3f that the approach is very similar to that of a powdered laundry detergent 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Figure 1.3e DIY4U Fablab concept as applied to  
powdered laundry detergents 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Figure 1.3f Fablab for creating personalized sports and  
nutrition drinks 
  
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    15  
  
in figure 1.3e. Indeed, there is nothing to prevent 
the fablab being set up so that the final liquid 
addition could be carried out within the device 
and hence dispense t he result as a fully 
formulated liquid product.   
Figure 1.3g illustrates a fully liquid-based fablab 
for manufacture of shampoo, in this case the 
major processing challenge relates to the 
rheology of the components which must be 
blended together and being able to achieve this is 
acceptable timeframe will be challenging. 
Hence, rapid heating of the components will be 
required. Cooling will be achieved by the flow of 
formulated product through non -heated parts of 
the dispensing system, with it actually being  
favourable from a consumer experience 
perspective for a warm product to be dispensed.      
Formulation is at the heart of the fablab and 
hence it is important to ensure ‘flexible robustness’ in 
terms of the options available to the consumer. It is 
important to ensure that consumers are not able to create 
non-viable, poorly performing, or even dangerous 
formulations, while at the same time still allowing them 
to make choices that have a meaningful impact on the 
product that they create. Furthermore, the fablab needs to 
provide assurance that the quality of product dispensed 
meets the requirements of the consumer who has 
formulated it. shampoos  
For example, if the consumer specifically requests a ‘non-biological’ detergent, the fablab will need to 
check this using in-line process analytics (e.g. Raman, UV, near-IR). Coupled with the real-time process 
analytics approach for product analysis, the f ablab will be integrated with a decision -making process 
such that sub-optimal formulations or nonviable formulations will not reach the consumer and will hence 
be recycled via blending into lower value,  
non-personalised products. While it will result in a bad user experience for the consumer to order a non-
viable product, it is envisaged that by employing self -learning neural networks (on both the digital 
platform and fablab), DIY4U will quickly be able to understand and prevent such events occurring. Over 
time, the device, complemented by improvements in the digital design modelling and simulation tools, 
will work to tighten the formulation space available to the consumer to prevent such bad experiences.  
Despite the overall approach of fablab being broadly equivalent for very different consumer goods, the 
challenges associated with maintaining product quality are subtly different and hence the approach needs 
to be sufficiently robust to meet these challenges. In the case of the gym supplement exemplar (figure 
1.3f), the cleaning of the device will be more prominent with cross contamination between users being 
important. In this case the process analytics being employed can be used to verify device cleaning and 
ensure material that exhibits unwanted ingredients above trace levels are recycled into non-personalised 
products. Provision of flexible PAT ports to  allow plugging or replacement of miniaturised PAT tools 
should mitigate this challenge. Examples of PAT tools that could be integrated include: In -line 
spectroscopy (Raman, UV, near-IR), Focused beam reflectance method, In-line rheometry/viscometry, 
Figure 1.3h Fablab for making personalized  
Figure 1.3h Fablab for making personalized  
Figure 1.3g: Fablab for making personalized shampoos 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    16  
  
Acoustic emissions sensing, Electrical resistance tomography, Particle size & shape (PVM), Colour 
analysis, Terahertz imaging, Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, Turbidity sensing, Hyperspectral 
Imaging).  
Business model Development: PICOM will work together  with the consortium and the DIY4U 
ecosystem engaged to develop a business model that will ensure the industrial adoption, 
commercialisation and long-term sustainability of the DIY4U platform and fablab.  
1.3.2 Methodology  
DIY4U will largely focus on deve loping and demonstrating the Open Innovation B2B/B2C digital 
platform and fablab MDFs in the detergent and soap domains. To achieve this, we will develop, modify, 
integrate and test several key components of DIY4U:   
Digital platform  
● Formulation ‘plug and produce’   
● Knowledge management and collaborative platform   
● Advanced data analytics  
● Formulation computational modelling   
● Formulation process digital twin  
● LCA and cost modelling  
● Distributed Ledger Technology/blockchain to track IP and interactions  
● Targeted marketing campaigns and open innovation competition to recruit users and suppliers  
Fablab MDFs   
● Hardware (unit operations)  
● Process analytical technology (PAT) and process control algorithms ● Digital 
twin (digitalisation of formulation manufacturing)  
  
Each of these components are further elaborated upon in this section.   
  
Formulation ‘Plug & Produce’: Relevant product and process information will be collated from 
FMCG manufacturers and suppliers and presented to platform users in a consistent format that allows 
the design of new viable/safe customised formulations via a “plug and produce” approach. Rele vant 
modelling and simulation tools, developed and/or plugged into the DIY4U platform, will allow users to 
simulate and optimise the performance of the created formulations.  
Knowledge management and collaborative (KMC) platform:  The KMC platform will faci litate a 
logical workflow for enabling end -users (including consumers, personalized product providers and 
Fablab owners) to collaborate throughout the product design, testing, production and delivery life cycle 
by developing novel product designs and formu lations or adapting existing ones. To achieve this, the 
KMC will provide users with a range of design methodologies to facilitate the process and product 
design and its subsequent testing, control and optimization. Computational modelling and simulation 
tools are an important component of the platform, and they will be based on a determination of not only 
the process drivers (the physical and chemical requirements of the process), but importantly they will 
be driven by customer satisfaction criteria as well as environmental and business requirements.  
The initial Platform Architecture will be validated and adapted based on the House of Quality from the 
QFD. The methodology that will be used to develop and code the Platform itself will be a proven agile 
methodologies of SCRUM (that is ideally suited to software developments) and Test Driven 
Development for efficiently developing “almost-bug-free” large software platforms like IBD® because 
it is a programming methodology oriented to code “reliable-by-design” software. The Scrum framework 
operates as follows: A product owner (i.e. represented by DCC with the support of EFF and IRIS) creates 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    17  
  
a prioritized wish list called a product backlog (this will be extracted from the House of Quality above). 
During sprint pla nning, the Scrum team (the IRIS and EFF software developers) pulls a small chunk 
from the top of that wish list, a sprint backlog, and decides how to implement those pieces. The team 
has a certain amount of time — a sprint (usually two to four weeks) — to complete its work, but it meets 
each day to assess its progress (daily Scrum). Along the way, the Scrum Master (IRIS) keeps the team 
focused on its goal. At the end of the sprint, the work should be potentially ‘shippable’: ready to hand 
to a customer, put  on a store shelf, or show to a stakeholder. The sprint ends with a sprint review and 
retrospective. As the next sprint begins, the team chooses another chunk of the product backlog and 
begins working again. Scrum is a highly powerful methodology for keepi ng the end-user engaged and 
with influence over the development process.   
The KMC Platform, which will be deployed through a supercomputer cloud to guarantee the high 
processing power and speeds required to run the tools, unites expert designed formulation design 
methodologies, numerical and process designer tools, Digital Twins, LCA and LCC tools, AI analytics, 
and Blockchain, considering the whole product design cycle, from ideation to fabrication and delivery. 
The KMC Platform will ensure the following features and performance in terms of simulation 
functionality:   
• The GUI wi ll be user friendly and will allow the potential users feeding the databases, user 
materials' implementation, etc. by means of custom encapsulated scripts.   
• Built-in models will be included in the global process interface in order to avoid the full design 
of every component (if something exists and it is successful, it should not be designed twice).   
• ‘One-stop-shop’ philosophy. The tool will account for everything involved in the process: from 
early design, to digital testing and functional simulations; from full product design and analysis, 
to LCA and environmental impacts evaluation. Integration with relevant databases engineering, 
physical and chemical, environmental, and economic   
• An optimization module, where almost everything should be input and output at a time.   
• A representative case study will serve as a preliminary validation example.   
• A platform template will be provided as a starting point.   
• The global interface will be able to call other software (either commercial or open source) for 
the particular analyses and process' bottleneck findings.  
The methodologies and tools that will be hosted into the Platform are:  
Advanced big data analytics methods: There are several open source methods and tools for advanced 
data analytics. In this project, the following techniques will be deployed and applied:  
- DIY4U will define a clustering technique based on a smart mix of algorithms 7 (K-means and 
OPTICS). This technique will allow for example to segment consumers and classify different 
products and evaluate the reachability of a new formulation on related cluster.  
- Machine learning: In order to analyse  and make decision, Decision trees will be adapted and 
used to assess the relevance of formulation and predict, for example, the behaviours and the 
demands of user.   
Formulation computational modelling: The usage of formulation computational techniques will allow 
the consumer to create viable, performing, or non-dangerous formulations that would fit with their desire 
levels of product that the consumer is searching for. The key idea is the development of a series of 
numerical methods that will forecast how the formulation will perform in the consumer home reducing 
the testing procedures and not creating a bad experience to the consumer.  Soft matter modelling and 
 
7 Kiran Jyoti “Data Clustering Approach to Industrial Process Monitoring, Fault Detection and Isolation” 
International Journal of Computer Applications, 2011.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    18  
  
simulation methods (e.g. Langevin dynamics, dissipative particle dynamics, multi -particle colli sion 
dynamics/stochastic rotation dynamics, and the lattice-Boltzmann method) will be applied to resolve the 
multi-scale nature of new FMCG formulations and provide quantitative information to predict their 
performance. Manufacturers (e.g. P&G) will also b e capable to plug -in specific models that allow 
consumers to create, digitally test and optimise their customised formulations. DIY4U DLT platform 
will ensure the manufacturer’s IP for the model is protected whilst giving access to such models to non-
formulation experts and stakeholders.   
Formulation process digital  twin: CETEMET and DSC will develop a multiphysics, multiscale, 
probabilistic simulation (digital twin) of the fablab processing equipment (to be developed in the project) 
using the best physical models, sensor/PAT updates data driven analytical algorithms, partners available 
knowledge (P&G, CDY, STEF and CPI)  and operation history.  The formulation process digital twin 
will virtually represent each of the production processes to obtain a formul ation virtually. This 
virtualization will take advantage of computer modelling that recreates each of the unit operations to 
mimic the overall equipment performance. The equipment process virtualization will take advantage of 
Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD) tools to analyse and optimize each unit operation virtually.  
LCA and LCCA Model Sub-platform: DIY4U’s LCA/LCCA model sub-platform will be designed to 
calculate the many permutations given for each material selection and decision point made by the User, 
and this will give an output result including environmental performance (equivalent CO2/kg) and 
monetary cost (£/kg). A mass and energy balance approach will be taken to simulate process stream 
mass flow rates (kg/h) and component concentrations within e ach stream. A comprehensive database 
will be created from publicly available data to assign to mass flows, and this will give manufacturing 
cost estimation and embedded carbon data for each material used in formulation. A decision tree will be 
built to simulate a User Interface, offering a range of preferences that pre -determine a defined process 
schedule. Life Cycle Assessment Guidelines ISO 14040/14044 will be adopted to develop the model 
with a systems -based approach. Life Cycle Costing will allow the id entification and evaluation of 
operational and capital costs (OPEX and CAPEX), and output results will include monetary product 
values, as well as other economic figures such as Net Present Value and Return of Investment. The LCC 
assessment is performed in  parallel to the LCA, making the same assumptions and using the same 
functional unit.   
Distributed Ledger Technology/Blockchain: A hybrid blockchain network (private permissioned 
DLT + public open network) will be deployed as the ‘base messaging layer’ be tween parties and will 
enforce a consistent structure of corporate or agent identity, process, mixture and ingredient metadata, 
as well as time-stamping and sequencing of requests and responses between parties to the ledger from 
different fablab sites, contributing companies, resellers or even consumers, and the use of modules atop 
the platform (e.g. CFD or analytics). There will also be the potential for process automation through 
‘smart contracts’, such as preventing dangerous mixtures or use of stale batches, or only allowing certain 
parties access to particular IP. Cryptography (including zeroknowledge proofs) will be used to ensure 
proprietary information is only legible by authorised parties, thus  
  
increasing the trust from corporate partners and in creasing their willingness to adopt the platform. 
Consistent and reliable messaging will ensure preservation and attribution of intellectual property 
developed on the platform, and uniformity of the data will allow it to be fed into machine learning 
processes developed for the platform. This will also enable a ‘reporting module’ to extract data from the 
ledger if requested for legal compliance processes. The DLT will be designed with open innovation in 
mind, and have well-documented APIs that will integrate with existing ERP systems and other graphical 
front-ends. It will also be possible to extend the system with automated payment methods beyond the 
end of this project, once there is more regulatory clarity.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    19  
  
To comply with GDPR there will be no recording o f PII onto the ledger, merely off -chain look-up 
locations or hashes to external databases (which could also be distributed between the parties using IPFS 
technology) which comply with the right to deletion.   
  
Fablab MDFs: CPI and STEF will host fablabs developed and provide open access for fablab 
demonstration and DIY4U design and manufacturing training.   
Fablab Design: The consortium will engage potential fablab  users and supply chain stakeholders to 
define user requirement specifications that will be used to develop technical specification and a design 
package for the fablabs. Key stakeholders to be engaged in the specification and design of the fablab 
will incl ude: FMCG consumers engaged through a user research carried out on the DIY4U digital 
platform, FMCG SME innovators and retailers signed up from PICOM’s retail innovation cluster and 
via user research on the DIY4U platform, consortium FMCG manufacturer (P&G ), FMCG ingredient 
suppliers engaged via P&G’s network and through targeted user research campaigns on the DIY4U 
platform, robotic and automation solution providers/equipment manufacturers (e.g. consortium partners 
– CDY, CTM, VTT, DSC), and consortium MDF  partners (CPI and STEF). The involvement of these 
stakeholders and potential users (from across the FMCG development and manufacturing innovation 
continuum and supply chain) in the specification and design of the fablab will ensure maximum impact 
of the fablab MDFs on all stakeholders and target market segments.    
Powder Detergent manufacturing fablab design considerations:  The main mixing processes for 
manufacturing detergent powders (spray drying, agglomeration and dry blending) will be reviewed and 
considered together with other user requirement specifications to select the most appropriate processing 
method or combination of methods to be integrated into the fablab. One intent of spray drying is to 
convert liquid materials such as (polymers/surfactants/silicates) into a powder form by mixing them with 
compatible powders (sulphate/carbonate for example) to create a “base powder” from which the final 
detergent is built.  Since spray drying is complex and costly, we do not expect to integrate it into the 
fablab. We expect detergent manufacturers like P&G to supply base powders as feedstock for the fablab. 
Agglomeration involves blending of dry raw materials with liquid ingredients using machines such as 
liquid binder, rolling or shear mixing devices that ca use the ingredients to collide and adhere to each 
other, producing larger particles with high -density. Dry mixing is used to blend dry raw materials to 
produce detergent powders and may sometimes involve the addition of small quantities of a liquid. The 
finished products from the above processes typically undergo further unit operations including storage 
in silos and bags, filling into bins and hoppers, handling and transportation in conveyors, packaging, etc. 
Key unit process challenges to be considered in the integrated fablab design will include:  
Powder Mixing & Segregation:  Many raw materials in detergent production are particulate form and 
their mixing/blending is a core unit operation. If the ingredients have different particle properties, in 
particular, particle size, this may cause segregation or de -mixing after mixing. This problem can 
seriously limit the potential for creating ingredient mixes. Online monitoring techniques (PAT, 
Chemometric data analysis, soft sensors, etc) will be developed and us ed for determining the endpoint 
of mixing processes. Producers would like to have tools for measuring segregation tendency and for 
predicting the maximum difference in particle properties tolerable before segregation becomes 
problematic.   
Powder Caking, Scale formation and Fouling: During some unit operations (spray drying, conveying, 
mixing, etc.) with specific formulations, powder may stick onto and coat the wall of the equipment and 
conveying lines. In powder mixing, the particles may stick to the mixin g chamber surface and form a 
crust over time.  This causes major problems as the equipment need to be cleaned to avoid blockages, 
cross contaminations, etc. There is therefore a need to integrate testing that can predict the likelihood of 
powder sticking onto a surface, and how this is affected by the composition of the powder and processing 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    20  
  
conditions. Modifications to the equipment surfaces and pipe walls (e.g. coating) could also be 
implemented to mitigate these problems.    
Powder Storage: Storage of raw materials, intermediate ingredients and final products plays a vital role 
in production processes. Frequent blockages in silo hoppers, uneven discharging, silo flooding, etc, are 
some of known challenges. In addition, powder storage devices contribute to  segregation issues in 
downstream processes.  Powder Conveying:  Conveying of powdered materials, as raw feeds, 
intermediate products and final products in packaging plays an important role in terms of product 
quality, energy consumptions, health and safety  issues, etc. Conveying pipeline blockages, product 
contamination and spilling out due to erosive wear of pipelines, energy optimisation, etc are some of the 
major challenges couple with powder transport.  
Liquid personal care products manufacturing fablab  design considerations: The just -in-time 
manufacturing of liquid personal care products such as shampoos also bring a specific number of 
challenges that are highlighted below. The main operations that will be required for the formulation of 
liquid products  are liquid/liquid blending , solid/liquid incorporation  which comprises both 
dissolution of soluble species and dispersion of insoluble particles along with the related wetting and 
incorporation as the two phases come together. Related to these two major formulation steps are powder 
conveying and dosing (discussed extensively above), rapid heating and cooling of components and 
products, liquid storage and stability, powder pumping and dosing, and finally cleaning. The challenges 
associated with these are discussed below.  
Blending of viscous liquids: Liquid/liquid blending of multi-component viscous systems can be difficult 
to achieve quickly with non-turbulent mixing often being required in order provide an optimal shear rate 
that does not disrupt the rheology of the formulated product. Moreover, the blending of multiple liquid 
components with different rheologies can be difficult to achieve in:   
Powder/liquid incorporation and dispersion generation:  Many FMCG will require the addition of 
solids to the liquid system. This can be for substances that dissolve or insoluble substances that need to 
be dispersed. In both cases, ensuring a favourable wetting and incorporation of the solid phase by the 
liquid will be key in ensuring rapid processing. From a process perspective, this operation will most 
likely be the most difficult to achieve with only a limited amount of optimisation being possible. To 
prevent unacceptable processing times for manufacturing within fablab, where possible, concentrated 
dispersions or feedstocks will be employed,  
Liquid pumping & dosing: Efficient pumping of the feedstocks and dispensing of the product will be 
required by a liquid processing fablab, this will need to be conducted in such a manner as to not 
compromise the key quality att ributes (rheology and functionality) of the product. While pumping of 
highly viscous liquids is relatively well understood, even at small scales, the design of the fablab will 
need to be sufficiently robust to prevent unwanted build-up or sedimentation within pipework.  
Liquid storage: Storage of multiple liquid components will need to be considered within the formulation 
of liquid products, along with vessel recharge, environmental control, and shelf -life. The challenges 
associated with achieving this will  be significantly different from the strategies employed for powder 
handling be equal within   Cleaning: Cleaning of dispensing lines and mixing tanks will need to be 
conducted following the formulation of each unique product. Strategies will need to be de veloped in 
order to minimise the amount of waste or off-spec material generated by the fablab.  
The above unit operations and key aspects of the powdered and liquid fablabs will be modelled and 
simulated using CFD by DSC, then the key unit operations valid ated by CPI and STEF prior to 
integration.  
Fablab High speed analysis and quality control:  Process analytical technology (PAT) is a well -
established concept for providing information about products and processes. While such technologies 
are often not in themselves ‘new’ the extent to which they can be miniaturised to be accommodated for 
process monitoring or inline material characterisation and quality checks is a strong drive for their 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    21  
  
continuing development to open up new areas of applications. It is believed that the fablab concept will 
pose significant opportunities within the field of PAT and hence drive the design and uptake of the next 
generation of in-line sensors that advance the state-of-theart. In addition to PAT being used for a ‘quality 
check’ of materials as they are being dispensed to the customer, it is envisaged that feedback from  the 
sensors can be used to optimise the manufacturing process. While the fablab process is inherently batch 
driven in nature, by employing PAT analysis of the materials as they feed in to the process, coupled with 
analysing the product as it is dispensed to the consumer, over time, the neural networks that provide the 
self-learning capability of fablab will be able to predict (based on the raw material inputs) the optimum 
way to run the process at the heart of fablab device. Over time, this approach will p rovide significant 
benefits as the fablab continues to learn: firstly, it will ensure that the properties of the product being 
delivered to the consumer are optimal and will hence reduce the amount of off -spec material being 
generated, secondly, it will optimise the process such that the product can be delivered to the consumer 
in the shortest possible time, finally, it will make the fablab robust via building predictive process models 
such that it can maximise its robustness in being able to deal with variations in the quality/properties of 
feedstock materials while still generating a formulated material of quality (model predictive control). 
While such techniques are ubiquitous within continuous processing they can also be used for a batch -
driven manufacturing by providing predictions on processing times and endpoints etc.  
Digitisation of formulation manufacturing:  In order to 
complement the PAT integration within fablab , by using the 
coupling of multi -scale models, a framework for building a 
‘digital twin’ of each fablab will be generated. Broadly, a digital 
twin will employ multi -scale modelling in order to link well 
established predictive models to generate insight as to the 
optimum way for a process to be run. While the PAT is able to 
learn over time to ensure quality products through 
manufacturing excellence and process robustness, the digital 
twin will allow the fablab to predict how it should operate when 
it is required to run with feedstocks for which it has little or no 
data. For example, it is envisaged that the formulation space of 
a particular fablab will not remain static and will evolve over 
time as formulators look to incorporate new and innovative 
components within their products. Hence, by predicting how 
these new components will behave and interact with the 
established formulation space, the digital 
twin will ensure that fablab is incredibly 
robust in being able to maintain the 
generation of optimum product s with little 
historic PAT data on a new component. 
Moreover, the digital twin will allow DIY4U 
platform formulators the ability to test how a 
new component could be incorporated 
within a fablab without the necessity for 
running a large matrix of compatibi lity 
experiments. By linking neural network 
driven learning, PAT for quality and 
predictive control, and a digital twin 
manufacturing approach, fablab will possess the required tools to drive the digitisation of the 
formulation of fully personalised consumer goods.   

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    22  
  
Inefficiency barriers of small batch/customised products:  In addition to using the PAT and control 
approach to improve efficiency, the economic feasibility of the integrated fablab will be accessed by 
performing a detailed study around process efficiency (optimised production rates), inventory costs, 
changeover/downtime and other relevant factors.  
Customisation and registration/consumer safety of a changing product: The consortium will use input 
from Product Stewardship teams from the relevant industries (e.g. P&G) and work with relevant 
regulatory bodies (e.g. AISE) to develop a software mechanism for evaluating the safety level of a 
requested product, developing MSDS, safety labelling etc. The DIY4U design algorithms will ensure 
that only inherently safe formulations can be designed. A request for a potentially hazardous or unsafe 
formulation would automatically return the message “NOT SAFE/POSSIBLE”.  
High speed labelling (for both ingredient labels/customisation): High speed labelling will be required 
but this does not need to be high throughput. Labelling will be provided to enhance the consumer 
experience and also to provide full materials and process traceability for products produced by a fablab. 
It is understood that current state -of-the-art within labelling will be sufficient to provide this with the 
novelty existing in the application to fablabs.   
Fablab Development: CDY (robotic and automation solution provider with expertise in manufacturing 
automated equipment for the formulation ind ustry) will work with consortium partners (P&G, CPI, 
STEF and CTM) to manufacture fablabs meeting design specifications and incorporating early unit 
process testing and simulation activities performed at CPI and STEF. The fablab should provide 
simplified simulation tools to facilitate the manufacturing process to the end -user (e.g. the consumer). 
CTM will implement a simulation module tools aiming to drive the user towards an easy product 
manufacturing. DSC will additionally implement DIY4U platform CFD ani mations of the internal 
performance of key operational units that have been virtually twinned.   
Fablab Demonstration, Optimisation and Training:  Following the installation of the developed 
fablabs at CPI and STEF, both partners will act as MDFs for the fablabs. The MDFs will provide open 
access for stakeholders that have designed new customised or personalised products on the DIY4U 
platform to use the fablabs to manufacture and characterise their products. Feedback from users will be 
used to optimise both the fablab and design & modelling tools on the digital platform.   
The MDFs will provide training to fablab users as well as to students and other industries interested in 
the DIY4U approach. Dedicated DIY4U training programmes/events (student placements, 
apprenticeships, workshops, conferences, equipment training and use of digital tools like virtual and 
augmented reality) will be organised and delivered to prepare current and future EU workforce for 
embracing the revolutionary customisation and smallscale industries approach.   
Open access element of the MDFs: During this project, the MDFs will provide open access to all EU 
FMCG stakeholders (including consumers and SMEs) that have successfully collaborated on the DIY4U 
platform to create a new customised/ personalised product design that they would like to manufacture 
using the fablab MDFs. From M24, DIY4U will open access to the public and FMCG value chain 
through a public event and via digital marketing strategies to invite stakeholders to use the DIY4U 
platform to design new customised/personalised detergents and soaps. In parallel, PICOM will organize 
a co-design workshops with 15/20 people including supermarkets, FMCGs and selected customers 1) to 
assess process and solution of both Open Innovation B2B/ B2C digital platform and MDFs and 2) to 
detect potential improvements. From M24-M36, optimal formulations designed and digitally tested on 
the platform will undergo a selection process that will choose customised/personalised formulations that 
will be manufactured and tested at the open access MDFs for free. The open access MDFs will be used 
to validate the DIY4U concept (i.e. going from product idea to prototype formulated product within a 
few days) and the overall DIY4U sustainability (demonstrating the p otential cumulative profit of >9M 
€ within 7 years post project (section 2). The detailed procedure for selection process is summarised 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    23  
  
below. A DIY4U OI Selection Committee (OISC) will ultimately be responsible for selecting the 
formulations that will be manufactured for free. The DIY4U consortium has allocated adequate resource 
and budget for STEF and CPI budget to provide free open access to third parties selected via OICs to 
develop and manufacture new customised DIY4U formulations. This free open access budget will cover 
the cost of training the third parties and providing DIY4U manufacturing support and consumables. The 
selection criteria will ensure that the third parties provided with free open access to the MDFs comply 
with EU rules. Third parties t hat have designed viable optimised formulations but do not meet the 
selection criteria for free open access to MDFs could self-finance their use of the open access MDFs.  
How we will select formulation recipes to be manufactured at the MDFs:  Companies applying to 
manufacture their formulations at MDFs will provide 1) company description, 2) marketing approach 
(finished product features and differentiation from customer's point of view, market analysis, targeted 
business canvas) and 3) tests de scription (procedure and involved stakeholders during testing, overall 
planning, external (i.e. CPI and STEF) expertise, resources and budget needed during MDFs use, internal 
dedicated resources, key indicators to be measured during tests, action plan in c ase of success). The 
consortium and its Advisory Board will propose eligibility of applicants based on company profile and 
proposal completeness. The DIY4U Selection Committee will select formulations and companies 
according to three criteria: product inno vation, business model and ability to address market needs, 
ability to perform testing.  
Following the completion of the DIY4U project, the MDFs will be available for EU companies that wish 
to use it on a flexible ‘pay -as-you-use’ collaborative/private bas is, to manufacture 
customised/personalised FMCG. Companies needing to use the MDFs will be provided training that 
allows them to operate the fablab themselves. Fablab MDF users will be responsible for the use of 
products (e.g. for relevant studies) manufactured. The facility will be maintained to standards, including 
appropriate cleaning protocols, and record keeping to allow flexibility for varying users as well as 
varying materials that feed through the infrastructure.  
To further encourage the use of the  facility by multiple organisations, confidentiality issues between 
users will be addressed by following best practices established within the respective operating open 
access innovation infrastructures at CPI’s National Innovation Centres and STEF. Both o rganisations 
will implement their respective policies for conflict management, confidentiality and IP, allowing 
multiple users to use the facility without fear of losing their IP or staff being conflicted. Appropriate 
resource planning (based on conflict checks and expertise) and effective project/innovation management 
by experienced project and innovation/technology commercialisation teams at CPI (>600 years 
combined experience) and STEF (>400 years combined experience) will also ensure adequate handling 
and management of partners’ confidential information at MDFs.  
Business needs and use cases definition and assessment … and be agile to react on evolutions:  
Business partners interviews within the consortium, studies analysis, external brands and retailers'  
interviews will be used by the project to find out business partners and ecosystem needs. Co -creation 
process will be used to design use cases and identify relevant initiatives that should be considered for 
collaboration. This process will work on some specific issues including: Which stakeholders are about 
to emerge? Which stakeholder should operate the platform and the fablab (manufacturer, retailer, city, 
third party, …)? i.e. what is the right value chain? Which stakeholder is in charge of customer 
relationship? Is there a need to coach the customer during the configuration process (because choices 
possibly impact health, price, environment, …)? Key performance indicators will be defined in 3 
domains (business economic impact, customer satisfaction, process improvement) and assessed during 
pilots through measures and customers feedback. The use cases descriptions will be used 1) to specify 
IS architecture; 2) to adapt project’s activities as well as 3) to adopt solutions adopted by the community. 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    24  
  
This approach will support improvement and enhancement of project outputs in iterations. The approach 
intention is to ensure that the final outcomes are well aligned with the latest trends and achievements.  
Use open innovation competitions (OICs) to extend DIY4U  functionality, test and promote DIY4U:  
To promote SME participation and unlock new business opportunities for SMEs based on the DIY4U 
approach, we plan to run two Open Innovation Competitions (OIC), one launched around M18 and the 
second around M28, to enable gradual and iterative expansion of DIY4U platform, and to promote the 
use of the DIY4U to create new business opportunities for SMEs. A standard process has been defined 
to select up to 10  Open Innovation Projects. The process starts with defining a b rief for the OIC and 
promoting it in social media, newsletter, events, and meetups with partner organisations in the relevant 
communities. After receiving a sufficient amount of applications, a curation process starts with follow 
up calls to select the best SMEs. Finally, this cohort is invited to a 1 day event with guest speakers from 
the consortium and workshop-like activities to start defining ways to collaborate, augment the DIY4U 
platform and develop bespoke formulations for commercialisation. This initiative will be useful to:  
1) Get feedback and test the functionality;   
2) Get businesses that can become contributors to data;   
3) Use the platform and fablab MDFs services to create and make new/innovative bespoke FMCG that 
they which to commercialise;   
4) Improve the solution by adding new technical modules (if partners consider there are significant 
technical improvement areas);   
5) Evaluate new business models, for the engineering of personalised goods, particularly for SMEs that 
can adapt to rapid demand change s and can implement changes in a shorter time to market;  6) 
Identification of new use cases for the personalisation or fabrication of other goods;  
 7) Reduction of design and development costs due to co -design and co -development between 
fablabs;  8) Promote the resulting solution towards B2B clients.  
We expect to fund up to 16 SMEs by providing real cost of up to 50k€ per successful application in 
addition to relevant technical and business mentorship from within the consortium to help the winners 
undertake the proposed OIPs. M15 OIC (200k€, 4 funded OIPs) will target SMEs that have developed 
relevant digital solutions that can be integrated and tested with the DIY4U platform.  M22 OIC (300k€, 
12 funded OIPs) will target (minimum Eligibility Criteria) EU SMEs aiming to: (a) use the platform and 
fablab MDFs services to create and make new/innovative bespoke FMCG that they which to 
commercialise; and (b) explore the use of DIY4U services for a new business offering (e.g. small-scale 
manufacturer) in the FMCG sector. The OIC selection process (further details in section 3, WP9) will 
follow: RFP and answer form definition (by DCC and PICOM, All partners an d Advisory Board), 
communication and interaction with relevant ecosystems (by All, led by DCC), proposals 
acknowledgement and eligibility instruction (by DCC and PICOM), proposals evaluation upon business 
and technical aspects (by 3 external evaluators), s election of proposals (by DIY4U Selection 
Committee), notification to winners (by DCC). Each selected project will be supported by relevant 
DIY4U partners in order to ease use of DIY4U resources, follow -up steps and planning, review 
deliverables and result s and monitor overall. An overall evaluation of OIPs vs DIY4U solution and 
ecosystem will occur at M36. 1.3.3 Technology Readiness Level: The start and end TRLs of DIY4U  
Technology  Start  
TRL  
End 
TRL  
Expected advancement through the project  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    25  
  
Knowledge  
Management and 
Collaboration  
Platform  4  6  
The KMC will use as foundation the platform developed by IRIS in the 
project IBD (see relevant project below). In the context of DIY4U IRIS will 
adapt this platform using the cloud architecture emplo yed during project 
SHAREBOX for a cloud online deployment. Both IBD and SHAREBOX 
platforms have been developed to TRL7 but the adaptations necessary for 
DIY4U will bring TRL down to 4. However, by the end of the project, the 
demonstration of the KMC with end-users will validate it at TRL6  
Knowledge-based 
formulation 
design  4  6  
Elaboration of Knowledge base through real user experience and digital 
formulations in order to propose safe and trust formulations, combining 
background knowledge and IP using established technology to demonstrate 
a new system to TRL6.  
Formulation and 
Process Modelling 4  6  
Formulation and process modelling are well established in industry. DIY4U 
will provide a step further so non -specialist/DIYers/SMEs will be able to 
provide better and safer products to consumers.  
Advanced  data 
analytics  4  6  
Enhance the collection of data and the extraction of valuable information 
from different types of data. Also, improve availability and scalability of 
services.   
DLT/Blockchain  
4  6  
The principles of IP tracking, uniqueness of digital data, and request 
processing are already validated/established (TR6 -9). Since these have not 
been integrated and validated with the DIY4U/KMC platform and related 
components, relevant adaptations are required, hence it appropriate to 
consider that DIY4U DLT/blockchain platform will start at TRL4 and reach 
TRL6 at the end of the project. DIY4U will develop API integration to ERPs, 
standard data formats for production requests and interactions with 
‘offchain’ data storage systems, as well as governanc e processes between 
parties sharing the system. If regulations and banking behaviours change 
suitably during the DIY4U project, we will also enable a blockchain -based 
payments layer.  
Fablab   
4  6  
Most of the hardware and electrical components for the the fablab are already 
at TRL6-9 and CDY has built several commercial and prototype systems for 
other applications using similar components. DIY4U will be the first 
miniaturisation and integration into  a fablab prototype machine (using 
background IP from CODY, STEF, CPI and P&G) followed by its 
demonstration (i.e. achieve TRL6).  
Fablab PAT and 
automation  4  6  
VTT has developed relevant PAT tools to TRL5-7 (e.g. NIR spectrometers). 
DIY4U will develop the integration of the PAT tools into the fablab and 
study different sampling interfaces, as well as data analysis methods to reach 
TRL 6 for the integrated system at the end of the project.  
1.3.4 Trans-disciplinary considerations: DIY4U’s collaborative approach will provide all its partners 
access to the interdisciplinary knowledge required to develop the digital platform and fablab. The project 
has a transdisciplinary character as it will incorporate software engineering, ICT, mate rial science, 
physics, chemistry, mechatronics, chemical engineering, process technology, numerical simulations, 
environmental science, marketing and finance.   
1.3.5 Other national and international research and innovation activities linked with DIY4U  
TagItSmart! - A Smart Tags driven service platform for enabling ecosystems of connected objects 
(https://www.tagitsmart.eu/) (PICOM) – The project includes 3 types of end -users: brands/ 
manufacturers (Unilever), retailers (Leroy Merlin, Univerexport) and service providers (Dondelotiro). 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    26  
  
PICOM is involved in use case definition, tests follow -up, showroom creation, disseminat ion 
workshops, exhibitions, standardization and open call management.  
Commercial projects (PICOM): Delivered several confidential product customization projects with 
manufacturers and retailers including chocolate 3D printing, color -changing shoes, custom ized 3D 
printed heels. Synchronicity (Digital Catapult) - H2020 - Converging EU IOT standards and creating 
a blockchain-based panEU marketplace for IOT data exchange, in pilot stage with 8 cities.  
Content Personalisation Networks (Digital Catapult) - H2020 - Creating a GDPR-protecting personal 
news reader app complemented by a blockchain-based pan-EU pool of licensed media content to lower 
barriers for freelancers to connect with major news agencies and vice versa.  
DLT Field Labs (Digital Catapult)  - Virtual collaborations across the UK to develop and evaluate 
blockchainbased systems beyond proof -of-concept stage. Each project involves a number of industry 
partners combined with DLT -developing SMEs/scale-ups to effect knowledge transfer and publicly 
demonstrate the value proposition of this technology.  
EFF has contributed to several architecture and development commercial projects covering adaptive 
state sharding (Elrond), enterprise blockchain  (Insolar), blockchain drone management  
(SkyyNetwork), blockchain business connectivity (Maxonrow), digital identity (Helix).  
IbD -Intensified by Design platform for the intensification of process involving solids handling 
(IRIS, Analisis -DSC, STEF, VTT): H2020 -IA, SPIRE -08-2015  – Online platform for Process 
Intensification (PI) of chemical process  so that among others advantages o f batch processes are 
transformed into continuous moreefficient process.  
SAM - Self-Adapting Model-based system for Process Autonomy (STEF) - The project is granted 
under BIAIPN fund program of Research Council of Norway (RCN) with 8 industrial partners.  
BIA- Effective Powder Handling (STEF) - BIA-KMB-RCN Minimising scale formation and erosion 
in pneumatic conveying pipeline of bulk powders   
MFLOW- Non-intrusive mass flow measurement & control system in pneumatic transport 
(STEF)- FORNY-3-RCN- commercialising of non -intrusive mass flow measurement system for 
pneumatic conveying of particulate bulk materials.  
BIO-Powders (STEF) - Marie Curie Research Training Network (Project ID: 512247) EU- FP6  
AceForm4.0 – Value Chain in Formulation Manufacturing (CPI): H2020 -CSA (Contract No. 
723045) – Facilitating exchange of non -competitive know-how in formulation technologies between 
stakeholders operating in key sectors that are dependent on formulation innovations and associated 
automation and digital tools.  
ADDoPT – advanced digital design transforming pharmaceutical development and manufacture 
(CPI):   InnovateUK – Developing and implementing advanced digital design techniques that eliminate 
nonviable drug candidate formulations, streamlining design, development and manufacturing processes.  
PROSPECT-CL (CPI):  Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in 
collaboration with UK industry – Development of complex liquid mixing scale up rig with advanced 
process analytics and advanced process control.  
PROSPECT-CP (CPI):  Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in 
collaboration with UK industry  – Implementation of PAT and Advanced Process Control on Twin 
Screw Wet Granulator for pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical applications  
PROSPECT-P&F (CPI) Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in 
collaboration with UK industry – Implementation of flexible rig for studying powder flow and packing  
ModelsMPP (CPI): Innovate UK – National Formulation Centre Strategic project in collaboration 
with UK industry – Transferring innovations in particle modelling into industrial practice - 
Methodology and framework to accelerate innovation in formulation development and manufacture 
cross-sector   
Development o f AI/data -mining and web -based applications (Python, R) (RDI): Veolia, EDF, 
Fareva   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    27  
  
CFA. Advanced Manufacturing Centre for Aeronautics and Naval Sectors  (CTM): Innovative 
SPANISH – Implementing advanced manufacturing techniques (3D printers, fablabs, robo tics, design 
and simulation, etc) for Aeronautics and Naval design and manufacturing components.   
DIH FAT. (CTM) Digital Innovation Hub (DIH) Advanced Manufacturing in Transport Sector. CTM 
is the coordinator of the Andalusia Regional DIH strategy. This p roject is focused on establishing a 
platform where manufacturing innovations can be developed by SMEs.  
SHiELD (STL): H2020-RIA, DS-03-2016 – Research and development of data protection and privacy 
framework for security toolkit for data exchange systems like OpenNCP  
OPERANDO (STL): H2020-IA, DS-01-2014 – Data protection and privacy platform to enable users 
to control the use of their data and to enable the marketing of privacy service provision  
eWALL (STL): FP7 -RIA, ICT -2013.5.1 – Research on ethics, sec urity and privacy by design in 
sensing and cloud systems for personalised healthcare services  
Safe Life Design of a Mixing Vessel for detergent production Persan (Analisis -DSC): Henkel – 
Safe life design of a mixing vessel for detergent (non-newtonian material) production.  
Thermal and fluid-dynamics analysis of a tensoactive agent production process (Analisis -DSC):   
This study evaluates using CFD tools, the behavior of three in-line devices for a tensoactive production 
process.   
Optimization of a reactor vessel and a heat exchanger for detergent KAO Corporation (Analisis-
DSC):  KAO Corp –The project aims to optimize the production of surfactant batch reactor analysis to 
avoid residual reaction in stirred reactor batch type using fluid dynamics optimizati on (CFD), and 
making proposals for improving efficiency.  
ProPat http://pro-pat.eu/ (VTT, IRIS):– Online PAT platform - aims to develop novel and smart 
sensors and analysers for providing measurements on composition, particle size, local bulk properties 
and process parameters. The platform also provides self -learning and predictive capabilities aimed for 
dramatically reducing over costs derived from even slight deviations from the optimum process.  
CODY Commercial Project:  Inspection and Packaging Line for radiopharmaceuticals. Recipe 
handling, data logging, electronic signatures and reporting with TITAAN software.  
CODY Commercial Project:   Product test station for testing high-voltage equipment. Automatic test 
execution by retrieving test recipes from external database using software developed by Cody 
(TITAAN). P&G UK led a Chariot UK AMSCI £18Million project, powder processing grant  
P&G UK was involved in the FP7 Marie Curie ITN project PARDEM & TMAPP, hosting 1 ESR.   
1.3.6 Sex and/or gender issues:  DIY4U consortium partners recognise and wholly support the EC’s 
policies/priorities for Promoting Gender Equality in Research and Innovatio n (R&I): women 
participation in research must be encouraged to close the gender balance gaps in research teams; 
promoting gender balance in decision -making to achieve 40% of the underrepresented sex in 
panels/groups and 50% in advisory groups; and integrating gender dimension in R&I  content to improve 
scientific quality and societal relevance of generated knowledge, technology and/or innovation. The 
general under -representation of women in FMCG sector R&I makes Gender issues particularly 
important for this project.  
All DIY4U participants are equal opportunity employers, with non-discriminatory policies with regards 
to gender. Some DIY4U participants (e.g. CPI with 26.66%) have higher proportions of female science 
and engineering staff than the national or regional (EU) industry norm. In accordance with the above 
EC’s recommendations for Promoting Gender Equality in R&I, we have actively included women in the 
technical delivery of the project’s WPs and tasks and expect to reach ≥25% of our total expected number 
of project personnel. All WPs are genderneutral with respect to employability. DIY4U digital platform 
and fablabs will also be gender-neutral, allowing anyone to become a creator/maker of particulate/liquid 
FMCG irrespective of their gender.  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2019)6093268 - 02/10/2019 
870148: DIY4U – Part B    28