4. RESOURCES................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  59
4.1 Consortium set-up ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 59
4.2 Project management (n/a for concept note)................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 60
4.3 Green management (n/a for concept note) ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 61
4.4 Budget (n/a for concept note) ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  62
4.5 Risk management (n/a for concept note) ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 62 
5. OTHER ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 64
5.1 Ethics ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  64
5.2 Security ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  64 
6. DECLARATIONS ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 64 
ANNEXES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 64 
#@APP-FORM-LIFESAPOAG@# 
#@PRJ-SUM-PS@#  [This document is tagged. Do not delete the tags; they are needed for the processing.] 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
2 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
Project summary   
Despite being the cornerstone of Europe's economy, the industrial sector is responsible for a 
vast amount of CO2 emissions. To align with the Net Zero Emissions (NZE) by 2050 Scenario, 
Energy Communities have emerged as a promising solution, although they remain uncommon 
in industrial areas. In this context, the ENERGIZE+ project seeks to demonstrate the feasibility 
of cooperative energy models in selected EU industrial zones (Manresa, Catalonia; Valesia 
Region, Italy; Zlín Region, Czech Republic; Upper Austria) by fostering energy collaboration.  
With a focus on significant Carbon reduction, thanks to its pilots and compelling KPIs in terms 
of company participation, training and skills development, energy savings, renewable energy 
generation, GHG emissions reduction, job creation, as well as its impacts for policy making and 
stakeholder outreach, the project aims to inspire global adoption of sustainable industrial 
energy practices. It is noteworthy that already ENERGIZE+ has secured the support of over 20 
industry players and associations, Industrial Parks, Councils, among others.  
The ENERGIZE+ project, which has been designed by a leading multidisciplinary team of 
researchers, regional and EU level agencies and expert companies from the energy sector, 
stands as a pioneering initiative to tackle the challenges experienced by the industrial secto r, 
demonstrating the feasibility of creating Industrial Renewable Energy Communities using 
cooperative energy models. In order to ensure access to and replicability of the projects 
outputs, the training and capacity building tools developed in  the project will be digitized and 
made available through a community -based Digital Hub for professionals interested in energy 
communities and collaborative energy models, who will benefit from an acceleration 
programme that will have been tested and valid ated in our 4 pilot industrial zones, the KPIs 
from which will be tracked and widely disseminated. 
#§PRJ-SUM-PS§# #@REL-EVA-RE@# #@PRJ-OBJ-PO@# 
1. RELEVANCE  
Fill in only sections 1.1-1.4 at stage 1 (concept note). Fill in all sections at stage 2 (full proposal).
1.1 Background and general project objectives 
Background and general project objectives 
Explain the problem and the needs to be addressed in the project. Describe the background, starting point / quantified 
baseline of the project.  
Please explain in which location and/or sector the main activities of the project will take place and justify that choice. 
For Nature and Biodiversity: 
Provide a clear and quantified description of the conservation issue and threats targeted, as well as relevant 
background information and quantified figures defining the baseline to justify the proposed Interventions by  
At stage 1 (concept note) when relevant, describe the main species/habitats directly targeted by the project: scientific 
name; refer to the Annex(es) of the EU Birds or Habitats Directive where they are listed; population size within each 
project area; conservation status; habitat name and Natura 2000 code; % of the cover within each project area; 
conservation status. 
At stage 2 (full proposals), when relevant, provide a brief description of the areas where conservation actions will be 
implemented and main species and / or main habitats directly targeted by the project, and submit the following annexes:  
− maps  
− description of sites  
− description of species and habitats 
Describe the previous conservation efforts in the project area or for the habitats/species targeted. 
For Circular Economy and Quality of Life (n/a to Environmental governance topics): 
Describe the previous technical preparatory work and results of previous research and development activities, showing 
the status of technical development achieved for the proposed solution, including the technical readiness level (TRL) 
where relevant and proving its technical feasibility. 
Explain the scale at which such results have been obtained and if prototypes have been already developed and tested. 
Their scale/dimension and relevant results and conclusions have to be clearly presented. Illustrate available best 
practices in the relevant sector (state of the art) and clearly and concisely explain the environmental, technical and 
economical improved performa nces/ advantages introduced by the proposed solution in case this is claimed to be 
innovative/ demonstrative. 
The industrial sector is a cornerstone of Europe's economy, driving innovation, employment, 
and economic growth. However, it is also a significant contributor to energy consumption and 
Carbon Dioxide (CO2) emissions. As the European Union (EU) takes ambitious steps towards 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adopting sustainable energy practices, it is imperative 
to scrutinize the role of the industrial sector in these efforts.  
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
3 
Europe's industrial sector stands as a pivotal player in the regional and global landscape, 
accounting for a substantial portion of energy consumption and CO 2 emissions. The statistics 
are telling (in 2022) this sector represented 37% of global energy use, a notable increase from 
the 34% recorded in 2002. This growth in energy consumption primarily stems from energy -
intensive subsectors within the industry. 
While industrialization has been pivotal in Europe's economic development, it has also been 
accompanied by a significant environmental cost. In 2022, the industrial sector alone was 
responsible for emitting a staggering 9.0 Gt of CO2. To put this into perspective, this translates 
to roughly one-quarter of global energy system CO2 emissions. Although modest improvements 
have been achieved in terms of energy efficiency and the adoption of renewable energy 
sources, the pace of progress remains notably slow. To  align with the Net Zero Emissions by 
2050 (NZE) Scenario, a substantial reduction in industrial emissions to approximately 7 Gt CO2 
by 2030 is imperative1;2.  
Amid these daunting challenges, the concept of Energy Communities has emerged as a 
promising solution, whereby three European directives describe two possible types: Renewable 
Energy Communities (REC) and Citizen Energy Communities (CEC). In general terms, Energy 
Communities are structured collectives of users actively engaged in innovative forms of 
energy sharing, with the primary objective of enhancing energy efficiency and 
cultivating sustainable practices . By fostering cooperation and resource sharing among 
industries within these communities, a multitude of advantages can be realized . First and 
foremost, these energy communities have shown immense potential for boosting energy 
efficiency. By combining resources, industries can share best practices, technologies, and 
expertise, ultimately reducing energy wastage and associated costs.  
A Renewable Energy Community, described in Directive EU/2018/2001, is a legal entity based 
on open and voluntary participation , where its members are located in th e proximity of the 
renewable energy projects  (broad range of activities and services related to all forms of 
renewable enery) and its primary purpose is to generate social & environmental benefits rather 
than focus on financial profits. This not only reduces the environmental footprint but also leads 
to economic benefits for member industries3;4. 
Despite the recognized potential , the  implementation of such energy cooperation and joint 
energy services remains uncommon in industrial areas. Numerous factors contribute to this 
scarcity, including a lack of awareness regarding the potential benefits, regulatory barriers, and 
the absence of supportive frameworks.  Additionally, challenges stem from the management 
structure, often under national governments, as well as contractual conditions with grid 
operators, utilities, suppliers, and technology providers. Financial viability and a lack of 
innovation in community -led business models and services further impede widespread 
adoption. Overcoming these barriers is essential for fostering a more robust and sustainable 
approach to energy cooperation in industrial settings. 
The ENERGIZE+ project stands as a pioneering initiative aiming to tackle these challenges in  
the industrial sector .It demonstrates the  feasibility of creating Industrial Renewable Energy 
Communities using cooperative energy models , directly addessing Scope B  of the LIFE-
2023-CET-BUSINESS call topic. The project has carefully selected four distinct industrial zones 
in four Europeanregions. These industrialised areas hold significant potential for fostering 
energy synergies, advancing renewable energy projects, promotingcooperation, and achieving 
substantial reductions in carbon emissions while optimizing resource consumption. 
The primary goals of the ENERGIZE+ project are the following: 
• To showcase the viability of cooperative energy models within selected industrial 
zones across the EU. The project's focus regions include  Manresa, Catalonia (Spain) - 
 
 
1 Albulescu, C.T., Artene, A.E., Luminosu, C.T. et al. CO2 emissions, renewable energy, and environmental regulations in 
the EU countries. Environ Sci Pollut Res 27, 33615–33635 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-06155-1  
2 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_5188  
3 Eslamizadeh, S., Ghorbani, A., & Weijnen, M. (2023). Establishing industrial community energy systems: Simulating the 
role of institutional designs and societal attributes. Journal of Cleaner Production, 419, 138009. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.138009  
4 Boulanger, S. O., Massari, M., Longo, D., Turillazzi, B., & Nucci, C. A. (2020). Designing Collaborative Energy Communities: 
A European Overview. Energies, 14(24), 8226. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14248226  
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
4 
Pilot 1, Valsesia Region (Italy) - Pilot 2, Zlín Region (Czech Republic) - Pilot 3 and Upper 
Austria ( Austria) - Pilot 4, chosen for their significant industrial presence and 
commitment to sustainable energy practices. 
• To harness the untapped potential of these regions by nurturing energy 
cooperation and collaboration among industrial entities  located in the selected 
industrial zones. 
• To make substantial strides in reducing carbon emissions , aiming by 930 tCO2eq 
during the project duration , thanks to fostering renewable en ergy projects,  optimizing 
resource consumption, and promoting circularity within these areas. 
The ENERGIZE+ project has the ambition to serve as a catalyst for sustainable industrial 
energy cooperation, inspiring other regions to embrace similar models , with a vision to make 
a substantial contribution to the global reduction of carbon emissions and the promotion of 
sustainable energy practices on a global scale. 
The Consortium is composed of 9 multidisciplinary partners, including 2 regional agencies  
(ICAEN, EAZK), 5 expert companies in energy sector (IRIS , 3OC, ESTRATS, SYM, 
ENGREEN), 1 research organisation  (EI-JKU), and a European federation of agencies  
(FEDARENE) and regions for energy environment  ensuring replicability across EU . It is 
coordinated by IRIS  (with a strong expertise in energy symbiosis inc ubators) & supported  
technically by the Energieinstitut an der Johannes Kepler University  (expert in sustainable 
energy cooperation and services in industrial parks).
1.2 Specific project objectives 
Specific project objectives  
Describe the specific objectives of your project (clear, measureable, realistic and achievable within the duration of the 
project). 
The ENERGIZE+ project aims to foster energy cooperation among companies in 
proximity in urban and industrial zones to reduce CO 2 emissions and enhance energy 
efficiency. To achieve this overarching goal, a set of clear and measurable Specific Objectives 
(SO) has been defined:  
• SO1: Promote the collaboration and participation of businesses in renewable energy, 
energy efficiency initiatives, and community energy projects across target regions.  
o KPI 1: 50 companies implementing energy cooperation approaches by the end of the 
project and 500 companies after 5 years.  
• SO2: Implement training and mentorship programs (via an Acceleration Programme 
model, as proven to rapidly propel the development of new initiatives by providing them 
with capacity building, resources, mentorship, networking opportunities, and other support 
mechanisms) for businesses and investors  to increase their understanding, skills and 
competencies in the vanguard field of cooperative energy models.  
o KPI 2: 4 jobs created by the end of the project in Full-Time Employment (FTE) and 40 
after 5 years. 
o KPI 3: 400 stakeholders by the end of the project  trained with increased skills and 
competencies on energy issues due to the project.  
o KPI 4: 5 new viable business models for energy cooperation by the end of the project 
and 10 new viable business models after 5 years. 
• SO3: Drive corporate sustainability by reducing CO 2 emissions through the adoption of 
renewable energy, enhancement of energy efficiency, and the promotion of circular 
economy practices, including resource reuse and recycling.  
o KPI 5: At least a cumulative reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in 930 of 
CO2 equivalent per year (tCO2eq/year) triggered by the project and 4500 
tCO2eq/year after 5 years   
• SO4: Assess and facilitate the transferability and replication of cooperative energy models 
in replication regions.  
o KPI 6: 3 documents of legislations, policies, or strategies created/adapted at any 
governance level as a result of the project, a nd the outreach to  at least 20  
policymakers in the area of Energy Efficiency at any governance levels influenced by 
ENERGIZE+ in shaping a sustainable energy landscape by the end of the project. 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
5 
• SO5: Develop an operational framework to analyse the energy cooperation landscape in 
industrial areas across all participating regions  and evaluate  the overall economic and 
social impact of ENERGIZE+ in the participating regions.  
o KPI 7: 10M€ of cumulative investments in sustainable energy triggered by the end of 
the project.  
o KPI 8: 4 real-life implementation sites carried out by the project (and 20 -40 real-life 
implementation sites after 5 years).  
• SO6: Optimize the use of energy resources and technologies in ENERGIZE+ pilot regions 
based on a series of KPIs that  directly measure the project's impact on energy efficiency 
and sustainability in the pilot regions.  
o KPI 9: Primary Energy Savings of 8 GWh/year triggered by end of the project.  
o KPI 10: Final Energy Savings of 3.4 GWh/year triggered by the end of the project.  
o KPI 11: Renewable Energy generation of 3 GWh/year triggered by the  end of the  
project.  
• SO7: Foster industry (clusters, industry parks, etc.) and community participation and 
engagement in all participating regions by designing strategies for communication, 
awareness, and stakeholder involvement, and measuring the success in the deployment 
of energy communities.  
o KPI 12: 1000 stakeholders reached and engaged through via events during the 
project.  
• SO8: Develop, deploy, and promote the effective use of the scalable ENERGIZE+ Digital 
Hub in all participating regions.  
o KPI 13: 100 of registered and engaged companies, clusters and industrial parks  
benefitting from direct support by the end of the project.  
These specific objectives of the ENERGIZE+ project will make a significant contribution to the 
promotion of energy cooperation in urban and industrial areas in Europe , with high potential of 
creating legacy due to the scalability and replicability of the projects outputs.
1.3 Compliance with LIFE programme objectives and call topic 
Compliance with LIFE Programme objectives 
Explain how the project contributes to the specific objectives of the LIFE Programme and the sub-programme targeted 
by the call (Nature and Biodiversity, Circular Economy and Quality of Life, Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation 
or Clean Energy Transition).  
The LIFE Programme is the EU Programme for Environmental and Climate Action , which 
not only finances innovative and best practice projects, but also draws attention to the need for 
supporting actions aimed at awareness raising and training, building capacity, stimulating 
investments and supporting implementation of policies focused on energy efficiency and small-
scale renewables. 
ENERGIZE+ contributes abundantly to the specific objectives of LIFE Programme, as 
numerous activities within the project are aligned with actions such as building capacity, 
stimulating investments and supporting implementation of policies focused on energy 
efficiency.  
In the context of the subprogramme Clean Energy Transition (CET), the focus is on facilitating 
the transition toward an energy -efficient, renewable energy -based, climate-neutral and 
resilient economy by funding coordination and support actions across Europe. These actions, 
of high EU added -value, aim at breaking market barriers that hamper the socio -economic 
transition to sustainable energy. 
ENERGIZE+ is aligned with this objective, aiming at providing technical, legal and financial 
support to energy communities and at delivering capacity building , including training 
programmes on methods and approaches to respond to the challenges raised by European 
policies for the sustainability transition, such as the European Green Deal and the promotion 
of energy cooperation mechanisms. 
The challenges faced by the CET Subprogramme typically require the engagement of multiple 
stakeholders (including large and small companies, public authorities, non-profit organisations 
amongst others) in specific and targeted actions . It is noteworthy that  ENERGIZE+ targets a 
broad diversity of stakeholders related to the establishment of  energy cooperation between 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
6 
companies in urban industrial areas  (including public authorities, companies already 
established in industrial areas, sustainability consultancies, technology suppliers , etc ) to 
identify the needs and co -design the collaborative approaches between large and small 
companies operating in proximity. Furthermore, regional energy agencies, and sustainability 
consultancies are committed in the activities’ development and promotion. 
 
Compliance with the call topic 
Indicate the call topic to which your proposal relates, and explain how the proposed project addresses the scope of 
the topic description in the Call document. 
ENERGIZE+ addresses the topic LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: “Supporting the clean energy 
transition of European businesses ”, and targets specifically its Scope B:  Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies . ENERGIZE+ covers all the requirements of the call, as 
indicated in the table below. 
Topic related demands – Scope B ENERGIZE+’s answer 
Actions should foster the market uptake of 
energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy (and heat pumps where 
relevant), through the establishment of 
collaborative approaches among companies. 
Applicants can focus on developing 
collaborative approaches, namely between 
large and small companies operating in the 
same value chain, or on energy 
cooperation among companies in 
proximity (region, cluster, industrial 
park/site). 
ENERGIZE+ will develop a collaborative 
approach to catalyse the  creation of 
Industrial Energy Communities.  This will be 
achieved by implementing a cooperative 
energy model among companies in 
proximity, facilitated by the establishment of 
virtual energy communities within the Digital 
Hub virtual energy communities in the 
Digital Hub (developed in WP4). Through 
ENERGIZE+, companies will be able to 
collaboratively utilize and share energy 
resources and assets (i.e. renewable 
energy generation, energy networks , 
energy storage) and energy services, as 
well as implement energy exchanges  with 
other complimentary companies in 
proximity. In essence, ENERGIZE+ seeks 
to stimulate the development of cooperative 
energy initiatives and services among 
companies in proximity  within each pilot 
area. In the project's later phases, the focus 
will shift to the implementation of viable 
business models for energy cooperation. 
This will be achieved through a structured 
Acceleration Programme model  (WP3), 
incorporating training and  mentorship 
activities to empower companies in 
establishing and sustaining successful 
energy collaborations (WP5). 
Related indicators- KPI 1: 50 companies 
implementing energy cooperation 
approaches; KPI 13: 100 registered and 
engaged companies, clusters and 
industrial parks benefitting from direct 
support by the end of the project. 
Proposals are expected to carry out 
activities aiming at triggering interest, 
awareness, knowledge and know -how 
(e.g. through the organisation of roundtables 
at sector or territorial level)  on the multiple 
benefits achievable from collaborative 
approaches. 
ENERGIZE+ will work on the development 
of capacity building materials for businesses 
and industries , as well as for investors,  
through an impactful and replicable 
mentorship and accompanied approach 
that will be designed and deployed in WP3. 
Workshops and mentorship sessions will be 
organised as part of the support to the 
industry and businesses. A digital repository 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
7 
of capacity building material, training 
programmes, and learning experiences and 
mentorship access  will be deployed, in 
order to  provide easy, one -stop-shop 
access to knowledge, materials, tools, 
experts and community for participation and 
implementation of cooperative energy 
models. The promotion of the ENERGISE+ 
initiative will be underpinned by  campaigns 
for raising awareness, and designed to 
create an effective call to action (CTA) to 
sign up to the digital platform.  ENERGIZE+ 
will also advocate for sel f-sufficiency, 
promote sustainability and increase the 
knowledge on energy efficiency and 
renewable energies of the Industrial Energy 
communities' members.  Ultimately, 
ENERGIZE+ will empower stakeholders 
through access to all the capacity building 
materials, and a specific communication 
and monitoring Cloud space for each pilot.  
Related indicators - KPI 3: 400 
stakeholders trained with increased 
skills and competencies on energy 
issues due to the project ; KPI 12: 1000 
stakeholders reached through media 
and events during the project. 
Proposals should also work on removing 
barriers that hinder energy cooperation , 
e.g. organisational (coordination, trust, 
responsibilities, data management, risk 
sharing), legal or social. 
ENERGIZE+ will tackle barriers faced by 
Industrial Energy Communities, primarily 
associated with the concept of energy 
sharing through an energy community  that 
is digitally enabled and facilitated by trusted 
experts and mentors  and via an 
Acceleration Programme, which is a proven 
approach for start-ups that can also offer the 
following advantages for established 
industries venturing into new cooperative 
energy models:  rapid learning curve, 
access to expertise and capacity build ing 
services and materials, n etworking 
opportunities, orientation in relation to 
where and how to access financial support, 
infrastructure, and resources. . A blend of 
virtual interaction underpinned by access to 
experts and mentors will ensure that we can 
not only make participation scalable and 
flexible, but we can also ensure that it is 
facilitated by experts to ensure trust and 
confidence. Moreover, ENERGIZE+ will 
develop business models tailored to the 
relevant legal and social framework s for 
cooperation models according to each 
region. Related indicators - KPI 4: 5 of 
new viable business models for energy 
cooperation created : KPI 6: 3 
legislations, policies, or strategies 
created/adapted (including sustainable 
energy issues) at any governance level 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
8 
as a result of the project, and the 
outreach at least 20 policymakers. 
Proposals should facilitate the 
establishment of concrete cooperation 
initiatives, including but not limited to 
identifying, investigating and validating 
economically viable business models  
(based on concrete interaction with 
participating companies). 
The first phase of the ENERGIZE+ project 
focused on studying previous initiatives 
around energy efficiency and communities 
in Industrial areas . Business models that 
are fit -for-purpose for the cooperative 
energy models implemented in the project 
will be designed and careful consideration 
will be given to the legal, sustainability and 
social requirements tailored to each 
business models  implemented in the 
different regions where the pilots will  be 
implemented. These will then be tested and 
validated during the deployment phase  of 
the project. Related indicators- KPI 1: 50 
companies implementing energy 
cooperation approaches, KPI 4: 5 viable 
business models for energy 
cooperation; KPI 8: 4 real-life 
implementation sites carried out by the 
project. 
The proposed activities should be focused on 
engaging businesses in energy 
cooperation activities; the involvement of 
additional relevant stakeholders  (e.g. 
industrial organisations, multipliers, financial 
players, ESCOs, public authorities) should be 
envisaged to ensure the success and the 
sustainability of the developed collaborative 
approach 
We will ensure that businesses are engaged 
in energy cooperation thanks to the 
expertise of the consortium members in 
energy cooperation and the implementation 
of successful dissemination and 
communication measures. In addition,  
ENERGIZE+ will implement roundtables 
with relevant stakeholders such as ESCOs, 
PA, industrial organisations, SME, energy 
community members, financial players, 
multipliers, suppliers, among others . For 
instance, ENERGIZE+ will facilitate the 
ability for ESCOs to develop and implement 
energy efficiency measures within the 
project. Additionally, the project will 
contribute to overcom ing barriers for 
community energy suppliers in securing 
financing and establishing direct contracts 
for selling renewable energy, such as 
through power purchase agreements 
(PPAs). Related indicators - KPI 13: 100 
registered and engaged companies, 
clusters and industrial parks benefitting 
from direct support by t he end of the 
project. 
The proposed approaches should 
demonstrate a high degree of replicability.  
Thanks to a digital delivery model,  
ENERGIZE+ will ensure an effective 
replication of the energy cooperation 
models, whereby the knowledge, learnings, 
training and tools will be accessible in the 
scalable Digital Hub developed in WP4, 
which will integrate specific features and 
materials that will be useable (and 
localisable) across all the industrial park 
sites of Europe. The ENERGIZE+ project 
will count on a “Replicability and exploitation 
phase” as a cornerstone for ensuring the 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
9 
sustainability of project results beyond its 
duration for legacy creation. It will 
encompass all the activities aimed at 
facilitating the successful replicability of the 
project into additional EU regions, beyond 
pilot zones.  Related indicators- KPI 8: 4 
real-life implementation sites carried out 
by the project 
Proposals should include a clear action plan 
to communicate experiences, critical 
success factors and results towards 
relevant energy cooperation actors and 
stakeholders across the EU. 
Our project includes a cross -cutting activity 
that centres on communication and 
dissemination campaigns, workshops, 
guidelines and best practices that will 
encapsulate all the experiences, learnings, 
critical success factors and results for the 
implementation of future Industrial Energy 
Communities, which will be effectively 
targeted to energy cooperation actors and 
stakeholders in the participating regions, as 
well as across the EU. Related indicators- 
KPI 12: 1000 stakeholders reached 
through media and ev ents during the 
project. 
Benchmarking and monitoring mechanisms, 
focusing on the energy use at value chain, 
or at cluster or industrial park/site level, 
could be developed to support the 
formulation of policy/regulatory 
recommendations aiming at speeding up 
the clean energy transition of the business 
sector towards the EU’s 2030 and 2050 
climate and energy objectives. 
ENERGIZE+ will develop guidelines and 
best practices  underpinned by an 
operational framework that will be designed 
for effectively analysing the energy 
cooperation landscape in urban and 
industrial areas across all participating 
regions, and the evaluation of the overall 
economic and social impact of ENERGIZE+ 
in the participating regions, which will 
provide evidence to support the formulation 
of future policy and regulatory  
recommendations to obtain a successful 
implementation of future Industrial Energy 
Communities. This evidence-based 
approach, which will  be disseminated to 
policy makers in whitepapers, will contribute 
to speeding up the clean energy transition 
of the industrial sector, which is responsible 
of a high percentage of CO 2 emissions. 
Related indicators-  
General demands  
Energy policy instruments such as the 
Energy Efficiency Directive (EED)[2] and the 
Renewable Energy Directive (RED)[3] 
recognise the role that businesses, 
especially SMEs, can have at local and 
national level in accelerating the 
transition. 
ENERGIZE+ will foster energy cooperation 
between businesses, from large companies 
to small SMEs  and t he EED and RED  
directives will be considered throughout the 
execution of the project. 
As highlighted in the Green Deal Industrial 
Plan, the achievement of climate-neutrality 
by 2050 will require a full mobilisation and 
deeper cooperation among all players 
ENERGIZE+ will be underpinned by a user-
centric co-creation and user-centred design 
methodologies aimed at developing the 
services and capacity -building materials 
tailored to user needs . This approach will  
place key emphasis on ensuring that the 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
10 
operating across the different value 
chains of Europe’s net-zero industry.  
needs and requirements of the different 
players across the value chain are 
understood and considered to ensure the 
best user experience , which will be 
instrumental for enduring participation and 
impact. As such, t he co-creation and 
engagement of the whole value chain will be 
considered, including large and small 
industries, public authorities, technology 
providers, among other actors.  
ENERGIZE+ will create regional clusters 
integrating energy consultants,  Local and 
Regional Authorities (LRAs),  ESCOs, 
utilities, etc. that will participate actively in 
the whole co -creation process: mapping of 
needs, design of a knowledge programme, 
building the materials, testing the tools, etc.  
(and ensuring that there are effective and 
timely feedback looping into the project 
development). The clusters will also be 
used for coordination and sharing of data, 
technical services, support staff (technical & 
financial consultants), thus extending 
capacity for support and more efficient use 
of the available resources.  Related 
indicators- KPI 13: 100 registered and 
engaged companies, clusters and 
industrial parks benefitting from direct 
support by the end of the project. 
Exposure to energy prices, increased global 
competition as well as potential transition 
risks linked to changing regulation, market 
demand and buyers/suppliers procurement 
criteria are increasing pressure on EU 
companies. New business models and 
financial schemes are needed to be able to 
adapt in the current energy crisis and take the 
decision to invest in an energy efficiency or 
renewable energy project 
ENERGIZE+ will support the design and 
verification of new business models that are 
feasible from a financial perspective . In 
addition, the project will engage with 
investors, and contribute information and 
knowledge towards the creation of  new 
financial schemes. Related indicators- KPI 
7: 10M€ investments in sustainable 
energy triggered by the end of the 
project. 
Enabling factors such as geographical 
proximity and value chain relations  can 
also make businesses decide to make 
investments in energy efficiency or 
renewable energy and engage in energy 
related collaborations. 
ENERGIZE+ will implement this new energy 
cooperation approach in regions of high 
industrial activity , and promoting the 
participation of the businesses, 
stakeholders, policy makers and providers 
of finance in these regions . Energy 
communities will be located in geographical 
proximity, such as Industrial Parks and 
zone, as well as at value chain level.  
Synergies with relevant EU projects[4] and 
initiatives such as the Covenant of 
Companies for Climate and Energy (CCCE) 
and/or the Enterprise Europe Network (EEN) 
are encouraged 
ENERGIZE+ shares synergies with 
prominent EU projects , and in particular 
INCUBIS (development of energy symbiosis 
incubators across Europe  for the reuse of 
waste energy from industries), and sPARCS 
(symbiosis between different companies in 
Industrial parks). ENERGIZE+ will capitalise 
on the knowledge generated in these H2020 
projects, whereby in the case of the former, 
it will build out from the relevant aspects of 
the INCUBIS Digital Platform that was 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
11 
developed as an MVP. In the case of the s-
PARCS coordinator (EI -JKU) is part of the 
ENERGIZE+ consortium and the project will 
leverage the linking of knowledge  and 
experience. ENERGIZE+ will mobilise 
synergies with the CCCE and EEN initiative 
by consulting within Regional Innovation 
agencies that the SME representative of the 
project has easy and direct access, as is 
further explained in Section 1.6. 
 
#§PRJ-OBJ-PO§# #@CON-MET-CM@#
1.4 Concept and methodology 
Concept and methodology 
Describe the overall intervention logic of the project, including the main idea and assumptions (i.e. how are the 
proposed activities and steps of your project expected to lead to the intended changes in terms of outcomes and 
impacts). 
Explain the methodology, i.e. the main tools, techniques, methods and procedures you will use to implement the 
technical part of your project. Justify why the proposed methodology is the most suitable for achieving the project’s 
objectives.  
For Clean Energy Transition:  
Describe the market barriers, the needs and constraints of market actors, and how  your concept will address them  
concretely. 
For Circular Economy and Quality of Life (n/a to Environmental governance topics): 
Describe the technical details of the proposed solution (process, material, product etc.) using a flowchart and including, 
where possible, the general mass and energy balance. Explain how you plan to establish your supply chain. 
Specify the scale (e.g. production capacity) and output of the project (e.g. quantity produced/sold during the project) . 
The chosen technical scale should be one that allows the evaluation of the technical and economic viability of the 
proposed solution. In case of close-to-market conditions the target should be industrial/commercial scale already during 
the project. 
In Europe, the industry sector is the third largest energy consumer, after transport and 
households, and its final energy consumption relies on more than 65% on fossil fuels and non-
renewable waste. The Clean Energy Transition of the industry sector is key to achiev ing the 
goals of the Paris Agreement.  
ENERGIZE+ Concept 
Industrial parks can catalyse huge economic development and structural transformation, which 
makes them perfect as Green Transitioner sites. A successful Energy Transition needs an 
empowered and engaged community to succeed, therefore ENERGIZE+ aims at fostering the 
creation of industrial park energy communities . Moreover, ENERGIZE+ seeks to promote the 
replication of successful energy cooperation models across urban -industrial settings, which 
results in  the development within the project of tools and protocols that will assure its 
replicability.  
Among other activities, the project will map the energy resources and  needs, it will co-create 
materials a nd digital tools to build capa cities and raise awarenes s, and will define key 
performance indicators to monitor the level of success of the initiatives carried out in the pilots. 
The main pilot carried out in ENERGIZE+ will be located in the region of Manresa, Catalonia 
(Spain) – Pilot 1 , which is an area with a high industrial activity . Additional pilots  will be 
implemented in other prominent industrial regions from other EU countries : Valsesia region 
(Italy) – Pilot 2; Zlín region (Czech Republic) – Pilot 3; and Upper Austria (Austria) – Pilot 
4.   
Key concepts underpinning the project 
▪ Industrial Energy Community:  Refers to a group or network of industrial entities that 
collaborate together to optimize their energy use, promote sustainable practices, and 
potentially share resources or infrastructure to improve efficiency and reduce overall energy 
costs. 
▪ Co-Creation: Our methodology is to identify and include the relevant stakeholders that 
will participate actively in the whole co -creation process: mapping of needs, design of a 
knowledge programme, building the materials, testing the tools, etc.  The participation of the  
pilot industrial sites businesses will be key on all the co -creation activities. Such an approach 
will contribute to promoting a greater sense of buy -in and ownership, as well as increasingly 
the likelihood of sustained adoption. 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
12 
▪ Capacity Building : the project will create a complete digital repository of capacity 
building material, training programmes, and learning experiences, in order to raise awareness, 
advocate for self -sufficiency, promote sustainability  and increase the knowledge on energy 
efficiency and renewable energies of the Industrial Energy communities' members.  A key 
feature will be the  Acceleration Programme approach. As discussed, such an approach can 
offer numerous advantages for established industries venturing into new cooperative energy 
models, such as rapid learning curve, access to expertise and capacity building services and 
materials, networking opportunities, orientation in relation to where and how to access financial 
support, infrastructure, and resources, among others.   
▪ User-centred design: In a true user-centred approach, the project will carry out a n in-
depth user research analysis with interviews, focus groups, surveys, etc. in order to ensure we 
build the most adapted material s and tools, with functionalities, feature and value tailored for 
different targeted stakeholders. 
▪ Empowerment and replicability through a Digital Hub : The empowerment of a  trusted 
energy community is key to ensuring its success. The project will  develop a  digital c loud 
platform, the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub, that will enable the empowerment of stakeholders 
through centralized access to all the capacity-building materials, and  mentorship (the Digital 
Hub will host the Acceleration Programme to ensure a blended virtual and face -to-face 
approach), training, as well as a dedicated communication and mon itoring Cloud space  for 
each pilot. The scalable Digital Hub will also facilitate the easy replicability of the pilot initiatives 
to other European Industrial Park sites.  
Market barriers and needs of market actors 
The primary obstacles to launching an Energy community stem from the absence of a 'culture 
of sharing' in contemporary society, a lack of awareness regarding the necessity for energy 
transition, and limited knowledge about the most efficient measures for t ransitioning to a more 
environmentally friendly and sustainable energy consumption model . Furthermore, other 
barriers that have been identified encompass a lack of familiarity with regulatory frameworks, 
administrative impediments in obtaining the necessar y supply licenses, and the complexities 
of complying to regulations challenges related to their business models and risk management 
strategies. Additionally, there are also barriers for community energy suppliers in securing 
financing and establishing direct contracts for selling renewable energy, such as through power 
purchase agreements (PPAs). ENERGIZE+ will effectively bridge all these gaps and overcome 
these barriers through the mobilisation of a specialised and trusted community of professionals 
(who will need to register to join), as well as access to experts and mentors.  The Digital Hub 
will provide access to all the information and knowledge in relation to cooperative energy 
models, the associated administrative processes, regulatory frameworks, financial support, etc. 
The Acceleration Programme will open up extensive capacity building  and a cooperat ion 
network between the different pilots of the project , which will have high replicability to support 
future roll out across the EU.   
Relevant stakeholders 
ENERGIZE+ will engage with a diverse group of stakeholders to maximize its impact. The 
project aims to generate industry awareness and commitment, expand the services offered by 
energy service providers, boost the economic and environmental performance of industria l 
bases, contribute to strengthening the European research area in energy symbiosis, and inform 
the public about industry sustainability efforts. The most important and first targeted 
stakeholders will be all the businesses existing in the Pilot i ndustrial park sites , together with 
already established energy communities . Additionally, public authorities and energy suppliers 
will also play relevant roles as initial stakeholders. Other significant stakeholders to involve will 
include ESCOs, energy consultants, utility companies, and key players in the energy transition 
sector, such as renewable energy installation companies, construction companies, and HVAC 
installers, among others.  
Moreover, the ENERGIZE+ project counts on the support of numerous prominent 
stakeholders from different areas who have already shown their interest in the by signing a 
Letter of Support (LoS): El Prat de Llobregat City Council; the Slavičín City Council; the deputy 
governor of the Zlín Region for strategic  development, tourism, and subsidies; as well as 
associations from industrial parks and zones: Economy Development Service of the Vilafranca 
del Penedès Council , Business Association of the Industrial Park of Bufalvent; Business  
Association of the Industrial Park of Els Dolors; Business Association of the  Industrial Park of 
El Pont Nou; Business Association of the Industrial Park of  Els Trullols; Holešov Strategic 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
13 
Industrial Zone, and Business Upper Austria – OÖ Wirtschaftsagentur GmbH; and, finally, also 
a series of LoS from industry  that are interested in cooperative energy models, or who are 
actors from the energy sector: Ceramica Elias S.A.; Proisotec Energia S.L.; Ramon Caus, S.A.; 
Array Plàstics, S.L.; CNA group; Granollers Mercat; Texknit S.A.; Barcelona Logistic Centre ; 
AH-ENERGY, s.r.o.; A.SPIRE Association; ADEPRO, BTH Slavičín s. r.o., and BLAUFABRIC, 
S.L.  
Methodology: 
The project follows a holistic methodology approach, where the technical, social and economic 
dimensions are considered across different activities  which contribute to the creation, 
development and implementation of an innovative model for energy collaboration: 
1. BENCHMARKING PHASE : The first phase will be focused on performing a deep 
benchmarking of previous and existing initiatives in relation to energy efficiency and 
communities in Industrial areas, circularity and industrial ecology , as well as a review of the 
legal and socioeconomical requirements for business models . The outcome will be a 
comprehensive study of the current state-of-art in industrial energy communities. This 
benchmark is crucial to identify all the existing achievements that could be of benefit as well as 
learn from other experiences.  – Implemented within WP2 
2. CO-CREATION PHASE: Within this phase, project partners and key stakeholders will 
collaboratively co-design the energy community services and tools, tailored to the unique 
needs of each pilot site. ENERGIZE+ will conduct pilot activities  in 4 prominent European 
industrial regions: Catalonia (Spain), Austria, Italy, and Zlín region (Czech Republic). From a 
technical point of view, it will be important to map the energy resources and technologies of 
each site. The definition of the energy community requirements, services and governance 
structure will be co -created through a participatory methodology  to ensure a customer -
oriented definition of services and therefore a higher demand success. Finally, the specific 
energy services and tools identified will help to define the KPIs for the monitoring to assess 
the effectiveness of the energy cooperation initiatives. As an outcome , the project will define 
the energy services, develop training materials, and tools to promote energy communities and 
establish KPI for each pilot. - Implemented within WP3 
3. DIGITALIZATION PHASE: With the goal of ensuring an easy and effective replication 
of the energy cooperation models, ENERGIZE+ will digitise the learnings, knowledge, services, 
training and tools, which will be deployed in a community -based digital platform (the 
ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub) an in order to make these resources accessible, scalable and 
available not only during the project, but in the post -project phase for enduring impact. It will 
also facilitate the deployment of an Accelerator Program for EU industrial park sites (and which 
will have been validated by the participating pilot sites). As such, the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub 
is a key delivery vehicle for the project results and an enduring and scalable tool for supporting 
and incubating energy industrial communities, by integrating into one single and secure cloud-
based platform all major phases of energy community creation: 1- Identification of the needs, 
including access to all the training materials, 2 - Creation of a strong community, with 
cooperation cloud -spaces for each industrial energy community and 3 - Monitoring and 
assessing, through a user-friendly visualization of all the defined indicators and their progress. 
The ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub cloud platform will be co-designed with and for the pilot 
stakeholders, and validated by them, ensuring a successful outcome with high replicability to 
other regions and sites across the EU.  – Implemented within WP4 
4. DEPLOYMENT PHASE: During the latter half of the project’s duration, the project will 
focus on the deployment all the materials and tools created to enhance the establishment 
of energy communities in the different industrial pilot sites. The efforts will be concentrated on 
deploying the Digital Hub, engaging stakeholders in the community creation process , raising 
awareness and conducting an Acceleration Programme of capacity building  and  training 
on services, solutions, business models and strategies  related to Clean Energy Transition, 
Circularity and Energy Communities. This phase will end with the establishment of energy 
cooperation synergies and services between business within each pilot site. - Implemented 
within WP5 
5. REPLICABILITY AND EXPLOTATION PHASE : This phase is essential to ensure the 
sustainability of project results beyond the project duration. It will encompass all the activities 
aimed at facilitating the successful replicability of the project to additional EU regions, beyond 
the initial four pilot areas. These activities will span various types, from communication and 
dissemination campaigns to workshops, exploitation planning, as well as the development of 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
14 
guidelines and best practices  to support the successful implementation of future Industrial 
Energy Communities. - Implemented within WP6 
Pilot description:  
Region of Catalonia (Pilot 1) 
The Main Pilot site will be the Region of Catalonia (Pilot 1), in Spain. Catalonia’s economy is 
industrially based and rivals any other location in Spain and across Europe. The industrial  
sector constitutes 19.8% of Catalonia’s GDP, surpassing the Spanish average, and  
manufacturing and industry related services account for 50% of the overall GDP. In the city of  
Manresa, the first Industrial Energy Community cooperative, known as “Manresa Il·lumina”, 
has been established. The initiative was born as a cooperative made up of 31 companies, 
initially to build and manage photovoltaic solar insta llations, although in the short term it will 
open up to other fields of sustainable energy. This pioneering initiative will serve as a lighthouse 
example to  other pilot regions, although it still requires significant effort and support to 
effectively operate as  an Energy Community, despite the recent establishment of its legal 
framework. 
The primary project structure revolves around the installation of 17 solar units on industrial  
rooftops (1.509kWp) and a mini wind farm (120kWp). These installations will generate  
renewable energy for collective self -consumption and surplus sales. Beyond clean energy  
generation, the project aims to reduce energy consumption and the environmental impact  
associated with mobility within the industrial park. To achieve this, there are plans to electrify 
the workforce vehicle fleet with electric chargers powered  by energy from solar and wind  
installations. Moreover, the project includes plans to start up thermal energy projects through 
a biomass heat network, renewable energy from the nearby Bages forests or the aggregate  
purchase of renewable electricity to cover the demand that solar installations cannot cover.  
As part of a pilot phase, a charging station with 6 double semi-fast chargers will be installed at 
a strategic location in the park. This area will serve as the base for three vehicles acquired by 
the cooperative, intended for a collective car -sharing service. Moreover, two of these vehicles 
will replace two currently used by the private security service of the park. It is projected that the 
renewable energy produced will cover approximately 30% of the current cooperative members 
consumption, including a si gnificant portion of the consumption from new electric chargers  
installed in companies. 
As such, the participation of Manresa Il·lumina in the ENERGIZE+ Life project is an opportunity 
to further mature and scale this Energy Community -potential to include up to 700 companies-
whilst setting an example for others. 
Valsesia Region (Italy) - Pilot 2 
Valsesia is an alpine valley in northern Italy which merges together a significant number of 
residential areas and a mix of industries, including also agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism 
activities. The Valsesia region is host to different EnGreen’s Renewable Energy Communities 
(RECs), promoting several renewable energy projects which involve local public authorities and 
private actors. EnGreen RECs are hundred kW scales, mostly based on photovoltaic panels 
and storages. The whole  region has around 50 ,000 inhabitants over a surface of about 850 
km2. Within the region, several industries are present: textile manufacturing, stee processing, 
sawmill, etc. Two of the most interesting local RECs are: 
▪ Postua: 167 kW of PV (218 kWh yearly estimated production); 45 kWh BESS; 203 
MWh of yearly consumption. 
▪ Guardabosone: 133 kW of PV (174 kWh yearly estimated production); 45 kWh BESS; 
138 MWh of yearly consumption. 
While t he region is already implementing some synergies among industrial and residential 
sectors, mostly thanks to the RECs , additional effort and improvements could provide further 
waste reduction and resource optimization. Opportunities for improvements have been 
identified in the following  areas: (1) Increased interaction among residential/industrial 
segments; (2) Increased interaction among different towns (few km distant) ; (3) Identification 
of common energy asset s for mutual benefit (i.e. public e -mobility for connecting different 
centres); (4) Valorisation of local resources (i.e. wood biomass wastes coming from one REC 
may have value for another local REC). 
Several public authorities are involved in the RECs project and , as such, are already 
established stakeholder. In addition, EnGreen is in tight contact with Unione Montane della 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
15 
Valsesia, a consortium of all the municipalities in Valsesia, and the Consorzio San Giulio, the 
local network of industrial activities active locally. 
The ENERGIZE+ project presents a good opportunity to i dentify of the best strategy for 
valorizing resources and wastes, from residential to industrial sector but also from a 
municipality to another one (Valsesia is grouping 29 municipalities) 
Zlín Region (Czech Republic) - Pilot 3  
The Zlín Region is a border region with an agricultural and industrial tradition and a high 
population density. There are 307 local authorities with a population of 580,531 (2023). Partner 
of the consortium EAZK (Energy Agency of the Zlín Region) was estab lished in 2006 as an 
implementation tool of the energy policy of the Zlín Region and is 100 % owned by the Zlín 
Region. The Zlín region is currently one of the economically developed regions of the Czech 
Republic, with a lmost 200 enterprises  (from such sec tors as the shoe manufacturing, 
engineering, aviation, defence, among others) , which is the 5th rank compared to other 13 
regions of the Czech Republic. The Zlín Region and especially its regional energy agency is 
an important player in the ongoing energy transformation, and the creation of functional energy 
sharing models is one of its primary interests. At the national level, EAZK actively participates 
in the implementation of European directives on energy communities into Czech legislation. 
The Zlín Regi on understands the development of energy communities as a process that 
involves multiple sectors, including public, private or citizens, is closely following the process 
of approving legislation on energy communities and he wants to be an active part of setting up 
functional business models for energy communities with all the regional background and 
experience he has. 
About 93% of the Zlín Region is gasified, which brings with it a considerable dependence on 
the import of fossil energy sources. Creating local communities will go a long way in reducing 
this dependency by allowing companies to share energy with other near by companies. A big 
challenge is also the removal of barriers that prevent energy cooperation, e.g. organizational 
(coordination, trust, responsibilities, data management, risk sharing), legal or social. New 
business models and financial schemes need to be  developed to adapt to the current energy 
crisis. On June 21, 2023, the government of the Czech Republic approved an amendment to 
the Energy Act “LEX OZE II” enabling the establishment of energy communities  (groups 
whose members can share electricity) and the sharing of produced electricity. After this 
approval of the amendment to the law, another legislative process of approval will follow, which 
may refute or confirm the information known so far. One of th e big challenges will be the 
implementation of the  assumed models in practice. So far, the expected types of community 
sharing are: Electricity sharing group 1 - the group is created within the community so that there 
can be one or more sharing groups within the community ; Electricity sharing group 2 - The 
customer/producer shares only to its transfer points regardless of location within the Czech 
Republic; Electricity sharing group 3 – The customer/producer shares to the transfer take -off 
points that do not belong to them (i.e. to others); Electricity sharing group 4 - According to the 
"LEX OZE II" proposal, this group can only be created by the customer/producer (not the 
community). To be included in this group, the condition must be met that all transfer points 
must be connected to the distribution syste m through one common main house fuse box or 
main house cable box. In this case, the distribution system is not used when sharing electricity; 
Electricity sharing group 5 - In this case, sharing between a "production" and a "consumer" 
transfer point will be  enabled in one consumption point with a production plant or in one 
production plant. The exact rules (implementation decree) for sharing electricity will be enacted 
by the amendment to the Energy Act “LEX OZE II” with expected effect on 1 July 2024.  
Some of the potential stakeholders who will be involved in this pilot: EGD – Owner and operator 
of electricity grid in the Zlín RegionČEZ (larget energy provider in the Czech Republic); AH 
Energy (important regional provider of energy services ); Zlín Region (NUTS III Region ); 
Strategic Industrial Zone Holešov (industrial zone owned by the Zlín Region); Municipalities of 
the Zlín Region with industrial, science or technologic parks where functional models are to be 
replicated; Any public body or key stakeholders interested in creating synergies between 
residential/industrial sectors. 
It is envisaged that participation in  the ENERGIZE+ project will deliver significant value, 
benefits and impact as follows: facilitating the implementation of specific cooperation models, 
including the identification, examination, and verification of economically viable business 
models (based on specific interaction with participating companies); involvement of businesses 
in energy cooperation activities to create energy communities; in particular industry 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
16 
organizations, public bodies, and financial entities in order to ensure the success and 
sustainability of the developed collaborative models ; high degree of repeatability ; Creating 
models and tools adaptable to the unique needs of each pilot site; Creation of a model of energy 
supply to industry from low-emission sources. 
Upper Austria (Austria) - Pilot 4 
Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz is currently involved in the development of cooperation activities 
in three industrial parks. Each park is unique with regard to the type of actors and status of 
development (energy-intensive and established vs. medium energy -intensity and established 
vs. medium energy-intensity and in development). In total, 50+ companies are or were involved 
in the activities, including parks with and without park managers. Initiatives addressed specific 
energy-related cooperation, but also networking activities and knowledge exchange for making 
informed/better decisions. In the parks, there is ongoing contact with park managers, site 
locations, leading companies, in order to guarantee successful exchange and feedback on 
ideas. 
In general, to date there is no cooperation between the companies in the industrial parks , with 
businesses  optimizes intensively right up to the fence of their property; there is usually no 
awareness of the processes and cooperation potential  of the neighbours. In some cases, the 
activities and projects have enabled cooperation or at least an intensified exchange to be 
initiated, which can also serve as examples. 
From their findings in former projects, involving some of the parks and stakeholders mentioned 
below, a series of challenges5 have been identified , where by lack of information 6 is one 
essential challenge for industrial symbiosis. Potential practical solution pathways have also 
been presented7 which can serve as effective contribution to this project. 
Potential stakeholders involved in this pilot use are detailed above: 
▪ Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz 
▪ Park manager in one park 
▪ Park implementation company in one park 
▪ Leading park company in one park 
▪ Site/location agency in other parks 
Participation in the ENERGIZE+ Project will strongly contribute to solving some of the existing 
challenges, including (among others) identifying effective methods of cooperation with park -
specific stakeholders and identifying needs/pains and potential solutions, elaborating effective 
methods of cooperation in park -specific company workshops and establish ing a facilitation 
process for third parties that consider themselves responsible for that. 
#§CON-MET-CM§# #@COM-PLE-CP@#
1.5 Upscaling results of other EU funded projects (n/a for concept note) 
Upscaling results of other EU funded projects (n/a for concept note) 
Explain if and how the proposal builds on or up-scales results of other EU funded projects. 
The ENERGIZE+ project will scale-up the results obtained in  previous EU-funded initiatives 
centred around energy cooperation and sustainable resource management . By taking 
advantage of  the knowledge, and innovations generated during the following previous EU 
funded projects, the consortium is positioned not only to sustain the legacy of success, but also 
to enhance the impact of our project in pursuit of the overarching goals set forth by the LIFE 
program: 
▪ INCUBIS project  (H2020; 2020-2023): the ENERGIZE+ project is aligned with 
INCUBIS, not only because both projects sharing the same Coordinator from IRIS (Albert 
Torres), but also as both initiatives trigger to help decarbonize European industry by 2050 by 
unlocking the market potential of energy symbiosis through developing and deploying energetic 
 
 
5 Rodin, Moser (2021) 100 reasons why energy cooperation is not realized in industrial parks, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.101964 
6 Moser, Rodin (2021) The ‘Industrial Symbiosis Gap’: information asymmetries are the main challenge for 
industrial symbiosis, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00502-021-00897-y 
7 From theory to practice: Supporting industrial decarbonization and energy cooperation in Austria, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2022.102863 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
17 
cooperative regions across Europe. Additionally, the present proposal aims to scale up other 
relevant outputs from INCUBIS, including the creation and implementation of innovative energy 
business plans. Building on the achievements of the INCUBIS project, ENERGIZE+ will further 
advance by deploying its main project output: a Digital Hub, in this case, to foment energy 
cooperation among regions. 
▪ sPARCS project (H2020; 20 19-2024): the s-PARCS coordinator ( EI-JKU) is part of 
the ENERGIZE+ consortium and as such will leverage the linking of knowledge, experience 
and they are bringing the Pilot 4 in Upper Austria. In that both projects share common goals in 
terms of aiming to implement collaborative and energy-efficient solutions within industrial parks, 
and facilitate greater energy savings and subsequently enhancing the competitiveness of the 
companies situated within these parks.  
▪ SuSPIRE (H2020_SPIRE; 2015-2018): The SuSpire project was focussed on energy 
recovery from residual heat streams  in energy-intensive industries , and it will serve as a 
successful case study on the part of symbiosis between different companies in Industrial parks.  
▪ CORALIS (H2020_SPIRE; 2020 -2024): CORALIS aims to create pathways for the 
decarbonization of resource and energy -intensive sector value chains through the 
implementation of viable industrial symbiosis approaches combining new business and 
management strategies with innovative technology -based enablers. All the learning from the 
networking and industrial symbiosis available from their public deliverables results will be taken 
as case studies for ENERGIZE+ project. 
▪ EUROPEAN COMMUNITY POWER COALITION (LIFE, European Climate 
Foundation, EUKI, BMU) (2021 -Ongoing): ENERGIZE+ will scale up results from the 
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY POWER COALITION which brings together some 40 like-minded 
associations across Europe – representing energy cooperatives, networks of cities and local 
authorities, the renewable energy industry, legal experts, environmental NGOs and others. The 
learning experience on energy communities' creation shared will be built on. 
▪ RESINDUSTRY (Interreg Europe; 2019 -2023) RESINDUSTRY defined 7 Action 
Plans, prepared Capacity Building materials, had 83 policy learning events, looked up for 10 
best Practices and designed 7 regional Assessments, including the Strategic Analysis of RES 
Technologies for regional industry and KPI s reports. All of these outcomes will be considered 
and use by ENERGIZE+ for WP2 and WP3 specially.  
 
In this regard, the ENERGIZE+ project endeavours to further build up on advance collaborative 
approaches among European regions, fostering the creation of energy cooperation initiatives 
and the development of innovative energy business models. Through the active engagement 
with relevant stakeholders, we  aim to establish a solid foundation for sustainable energy 
cooperation activities in order to contribute to carbon emissions reduction and foster renewable 
energy use. Moreover, we expect to expand the benef its of the project outputs through their 
stakeholder network to further contribute to carbon emissions reduction and foster renewable 
energy use.
1.6 Complementarity with other actions (n/a for concept note) 
Complementarity with other actions (n/a for concept note) 
Explain how the project is complementary to other regional, national or international initiatives/activities/projects. How 
will it integrate the results from these other actions?  
The ENERGIZE+ project is complementary to other regional, national, or EU initiatives and 
activities.  
ENERGIZE+ is totally aligned with the Covenant of Companies for Climate and Energy 
(CCCE) and Enterprise Europe Network (EEN)  to encourage and support the companies in 
the EU, in particular SMEs, to step up their contribution to a clean energy transition and climate 
action and increase private investments in clean energy Research & Innovation (R&I), 
technologies and solutions. There is high potential for these entities to become stakeholders of 
the ENERGIZE+ project, by promoting the project on their digital networks and facilitating 
updates of the results and progress using their communications channels.  
With the 2030 Climate Target Plan, the Commission proposes to raise the EU's ambition on 
reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to at least 55% below 1990 levels by 2030. 
Moreover, the European Green Deal  will transform the EU into a modern, resource -efficient 
and competitive economy, ensuring: no net emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050, economic 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
18 
growth decoupled from resource use, no person and no place left behind . To this end, by 
promoting energy communities and increasing the adoption of cooperative energy models, 
ENERGIZE+ will contribute to setting a more ambitious path to achieving climate neutrality by 
2050. Energy communities can contribute to four main policy objectives: i) increase renewable 
energy capacity, ii) mobilize private capital, iii) provide flexibility for the electricity system, and 
iv) empower consumers8, and can play a tangible role in allowing Europe to continue in its track 
record of cutting GHG emissions whilst growing its economy, through the implementation of a 
methodology for industrial energy cooperation  underpinned by increasing the share of 
renewable energy and promoting energy efficiency, which will have a direct influence on the 
GHG emissions reduction.  
The ENERGIZE+ project is aligned with the goal of the EU Industrial Strategy of advancing 
on the regions’ economic growth, sustainability and global competitiveness , as it supports the 
implementation of clean approaches and circular economy principles to reduce environmental 
impact and mitigate climate change, while ensuring secure and robust supply chains, reducing 
the dependency on imports in critical sectors, and fostering a competitive industrial landscape 
within the EU by supporting SMEs and clean energy.  
Furthermore, the ENERGIZE+ project is totally aligned with the REpowerEU plan  as it 
promotes the decarbonisation of the industry by accelerating the switch to electrification and 
enhancing our low -carbon manufacturing capabilitie s, which is aligned with the reduction of 
CO2 emissions.  
The ENERGIZE+ project is aligned with the SDG 9: “ Build resilient infrastructure, promote 
sustainable industrialization and foster innovation ” as well as SDG 7 “ Ensure access to 
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy” principles. 
On a more local point of view, ENERGIZE+ is also aligned with the pilots regional and local 
climate plans. For example, regarding the main pilot located in Catalonia, the Catalan 
Government approved in 2017 a “ Climate Change Law”, aiming to reduce 60% of GHG 
emissions in 2030 compared to 2005, and foster the energy transition to a 100% RES energy 
consumption by 2050. In Catalonia, the industrial sector accounted in 2021 for the 31% of GHG 
emissions, and the law fixes for this sector a reduction of 32% of GHG compared to 1990.
1.7 Synergies and co-benefits with other LIFE sub-programmes (n/a for concept note) 
Synergies and co-benefits with other LIFE sub-programmes (n/a for concept note) 
Describe synergies with other LIFE sub-programmes (Nature and Biodiversity, Circular Economy and Quality of Life, 
Climate Change or Clean Energy Transition). Describe spillover effects (co-benefits) in addition to those targeted by 
the project. If possible, quantify the contribution. 
Identify the activities/tasks that address these policy objectives of other LIFE sub-programmes. 
ENERGIZE+, developed under the Clean Energy Transition sub -programme, contributes to 
the shift towards a sustainable, energy-efficient, renewable energy-based, climate-neutral and 
resilient economy, through increasing the uptake of renewable energies, improving energy 
efficiency, proposing guidelines and training modules add ressing those specific aspects, 
proposing energy cooperation mechanisms and capacity building activities for businesses and 
stakeholders in the geographical proximity, including energy savings, energy performance, 
energy efficiency, resource efficiency, and renewable energy sources  aspects. These 
themes can be considered cross-sectorial in the LIFE programme, hence the activities carried 
out by the ENERGIZE+ project can have co -benefit also on the sub-programmes “Circular 
Economy and Quality of Life” (e.g. by reducing resource consumption and fostering energy 
cooperation at local level, thus facilitating the transition toward a sustainable, energy -efficient 
and climate -resilient economy ) and “ Climate change mitigation and adaptation ” (e.g. by 
cutting greenhouse gas emissions, increasing climate change resilience and facilitating the 
shift towards a sustainable, energy -efficient, renewable energy -based, climate -neutral built 
environment).WP1 Project Management and Coordination and WP6 Sustainability, replication 
 
 
8 Anne-Lorène Vernay, Carine Sebi, Fabrice Arroyo. Energy community business models and their impact on 
the energy transition: Lessons learnt from France, Energy Policy, Volume 175, 2023, 113473, ISSN 0301-
4215, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2023.113473 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
19 
and exploitation plan will be the key WPs that partners will have to bear in mind in order to 
ensure the implementation of the activities are aligned with the LIFE roadmaps.
1.8 Synergies and co-benefits with other EU policy areas (n/a for concept note) 
Synergies and co-benefits with other EU policy areas (n/a for concept note) 
Describe the synergies and positive spillover effects (co-benefits) with other EU policy areas (for example agriculture, 
health, civil protection, jobs and growth, etc.). If possible, quantify the contribution. 
Identify the activities/tasks that address these other EU policy objectives. 
ENERGIZE+ has synergies with several EU policy areas.  
Clear co-benefits can be identified with the goals of the areas Climate action, Energy and 
Environment. In fact, the project aims at spreading methodologies, knowledge , solutions and 
business models necessary to foster energy cooperation in the built environment, preventing 
and alleviating the impacts of climate change in the built environment as part of the general 
framework of EU climate targets. This includes not only energy strategies – such as the use of 
renewable sources and the efficient use of energy – but also environmental actions in the view 
of a resource -efficient and circular economy applied to the built environment  (for 
example, to the building sector, public lighting, mobility, etc).  
ENERGIZE+ is also aligned with the EU policy area “Digital Europe”. The project includes the 
development of a Digital Hub for facilitating participation (cocreation), accessibility to the project 
results, as well as enhancing governance and coordination of energy communities, in particular 
for businesses but also replicable to any type of energy communities already established or in 
the creation process. This platform will also provide with e-learning content like training material 
ENERGIZE+ also supports the objectives of the skills for industry area of the “Internal Market, 
Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs policy area ”. The ENERGIZE+ Accelerator 
Programme is inspired by the startup acceleration methodology, and the resources (materials, 
information, tools…) developed by the project will increase energy-related skills and capacities 
of at least 400 stakeholders (KPI4), businesses and workers. 
WP3 Definition of ENERGIZE+ services and capacity Building Materials, WP4 ENERGIZE+ 
Digital Hub and WP6 Deployment of the ENERGIZE+ energy communities and pilot 
demonstrations will be the main WPs where such activities will take place along the timeframe 
of the project, moving from an initial theoretical perspective till the demonstration phase and 
final replications. 
#§COM-PLE-CP§# #§REL-EVA-RE§# #@IMP-ACT-IA@# 
2. IMPACT  
Fill in only sections 2.1-2.3 at stage 1 (concept note). Fill in all sections at stage 2 (full proposal).
2.1 Ambition of the impacts 
Ambition of the impacts 
Identify and quantify the effects of the project (during the implementation and up to 5 years after its end).  
Be specific and provide only information about impacts that are a result of your project. The impact of other projects 
should not be taken into account. 
Wherever possible, use quantified indicators and targets.   
Note: In addition to the description above, for stage 2 (full proposals) include quantified indicators in Part C of the 
application forms (both horizontal KPIs for the LIFE programme as well as any specific KPIs relevant to the proposal). 
Ensure correspondence between Part B and Part C. 
ENERGIZE+ is dedicated to facilitating a substantial transformation within the participating 
industrial areas by focusing on three pivotal scopes. Firstly, it aims to develop viable business 
models for energy cooperation between companies, poised for seamless market 
implementation. Secondly, the project is committed to the deployment of energy -related 
infrastructure, energy services, and energy exch anges, all of which contribute significantly to 
the clean energy transition of businesse s. Thirdly, the project through its scalable and 
replicable Digital Hub, Acceleration Programme and training/capacity building, which will be 
cocreated, deployed, tested, used, and optimised over the course of the project, underpinned 
by an exploitation plan for sustaining and growing into the future, will ensure a legacy pathway 
beyond the project lifetime.   
As such, the ENERGIZE+ proposed activities will make a clear contribution to Scope B impacts 
from the call topic, and below we outline the rationale behind the KPIs that we will track during 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
20 
the project (and in the 5 years after the completion of the project), and with quantifications for 
each being provided in the table below):  
Viable business models for energy cooperation between companies ready to be rolled 
out on the market  
ENERGIZE+ activities will lead to the development and implementation of a series of up to 5 
innovative business models that foster energy cooperation among companies. This in cludes 
establishing clear frameworks, identifying key stakeholders, and providing direct support to 
companies. ENERGIZE+ will ensure those business models respond to the needs and 
expectations of stakeholders, through the different engagement activities plann ed within the 
project duration. 
o KPI 1: 50 companies implementing energy cooperation approaches by the end of the 
project and 500 companies after 5 years. 
o KPI 4: 5 new viable business models for energy cooperation by the end of the project and 
10 new viable business models after 5 years. 
o KPI 2: 4 jobs created by the end of the project in Full-Time Employment (FTE) and 40 after 
5 years.  
o KPI 8: 4 real -life implementation sites carried out by the project (and 20 -40 real -life 
implementation sites after 5 years). 
Deployment of energy related infrastructure, energy services, and/or energy exchanges 
contributing to the clean energy transition of businesses  
The project will actively contribute to the deployment of infrastructure, services, and exchanges 
that facilitate the clean energy transition for businesses, by developing at least 5 new services 
for energy cooperation between companies  that enhance energy efficiency, and platforms for 
energy exchanges , aiming at reduction of  their global greenhouse emissions (either by 
reducing energy consumption,  or by fostering renewable energy production) . Moreover, an 
ambitious number of stakeholders will be trained on energy cooperation approaches, and on 
suitable technologies and opportunities for energy cooperation, thus increasing their capacities 
to deploy within their  energy community’s effective energy exchanges, energy services or 
energy related infrastructure.  
o KPI 3: 400 stakeholders by the end of the project trained with increased skills and 
competencies on energy issues due to the project.  
o KPI 12: 1000 stakeholders reached through media and events during the project.  
Implementation of EU legislation (in particular Energy Efficiency Directive and 
Renewable Energy Directive) addressing the business sector)  
ENERGIZE+ will ensure compliance with EU legislation, particularly the Energy Efficiency 
Directive and Renewable Energy Directive, within the business sector . This involves aligning 
project activities with legal requirements and promoting adherence to established directives.  
ENERGIZE+ will aim to contribute learnings to policy makers (via Whitepapers)  with the 
potential to influence up to  3 policy frameworks to encourage and facilitate the creation and 
deployment of energy communities in indu strial areas. These frameworks will ensure 
compliance with EU legislation, particularly the Energy Efficiency Directive and the Renewable 
Energy Directive, aligning project activities with legal requirements and promoting adherence 
to established directives. 
o KPI 13: 100 of registered and engaged companies, clusters and industrial parks benefitting 
from direct support by the end of the project. 
o KPI 6: 3 documents of  legislations, policies, or strategies created/adapted at any 
governance level as a result of the project, and the outreach to at least 20 policymakers.in 
the area of Energy Efficiency at any governance levels influenced by ENERGIZE+ in 
shaping a sustainable energy landscape by the end of the project. 
ENERGIZE+ has also a clear contribution to the common indicators for the LIFE Clean Energy 
Transition subprogramme. In particular:   
o KPI 7: 10M€ of cumulative investments in sustainable energy triggered by the end of the 
project.  
The project aims to create a conducive environment for increased financial commitment to 
sustainable energy practices, the impact of which will be tracked based on number of 
sustainable energy investments, encompassing both efficiency and renewables benchmarked 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
21 
against a detailed baseline analysis, whereby active stakeholder engagement will catalyse 
investments. 
o KPI 9: Primary Energy Savings of 8 GWh/year triggered by end of the project.  
o KPI 10: Final Energy Savings of 3.4 GWh/year triggered by the end of the project.  
ENERGIZE+ aims for significant primary energy savings, leveraging a detailed baseline 
analysis and careful assumptions. Through business model development, renewable adoption, 
and resource optimization, the project targets impactful savings. Ongoing monitoring and 
strategic adjustments ensure a sustained and meaningful impact on primary energy savings. 
o KPI 11: Renewable Energy generation of 3 GWh/year triggered by the end of the project   
Thanks to the active promotion of renewable projects/solutions and empowering collaborative 
initiatives among businesses to drive adoption, ENERGIZE+ envisions a substantial increase 
in renewable energy generation , which will be benchmarked against  baseline assessments, 
and strategic assumptions. 
o KPI 5: At least a cumulative reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in 930 of CO2 
equivalent per year (tCO2eq/year) triggered by the project and 4500 tCO2eq/year after 5 
years   
ENERGIZE+ commits to a significant reduction in GHG emissions for a greener, sustainable 
industrial landscape, underpinned by  a robust baseline analysis, coherent assumptions, and 
strategic interventions, including circular practices.  
Other impacts in the topic call   
It is noteworthy that our ENERGIZE+ approach does not address impacts from Scope A . As 
such it is not focussing on improved quality of energy audits, harmonization of energy audit 
frameworks, replication of best practices across participating countries, or the implementation 
of EU legislation addressing the business sector, as these are not relevant for Scope B. Neither 
are indicators related to Scope A employed by us, namely: Implementation rate of energy audit 
recommendations resulting from the proposed activities ; Number of energy auditor s using 
improved energy audit methodologies; Number of national/regional ecosystems supported for 
energy management systems and energy audits.   
 
KPI 
No. 
Project Performance 
Indicator (KPI name) 
Quantification 
Measurement unit By project 
end  
After 5 
years  
KPI 
1 
Number of companies 
implementing energy 
cooperation approaches. 
50 500 Companies 
KPI 
2 
Number of jobs created 
in FTE  (Full time 
Employment) 
4 40 FTE Jobs 
KPI 
3 
Number of market 
stakeholders trained with 
increased skills and 
competencies on energy 
issues due to the project 
400 2000 Stakeholders 
KPI 
4 
Number of new viable 
business models for 
energy cooperation 
5 10 Type of business model 
(or variants) 
KPI 
5 
Reduction of 
greenhouse gas 
emissions in tons of CO2 
equivalent per year 
(tCO2eq/year) triggered 
by the project 
930 4500 tCO2-eq/y 
KPI 
6 
Total number of 
legislations, policies, or 
strategies 
created/adapted 
3 10 No of documents + N º of 
Policy Makers 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
22 
(including sustainable 
energy issues) at any 
governance level as a 
result of the project, and 
the outreach to  at least 
20 policymakers 
KPI 
7 
Cumulative investments 
in sustainable energy 
triggered by the project 
10 50 Million€ 
KPI 
8 
Number of real -life 
implementation sites 
carried out by the project 
4 30 New cooperative energy 
communities 
KPI 
9 
Primary Energy Savings 
in GWh/year triggered by 
the project 
8 50 GWh/year 
KPI 
10 
Final Energy Savings in 
GWh/year triggered by 
the project 
3.4 20 GWh/year 
KPI 
11 
Renewable Energy 
generation in GWh/year 
triggered by the project 
3 10 GWh/year 
KPI 
12 
Number of stakeholders 
reached through media 
and events during the 
project 
1000 2500 Stakeholders 
KPI 
13 
Number of companies 
benefitting from direct 
support 
50 100 Companies
2.2 Credibility of the impacts 
Credibility of the impacts 
Show the steps of your calculations and base yourself on the activities mentioned in your work plan.  
Justify and substantiate the baselines, benchmarks and assumptions you used, making reference to relevant 
publications, studies or statistics.  
Try to use the same methodologies for calculating impacts (avoid using different methodologies for each partner, region 
or country).  
The table presented below delineates the methodology by which we evaluate the selected Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) and it describes the means by which the targets, as outlined in 
section 2.1, are achieved. The selected indicators within categories such as energy efficiency, 
sustainability, digital collaboration, and others serve as direct measures of the project's specific 
objectives, and their assessment is straightforward, involving metr ics such as Primary energy 
savings, Renewable energy generation, Investments in sustainable energy renovation, and 
Whole life carbon savings, among others. These KPIs are quantifiable and provide direct insight 
into goal achievement. In contrast, certain impacts are assessed indirectly, utilizing methods 
such as ex -post surveys to assess, for example, the increase in active participation of 
stakeholders and the adoption of established business models in other regions. Furthermore, 
the project's ripple effects in terms of enhanced collaboration and model replication are derived 
from the successful implementation of business models and governance structures in industrial 
zones, which will be comprehensively gauged using predefined KPIs. It is imperative to 
emphasize that this methodology aligns with credible industry baselines and benchmarks, 
making reference to well -regarded publications, studies, and statistics, which further  solidifies 
the credibility of our projected impacts, as detailed in the comprehensive table below.  
 
 
 
 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
23 
No. Indicator Means of Verification Method of calculation and 
assumptions 
KPI 1  Number of 
companies (50) 
implementing 
energy cooperation 
approaches.  
Verification of the final number of 
companies that actually 
implemented energy cooperation 
approaches.  
In Work Package 2 (WP2), 
specifically in the task of reviewing 
regional Urban -Industrial Park 
energy cooperation initiatives, we 
establish a baseline count of 
companies engaged in energy 
cooperation. As the project 
progresses, activities across WPs  
such as takeholder engagement 
and the co -creation of governance 
framework cooperation models in 
WP3 contribute to an enhanced 
ecosystem. This, in turn, fosters an 
increased number of companies 
implementing energy cooperation 
approaches. 
Activities in subsequent WPs, 
particularly in WP5 where the 
Acceleration Programme is 
executed, lead to a direct increase 
in the number of companies 
participating in energy cooperation 
approaches. The capacity -building 
efforts and stakeholder 
engagement throughout the project 
contribute to an expanding network 
of companies actively involved in 
energy cooperation initiatives. 
KPI 2  Number of jobs (4) 
created in FTE  
The baseline for job creation is 
initially set during the 
comprehensive review of regional 
initiatives in WP2. This provides a 
snapshot of the current 
employment landscape in the 
context of energy cooperation.  
As we progress into WP5, the 
execution of the ENERGIZE+ 
Acceleration Programme directly 
contributes to job creation. 
Through focused workshops on 
economic sustainability and 
business models, the project aims 
to not only create jobs but also 
provide the necessary skills for a 
sustainable workforce in t he 
energy cooperation sector. 
To measure the number of jobs 
created in FTE, the following steps 
can be taken:  
Determine the number of hours 
worked by each employee, 
including full -time and part -time 
employees. 
Calculate the FTE for each 
employee by dividing the number of 
actual hours worked by the number 
of hours representing a full work 
schedule for the kind of job.  
Add up the FTE for all employees 
to get the total FTE for the project.  
Divide the total FTE by the number 
of FTEs for a full -time position to 
get the number of jobs created  in 
FTE. 
It is important to note that FTE 
measures the total number of hours 
worked by all employees, including 
part-time and full -time employees, 
and aggregates them into full -time 
equivalents. This allows for a more 
accurate comparison of the 
productive capacitie s of different 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
24 
companies and departments. 9  
The European Union ’s LIFE 
program provides funding for 
projects10 that support the clean 
energy transition of European 
businesses, which could lead to job 
creation in the renewable energy 
sector. To set up the target other 
project were consulted.   
11 
KPI 3  Number of market 
stakeholders (400) 
trained with 
increased skills 
and competencies 
on energy issues 
due to the project  
The task of stakeholder and energy 
cooperative user research in WP3 
lays the groundwork for 
understanding the skills and 
competencies of market 
stakeholders related to energy 
issues. 
The subsequent co -creation of 
ENERGIZE+ services in WP3, 
particularly in Task 3.3, involves 
the development of an Acceleration 
Programme and capacity -building 
materials. This directly contributes 
to training market stakeholders, 
enhancing their skills and 
competencies in the domain of 
energy cooperation. 
Identify the target market 
stakeholders for the project, such 
as employees, suppliers, 
customers, or local communities.  
 Determine the energy issues that 
the project aims to address and the 
skills and competencies required to 
address them.  
 Develop a training program that 
addresses the identified energy 
issues and the required skills and 
competencies. 
Implement the training program 
and track the number of market 
stakeholders who participate in the 
program. 
Evaluate the effectiveness of the 
training program by assessing the 
knowledge and skills gained by the 
market stakeholders who 
participated in the program.  
For example, if an energy 
cooperation project aims to 
increase the use of renewable 
energy in a local community, the 
training program could include 
sessions on the benefits of 
renewable energy, the 
technologies used to generate 
renewable energy, and the sk ills 
required to install and maintain 
renewable energy systems. The 
number of market stakeholders 
trained could be tracked by keeping 
a record of the number of 
participants in each training 
session.12.13 
 
 
9  https://www.indikit.net/indicator-pdf/3793-number-of-jobs-created 
10 Funding & tenders. (s. f.). https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic -details/life-2023-cet-
business;callCode=LIFE-2023-
CET;freeTextSearchKeyword=;matchWholeText=true;typeCodes=0,1,2,8;statusCodes=31094501,3 1094502,31094503;programmePeriod 
11 Gear@SME. (2021c, febrero 4). Project Impact | GEAR@SME. GEAR@SME. https://www.gearatsme.eu/about/project -impact/ 
12 Bianco, G., Bonvini, B., Bracco, S., Delfino, F., Laiolo, P., & Piazza, G. (2021). Key performance indicators for an energy community based 
on sustainable technologies. Sustainability, 13(16), 8789. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13168789  
13 Johnston, D. C., & Uro, J. (2021, 18 febrero). How energy companies can approach strategy to thrive amid change. EY - US. 
https://www.ey.com/en_us/strategy/how-energy-companies-can-approach-strategy-to-thrive-amid-change 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
25 
KPI 4 Number of new 
viable business 
models (5) for 
energy cooperation 
The Business Models will be 
presented in Business Model 
Canvas format as a very effect lean 
tool for the planning, design and 
verification of business models.  
We estimate that at least 5 
Business Models will be designed 
and verified over the course of the 
project, based on the assumption 
that different cooperative energy 
models will vary depending on the 
different unique energy needs, 
available resources and dif ferent 
business and social structures in 
the different regions, as well as 
between different contexts in the 
same region. 
KPI 5  Reduction of 
greenhouse gas 
emissions in (930) 
tons of CO2 
equivalent per year 
(tCO2eq/year) 
triggered by the 
project  
Baseline measurement for 
greenhouse gas emission 
reduction is established during the 
assessment of CO 2 emissions in 
WP2. 
Ongoing activities such as 
stakeholder engagement, 
communication campaigns, and 
the execution of the ENERGIZE+ 
Acceleration Programme (WP5, 
Task 5.4) contribute to continual 
improvements in the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions. The 
project aims to identify and 
implement measures that result in 
a tangible reduction in CO 2 
equivalent emissions. 
Collect data on energy savings and 
sources in the pilot regions. For 
estimating the energy sources 
saved, a factor of CO2 emissions 
associated to each energy 
consumption will be applied . See 
the International Energy Agency 
publication of yearly emissions 
factor: https://www.iea.org/data-
and-statistics/data-
product/emissions-factors-2023 
Finally, the percentage reduction  
will be calculated  by comparing 
emissions after project 
implementation with the baseline 
emissions14.  
* The estimation of the final project 
KPI  is on the basis that the main 
energy savings will come from 
electricity, in that this will be first 
and easy source to tag from an 
Energy Community. 
KPI 6 Total number (3) of 
legislations, 
policies, or 
strategies 
created/adapted 
(including 
sustainable energy 
issues) at any 
governance level 
as a result of the 
project, and the 
outreach at least 
20 policymakers. 
During the task of generating 
roadmaps on regulatory and policy 
aspects (WP6, Task 6.4), baseline 
measurements are established by 
engaging with policy actors and 
initiating discussions on adaptation 
of results.  
Through ongoing engagement with 
policy actors and scaling -up 
activities, such as national level 
webinars (WP6, Task T6.2.2), the 
project contributes to the creation 
and adaptation of legislation, 
policies, and strategies. This 
ensures a dynamic regulatory 
environment supportive of energy 
cooperation. 
 We assume that 4 regions will 
have active participation and direct 
access to policy makers, from our 
understanding a policy maker can 
be either a council, either a regional 
or national administration, a cluster 
or association, an industrial park or 
even a group of companies 
organised. Moreover the fact of 
having FEDARENE in the 
consortium will give us direct 
access to the overall members of 
their network and the participation 
in Brussels events where the main 
policies are being created and 
many EU Policy makers attend. 
 
 
14 Cut global emissions by 7.6 percent every year for next decade to meet 1.5°C Paris target - UN report. (s. f.). UN Environment. 
https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-release/cut-global-emissions-76-percent-every-year-next-decade-meet-15degc 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
26 
KPI 7  Cumulative 
investments 
(10M€) in 
sustainable energy 
triggered by the 
project  
Baseline measurement involves 
tracking the cumulative 
investments triggered by the 
project, with a focus on renewable 
energy utilization, during WP2.  
As the project progresses, 
activities such as stakeholder 
engagement, communication 
campaigns, and dissemination 
activities (WP6, Task 6.1.3) 
contribute to the continual growth 
of investments in sustainable 
energy. This ongoing engagement 
attracts investme nts, fostering a 
sustainable energy ecosystem. 
Collect data on the investment in 
energy from renewable sources 
before and after the project's 
implementation. Monitor the 
investment in energy efficiency and 
renewable energy tiggered by the 
project. 15  
KPI 8  Number of real-life 
implementation 
sites (4)  carried out 
by the project  
Baseline measurement involves 
counting the initial regions 
replicating energy models during 
WP6, particularly in the Fostering 
Replicability task.  
The identification of successful 
models and real -life 
implementation sites during 
Fostering Replicability (WP6, Task 
6.2) contributes to an increased 
number of regions replicating 
energy models. This ongoing effort 
ensures the practical 
implementation and success of 
ENERGIZE+ approaches in 
various regions. 
Maintain records of replication 
regions successfully implementing 
cooperative energy models based 
on ENERGIZE+. Track the 
progress of replication and update 
the count as new regions replicate 
the models. 
KPI 9  Primary Energy 
Savings in  (8) 
GWh/year 
triggered by the 
project  
Baseline measurement for primary 
energy savings is established in 
WP2, with a focus on quantifying 
the initial impact of ENERGIZE+ 
actions. 
Ongoing identification and 
promotion of energy savings during 
stakeholder engagement (WP5, 
Task 5.4) contribute to sustained 
improvements in primary energy 
savings. The continual dialogue 
with stakeholders ensures a 
consistent effort towards optimizing 
energy consumption. 
From the Final energy savings 
monitorised, there will be applied 
the energy factors conversion to 
primary energy, which depends on 
the energy source and also 
between each country pilot. For 
example, in Spain the approved 
conversion factor from final energy 
to primary energy in the case of 
electricity is 2,368. 
 
*For the estimation of the final 
project KPI it has been considered 
that the main energy savings will 
come from electricity, because this 
will be the first and easy source to 
tag from an Energy Community. 
KPI 
10  
Final Energy 
Savings in  (3.4) 
GWh/year 
triggered by the 
project  
Similar to primary energy savings, 
baseline measurement for final 
energy savings is initiated during 
the initial phases of the project in 
WP2. 
 
Determine the baseline energy 
source and consumption  of the 
project area or target group before 
the project was implemented. 
 Measure the energy consumption 
by source of the project area or 
 
 
15 Gear@SME. (2021b, febrero 4). Project Impact | GEAR@SME. GEAR@SME. https://www.gearatsme.eu/about/project -impact/ 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
27 
Ongoing activities such as 
stakeholder engagement and the 
execution of the ENERGIZE+ 
Acceleration Programme (WP5, 
Task 5.4) contribute to sustained 
improvements in final energy 
savings. The project aims to 
continually identify and implement 
measures leading to enhanced 
energy efficiency. 
target group after the project was 
implemented. 
 Calculate the difference between 
the baseline energy consumption 
and the post -project energy 
consumption by source to 
determine the energy savings. 
  
 For example, if an energy 
cooperation project aimed to 
improve the energy efficiency of a 
building, the baseline energy 
consumption of the building could 
be determined by reviewing the 
energy bills on heating/cooling or 
lighting for the previous year. Aft er 
the project was implemented, the 
energy consumption of the building 
could be measured using smart 
meters or other monitoring tools. 
The difference between the 
baseline energy consumption and 
the post -project energy 
consumption would then represent 
the energy savings triggered by the 
project. 
KPI 
11  
Renewable Energy 
generation in (3) 
GWh/year 
triggered by the 
project  
Baseline measurement involves 
tracking the initial renewable 
energy generation triggered by the 
project in WP2.  
Through ongoing stakeholder 
engagement, communication 
campaigns, and dissemination 
activities (WP6, Task 6.1.3), the 
project contributes to sustained 
improvements in renewable energy 
generation. This involves 
promoting renewable energy 
sources and encourag ing their 
adoption within the pilot regions. 
Determine the renewable energy 
sources that will be used in the 
project, such as solar, wind, or 
hydroelectric power. 
 Identify the project area or target 
group that will benefit from the 
renewable energy generation. 
  
 Set a target for the amount of 
renewable energy generation in 
GWh/year that the project aims to 
achieve. 
 Measure the renewable energy 
generation of the project area or 
target group after the project was 
implemented. 
KPI 
12  
Number of 
stakeholders 
(1000) reached 
through media and 
events during the 
project  
Baseline measurement for 
stakeholder outreach is 
established through 
communication and dissemination 
activities in WP6, starting with the 
creation of a Communication, 
Dissemination, and Engagement 
Plan (CDEP).  
Continual engagement through 
activities such as social media 
campaigns, press releases, and 
participation in public events (WP6, 
Task 6.1.3) ensures an expanding 
reach of stakeholders. These 
ongoing communication efforts 
Identify the target stakeholders for 
the project, such as employees, 
suppliers, customers, or local 
communities. 
 Determine the media and events 
that will be used to reach the target 
stakeholders, such as social 
media, press releases, webinars, 
or conferences.  
 Develop a communication plan 
that outlines the media and events 
that will be used to reach the target 
stakeholders. 
 Implement the communication 
plan and track the number of 
stakeholders who are reached 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
28 
enhance the project's visibility and 
engagement levels. 
through each media and event.  
 Evaluate the effectiveness of the 
communication plan by assessing 
the level of engagement and 
feedback received from the 
stakeholders who were reached.  
 For example, if an energy 
cooperation project aims to 
increase awareness of renewable 
energy among local communities, 
the communication plan could 
include social media posts, press 
releases, and community events 
such as webinars or workshops. 
The number o f stakeholders 
reached could be tracked by 
keeping a record of the number  of 
likes, shares, and comments on 
social media posts, the number of 
attendees at community events, 
and the number of media outlets 
that covered the project.16 
KPI 
13  
Number of 
companies (100) 
benefitting from 
direct support.  
Direct support to companies is 
identified during the co -creation of 
governance framework 
cooperation models in WP3, where 
tailored financial arrangements are 
defined. 
The subsequent task in WP5 (Task 
5.3) involves the execution of the 
ENERGIZE+ Acceleration 
Programme, including workshops 
on economic sustainability and 
business models. This leads to 
direct support for companies, 
guiding them in the establishment 
and growth of industrial energy 
communities. 
Identify the type of direct support 
provided by the project, such as 
funding, training, or technical 
assistance. 
 Determine the criteria for 
companies to be eligible for the 
direct support, such as industry 
sector, location, or size. 
 Develop a list of companies that 
meet the eligibility criteria and have 
received direct support from the 
project. 
 Calculate the total number of 
companies on the list to determine 
the number of companies 
benefitting from direct support as 
an impact of the project. 
 For example, if an energy 
cooperation project provides 
funding to small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) in the 
renewable energy sector, the list of 
companies that have received 
funding could be developed by 
reviewing the project's financial 
records. T he total number of 
companies on the list would then 
represent the number of 
companies benefitting from direct 
 
 
16 Documents download module. (s. f.). 
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/downloadPublic?appId=PPGMS&documentIds=080166e5b776471c%20%20https://ec.
europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic -details/life-2023-cet-business;callCode=LIFE-2023-
CET;freeTextSearchKeyword=;matchWholeText=true;typeCodes=0,1,2,8;statusCodes=31094501,31094502,31094503;programmePeriod  
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
29 
support as an impact of the 
project.17  
#@SUS-CON-SC@#
2.3 Sustainability of project results  
Sustainability of project results 
Describe your strategy to sustain the project’s results after the EU funding ends. Consider the following aspects:  
− How will the project impact be ensured and sustained? Which tasks will you carry out during the project to 
ensure that? 
− Which parts of the project should be continued or maintained? How will this be achieved and which resources 
will be necessary?  
The sustainability of the project results is a critical aspect to consider, and a credible and 
effective strategy has been developed to ensure the lasting impact of the project beyond the 
conclusion of EU funding. The strategy is underpinned by digitalisation as a key vehicle for 
delivery and accessibility to the projects results, scalability, replicability and long -term 
permanence for legacy. Digitalization not only facilitates efficient dissemination but also 
enhances scalability and replicability. As such, a central pillar for ensuring the sustainability of 
the results is to digitalise all the outputs and deploy them via them via ENERGIZE+ Digital 
Hub. This digital platform serves as the central repository and dissemination channel for all 
project-related content. Through the Digital Hub, registered stakeholders, collaborators, and 
the wider community can access a wealth of information, including research findings, best 
practices, and innovative solutions developed during the project's lifecycle.  By converting all 
project outputs into a digital format, this allows for their seamless adaptation and application to 
diverse contexts and settings. This scalability is fundamental for maximizing the project's reach 
and ensuring its relevance in various communities, industries, and geographical locations.  
In addition to the underpinning digitalisation strategy, the project is structured around several 
key aspects to maintain the project's outcomes and deliverables effectively and to facilitate the 
sustainability of its impact. A critical focus is the enhancement of stakeholders' skills and 
knowledge. Capacity-building activities (embodied in a replicable Accelerator Programme)  for 
businesses and investors in the regions are conducted to empower them with the expertise and 
tools needed to independently contin ue implementing energy -efficient and renewable energy 
solutions. This knowledge transfer will create a self -sustaining environment for sustainable 
energy practices, ensuring the project's long-term effectiveness. 
Additionally, specific plans have been devised to ensure the continuity of all project outputs, in 
addition to the digital platform. This includes a comprehensive strategy for the maintenance 
and support of key components and services introduced by the project. Regular updates, quality 
control, and ongoing development of contents and services are essential to keep them relevant 
and valuable to the project's beneficiaries. Proper allocation of resources, including personnel 
and budgets, will guarantee the co ntinued usability and effectiveness of these services, even 
after the project officially concludes. 
Moreover, the sustainability strategy includes a proactive approach to foster a critical mass of 
users on the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub throughout the project's duration , whereby 
communication activities will aim to generate a community of registered users on the platform . 
As such, an active promotion plan is in place to ensure that the platform remains vibrant and 
continuously attracts new users. An active community of users will be a positive asset for future 
financing of the post-project maintenance and sustainability of the Digital Hub, as a promising 
investment for future funders. An active user bases would showcase the platform's impact, 
potential for growth, and the value it brings to the cooperative energy community, which would 
facilitate the ability to attract sustained funding support , also lending itself to potential 
monetisation models. This strategy aims to mitigate the risk of the platform becoming inactive 
after the project ends, effectively preventing the undesirable scenario of a "dead" platform within 
weeks of the project's conclusion. 
In essence, the sustainability strategy for the project is multifaceted. It encompasses capacity 
building, maintenance of essential project components and services, and proactive 
engagement to ensure that the project's impact and success endure well beyond the conclusion 
 
 
17 Landau, P. (2023, 22 octubre). Cost-Benefit Analysis: A quick guide with examples and templates. ProjectManager. 
https://www.projectmanager.com/blog/cost-benefit-analysis-for-projects-a-step-by-step-guide 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
30 
of EU funding. This comprehensive approach solidifies the commitment to a sustainable energy 
future in the regions involved and guarantees the continuity of the project's outputs and 
services. 
#§SUS-CON-SC§#
2.4 Exploitation of project results (n/a for concept note) 
Exploitation of project results (n/a for concept note) 
Do you foresee other ways of exploiting the project’s results (e.g. utilisation in further research, in developing / creating 
/ marketing a product or process, in creating / providing a service, in standardisation activities etc.)? Who are the 
targeted users? 
For close-to-market projects: Describe the reference market: actual and potential market size, features of prospective 
customers and of their demand, competitors, market and regulatory barriers, etc. Explain the economic feasibility of 
the proposed solution comparing cost, price or other economic investment variables (e.g. payback period, net present 
value, etc.). 
Note: Don’t forget to include the activities in the mandatory Work Package for Sustainability, replication, and 
exploitation of project results.  
Aligned and coordinated with communication and dissemination, a focussed series of 
exploitation activities will aim at preparing for post project exploitation pathways of the project’s 
outputs and developed technological solutions, maximizing their sustained impacts. To this end, 
under the guidance of the Project Coordinator and aligned with the Exploitation Manager the 
consortium will deal with IPR protection , definition of a detailed  business model and a 
subsequent business plan, which will form the basis  for the consortium’s exploitation plans. 
The participation of the project partners will be mobilised in these exploitation activities, with 
special emphasis on the industrial and commercial ones. 
Exploitation Roadmap 
By the end of the second year of the project, a first release of ENERGIZE+ tools will have been 
deployed and launched in the Digital Hub so that they can be used and tested at the level of 
the case studies /pilots, and will also provide the opportunity for the ENERGIZE+ partners to 
acquire an insight into the required effort in terms of maintenance, updating and support of the 
Digital Hub and its tools . The long-term strategies for hosting, maintaining updating the entire 
Digital Hub and its tools will be mapped out, led by IRIS as the digital development team, and 
also involving the partners who have supplied tools to the platform. Access to the Digital Hub 
will be free of charge and via a registration process, whereby the target users are public 
authorities and public/private stakeholders interested in the creation of energy communities 
and the adoption of cooperative energy models, and who can use the Hub, its capacity building 
materials, training and tools in order to accelerate  the adoption of cooperative energy models. 
Moreover, the future possibility to activate consulting engineering services that can be offered 
to the energy communities represents a business opportunity for ENERGIZE+ partners. Over 
the course of the evolution of the project, different exploitation routes for ENERGIZE+ tools will 
be analy sed aiming to achieve, by the closure of the project, the definition of the most 
appropriate exploitation pathways to ensure the project outputs can be sustained and 
supported, scaled and replicated into the future for continued impact.  
Strategy and procedures for IP management 
Strategy and procedures for IP management will be an integral part of the ENERGIZE+ 
knowledge management and protection, in order to ensure we capitalise on any opportunity to 
generate IPRs as a tangible and exploitable asset from the project . In order to ensure the 
efficient management of IP and exploitation of the developed technologies an exploitation  
working group (EWG) will be set up consisting of one representative from each partner who will 
be the contact point for IP and exploitation issues. The group will meet regularly to collect inputs 
from all partners regarding  all key exploitable results, assess viable IPR tools, and asses the 
use potential of each IPR (commercial and non -commercial use), and plan out its exploitation 
pathway and route to market as relevant . This EWG will be managed by the Exploitation 
Manager (supported by the Project Coordinator). In terms of IP Management,  the duties will 
involve managing the operation of the group, keeping record of the generated results, 
coordinating the implementation of the IP strategy, integrating the inputs from all the partners, 
reviewing any communication disclosure of results that could harm IP and reporting to the 
project management. IP management will be developed considering the basic principles se t in 
the Annotated Model Grant Agreement , as well as the Consortium Agreement General 
Principles, onto which this strategy and procedures are built. The  core element  can be 
summarized as follows (the precise definitions will be agreed upon in the CA):  
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
31 
• Ownership of results:  results are owned by the beneficiary that generates them, 
whereby ‘results’ means any (tangible or intangible) output of the action, as well as any rights 
attached to it. 
• Joint ownership by several beneficiaries:  whenever results have been jointly 
generated by two or more beneficiaries, and it is not possible to establish the respective 
contribution, such results shall be jointly owned by the beneficiaries that generated them. In 
such a situation, the joint owners must agree (in writing) on the allocation and terms of exercise 
of their joint ownership. Joint owners are encouraged to sign such Joint Ownership Agreement 
(JOA) within 6 months from the generation of the result i n order to avoid any potential issue 
and smooth the protection and commercialization of the technology. In particular, the JOA 
should govern the allocation of shares, the conditions of use and exploitation, IP protection and 
maintenance, IP monitoring and enforcement, and the governing law/jurisdiction. 
• Agreement on background: the beneficiaries must identify and agree (in writing) on 
the background for the action. ‘Background’ means any data, models, software solutions, know-
how or information held by the beneficiaries before their accession to the GA and needed to 
implement the action or exploit the results. 
• Access rights:  the beneficiaries have agreed on the principle of giving each other 
access – on a royalty -free basis – to the background needed to implement their own tasks 
under the action. 
ENERGIZE+ Business models 
Our strategy is to digitize and deploy the Key Exploitable Results  or outputs of the  project 
through the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub, which is a cloud -based web application, which will be 
accessible to registered users . The main target users of the Hub will the cooperative energy 
communities (their manager and participating entities among residential/industrial sectors) in 
addition to the stakeholders and enablers (public authorities, service and infrastructure 
providers, financing bodies, investors…). Further to  this, project partners could also exploit 
ENERGIZE+ results for dedicated consulting services. The corresponding potential business 
models are as follows: 
Business models are the main instrument to support the exploitation of project’s results, so 
WP3 and WP6 will provide particular business models to each KER. In addition, novel business 
models will be created to support profitable and sustainable uptake of the project Digital Hub. 
EnGreen will create a BM catalogue assisted by partners and use case experienc es. At the 
same time, use case partners will be benefitted from the result coming from the demonstration 
campaign which will enable them to re-define their approaches and to obtain benefits with lower 
GHG emissions and environmental impact. Collaboration schemes will foster partners to 
participate in new markets and form alliances
2.5 Catalytic potential: Replication and upscaling  
Catalytic potential: Replication and upscaling (n/a for concept note) 
Describe the potential for the results to be replicated in the same or other sectors or places. Which factors might favour 
or limit the replication? 
Describe the potential for the results to be up-scaled by public/private actors or through mobilising larger investments 
or financial resources. What is the coverage and size of the market? Who are the potential users of the results? 
Describe the strategy and tasks to multiply the impact of the project (during implementation or afterwards). How will its 
main actions and results be replicated elsewhere? 
Note: Don’t forget to include the activities in the mandatory Work Package for Sustainability, replication, and 
exploitation of project results.  
The ENERGIZE+ project's outcomes hold significant potential for replication and upscaling  to 
facilitate the creation and running of cooperative energy communities across the EU, and 
equally it has the potential to be transferred to other use cases with the Circular Economy field 
whereby new value chains and collaborative models require capacity building, enablement and 
facilitation.  
The project's core concept involves replicating its results by establishing a specialized training 
matrix targeted at various profiles of key decision -makers in the energy strategy sector and 
representatives of industrial sectors, both in the private and public domains. In short, w e are 
creating a Digital Hub that will encapsulate all the community, training and capacity building 
resources, experts, tools and funding opportunities (serving as an Acceleration Programme for 
new cooperative energy communities),  that will be  cocreated with relevant stakeholders across 
the cooperative energy model value chain and validated in 4 Industrial Zone Pilots. The goal 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
32 
will be to develop a powerful one-stop-shop that is easy to use, scalable and replicable across 
the EU for supporting cooperative energy community establishment, running and monitoring.  
The Digital Hub's one-stop-shop model, designed for cooperative energy communities, has the 
potential to find applicability in other sectors  in the Green energy and Circular Economy  with 
similar needs for community-building, training, and resource aggregation, and particular where 
for example new value chains are being created . We will ensure a modular and customizable 
design to enhance the platform's adaptability.  Success in the Industrial Zone Pilots, user -
friendliness, and support from a diverse stakeholder network will be key factors influencing the 
platform's replicability. Aspects that could hinder replicability could be sector-specific features, 
lack of genuine stakeholder engagement, regulatory variations, and limited resources for 
customization. 
Collaboration agreements play a pivotal role in addressing opportunities on a larger scale. To 
facilitate replication and dissemination, several tools and mechanisms will be employed.   
The project's own network will regularly exchange information related to needs analysis and 
training programs discussed by internal working groups.  
The strategy for multiplication will encompass the activities outlined in the WP6, dedicated to  
Sustainability, Replication, and Exploitation of Project Results. These activities will not only 
support the dissemination and replication of the project's main actions and results during the 
implementation phase but will also lay the groundwork for post -project replication in other 
sectors and regions. The strategy will involve close collaboration with stakeholders, knowledge 
sharing, and the provision of resour ces, all designed to facilitate the broad adoption of energy 
cooperative communities beyond the ENERGIZE+ project. 
In terms of upscaling the project's results, there is substantial potential for both public and 
private actors to be involved in this process. These actors can contribute by mobilizing larger 
investments. The market size and coverage are expected to expand as more industrial entities 
and communities recognize the benefits of energy cooperative communities. ENERGIZE+ 
plays a crucial role in regional energy transitions by promoting investments in environmentally 
friendly energy solutions production within industrial communities.  
The potential users of the results are diverse and include industrial stakeholders, local 
communities, and public and private entities interested in sustainable energy solutions. The 
emergence of cooperative energy communities at the industrial level reflects the active 
participation of stakeholders, predominantly encompassing industrial entities, in shaping 
energy markets. This engagement is driven by environmental and policy considerations 
pertaining to energy supply (Bauwens et al., 2016; Dewald & Truffer, 2011; Yildiz et al., 2015).  
One of the notable factors contributing to the replication potential is the emphasis on democratic 
and participatory elements within the project. These aspects have been shown to enhance 
public acceptance of environmentally friendly energy solutions (Bauwens, 2016; Bauwens & 
Devine-Wright, 2018; Jobert et al., 2007).  Moreover, the project's focus on local involvement, 
primarily at the industrial level, provides a solid foundation for replication since it aligns with the 
inherent limitations of expanding bey ond local contexts in similar initiatives (Hufen & 
Koppenjan, 2015).  Indeed, the co -creation process involving relevant stakeholders is a key 
aspect in ENERGIZE+ that can also be replicated, and it is effective in achieving a sense of 
ownership, engagement, and expertise sharing, contributing to the success and user adoption 
(and indeed ENERGIZE+ will build on learnings from the Horizon Europe FoodSafeR project 
that is successfully implementing a cocreation approach to its project developments).  
#§IMP-ACT-IA§# #@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@# 
3. IMPLEMENTATION 
Fill in only section 3.1 and 3.3 at stage 1 (concept note). Fill in all sections at stage 2 (full proposal).
3.1 Work plan 
Work plan 
Provide a brief description of the overall structure of the work plan (list of work packages or graphical presentation (Pert 
chart or similar)). 
To fulfil the objectives of the ENERGIZE+ Project, a well-structured and competitive work plan 
has been devised. This plan encompasses 6 Work Packages (WPs), each further broken down 
into specific working tasks, that outline specific objectives, ensuring that the project activities 
are focused and purposeful.  
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
33 
The WPs are defined to interconnect and complement each other, creating a cohesive 
framework for the entire project  to ensure that activities are coordinated and contribute 
synergistically towards achieving project objectives.  
The structured work plan has been carefully designed to cover every facet of the project, from 
efficient management and analysis, cocreation and a participatory approach to developing and 
deploying tools and solutions for enhanced energy cooperation.  
Specifically, the work plan includes a focus on project management and coordination  (WP1), 
ensuring efficient resource allocation, compliance, and ethical considerations throughout the 
project's duration. The plan then delves into the analysis of the energy cooperation landscape  
(WP2) involving a thorough review of existing initiatives, understanding legal and 
socioeconomic requirements, and quantifying energy resources. The subsequent phase is 
focussed on the definition of  the ENERGIZE+ services and tools  (WP3), which includes 
mapping energy resources, designing services, creating business models, and establishing 
governance frameworks. A key component is the creation of the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub  
(WP4), as a centralized, scalable and enduring platform for accessing the projects results, for 
knowledge dissemination, training, and monitoring project KPIs . ENERGIZE+ energy 
communities will be established (WP5), as the central focus of the project, involving stakeholder 
engagement, educational programs, capacity building, and monitoring the impact of these 
energy communities. Our workplan is underpinned by a strategy for sustainability, replication, 
and exploitation, involving communication efforts, an exploitation plan, policy and regulatory 
recommendations, and guidelines for post-project implementation (WP6). 
Moreover, responsibilities are also clearly allocated to designated leaders, ensuring 
accountability for progress and results. While IRIS takes on the role of project coordinator, each 
WP and task is assigned a dedicated leader responsible for overseeing p rogress and 
communicating results, and for ensuring the participation of the rest of the team to  maintain 
project momentum and ensure tasks are carried out efficiently. 
The interconnectedness of the work packages is visually represented in the following Pert chart: 
Figure 1: PERT Diagram 
Each of the work package s and their tasks are thoroughly described in the next section to 
provide a comprehensive understanding of the project's operational framework . 
 

Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
34
3.2 Work packages and activities (n/a for concept note) 
WORK PACKAGES (n/a for concept note) 
Work packages 
This section concerns a detailed description of the project activities.  
Group your activities into work packages. A work package means a major sub-division of the project. For each work package, enter an objective (expected outcome) and list the activities, milestones 
and deliverables that belong to it. The grouping should be logical and guided by identifiable outputs.  
The number of work packages should be proportionate to the scale and complexity of the project. WP1 should cover the project management and coordination activities (meetings, coordination, project 
monitoring and evaluation, financial management, progress reports, etc.) and all the activities which are cross-cutting and therefore difficult to assign to just one specific work package (do not try splitting 
these activities across different work packages). WP2 (and further WPs) should be used for the other project activities. You can create as many work packages as needed by copying the structure of WP1. 
Include a mandatory work package called ‘Sustainability, replication and exploitation of project results’.  
For Nature and Biodiversity, include also a mandatory work package on ‘Monitoring and evaluation’. 
In addition, ensure your work packages cover also the following activities:  
− dissemination and communication, including networking with other LIFE projects 
− impact monitoring and evaluation  
− reporting of (estimated and actually achieved) key-performance indicators (KPIs) in the LIFE KPI web tool within the first 9 months from grant signature and at the end of the project 
Work packages covering financial support to third parties (  only allowed if authorised in the Call document) must describe the conditions for implementing the support (for grants: max amounts per 
third party; criteria for calculating the exact amounts, types of activity that qualify (closed list), persons/categories of persons to be supported and criteria and procedures for giving support; for prizes: 
eligibility and award criteria, amount of the prize and payment arrangements).  
Mandatory deliverables: 
− dedicated project page on the beneficiaries’ websites 
− exploitation plan including replication component / business plan including replication component / ‘After-LIFE Conservation Plan’ 
− extract of the project data from the LIFE KPI webtool (month 9 and end of the project) (n/a for Clean Energy Transition) 
− in case of land purchase, digital copies of the land register (with "conservation clause")  
 Enter each activity/milestone/output/outcome/deliverable only once (under one work package). 
 Ensure consistency with the detailed budget table/calculator (if applicable). (n/a for prefixed Lump Sum Grants) 
Objectives and results 
List the specific objectives to which the work package is linked and expected results. 
Activities and division of work (WP description) 
Provide a concise overview of the work (planned tasks). Be specific  and give a short name and number for each task. The tasks should be numbered continuously, linked to the WP they relate to (e.g. 
T.1.1, T.1.2, T.2.1, etc.). 
Show who is participating in each task: Coordinator (COO), Beneficiaries (BEN), Affiliated Entities (AE), Associated Partners (AP), indicating in bold the task leader.  
Add information on other participants’ involvement in the project e.g. subcontractors, in-kind contributions.  
Note:  
The Coordinator remains fully responsible for the coordination tasks, even if they are delegated to someone else. Coordinator tasks cannot be subcontracted. 

Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
35 
Milestones and deliverables (outputs/outcomes) 
Milestones are control points in the project that help to chart progress (e.g. completion of a key deliverable allowing the next phase of the work to begin). Use them for major outputs or achievements 
expected during the project time, and not only at the end.  Please limit the number of milestones by work package. 
Means of verification are how you intend to prove that a milestone has been reached. If appropriate, you can also refer to indicators. 
Milestones have a continuous numbering not linked to their WP (e.g. MS1, MS2, etc). 
Deliverables are project outputs which are submitted to show project progress (any format). Refer only to major outputs. Do not include minor sub-items, internal working papers, meeting minutes, etc.  
For deliverables such as meetings, events, seminars, trainings, workshops, webinars, conferences, etc., enter each deliverabl e separately and provide the following in the 'Description' field: invitation, 
agenda, signed presence list, target group, number of estimated participants, duration of the event, report of the event, training material package, presentations, evaluation report, feedback questionnaire.  
For deliverables such as manuals, toolkits, guides, reports, leaflets, brochures, training materials etc., add in the ‘Description’ field: format (electronic or printed), language(s), approximate number of pages 
and estimated number of copies of publications (if any).  
Deliverables a continuous numbering linked to their WP, (e.g. D1.1 in WP1, D2.1 in WP2, etc). 
For each deliverable you will have to indicate a due month by when you commit to upload it in the Portal. The due month of the deliverable cannot be outside the duration of the work package and must be 
in line with the timeline provided below. Month 1 marks the start of the project and all deadlines should be related to this starting date. 
The labels used mean: 
Public — fully open (  automatically posted online on the Project Results platforms) 
Sensitive — limited under the conditions of the Grant Agreement 
EU classified — RESTREINT-UE/EU-RESTRICTED, CONFIDENTIEL-UE/EU-CONFIDENTIAL, SECRET-UE/EU-SECRET under Decision 2015/444. For items classified under other rules (e.g. 
national or international organisation), please select the equivalent EU classification level. 
 
Work Package 1  
Work Package 1: Project management and coordination (n/a for concept note) 
Duration: M1 - M36 Lead Beneficiary:  IRIS 
Objectives and results 
The objectives of the WP are : to manage and optimise the application of resources by creating an appropriate management framework linking together all the 
project components and to ensure that the contractual requirements for communication and reporting are met ; to ensure the project management procedures are 
implemented; and, to coordinate with and report to the European Commission (EC)  
Activities and division of work (WP description) 
T.1.1 Oversight of project resources management  
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: IRIS (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN), SYM (BEN), EAZK (BEN) M1-M36 
The activities involved in the management of the project resources are as follows : i) Coordination and careful monitoring of the activities of the project (with the 
assistance of a project management tool), ii)  Organising the dates, agenda and documenting the minutes of all the meetings, iii) Overseeing the  management 
structure and the different managerial positions, iv) Ensuring that the decision making procedures for the different management bodies of the management structure 
are respected at all times, v) Tracking and reporting progress, vi) Financial administration of the project and its funds, vii) Administrative management of the project, 
viii) Ensuring all partners adhere to the contractual obligations of the GA, ix) Responsibility for maintenance of the CA, x) Overseeing the promotion of gender 

Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
36 
equality in the project, xi) Overseeing the adherence of the project to the Green Management principles.  IRIS will lead this task and all partners will be involved to 
ensure the robust management of resources, whereby each partner will ensure effective use of their own resources through careful internal project management.  
T.1.2 Implementation of the management procedures  
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: All (BEN) M1-M36 
During this task, the project management procedures presented will be implemented in order to ensure a well -run project. At the project K oM, the project 
management procedures will be available in a Handbook (Deliverable 1.1) based on the proven processes and procedures of the experienced coordinator and 
team, and providing all supporting documentation and tools. These ISO 9001:2008 certified processes and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems for R&D&I 
certified procedures are implemented by IRIS in the management of all their projects and they form part of the ir continuous quality improvement processes. The 
necessary templates and documentation for implementing these procedures are available in IRIS and will be used by the Project Coordinator (COO). The COO will 
ensure that all partners are fully briefed on each procedure, how it works, and their role in its implementation. The project  management procedures that will be 
followed are: i) Technical Workplan Review and Update Procedure; ii) Issues Management Pro cedure; iii) Scope Management Procedure; iv) Risk Management 
Procedure; v) Conflict Management Procedure; vi) Communication Management Pro cedure; vii) Document Management procedure; viii) Quality Management 
procedure, vv) Green Management Procedures. IRIS will assume overall responsibility for ensuring these project management procedures are followed throughout 
the project, and all partners will collaborate. 
T.1.3 Coordination, reporting and ensure of EC compliance  
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: All (BEN) M1-M36 
The coordinator is the sole point of contact between the EC and the project consortium. The coordinator must ensure that all milestones are met and that all reports 
are prepared and delivered to the EC in accordance with contractual requirements. IRIS will execute this task and will keep updated all the EC IT tools, such as the 
LIFE KPI Web tool. 
T.1.4 Ethics requirements and data protection 
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: All (BEN) M1-M36 
This task will ensure that the project  ́s activities conform to all data protection, confidentiality and anonymity requirements, be they regulatory (e.g. GDPR), 
organizational (i .e. confidentiality concerns of organizations engaged/participating in the project) or personal (i .e. privacy requirements of stakeholders 
engaged/participating in the project). This will be accomplished by putting in place a detailed Data Management Plan and corresponding processes and procedures 
(including templates of NDAs and GDPR statements to be included in the respective se ctions of the Digital Hub or signed by participants during interviews and 
workshops). An initial DMP will be delivered in M6 and any updates will be included in the interim and final PEDR. 
Milestones and deliverables (outputs/outcomes) 
Mile-stone No Milestone Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiar
y 
Description Due Date 
(month 
number) 
Means of Verification  
MS1 Kick off the project 1 IRIS The project has started, and the 
overall partners are actively 
involved and committed to start 
the activities 
M1 A Kick Off Meeting has been 
organised by the Coordinator 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
37 
Deliverable No Deliverable Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiar
y 
Type Dissemination 
Level 
Due Date 
(month 
number) 
Description  
(including format and language) 
D1.1 Project Management Handbook 1 IRIS  R — 
Document, 
report 
 
SEN  
 
M3 Guidelines and procedures  and 
project governance.  PDF document 
in English language electronic 
format only 
D1.2 Interim Reporting of (estimated 
and actually achieved ) key -
performance indicators (KPIs) in 
the LIFE KPI web tool 
1 IRIS R — 
Document, 
report 
 
 
SEN 
 
M9 Reporting activity of the impact of 
the project, the report is updated in 
the LIFE KPI web tool. In English 
language electronic format only 
D1.3 Periodic progress report  M1-
M18 
 
1 IRIS R — 
Document, 
report 
 
 
SEN  
 
M18 Periodic reporting activity of the 
progress of the project and costs 
checked PDF document in English 
language electronic format only 
D1.4 Data Management Plan  
(delivered in M6 and periodically 
updated) 
1 IRIS R — 
Document, 
report 
[SEN — 
Sensitive]  
 
M6 This document includes the plan for 
Data Management. PDF document 
in English language electronic 
format only 
D1.5 Periodic progress report M9 -
M36 
1  
IRIS 
R — 
Document, 
report 
SEN — 
Sensitive 
 
M36 Periodic reporting activity of the 
progress of the project and costs 
checked PDF document in English 
language electronic format only 
D1.6 Final Reporting of (estimated 
and actually achieved) key -
performance indicators (KPIs) in 
the LIFE KPI web tool 
1 IRIS 
 
R — 
Document, 
report 
 
SEN — 
Sensitive 
 
M36 
 
Reporting activity of the impact of 
the project, the report is updated in 
the LIFE KPI web tool. In English 
language electronic format only 
Timetable (n/a for concept note) 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
38 
 
 Timetable (projects of more than 2 years) (n/a for concept note) 
Fill in cells in beige to show the duration of activities. Repeat lines/columns as necessary. 
Note: Use the project months/years instead of calendar months/years. Month 1 always marks the start of the project. In the timeline you should indicate the timing of each activity per WP. 
You may add additional columns if your project is longer than 6 years.  
ACTIVI
TY 
MONTHS 
M
1 
M
2 
M
3 
M
4 
M
5 
M
6 
M
7 
M
8 
M
9 
M 
1
0 
M 
1
1 
M 
1
2 
M 
1
3 
M 
1
4 
M 
1
5 
M 
1
6 
M 
1
7 
M 
1
8 
M 
1
9 
M 
2
0 
M2
1 
M2
2 
M2
3 
M2
4 
M2
5 
M2
6 
M2
7 
M2
8 
M2
9 
M3
0 
M3
1 
M3
2 
M3
3 
M3
4 
M3
5 
M3
6 
WP1                                     
T.1.1      
 
                               
T.1.2                                      
T.1.3      
 
                               
T.1.4      
 
                               
 
Work Package 2  
Work Package 2: Operational Framework and analysis of energy cooperation landscape (n/a for concept note) 
Duration: M1 - 
M6 
Lead Beneficiary: ESTRATS 
Objectives and results 
This WP focusses on performing a deep benchmarking of previous and existing initiatives in the area of energy efficiency and communities in Industrial zones, 
circularity and industrial ecology, as well as a review of legal and socioeconomical requirements for business models. The objective of this benchmark is to identify 
all the existing achievements that could be profitable as well as learn from other experiences, and identify all the areas where improvements can be made . The 
outcome will be a comprehensive assessment of the actual state -of-art of technical, legal and socio -economical requirements for the set-up of industrial energy 
communities. 
Activities and division of work (WP description) 
T.2.1 Review of regional Urban - Industrial Park Energy cooperation initiatives  
Lead: LINZ (BEN) | Participants: IRIS (BEN) ICAEN (BEN), EI-JKU (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN), M1-M4: 
This task will gather and review all the existing and previous initiatives  on Urban-Industrial Parks focused on either energy cooperation, industrial symbiosis and  
circularity or Industrial ecology. While the search will focus mainly on European regions, an overview of significant existing projects in other continents  will also be 
performed. Information searches will be performed on initiatives in several existing databases, such as for example the International Society for Indu strial Ecology 
(ISIE), SPIRE and Processes4Planet projects (Hubs for Circularity Initiative), among others. From all the initiatives reviewed an analysis of key parameters will be 
carried out allowing for a categorization  to be drawn up , and based on this,  a derivation of best practices on participation and/or energy cooperation between 
businesses in Industrial Parks (and its surrounding urban areas, if applicable). Potential categories could be: cooperation businesses strategies and needs, type of 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
39 
actors involved, main cooperation drivers, quantification methods and tools developed (either in energy or cooperation). The result will be a Benchmark Report that 
will provide key information for the development of the ENERGIZE+ services (WP3) and Digital Hub (WP4). 
T.2.2 Review of current legal and socioeconomical requirements and methodologies for the creation of business model and governance   
Lead: ENGREEN (BEN) | Participants: EI-JKU (BEN), 3OC (BEN), ICAEN (BEN) M1-M6: 
This task will provide an in-depth analysis of the current trends in financial schemes and business models in established energy cooperatives, with the goal of 
getting the big picture (mapping) in relation to financing bodies and instruments, potential business opportunities and motivations of the initiators. The intention of 
this task is to identify and leverage already existing models of positive synergies among industrial and residential segments. This analysis will include a mapping of 
relevant financial instruments given the specific n ational and local context, as well as stakeholders needs and requirements. It will also map the financing bodies 
(banks, financial institutions, investors and structured funds…), alternative sources (crowd funding, crowd lending, general citizen financing, multilateral) and the 
most relevant fiscal incentives and subsidies in place to support energy cooperatives, with the aim of  designing in WP3, suitable and effective business models  
templates. Research in new trends in green financing and tailor -made financial products for citizen’s  and industrial energy cooperative  requirements will also be 
considered, as well as identification of potential business models already implemented.  
T.2.3: Review of existing energy community success case studies and specifications for setting up an urban industrial energy community   
Lead: ESTRATS (BEN) | Participants: ENGREEN (BEN), FEDARENE (BEN), EI-JKU (BEN), 30C (BEN) ICAEN (BEN),  M1-M6 
The aim of Task 2.3 is to develop comprehensive specifications for the establishment of an industrial energy community. To achieve this goal, the task will commence 
by conducting an in -depth review of critical success factors in well-established energy cooperative case studies, which are more mature in their development 
compared to industrial energy communities. To inform our specifications, we will extensively draw upon the resources and databases available through REScoop - 
Renewable Energy Sources Cooperatives a nd Energy Cities . Special attention will be given to case studies that have effectively incorporated industrial ecology 
principles, as these principles are integral to ensuring resource efficiency, waste reduction, and the establishment of symbi otic relationships among industries . 
Drawing upon the insights derived from these case studies and in collaboration with the efforts of Task 2.1 and 2.2,  we will craft specifications that encompass key 
elements, including energy generation, distribution, cooperation and business models templates, and sustainability objectives for urban industrial energy 
communities. The outcomes of this task are anticipated to yield valuable insights and key recommendations that will significantly contribute to  and inform the 
development of ENERGIZE+ services (WP3) and Digital Hub (WP4). 
Milestones and deliverables (outputs/outcomes) 
Mile-stone No Milestone Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiar
y 
Description Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Means of Verification  
MS2 Deliverable 2.1 available 
publicly in the  the Digital 
Hub 
2 LINZ Review report of regional Urban - 
Industrial Park Energy cooperation 
initiatives 
 
M4 Document report accessible for any 
stakeholder in an easy manner online 
MS3 Deliverable 2.2 - 2.3 - 2.4 
available publicly in and 
the Digital Hub 
2 ENGREE
N 
Review report for ENRGIZE+ business 
models creation +  
Review report on existing Energy 
Communities + Specifications list 
M6 Document report s accessible for any 
stakeholder in an easy manner online 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
40 
mapping report for setting up an urban 
industrial energy community 
MS4 Specifications list 
mapping report for setting 
up an urban industrial 
energy community 
2 ESTRATS Report mapping a list of all the most 
relevant key elements to consider for 
creating a successful Industrial Energy 
community.  
M6 Document reports accessible for any 
stakeholder in an easy manner online 
Deliverable No Deliverable Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiar
y 
Type Dissemination Level Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Description  
(including format and language) 
D2.1 Review report of regional 
Urban - Industrial Park 
Energy cooperation 
initiatives 
2 LINZ 
(BEN) 
[R — 
Document, 
report]   
[PU — Public]  
 
M4 This document will include a list of all the 
initiatives analysed, a categorization (e.g. 
by type of cooperation, lead actors , 
number of parties, etc.)  as well as the 
derivation of best practices. PDF 
document in English language electronic 
format only. 
D2.2 Review report for 
ENERGIZE+ business 
models creation 
2 EnGreen R — 
Document, 
report  
[PU — Public]  
 
M6 Report about financial mechanisms and 
business models already in place for 
enhancing the cooperation among 
industrial and residential sectors   
D2.3 Review report on existing 
Energy Communities 
2 ESTRATS R — 
Document, 
report 
 
[PU — Public] 
 
M6 A report summarizing the best practices 
assessed, with an identification of their 
critical success factors  categorised type 
of actors, number of parties, energy type 
forms and legal model , and location 
among others. 
PDF document in English language 
electronic format only. 
D2.4 Specifications list 
mapping report for setting 
up an urban industrial 
energy community 
 
2 ESTRATS R — 
Document, 
report 
 
[PU — Public] 
 
M6 This report will basically consist on a 
mapping list of all the most relevant key 
elements to consider for creating a 
successful Industrial Energy community. 
This mapping list will be categorise by 
energy, socioeconomic and legal 
concepts. It will be an ea sy and simple 
way to identify at first sight the lessons 
learned from all the initiatives studied in 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
41 
T2.1, T2.2 and T2.3. PDF document in 
English language electronic format only. 
Timetable (n/a for concept note) 
 Timetable (projects of more than 2 years) (n/a for concept note) 
Fill in cells in beige to show the duration of activities. Repeat lines/columns as necessary. 
Note: Use the project months/years instead of calendar months/years. Month 1 always marks the start of the project. In the timeline you should indicate the timing of each activity per WP. 
You may add additional columns if your project is longer than 6 years.  
ACTIVI
TY 
MONTHS 
M
1 
M
2 
M
3 
M
4 
M
5 
M
6 
M
7 
M
8 
M
9 
M 
1
0 
M 
1
1 
M 
1
2 
M 
1
3 
M 
1
4 
M 
1
5 
M 
1
6 
M 
1
7 
M 
1
8 
M 
1
9 
M 
2
0 
M2
1 
M2
2 
M2
3 
M2
4 
M2
5 
M2
6 
M2
7 
M2
8 
M2
9 
M3
0 
M3
1 
M3
2 
M3
3 
M3
4 
M3
5 
M3
6 
WP2                                      
T.2.1      
 
                               
T.2.2      
 
                               
T.2.3     
 
                               
 
Work Package 3  
Work Package 3: Definition of ENERGIZE+ services and capacity building materials to enhance energy cooperation across the pilot demonstrations 
(n/a for concept note) 
Duration: M3 - M18 Lead Beneficiary: 3OC 
Objectives and results 
The objective of WP3 is to use co-creation and user-centred design methodologies to design the ENERGIZE+ Accelerator programme (based on a blended virtual 
and mentorship delivery model), and develop the associated ENERGIZE+ services and capacity-building materials tailored to user needs, ensuring the best user 
experience. This lays the foundation for effective stakeholder engagement and the design of project outcomes. The WP will commence by identifying and cataloguing 
the range of energy sources and technologies available within the pilot regions. Subsequently, user research will be conducte d to understand user habits, primary 
challenges, and areas of concern, building on identified priorities and opportunities. This user research will then inform a series of co-design workshops with pilot 
stakeholders to create capacity-building materials, determining their format, content, and associated tools. 
Activities and division of work (WP description) 
T.3.1 Mapping and inventory of energy resources and technologies in the ENERGIZE+ regional urban-industrial pilots  
Lead: ESTRATS (BEN) | Participants: IRIS (BEN) , ENGREEN (BEN), ICAEN (BEN) M3-12 
The main goal of Task 3.1 is to identify and catalogue the array of renewable energy sources and technologies accessible within the pilot regions. The task will map 
the pilots type of industrial businesses, main current energy consumption types and sources, energy waste, energy efficiency technologies available, local renewable 
energy potential and technologies. The information gathered will be basically presented in table formats and visually with di fferent type of maps and graphs,  such 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
42 
as energy flow diagrams (Sankey Charts), pie charts and funnel charts among others. This information will serve as a foundation for co-creating the ENERGIZE+ 
regional urban-industrial cooperation models and formulating sustainable energy strategies. 
T.3.2 Stakeholders and energy cooperative user research  
Lead: 3OC (BEN) | Participants: ENGREEN (BEN), ICAEN (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN) M3-M12 
The aim of this task is twofold. Initially, it aims to comprehensively map and define the specific roles played by diverse lo cal stakeholders within the co -creation 
process of the ENERGIZE+ regional urban-industrial pilots. Furthermore, the task is geared towards identifying critical needs, skill gaps, and often overlooked 
challenges faced by the stakeholders. This will be achieved by 1) analysing skills gaps in training, 2) aligning priorities and needs, and 3) identifying and addressing 
barriers, including those related to policy, perception, economics, and technical factors associated with energy cooperation. This will be done through desktop 
research, interviews and surveys. The output of this task will be detailed personas (user profiles) with its related capacity building needs, pains and priorities. 
T.3.3 Co creation of ENERGIZE+ services and capacity building materials  
Lead: 3OC (BEN) | Participants: ENGREEN (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN) M6 – M18 
Informed by the findings of the user research and the evaluation of capacity-building needs conducted in Task 3.2, Task 3.3 is dedicated to the co-creation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Accelerator Programme and associated capacity building materials. This programme is designed to provide essential knowledge a nd tools for the 
successful establishment of industrial energy communities for target stakeholder groups. To achieve this, the tas k will initially determine which types of training 
materials and programs best suit each target group, incorporating insights and feedback gathered from real users in Task 3.2 and Task 5.2. Emphasis will be 
placed on target groups, such as businesses, industries, and local governments. We will analyse and build from available existing resources, such as those on 
the Energy Community Platform, to identify gaps and areas where more material is needed. 
The Accelerator Programme will encompass a variety of e -learning materials, including Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) and instructional videos, along 
with online and in-person acceleration training sessions. ENERGIZE+ will build on existing resources (section 1.5), including the ones from the Energy Community 
Platform. It will adapt these materials, and co-create new where knowledge gaps are identified. While the content of the program will evolve throughout the project, 
we have initially identified key  areas of focus, including Communication and Community Engagement, Regulatory and Administrative Procedures, and Business 
and Financial Viability. These areas will be further refined based on insights gained from user research and the collaborativ e co-creation process. 
The outcome will be scalable versions of all capacity -building materials that will be consolidated in the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub (WP4), which will also host the 
Accelerator Programme, with a few to high replicability of this programme in the post -project.  
T.3.4 Co-creation of ENERGIZE+ governance framework cooperation models  
Lead: ENGREEN (BEN) | Participants: 3OC (BEN), ICAEN (BEN) M6-M18 
This task aims to define and co-create the most appropriate and affordable financial arrangements and particularities for industrial energy cooperatives in each pilot 
country, type of organisation and financial requirements.  For better understanding stakeholder needs and requirements, a series of events will be organized: the 
first one, in Catalonia, will be physical and will include all the most relevant key stakeholder involved in the main project pilot; for the other p roject pilot, online 
consultations will be organized. Task 3.4 will also leverage outc omes of WP2 -requirements & needs, trends, financing instruments and business models - for 
enhancing a tailored co-creation process, having the ambition of creating of new financing alternatives and business models. 
T.3.5 Development of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to assess the effectiveness of ENERGIZE+ energy cooperation initiatives  
Lead: ESTRATS (BEN) | Participants: 3OC (BEN), ICAEN (BEN) M6-M18 
In order to assess the effectiveness of the different project activities in achieving the main goal  of enhancing the creation of Industrial Energy communities' 
cooperatives in the pilot areas, there will be defined a set of Key performance Indicators (ENERGIZE+ KPIs). These KPIs will be defined taking into consideration 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
43 
the results of the rest of WP3 tasks and T4.1. The KPIs defined will monitor concepts like the renewable energy projects identified and/or initialised, the effectivity 
of the ENERGIZE+ capacity building trainings, or the user participation in the ENERGIZE+ services co-created, among others and will be complementary to the 
LIFE+ KPIs that are needed to be reported. 
Milestones and deliverables (outputs/outcomes) 
Mile-stone 
No 
Milestone Name WP 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Description Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Means of Verification  
MS4 Co-Creation events  
organization 
3 EnGreen Organization of a physical event for Catalan 
pilot for assessing ENERGIZE+ governance 
M12 Attendance list and material available on 
the Digital Hub 
MS5 Public Material published 3 3OC All public material coming from WP3 
Deliverables published online 
M18 Document reports accessible for any 
stakeholder in an easy manner online 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name WP 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination Level Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Description  
(including format and language) 
D3.1 Inventory map report of energy 
resources and technologies in 
the ENERGIZE+ regional 
urban-industrial pilots 
3 ESTRATS [R — Document, 
report][DATA — data 
sets, microdata, etc.]  
  
[SEN — Sensitive]  
 
 
M12 This report will be a n inventory map with 
tables and diagrams of all the gathe red 
pilots data. The information will be 
separated in different chapters for each 
pilot analysed. PDF document and excel 
file in English language electronic format 
only. 
 
D3.2 User experience maps & user 
personas 
3 3OC 
 
[R — Document, 
report] [ 
[PU — Public]  
 
M9 Report including the user experience 
maps for each user profile. PDF document 
and excel file in English language 
electronic format only. 
D3.3 Co creation of ENERGIZE+ 
Acceleration Programme 
3 3OC [R — Document, 
report] 
[PU — Public]  
 
M22 Report outlining the detailed structure and 
plan for the ENERGIZE+ Acceleration 
Programme that will be implemented in 
the framework of WP 5 and published 
online in WP4 Digital HUB.  Slides and 
Videos in English language electronic 
format only. 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
44 
D3.4 Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) sheet to assess the 
effectiveness of ENERGIZE+ 
energy cooperation initiatives 
3 ESTRATS 
 
 [DATA — data sets, 
microdata, etc.] 
 
[SEN — Sensitive] 
 
 
M18 
 
This deliverable will be an excel sheet with 
the list of ENERGIZE+ KPIs, definition , 
measure units and expected outcome at 
the end of the project. In English language 
and electronic format only. 
 
Timetable (n/a for concept note) 
 
Work Package 4  
Work Package 4: Development of ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub (n/a for concept note) 
Duration: M6 - M36 Lead Beneficiary: IRIS 
Objectives and results 
• To build Open Digital Hub: unique ‘One-stop-shop’ interface for accessing project outputs & for hosting a pan -European virtual stakeholder community 
linked to energy cooperation. To design effective communication campaigns for multi -actor outreach & engagement 
• To host resources and training material coming from all the rest of WPs to enable cocreation with relevant energy cooperation system actors 
• To report and visual ENERGIZE+ KPIs in an easy and accessible dashboard for all stakeholders 
Activities and division of work (WP description) 
T4.1 Co-design of the user experience and design of the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub and tools 
 Timetable (projects of more than 2 years) (n/a for concept note) 
Fill in cells in beige to show the duration of activities. Repeat lines/columns as necessary. 
Note: Use the project months/years instead of calendar months/years. Month 1 always marks the start of the project. In the timeline you should indicate the timing of each activity per WP. You 
may add additional columns if your project is longer than 6 years.  
ACTIVIT
Y 
MONTHS 
M
1 
M
2 
M
3 
M
4 
M
5 
M
6 
M
7 
M
8 
M
9 
M 
1
0 
M 
1
1 
M 
1
2 
M 
1
3 
M 
1
4 
M 
1
5 
M 
1
6 
M 
1
7 
M 
1
8 
M 
1
9 
M 
2
0 
M2
1 
M2
2 
M2
3 
M2
4 
M2
5 
M2
6 
M2
7 
M2
8 
M2
9 
M3
0 
M3
1 
M3
2 
M3
3 
M3
4 
M3
5 
M3
6 
WP3                                     
T.3.1      
 
                               
T.3.2      
 
                               
T.3.3      
 
                               
T.3.4                                      
T.3.5                                      
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
45 
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: All M6-M9 
The aim of this task is to design and develop the best user experience for the different target groups of stakeholders to build an ea sy accessible and intuitive  
ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub, whereby users can benefit from the trusted professional community, the  resources and materials, as well as access to mentors (via the 
Acceleration Programme). A set of 3 co-design workshops will be organised in the pilots with different stakeholders (energy planners, energy transition managers, 
energy modelling…) to ensure that the r esults are adapted to their specific needs (both the platform and the capacity building materials ). The output of these 
workshops will be a user journey for each persona, that is a conceptual idea of the ICT prototypes and mock -ups of what the platform and materials should do and 
look like to feed directly into the UI (User Interface) and UX (User Experience) of the Digital Hub (WP4) and the design of the tools and capacity building materials 
(WP3).  
T.4.2 Development and deployment of ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub  
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: All M9-M36 
Architecture (microservices -based) of ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub will be drawn up for delivering high flexibility, scalability and performance. An appealing User 
Interface (UI) will be designed to cater for the different target audiences who, from a central landing page, can easily navigate dedicated subsites depending on 
their interests. The back end (including the API) and the front-end of the Hub will be programmed. The first public release of the Hub (D4.2) scheduled for M18 with 
sufficient first functionality to facilitate early community building. Subsequent releases will be scheduled to phase in the full suite  of functionality: Integration with 
Google, Microsoft to facilitate Single Sign On (accessibility) & User Experience (UX); Profile section to allow users to create their own professional profile & identity 
to facilitate community building & engagement; Calendar  integration (with Google & Microsoft calendars ) to facilitate the attendance on o nline events, activities 
(including MOOCS T3.3), meetings and joint tasks across the community . Communication suite: chat, messaging, integration with video conferencing facilities to 
enable seamless communication & engagement  across the community of stakeholders; Training Module  (see Task 4.3) ; Online dashboard for inserting and 
monitoring ENERGIZE+ KPI’s (developed in Task 4.3); Core Knowledge modules: thematic content spaces for creating, posting, sharing & maintaining content 
(text, video...); Private Workspaces for enabling community participation s to interact and collaborate online in a private and secure manner. Final Public Launch 
release will be done by Month 24 (D4.3), ensuring at least 12 months before the end of the project to showcase the ENERGIZE+ digital Hub and replicate the usage 
and content among different pilots till the end of the project.  The version releases will be supported with short video tutorial clips guiding users in how to use the 
Hub and it’s features and functionality (the version releases will also be publicized thanks to the communication activities performed in WP6). This task will engage 
with Task 6.3 Exploitation Plan of ENERGIZE+ in order to design a scalable business model for ensuring post -project maintenance and growth of the Digital Hub 
for enduring transformation of the energy cooperation system.  
T.4.3 Integration of online knowledge/training modules and definition of an online dashboard for inserting and monitoring ENERGIZE+ KPI’s 
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: All M18-M36 
The task involves integrating online knowledge and training modules into the project  (coming from WP3) in order to enhance participant learning. Simultaneously, 
it focuses on developing a user-friendly online dashboard for collecting and monitoring key project data and performance indicators defined in T3.5. The objectives 
include ensuring accessibility, aligning with project goals, and maintaining data security. User training and ongoing support  are provided, with alignment to the 
overall project work plan. The anticipated outcomes encompass a seamlessly integrated online platform, an operational dashboard, and improved collaboration and 
data management. 
Milestones and deliverables (outputs/outcomes) 
Mile-stone 
No 
Milestone Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiary 
Description Due Date Means of Verification  
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
46 
(month 
number) 
MS6 First public Launch of 
ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub 
4 IRIS Functional access to the digital platform M18 Any user can access and register publicly to the 
ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub 
MS7 Final Public release of the 
ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub 
4 IRIS All Functionalities available and training 
material published 
M24 Improved user experience accessing to the 
ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub 
MS8 ENERGIZE+ training material 
and KPIs dashboard integrated 
4 IRIS ENERGIZE+ KPIs dashboard accessible 
and configurable  and training material 
available 
M30 Any Stakeholder aiming to create an energy 
community can include KPIs inside the 
dashboard 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiary 
Type Dissemination 
Level 
Due Date 
(month 
number) 
Description  
(including format and language) 
D4.1 Alpha version of the 
ENERGISE+ Digital Hub 
4 IRIS  [DEC —Websites, 
patent filings, videos, 
etc.]  
[PU — Public]  
 
18 First functional ENERGISE+ Digital Hub public 
domain online. English. 
D4.2 Final version of the ENERGISE+ 
Digital Hub 
 
4 IRIS [DEC —Websites, 
patent filings, videos, 
etc.] 
[PU — Public]  
 
24 Definitive ENERGISE+ Digital Hub public domain 
online. English. 
 
D4.3 Video tutorial clips of the 
ENERGISE+ Digital Hub 
4 IRIS 
 
[DEC— Websites, 
patent filings, videos, 
etc ] 
[PU — Public]  
 
30 Link to YouTube Channel that will house the 
short video clips guiding users in how to use the 
Hub and it’s features and functionality and how it 
can be of value for the energy communities 
 
Timetable (n/a for concept note) 
 Timetable (projects of more than 2 years) (n/a for concept note) 
Fill in cells in beige to show the duration of activities. Repeat lines/columns as necessary. 
Note: Use the project months/years instead of calendar months/years. Month 1 always marks the start of the project. In the timeline you should indicate the timing of each activity per WP. You 
may add additional columns if your project is longer than 6 years.  
ACTIVIT
Y 
MONTHS 
M
1 
M
2 
M
3 
M
4 
M
5 
M
6 
M
7 
M
8 
M
9 
M 
1
0 
M 
1
1 
M 
1
2 
M 
1
3 
M 
1
4 
M 
1
5 
M 
1
6 
M 
1
7 
M 
1
8 
M 
1
9 
M 
2
0 
M2
1 
M2
2 
M2
3 
M2
4 
M2
5 
M2
6 
M2
7 
M2
8 
M2
9 
M3
0 
M3
1 
M3
2 
M3
3 
M3
4 
M3
5 
M3
6 
WP4                                     
T.4.1      
 
                               
T.4.2      
 
                               
T.4.3      
 
                               
 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
47 
Work Package 5  
Work Package 5: Deployment of the ENERGIZE+ energy communities across pilot demonstrations (n/a for concept note) 
Duration: M6 - M36 Lead Beneficiary: ENGREEN 
Objectives and results 
This work package will focus on the deployment of all the materials and tools created to enhance the establishment of energy communities in the different 
industrial pilot sites. The efforts will concentrate on engaging stakeholders in the community creation process, raising awareness and conducting specific training 
sessions on services, solutions, business models and strategies related to Clean Energy Transition, Circularity and Energy Communities. The result of the WP will 
be the establishment of energy cooperation synergies and services between business within each pilot site.  
Activities and division of work (WP description) 
T.5.1 ENERGIZE+ community engagement strategy and plan 
Lead: 3OC (BEN) | Participants: ENGREEN (BEN), FEDARENE (BEN), ICAEN (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN) M6 - M18 
Task 5.1 is dedicated to the creation of the ENERGIZE+ community engagement strategy and plan, designed to cater to all types of stakeholders identified in T3.2. 
This comprehensive strategy will intricately outline the communication channels, interaction methods, and a wide array of act ivities in which they w ill actively 
participate. The ENERGIZE+ stakeholder community will play a central role in driving project activities across multiple tasks, spanning from the incepti on of the 
Digital Hub to the collaborative development of capacity -building initiatives and their subsequent validation. In collab oration with insights from user research and 
the engagement strategy, a well-defined project activity timeline will be established, encompassing elements such as awareness workshops and capacity -building 
initiatives. 
T.5.2 Deployment of stakeholder engagement strategy & plan for launching and roll -out of ENERGIZE+ communities  
Lead: SYM (BEN) | Participants: ENGREEN (BEN), FEDARENE (BEN), ICAEN (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN) M18 - M36 
Task 5.2 will execute the plan and strategy outlined in T5.1, culminating in the establishment of the ENERGIZE+ communities. The primary goal is to provide 
services leading to the creation and enhancement of at least one potential energy community per region (Upper Austria, Austria; Zlín region, Czech 
Republic;Valsesia region, Italy & Manresa, Catalonia, Spain), , which will be hosted in the Digital Hub, and whereby the Acceleration  Programme will be 
implementated. Consequently, this task will be carried ou t concurrently with T5.3. The energy community of Manresa I·lumina (Spain) will serve as a benchmark, 
offering insights based on their experiences during community establishment, including challenges faced, lessons learned, and  necessary procedural steps. 
This evaluation will facilitate the precise definition of each ENERGIZE+ community and its Acceleration Programme (in Task 5.3) , tailoring activities such as open 
days in pilots, technical visits, workshops, awareness-raising campaigns, etc., to meet the specific needs and services required for their materialization. As a result, 
the services provided to the energy communities will foster their development, guiding them from an embryonic state to a more mature stage. This comprehensive 
support and mentorship will encompass technical, economic, legal, financial, and technological aspects encountered during the establishment of an en ergy 
community. 
Furthermore, depending on the maturity of each community, additional measures could be advocated to expand the number of memb ers participating in the 
community and other concurrent projects and investments necessary to augment energy production from existi ng and alternative renewable sources. To measure 
the success of each community, specific KPIs defined in T3.3 will be diligently considered.  
T.5.3 ENERGIZE+ Acceleration Programme execution 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
48 
Lead: 3OC (BEN) | Participants: FEDARENE (BEN), ENGREEN (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN) M18-M36 
This task will ensure the launching of the Acceleration Programme, including e -learning materials and online and in person training and mentorship sessions. It 
guarantees the seamless activation and online accessibility of the program through the Digital H ub. Additionally, this task will meticulously coordinate and execute 
access to experts/mentors and online workshops. The work is strategically divided into the following subtasks.  
Subtask 5.3a Capacity building for businesses and industries 
In addition to the creation of e -learning materials, three workshop sessions  (WS) (in person or online)  will be organised in each pilot as a part of the support to 
the industry and businesses  at M24, M28 and M32. Key topics covered may include:  WS1: Organisational and cooperation models, WS2: Technology & 
Regulation and WS3: Economically viable business models. 
Subtask 5.3b Capacity building for investors and financial 
In addition to the creation of e -learning materials, three other workshops are scheduled at M24, M28, and M32  in each pilot  (in person or online)  to provide 
comprehensive support to  investors and financial stakeholders.  Key topics for these sessions may in clude: WS1: Investment Landscape & Engagement, 
WS2: Financial Strategies & Regulatory Insights. and WS3: Financial Viability & Partnership Models. 
T.5.4 Impact and KPI monitoring of ENERGIZE+ regional urban-industrial park energy communities 
Lead: ESTRATS (BEN) | Participants: ENGREEN (BEN), M18-M36 
This task aims at monitoring the KPIs defined in T3.5. T he monitoring of these KPIs will provide information on the development of the different tasks  of WP5 and 
the effectiveness of the deployment of the ENERGIZE+ urban-industrial park energy communities. To allow the project partners to follow up the project deployment 
and be able to correct and improve  any actions that are not working properly , there will be 3 full monitoring cycles of the KPIs : 1-Monitoring of the KPIs at the 
beginning of the deployment WP5 (M18), 2-Monitoring at M27 and Milestone, 3-Monitoring at M36. The M27 Milestone will be key for analysing the KPIs to establish 
if there is a favourable evolution. At M36 a general report will be created with the monitoring for all the stages, an analysis and the corrective measures applied 
when necessary. 
Milestones and deliverables (outputs/outcomes) 
Mile-stone 
No 
Milestone Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiary 
Description Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Means of Verification  
MS9 100 Relevant Stakeholders 
reached 
5 3OC After the communication campaign at 
least 100 stakeholders across different 
regions have been reached 
24 Registrations on the Digital Hub 
MS10 ENERGIZE+ KPIs updated 
in the Digital Hub  by at 
least 5 energy 
communities 
5 ESTRATS KPIs Dashboard completed by 5 energy 
communities 
24 Information inside the Dashboard of the ENERGIZE+ 
Digital Hub 
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name WP 
No 
Lead 
Beneficiary 
Type Dissemination 
Level 
Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Description  
(including format and language) 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
49 
D5.1 ENERGIZE+ stakeholder 
engagement strategy 
5 3OC [R — Document, 
report]  
[PU — Public]  
 
12 Definition of the engagement strategy and social activities 
English language and electronic format. 
 
D5.2 Report on the Acceleration 
Programme activities 
5 3OC [R — Document, 
report]  
[PU — Public]  
 
M36 Report on the capacity-building activities and services 
implemented within the ENERGIZE+ Acceleration 
Programme. English language and electronic format 
D5.3 ENERGIZE+ KPIs 
monitoring report of the 
urban-industrial Park areas 
across the regions 
5 ESTRATS [R — Document, 
report] [ DATA — 
data sets, 
microdata, etc.] 
 
[SEN — Sensitive] 
 
M18 
M27 
M36 
Excel data sheet with KPIs in English language and 
electronic format for M18 and M27. 
In M36 a pdf document report with all the monitoring data 
for all the 18 months of deployment, and the analysis and 
corrective actions take in M27 when necessary. Eng lish 
language and electronic format only. 
 
Timetable (n/a for concept note) 
 
Work Package 6  
Work Package 6: Sustainability, replication, exploitation plan (n/a for concept note) 
Duration: M1 - M36 Lead Beneficiary: FEDARENE 
Objectives and results 
WP6 strategically addresses communication, dissemination, and replicability. Emphasizing and developing a comprehensive Commu nication, Dissemination, and 
Engagement Plan, creating impactful materials, and executing diverse dissemination activities to enhance the project's outreach. Moreover, it will focus on building 
 Timetable (projects of more than 2 years) (n/a for concept note) 
Fill in cells in beige to show the duration of activities. Repeat lines/columns as necessary. 
Note: Use the project months/years instead of calendar months/years. Month 1 always marks the start of the project. In the timeline you should indicate the timing of each activity per WP. You 
may add additional columns if your project is longer than 6 years.  
ACTIVIT
Y 
MONTHS 
M
1 
M
2 
M
3 
M
4 
M
5 
M
6 
M
7 
M
8 
M
9 
M 
1
0 
M 
1
1 
M 
1
2 
M 
1
3 
M 
1
4 
M 
1
5 
M 
1
6 
M 
1
7 
M 
1
8 
M 
1
9 
M 
2
0 
M2
1 
M2
2 
M2
3 
M2
4 
M2
5 
M2
6 
M2
7 
M2
8 
M2
9 
M3
0 
M3
1 
M3
2 
M3
3 
M3
4 
M3
5 
M3
6 
WP5                                     
T.5.1      
 
                               
T.5.2      
 
                               
T.5.3      
 
                               
T.5.4                                      
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
50 
a replicability blueprint, establishing partnerships, and executing a national and regional replication program. Exploitation plan for the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub, 
emphasizing business models, commercialization paths, and post -project sustainability. and regulatory roadmaps, fostering political commitment, creating 
guidelines, recommendations, and best practices for implementing industrial energy commun ities post -project, contributing to a comprehensive e -handbook. 
Together, these tasks aim to ensure the project's impactful communication, widespread replicability, and enduring post-project success. 
Activities and division of work (WP description) 
T.6.1 Communication & Dissemination of ENERGIZE+ Project 
Lead: ESTRATS (BEN) | Participants: All (BEN) M1-M36  
T6.1.1: Communication, dissemination and engagement Plan (ESTRATS, M1 -M30). A detailed communication, dissemination and engagement Plan (CDEP) will 
be developed by ESTRATS at the start of the project (D6.1, M4), and it will constitute the core document outlining the activi ties at the basis of the project’s 
dissemination and communication activities. The CDEP will be updated at M12, M24 and M30, to fine tune the Communication and Dissemination objectives based 
on project results and KPIs progress. It will address the following aspects: detailed planning of all communication and dissemination actions, roles and responsibilities 
to attributed to each partner, target audiences & tailored key messages, event & publications management plan, and communicat ion and dissemination KPIs. 
T6.1.2: Communication material and tools (ESTRATS, M1-M36). This task will focus on the development of material and tools for communication and dissemination 
actions, in particular: 
a) Project brand and visual identity (M1-M6). This task will develop the visual identify and project brand (M3) which will serve as a basis for all the project material 
development. It includes production of project flyer to explain the objectives, expected results and methodology of the proje ct (M6, English + local languages), and 
Roll up (M6, English) for presentation at events. 
b) Landing webpage and blog (M1 -M36). Landing webpage linked to the digital hub, including exchange blog for stakeholders and repository of meaningful 
information on the project (news, articles, roadmaps, etc) and providing access to the registration to the Digital Hub community. It will be linked to an online repository 
(e.g. Zenodo or similar), for smooth distribution of public deliverables. Operative landing blog page delivered by M4, in English and local languages. Moreover, 
following the rules of LIFE+ each beneficiary will have a dedicated project page on the beneficiaries’ websites.  
c) Project brochure (M18 -M27). The project brochure will highlight the project approach and its first achievements. It will be used to engage stakeholders a nd 
public authorities once the core developments of the project have been achieved, to maximise scaling up and replication. It w ill also provide information on the 
Digital Hub and will provide a link to the registration page, Brochure will be delivered in English, at M24.  
d) Communication videos (M3-M36). 2 different types of videos will be produced during the project duration: short videos (around 15” duration) and long videos 
(around 100” duration). ENERGIZE+ plans to produce at least 10 short video clips, including engaging content (e.g. infographics, factsheets, testimonials of th e 
pilots, etc.) to foster adoption of project solutions. In addition, 2 long videos will be produced, one of them presenting the project objectives and expected outcomes 
(Constitutional video, M 8), the other addressing project results and outcomes at a later stage of development (Scaling Up video, M30). Both will be p roduced in 
English, with subtitles in local languages.    
T6.1.3: Dissemination activities and communication campaigns (ESTRATS, M1-M36). This task aims to disseminate and promote the results and progress achieved 
in ENERGIZE+ and build a strong uptake from project's stakeholders, with a particular focus on industries and businesses, local governments, energy providers, 
investors and community residents. The coordination of engagement activities will be produced in WP5. Pilot leaders will deploy the strategy at local level, organize 
events and engage with stakeholders. Dissemination activities and tools within this task include: 
a) Social media accounts (M1 -M36). Aiming at the promotion of produce material, and to build and engage communities and stakeholders. The most suitable 
channels (e.g. LinkedIn, X, Facebook, Instagram, etc) will be selected following the CDEP plan.  
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
51 
b) Press releases and Newsletter (M1-M36). This material will be developed to share project updates and news. Newsletters will be distributed every 6 months to 
web registered users and will be made publicly available on the project Digital Hub and social media. Press releases will be distributed at the beginning of the 
project and when milestones or high interest outcomes are reached. Specific channels for press releases will be identified th rough the CDEP plan.  
c) Communication campaigns (M6 -M36). 3 specific awareness raising campaigns will be  designed and  implemented, to promote the engagement of key 
stakeholders (e.g. industrial clusters, energy services companies, financial investors, etc), and interaction with Local and Regional Authorities (LRAs) and citizens. 
The specific target audience will be selected depending on the progress of the project and the CDEP plan. 
d) Site visits (M12-M30). Project partners will organise at least 3 site visits, that will be conceived as learning expeditions to best practices in pr oject regions. The 
main learnings from these site visits will be documented in engaging formats for dissemination.  
e) Participation in public events (M3-M36). ENERGIZE+ will be present in a minimum of 10 national or international conferences, strategic workshops, seminars, 
fairs, or workshops relevant to industrial energy cooperatives to share project outcomes with identified target groups, as well as to network and promote the growth 
of the community in the ENERGIZE+ digital hub. Preliminary event planning will be conducted within the first four months of the project and will be integrated into 
the dissemination strategy of the CDEP developed in D6.1. 
f) Networking with other LIFE projects (M3-M36). Clustering with at least 6 other relevant projects will be promoted, to leverage synergies and foster cooperation. 
An initial set of sister projects will be selected before M6. 
g) Final ENERGIZE+ International Workshop (M24-M36). Towards the end of the project's duration, ENERGIZE+ will organize an international workshop (which 
may be planned to coincide with a synergistic conference or exhibition for high impact) to present the final results, showcase case studies, methodologies, guidelines, 
best practices, and business models. This event will contribute to the sustainability of the project's impacts.  
T.6.2 Fostering Replicability: Building a Blueprint for Success  
Lead: FEDARENE (BEN) | Participants: EI-JKU (BEN), ESTRATS (BEN) M18-M36 
Task 6.2 focuses on creating a replicability blueprint for the success of ENERGIZE+, providing a comprehensive guide and framework for adopting and implementing 
the project's outcomes. It aims to identify key factors contributing to success, develop replicable models, and disseminate b est practices, enabling wider adoption 
and implementation beyond the project's scope. The task emphasizes the transferability of ENERGIZE+ achievements to diverse contexts, promoting sustainability 
and scalability.  
Task T.6.2.1 – Replication and Networking plan (M 12-M36) A Replication and Networking plan will be developed in M12, to establish a specific work plan for the 
stakeholders’ involvement, including tailored messages and activities, engagement strategy timeline and responsibilities of each partner. 
 1/ The first step will be to research and identify potential industrial parks  interested in energy collaboration ( within the regions, as well as nationwide across the 
participating Member States, and additional Member States beyond those of the consortium) .  
2/ Establish partnerships with key stakeholders : Chambers of Commerce, local authorities , SMEs clusters and energy-focused organizations to create a robust 
support network for the initiative.  
Regional partners will ensure they have identified at least 5 other Industrial Parks in their country (within or outside their regions) and will have had bilateral calls or 
meetings with at least 5 organisations that could help reach out to industrial parks and companies. KPI8 4 real-life implementation sites carried out by the project 
(and 20-40 real-life implementation sites after 5 years) 
FEDARENE and other partners will do the same  using their own networks to populate this database from other regions across the EU and reach ou t to at least 5 
EU organisations that could help disseminate the replication programme (EUROCHAMBERS, SME associations, Industry clusters …). This will set up the basis for 
the replication programme. 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
52 
Task T.6.2.2 - Scaling-up at national level and within pilot regions [M13 -M36]: The Replication and Networking Plan will have a dedicated session focussed on 
scale-up activities at national level and within the regions of ENERGIZE pilot sites. The main purpose of the task is to transfer the ENERGIZE methodology and the 
Digital Hub, its Acceleration Programme and the training material developed in WP3 and WP4. The task aims at executing a replication program to foster 
collaboration among industrial parks nat ionwide for the creation of energy communities. The primary objective is to identify potential industrial parks interested in 
collaborative energy initiatives to enhance sustainable energy practices.  The partners will have tested the models in very diverse environments and territories and 
as such will have gathered a significant base of different insights and experience to share  with the aim of inspiring and training other parks and companies. The 
objective is to inspire and train 2 other industrial parks per country. The replication program me will be based on the methodologies of successful mentoring 
programmes and will allow each partner to conduct an expert mission (partner s visiting the selected region) or a work shadowing mission (selected region visiting 
the partner region).  
Programme framework: FEDARENE with the support of partners will define the criteria for selecting suitable industrial parks o r organisation and an evaluation 
method for assessing the effectiveness of the strategy. Criteria could include: 1) legislative fra mework (from the same countries), company types, energy needs, 
existing networks that need to be developed or enhanced; 2) Topics for work shadowing/expert mission will be further defined in accordance with the selected 
partner but indicative topics are listed below; 3) Setting up a collaboration on energy within an industrial park  
Energy agencies from the consortium (ICAEN, EAZK) together with FEDARENE will gain significant knowledge on how to foster energy cooperation in industrial 
parks, thanks to the project. They will be able to train other EU energy agencies on the best practices learnt. At least, 2 o nline seminars and 1 workshop will be 
organised.   
T.6.3 Exploitation Plan of ENERGIZE+ 
Lead: IRIS (COO) | Participants: FEDARENE (BEN) M1-M36 
This task will consist mainly of activities linked to business model  design and business planning for the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub and energy communities with the 
goal of drawing up a sustainable model for the post project in order to ensure that the results can continue to be made accessible, exploited and scaled in order to 
create project legacy with a continued positive impact on collaborative energy model adoption across the EU. The outcomes from this task will be reported in D6.7 
Interim Exploitation Plan and D6.8 Final Exploitation plan . The business model ling and exploitation activities will involve the ideation and analysis of alternative 
paths for the continued post-project deployment of the outputs via monetisation and commercialisation of the ENERGIZE+ service portfolio. On the basis of this 
analysis and subsequent discussions, one or various feasible business models will be selected and, based on th is, a complete business plan will be elaborated in 
D6.8 along with a post -project roadmap D6.10 ensuring post-project sustainability. The final Business  Plan of the ENERGIZE+ Digital HUB will include specific 
sections, as (i) Value Proposition and positioning, (ii) Target Market, (iii) Business model, (iv) Organizational model and (v) Financial Planning.  
T.6.4 Policy and regulatory recommendations 
Lead: FEDARENE (BEN) | Participants: ICAEN, ESTRATS (BEN) M18-M36 
This task aims to generate  roadmaps in relation to regulatory and policy aspects, which could influence on political commitment in the promotion of energy 
communities in industrial areas. Effort will include meetings with policy actors (focus group meetings, in all the pilot regions) to present them the progress and 
outcomes of the project and 1) get their feedback and 2) generate technical and strategic discussions on the adaptation of re sults in the involved territories. This 
task will culminate in a deliverable (whitepaper) on policy and regulatory recommendations. This activity will be addressed partially through the focus group activities 
planned in T6.2. 
T.6.5 Guidelines, recommendations and best practices for successful implementation of ENERGIZE+ model post project  
Lead: ENGREEN (BEN) | Participants: FEDARENE (BEN) M18-M36 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
53 
The aim of this task is to develop a set of guidelines supporting businesses, investors and policymakers in the implementation of industrial energy communities 
by employing the ENERGIZE+ approach. It will represent a collection of best practices, benefits, lessons learned , potential challenges and methodologies for 
overcoming these challenges, and will be included in the ENERGIZE+ guidelines e-handbook. The outcomes resulting from WP2, WP3 and WP4 and the work 
carried out with pilots in WP5 in terms of engagement and lived experiences and feedback will be fundamental to further enhance the ENERGIZE+ model deployment 
and promote its future development and applicability. It will include guidelines, recommendations, and best practices. 
Milestones and deliverables (outputs/outcomes) 
Mile-stone 
No 
Milestone Name WP 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Description Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Means of Verification  
MS11 C&D strategy defined  6 ESTRATS The communication and dissemination 
strategy has been defined, and 
ENERGIZE+ is ready to deploy it.  
M4 D6.1 submitted 
MS12 C&D Material toolkit 
produced  
6 ESTR  An initial C&D toolkit including flyers, roll -
out, landing blogpage, and the 1 st video 
have been defined.  
M12  D7.2 submitted; 1st video produced;  
Deliverable 
No 
Deliverable Name WP 
No 
Lead Beneficiary Type Dissemination 
Level 
Due 
Date 
(month 
number) 
Description  
(including format and language) 
D6.1 Communication, 
Dissemination and 
Engagement Plan 
6 ESTRATS [DMP — Data 
Management Plan] 
[PU — Public] 
 
M4 Plan on how, to whom and when communicate the 
project developments and results both internally 
and externally, updated at M12, M24, M30. 
[Document, English]  
 
D6.2 Initial set of communication 
and dissemination material 
6 ESTRATS [DEC —Websites, 
patent filings, 
videos, etc.] 
 
[PU — Public] 
 
M6  Set of general communication and dissemination 
material, including Flyer and Roll-out explaining the 
main aims and goals of the project, as well as an 
initial operative version of the landing blogpage for 
information exchange. [Document and Roll -out, 
National languages and English; Landing 
blogpage, English and local languages]  
D6.3 Project brochure 6 ESTRATS [R — Document, 
report] 
 
[PU — Public] 
 
M24 Document highlighting the project approach and its 
first achievements. [Document, English] 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
54 
D6.4 Videos 6 ESTRATS [DEC —Websites, 
patent filings, 
videos, etc.] 
 
[PU — Public] 
 
M10, 
M24, 
M32 
Several videos (housed on a project YouTube 
channel) with project key messages: M10: 
constitutional video; M24: pilot demonstration 
video; M32: testimonial video. [Videos, English, 
with local language subtitles].  
 
D6.5 Report on communication 
and dissemination actions 
6 ESTRATS [R — Document, 
report] 
[PU — Public] M18, 
M36 
Report on the progress of all the communication 
and dissemination activities, including KPIs 
monitoring, launched at M18 and updated at M36. 
[Document, English]  
 
D6.6 Interim Exploitation Plan 6 IRIS [R — Document, 
report] 
[SEN — Sensitive] 
 
M18 This report will contain initial business plans and 
business models for each potential Key Exploitable 
Result of the ENERGIZE+ Project. 
D6.7 Final Exploitation Plan 
including After LIFE 
Conservation Plan 
6 IRIS [R — Document, 
report] 
[SEN — Sensitive] 
 
M36 This report will include final business plans and 
business models 
D6.8 ENERGIZE+ Policy 
Recommendations 
6 FEDARENE [R — Document, 
report] 
[PU — Public] M36 Whitepaper aiming to get actual feedback of the 
different interviews made to different policy makers 
to improve ENERGIZE+ Impact replicability 
D6.9 ENERGIZE+ e-handbook 6 EnGreen [R — Document, 
report]  
[PU — Public]  
 
M36 Handbook containing project lessons learnt and 
guidelines for properly exploring ENERGIZE+ 
results and products.  
 
Timetable (n/a for concept note) 
 Timetable (projects of more than 2 years) (n/a for concept note) 
Fill in cells in beige to show the duration of activities. Repeat lines/columns as necessary. 
Note: Use the project months/years instead of calendar months/years. Month 1 always marks the start of the project. In the timeline you should indicate the timing of each activity per WP. You 
may add additional columns if your project is longer than 6 years.  
ACTIVIT
Y 
MONTHS 
M
1 
M
2 
M
3 
M
4 
M
5 
M
6 
M
7 
M
8 
M
9 
M 
1
0 
M 
1
1 
M 
1
2 
M 
1
3 
M 
1
4 
M 
1
5 
M 
1
6 
M 
1
7 
M 
1
8 
M 
1
9 
M 
2
0 
M2
1 
M2
2 
M2
3 
M2
4 
M2
5 
M2
6 
M2
7 
M2
8 
M2
9 
M3
0 
M3
1 
M3
2 
M3
3 
M3
4 
M3
5 
M3
6 
WP6                                     
T.6.1      
 
                               
T.6.2      
 
                               
T.6.3      
 
                               
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
55 
T.6.4                                      
T.6.5                                      
#§WRK-PLA-WP§# 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
56
3.3 Stakeholder engagement 
Stakeholders engagement 
Identify any key stakeholders outside the consortium that are required to ensure the success of the project. How will 
you mobilise them to contribute to your project activities or participate in these?  
Annex Letters of support to demonstrate the type and level of commitment already secured (if any). (n/a for concept 
note) 
For Nature and Biodiversity:  If your project (or a part of it) depends on support of the competent authority or 
stakeholders, provide letters of support to show their commitment to the project (needed for full proposal, n/a for 
concept note) 
While the overall success of ENERGIZE+ project fundamentally relies on the expertise and 
efforts of the consortium members,  as well as the engagement and participation of specific 
external stakeholders including regional industrial parks and clusters, industry associations, 
energy agencies, financial institutions, ESCOs, public authorities, local communities, investors, 
and others who possess expertise, resources, or networks have been identified as potential 
contributors to augment and enhance the achievem ent of the project’s goals  in terms of 
cooperative energy model capacity building, set up and replicability. Each of these stakeholders 
plays a crucial role in facilitating energy cooperation and collaborative approaches in various 
contexts, from value chains to local communities and industrial parks.  These identified 
stakeholders have the potential to make valuable contributions in terms of providing specialized 
knowledge, offering access to relevant networks or resources, and participating in cocreation 
and collaborative activities that align with the project’s mission. 
The above referenced key stakeholders outside the consortium are described below:  
1. Regional Industrial Parks and Clusters: 
• Importance: They play a central role in energy cooperation and can provide valuable 
insights into local energy needs and potential collaboration opportunities. 
• Mobilization Strategy:  
o Conduct targeted outreach and workshops to engage regional industrial parks and 
clusters. 
o Highlight the benefits of participating in the project, such as reduced operating costs 
and improved sustainability. 
2. Industry Associations and Chambers of Commerce: 
• Importance: They represent the interests of businesses within specific sectors and can 
facilitate broader industry adoption of clean energy practices. 
• Mobilization Strategy:  
o Establish partnerships with industry associations to promote the project and encourage 
member participation. 
o Collaborate on organizing events, seminars, or conferences to raise awareness and 
share project updates among their members. 
3. Energy Agencies and Authorities: 
• Importance: They hold expertise in energy policies and regulations, and can provide 
valuable data and insights for project analysis. 
• Mobilization Strategy:  
o Engage in collaborative discussions with energy agencies to ensure alignment with 
regional energy goals. 
o Seek their input on regulatory challenges and opportunities for clean energy adoption. 
4. Financial Institutions and Aggregators: 
• Importance: They play a crucial role in financing energy efficiency and renewable energy 
projects, providing necessary capital for implementation. 
• Mobilization Strategy:  
o Establish partnerships with financial institutions to explore funding options and financial 
instruments. 
o Provide them with detailed business models and ROI projections to showcase the 
viability of the project. 
5. Energy Service Companies (ESCOs): 
• Importance: ESCOs specialize in energy efficiency solutions and can offer valuable 
expertise in project implementation. 
• Mobilization Strategy:  
o Collaborate with ESCOs to develop and implement energy efficiency measures within 
the project. 
o Leverage their experience to optimize energy consumption and maximize cost savings. 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
57 
6. Public Authorities Responsible for Energy Policies: 
• Importance: They set the regulatory framework and policies that can either support or 
hinder clean energy initiatives. 
• Mobilization Strategy: 
o Engage in dialogue with public authorities to ensure that project activities align with 
regional energy policies. 
o Seek their support in removing any regulatory barriers that may hinder energy 
cooperation. 
7. Local Communities and Residents: 
• Importance: Their buy-in and support are critical for the successful deployment of energy 
e-communities. 
• Mobilization Strategy:  
o Conduct awareness campaigns and community outreach to inform residents about the 
benefits of the project. 
o Involve them in decision -making processes and solicit their feedback to ensure the 
project meets their needs. 
8. Investors and Financial Institutions (for Pilot Deployment): 
• Importance: Securing funding is essential for the successful launch and rollout of energy 
e-communities. 
• Mobilization Strategy:  
o Engage with potential investors and financial institutions to present the business case 
and seek funding opportunities. 
o Highlight the long-term benefits, including potential returns on investment and positive 
environmental impacts. 
The ENERGIZE+ project outlines an active strategy for engaging these identified stakeholders, 
which involves establishing effective channels of communication, designing an effective 
message to mobilise this interest (clearly communicating the goals and impacts of the project, 
their expected participation - call to action - and the benefits that they can derive by 
participating), then conducting targeted outreach initiatives (and A/B testing different messages 
as required to ensure we are successful) , and the organizing activities designed to facilitate 
their meaningful participation, ultimately strengthening the project's impact and outcomes. 
It is noteworthy that while the project's core success rests with the expertise and commitment 
of the consortium, the identified external key stakeholders represent a powerful external 
resource pool whose potential contributions can significantly advance the project's objectives.  
Their involvement will be pursued in a manner that aligns closely with the specific areas where 
their expertise and resources can augment the project's endeavours. This inclusive approach 
aims to foster a holistic and effective implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project. 
#@PRJ-MGT-PM@#
3.4 Impact monitoring and reporting (n/a for concept note) 
Impact monitoring, evaluation and reporting strategy (n/a for concept note) 
Describe your overall approach to monitor and evaluate the impact indicators during your project. Ensure that you 
include specific tasks to monitor, evaluate and report impacts in the work plan (section 2 of this template).  
Our impact monitoring, evaluation, and reporting strategy are integral to our project's success. 
We will employ a comprehensive approach to continuously assess the effectiveness of 
ENERGIZE+. Specific tasks are embedded within our work plan to ensure diligent monitoring 
and reporting, as detailed below: 
1) Task 3.5 Development of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to assess the 
effectiveness of ENERGIZE+ energy cooperation initiatives (ESTRATS)  (M1-M18) will make 
sure that the first phase of the project, we track the achievement of all the established indicators. 
This action will be checked and validated following the management structure by the 
coordinator (COO) as well as part of the regular follow up with the Project Officer from the EU, 
including also the review meeting. 
2) Task 4.3 Integration of online knowledge/training modules and definition of the 
ENERGIZE+ dashboard for monitoring KPI’s (IRIS) M18-M36: This task will follow-on from the 
tracking performed in Task 3.5, whereby tracking will be upgraded to t he new live dashboard 
deployed on the Digital Hub, and which will ens ure that the ENERGIZE+ KPIs are  closely 
monitored and met. All partners will be able to report KPIs in an easy connected manner , and 
will be able to review, check and notify of their progress or achievements. 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
58 
3) Task 5.4 Impact and KPI monitoring of ENERGIZE+ regional urban -industrial park 
energy communities (ESTRATS) M18 -M36. This task will be linked to the external KPIs 
generated from the replication activities and which will maximise the effect of the ENERGIZE+ 
energy community building . These  KPIs will  be reported in the Digital Hub on the KPIs 
Dashboard. 
The ENERGIZE+ impact monitoring and evaluation strategy is a dynamic process that is 
integrated into the project's workflow and which helps us track our progress, identify areas for 
improvement, and make informed decisions to ensure the achievement of our project goals.  
#§PRJ-MGT-PM§# #@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@#
3.5 Communication, dissemination and visibility (n/a for concept note) 
Communication, dissemination and visibility of funding (n/a for concept note) 
Define your target audience(s). Describe the planned communication and dissemination activities to promote the action 
and its results and maximise the impact  (to whom, which format, how many copies, etc.). Clarify how you intent to 
reach each target audience, and explain the choice of the dissemination channels. Describe the methods and indicators 
(quantitative and qualitative) to monitor and evaluate the outre ach and coverage of the communication and 
dissemination activities and results. 
Describe how the visibility of EU funding will be ensured. 
General Strategy 
ENERGIZE+ approach is to cross-cut our project with a digitalization strategy that will serve as 
a major contribution to the  cooperative energy knowledge space also after the funding is 
terminated. The centrepiece of this strategy is the co creation (with selected representative of 
our stakeholders), building and deployment of ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub, which will serve as a 
centralised ‘one-stop-shop’ for delivery and dissemination of the project results (and will also 
serve as a key post-project exploitation vehicle for the project). It will also be the key vehicle for 
the project communication dissemination effort, in tandem with a landing blog page which will 
be a continuous source of public information and news about the progress of the ENERGIZE+ 
project. It will also attract professional visitors from the cooperative energy value chain and 
those interested in establishing new energy sharing communities to register to the Digital Hub. 
As such, c ommunication activities will centre on building a  critical mass of registered users 
(Community & Network) in the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub, whereby the aim will be to drive visitors 
to the Hub whereby the initial ‘call to action’ will be register to the ENERGIZE+ 
community/network. Communication activities thereafter will aim at growing the Community and 
mobilizing participation in cocreation activities and other events organised by the project.  
Ultimately, the ENERGIZE+’s dissemination strategy will be designed to achieve the following 
impacts: 1) Reduce the knowledge gap for the actors involved , 2) facilitate and ease the 
establishment of industrial energy communities 3) identify and collaborate with similar 
projects (clustering), 4) availability of knowledge produced for the scientific community 
5) behaviour change on citizens in relation to industrial energy communities . 
In summary, and t o effectively communicate and disseminate the broad project results, 
and to engage stakeholders,  ENERGIZE+ will establish a comprehensive communication, 
dissemination and engagement  plan (D6.1, M4) , outlining all the Dissemination and 
Communication activities (in addition to the exploitation strategy planning) to be carried out 
during the project’s lifetime. It will be reviewed at mid -project (M18) to fine tune the 
dissemination & communication object ives and actions based on the analysis o f the defined 
KPIs and may be updated with additional actions and tools. 
Target audiences and tailored messages 
Activities will target a wide range of stakeholders , spanning from potential ENERGIZE+ 
end-users/adopters, the research community  gravitating around the specific scientific and 
technical fields tackled by the project, and civil society as a whole . The presence of many 
partners with high level networks in energy related topics like renewal energies  and of 
energy agencies guarantees project visibility in the EU and AU policy making sectors, as well 
as the identification of best strategies for identifying a long-term strategy for ENERGIZE+ future 
deployment.   
Key ENERGIZE+ target audiences are: Businesses located in the participating Industry Parks 
and Clusters ; Industry Associations and Chambers of Commerce ; Energy Agencies and 
Authorities; Financial Institutions and Aggregators ; Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) - 
energy consultants, utility companies, and key players in the energy transition sector, such as 
renewable energy installation companies, construction companies, and HVAC installers, 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
59 
among others ; Public Authorities Responsible for Energy Policies ; Local Communities and 
Residents; Investors and Financial Institutions; Research/Academic community; Civil Society.  
Communication and dissemination measures, channels and indicators  
The Communication, Dissemination and Engagement plan will foresee a wide array of high 
quality, complementary and diverse actions, including communication material (flyers, 
brochures, visual identity update), videos, organisation of site -visits, training workshops for 
companies and other stakeholders, etc. Different communication channels will be promoted 
depending on the target audience. For example, it is expected that the communication channels 
to increase project visibility to investment and financial e ntities will not be the same than the 
communication channels for engaging business from specific energy communities. The initial 
draft of the communication and dissemination plan will anyway include at least these measures 
and indicators to monitor the impact of the diverse actions:  
 
 
#§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§# #@CON-SOR-CS@# 
4. RESOURCES 
Fill in only section 4.1 at stage 1 (concept note). Fill in all sections at stage 2 (full proposal).
4.1 Consortium set-up  
Consortium cooperation and division of roles (if applicable)  
Describe the consortium composition. How will all the partners together bring the necessary expertise?  
In what way does each of the participants contribute to the project? Show that each has a  valid role and adequate 
resources to fulfil that role.  
For stage 2 (full proposal), f ill out the Participant information (annex) with more details on the participants and their 
project teams (key staff). 
Uniting public and private entities throughout Europe and fostering energy cooperation among 
participants spanning the entire European industrial sector is crucial for removing barriers that 
hinder energy collaborative approaches needed to identify, investigate, and validate innovative 
business models and financial frameworks to effectively respond to the existing energy crisis 
and invest in a greater extent in energy efficiency and renewable energies.  

Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
60 
The ENERGIZE+ project has brought together an exceptional consortium comprising 8 
organizations from 5 different European countries (Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Italy and  
Spain). 
ENERGIZE+ conjoins the combined expertise and capabilities of a consortium comprising 
partners with industrial excellence in their respective fields. This consortium encompasses  1 
pan European Association of Energy agencies (FEDARENE) and 2  regional energy agency 
partners (ICAEN - EAZK), which will support the direct dialogue among relevant stakeholders 
across participating regions. 1 research centre (EUKU), experience in the energy sector and 
coordination of EU projects, alongside 5 technology and consultancy SMEs (IRIS -ESTRATS 
– 3OC – ENGREEN - SYM) which will bring the experience and agility on the business 2 
business energy sector to ensure success on the project implementation and assurance of the 
expected KPIs , moreover such partners has previous experience d in energy communities 
deployment which would help the ambition of the project. 
The consortium is led b y IRIS, an experienced technology and engineering company that is 
pioneering in the Industry 4.0 and digitalisation space. In addition to leading the project (based 
on their successful track record in Project Coordination roles in collaborative R&D projects in 
FP7, H2020 and Horizon Europe), IRIS will also lead the development of the Digital Hub in 
WP4, whereby they will mobilised their experienced digital team who have successfully built 
community based and collaborative platforms in the past, and also have expertise in the design 
of effective business models for platform continuity in the post-project. 
.
 
Figure 2: Consortium EU map 
#§CON-SOR-CS§# #@PRJ-MGT-PM@#
4.2 Project management (n/a for concept note) 
Project management, quality assurance and monitoring of progress (n/a for concept note) 
Describe the management structures and decision-making mechanisms within the consortium. Explain how decisions 
will be taken and how regular and effective communication will be ensured.  
Describe the measures and methods planned to ensure good quality, monitoring, planning and control of project 
implementation. 

Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
61 
The project features a fit-for-purpose management structure designed to guarantee effective 
oversight, decision making and governance,  as well as monitoring, planning, and control of 
project execution. The central coordination of the project falls under the responsibility of IRIS, 
the designated Project Coordinator (COO). The COO will be supported by a Project Steering 
Committee (PCS) that has been established, consisting of representatives from each of the 
project partners, in order to decentralise governance and to give all partners a voice in the 
strategic running of the project . The ultimate goal is to foster a balanced decision -making 
process and ensure the efficient management of diverse aspects of the project.  
In relation to the executive management of the project, each WP Leader will be responsible for 
the effective execution of their WP and all the tasks within. In addition, v arious measures and 
methods have been established in collaboration with the consortium to facilitate and oversee 
the execution of the tasks for each WP. These monitoring of progress procedures include:  
1. Use of the GANTT chart as a reference and to benchmark progress against the GANTT 
2. Conduct monthly remote management meetings (chaired by the Coordinator and involved 
all WP Leaders), reporting progress and action points. 
3. Arrangement of four presential general project partnership meetings held in the respective 
countries of the regional pilots. 
4. Creation of an extensive internal communication plan  that will encompass the entire 
duration of the projects , and will also foster effective engagement between the inter -
dependent WPs and tasks. 
5. Establishment of a project legacy plan to ensure thorough planning for the exploitation of 
outcomes, even after the conclusion of the project. 
In relation to project meetings (be they remote, hybrid or on-site), all meetings will have a clear 
agenda, participants list and will be documented for public record (minutes of the key 
statements, actions and issues, as well as any decisions that have been taken). Each meeting 
will have clear roles defined (Meeting Leader, Recorder and Members/Participants). These 
meetings are crafted to oversee each stage of implementation  and plan for the next stage, 
foster consistent reporting, facilitate prompt intern al communication with all consortium 
partners, and assist in the identification and analysis of risks for swift resolution as required.  
Furthermore, the consortium plan outlines detailed guidelines and strategies  (that will be 
delivered to all partners in the Project Management Handbook) for the successful execution of 
the project, providing a structured framework and encompassing comprehensive 
implementation guidelines to offer resolutions and ensure adherence to deadlines, ensuring 
equitable execution of the tasks outlined in Work Package 1, Task 1.2. 
Finally, the Impact Report (IR) and Progress Report (PR) assess the project's Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) and provide a technical update on project activities, by Work Package 1, Task 
1.3. With this, the alignment with the projected outcomes of the project is continually supervised 
throughout its duration and, additionally, the information feeds into the periodic reports 
mandated by the European Commission.
4.3 Green management (n/a for concept note)  
Green management (n/a for concept note) 
Describe the measures proposed to reduce the environmental impact of your project, for example through the use of 
green procurement, environmental management systems, etc. 
We have designed a series of measures underpinned by green management principles to 
ensure we reduce the environmental footprint of our project,  contribute to sustainability goals 
while successfully achieving the project objectives, as follows: 
1. Sustainable Procurement: When developing the project management plan (Task 1.2) and 
implementing the project,  we will  consider green procurement practices  and in particular 
Sustainable Procurement (which will be documented in the Project Management Handbook). 
The purchase of environmentally friendly and sustainable products and services  will be 
prioritised. This may include sourcing energy -efficient technologies and using recycled or 
sustainable materials for project activities. 
2. Resource Efficiency  and Carbon Emissions reduction : The project is committed to 
optimizing the use of resources, including energy, materials, and manpower, to minimize 
waste and reduce the project's environmental impact. In order to avoid extra costs, time and 
resources on travelling, where possible and meaningful online meetings will be encouraged, 
which will also have a tangible impact for CO2 emissions reduction. Moreover, a paperless 
policy will be adopted in as much as possible for all internal management aspects to avoid 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
62 
the consumption of paper and printing consumables. This will be based on a simple but 
effective reflection of: ‘Does this material need to be printed, or can a digital format suffice?’  
3. Compliance with Environmental Regulations: We will ensure that the project follows and 
complies with environmental laws and regulations to minimize the project ’s impact on the 
environment. Each organisation will list the environmental regulations that it normally follows. 
4. Sustainable Dissemination:  When promoting the project and its results, sustainable 
communication and dissemination activities  will be considered, such as digital delivery 
formats, and in particular the use of the ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub and other online resources 
for dissemination to reduce the need for printed materials.  
5. Sustainable KPIs Reporting: Following the usual practice of LIFE+ Projects, ENERGIZE+ 
will report on the project's environmental performance, such as energy savings, emissions 
reductions, and any sustainable practices implemented. 
EU Funding Acknowledgment : As is contractually required, we will always e xplicitly 
acknowledge that the action has received EU funding , and we will also take care to 
communicate the EU project in a manner that aligns with sustainability principles , by 
emphasizing how the project contributes to the EU's sustainability goals and its positive impact 
on the environment. 
#§PRJ-MGT-PM§# #@FIN-MGT-FM@#
4.4 Budget (n/a for concept note) 
Estimated budget — Resources (n/a for concept note)  
See detailed budget table/calculator (annex 1 to Part B). 
A thorough budget has been defined to encompass the entire cost of the project work plan's 
implementation. The total budget is a sum up of the Total Personnel costs (81% of the total budget), 
calculated according to partner participation in each WP; Subcontracting (2% of the total budget) of 
BUFALVENT by SYM, and Other direct costs  (10,5% of the total budget), specifically, those costs 
associated to project meetings organization and hosting, and other goods related to workshops 
organizations. Additionally, overheads account for a 6,5% of the total budget. 
#§FIN-MGT-FM§# #@RSK-MGT-RM@#
4.5 Risk management (n/a for concept note) 
Critical risks and risk management strategy (n/a for concept note) 
Describe critical risks, uncertainties or difficulties related to the implementation of your project, and your 
measures/strategy for addressing them.  
Indicate for each risk (in the description) the impact and the likelihood that the risk will materialise (high, medium, low), 
even after taking into account the mitigating measures. 
Describe any barriers/obstacles and framework conditions (such as regulation and standards) that may be a risk for 
the achievement of the project’s objectives/impacts.  
Note: Uncertainties and unexpected events occur in all organisations, even if very well-run. The risk analysis will help 
you to predict issues that could delay or hinder project activities. A good risk management strategy is essential for 
good project management. 
Risk 
No 
Description Work 
package 
No 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
1 Changes in legal or socioeconomic 
requirements during the project 
could result in the need to make 
adjustments to the energy 
cooperation business model s and 
governance. (Likelihood: Medium – 
Impact: High) 
2 Establishment of continuous 
monitoring of the legal European 
framework, engage legal counsel, 
allocate resources for compliance, 
and collaborate with stakeholders. 
Moreover, the implementati on of  
regular reviews and proactive 
adjustments to business models and 
governance structures to ensure 
alignment with evolving regulations 
and conditions  on the energy 
cooperation frameworks. 
2 Lack of stakeholder engagement 
could result in insufficient input for 
service design  (Likelihood: Low – 
Impact: Medium) 
3 Address stakeholder engagement 
challenges by implementing a 
comprehensive communication 
strategy (that effectively 
communicated the value and benefits 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
63 
of participation)  and leveraging 
virtual feedback mechanisms  as 
necessary to ensure robust 
participation in service design.  
3 Delay in the deployment of the 
ENERGIZE+ Digital Hub (Likelihood: 
Medium– Impact: Medium) 
4 Large digital platforms can be 
complex to define in terms of the 
features and functionality that 
delivers the most effective use cases 
for end -users, with a key focus on 
User Experience. A mitigating 
approach is to work out from design 
screens and prototypes, underpinned 
by agile methodologies. The aim will 
be to en sure there is a functional 
MVP as early as possible. Any delays 
in releases will be flagged and 
communicated in a timely fashion to 
effectively manage expectations and 
to ensure disruption is minimal. 
4 The impact and KPI monitoring may 
be hindered by difficulties in data 
collection or inconsistent data 
quality. (Likelihood: Medium – 
Impact: High) 
5 Implementation data validation 
protocols, standardized data 
collection methods, and regular 
quality checks to ensure accurate 
KPI monitoring and reliable impact 
assessment coming directly from 
expert partners experienced in the 
sector. 
5 Inadequate i mplementation of the 
pilots or Pilot withdrawal (Likelihood: 
Medium – Impact: High) 
5 WP2 and WP3 will define 
specifications and requirements in 
order to make sure that the pilots can 
implement all the designed services 
adequately. Regarding the Pilot 
Withdrawal, each of the partners 
representing regions has a wider 
network of potential alternatives in 
case it happens. 
6 Communication and dissemination 
efforts may not be effective in 
reaching or engaging  the intended 
audience, affecting project visibility  
and stakeholder mobilisation. 
(Likelihood: High – Impact: Medium) 
6 Ensure effective communication by 
utilizing multiple channels, tailoring 
messages to target audiences (using 
A/B testing), and regularly assessing 
the impact of dissemination efforts to 
optimize project visibility 
7 Companies are not aligned with the 
business models 
(Likelihood: Medium – Impact 
Medium) 
6 The co-creation approach used in the 
project development should mitigate 
this risk. We will also conduct market 
research to identify target 
companies' needs, adapting 
business models accordingly, and 
implementing a proactive outreach 
strategy to engage potential partners 
effectively, specifically in each pilot 
region and later on scaling up and 
replicating to other regions. 
#§RSK-MGT-RM§# #§QUA-LIT-QL§# #@ETH-ICS-EI@#  
 
 
 
 
Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
64 
5. OTHER
5.1 Ethics 
Ethics  
 
Not applicable 
#§ETH-ICS-EI§# #@SEC-URI-SU@#
5.2 Security 
Security  
 
Not applicable 
#§SEC-URI-SU§# #@DEC-LAR-DL@#                                                                                                                                   
6. DECLARATIONS 
Higher funding rate (for Nature and Biodiversity; n/a for concept note) YES/NO 
Do you fulfil the conditions set out in the Call document for a higher funding rate (75% or 
67%)? 
If YES, explain and provide details. 
- 
N/A 
 
Double funding (n/a for concept note) 
Information concerning other EU grants for this project  
 Please note that there is a strict prohibition of double funding from the EU budget (except 
under EU Synergies actions).  
 
YES/NO 
 
We confirm that to our best knowledge neither the project as a whole nor any parts of it have 
benefitted from any other EU grant  (including EU funding managed by authorities in EU 
Member States or other funding bodies, e.g. EU Regional Funds, EU Agricultural Funds, etc.). 
If NO, explain and provide details. 
YES 
We confirm that to our best knowledge neither the project as a whole nor any parts of it are 
(nor will be) submitted for any other EU grant (including EU funding managed by authorities in 
EU Member States or other funding bodies, e.g. EU Regional Funds, EU Agricultural Funds, 
etc.). If NO, explain and provide details. 
YES 
 
 
Financial support to third parties (if applicable) (n/a for concept note) 
If in your project the maximum amount per third party will be more than the threshold amount set in the Call document, 
justify and explain why the higher amount is necessary in order to fulfil your project’s objectives. 
 N/A 
 
Seal of Excellence (if applicable) (n/a for concept note) 
If provided in the Call document, proposals that pass the evaluation but are below the budget threshold (i.e. pass the 
minimum thresholds but are not ranked high enough to receive funding) will be awarded a Seal of Excellence. 
In this context we may be asked to share information about your proposal with other EU or national funding bodies.  
Do you agree that your proposal (including proposal data and documentation) is shared with other 
EU and national funding bodies to find funding under other schemes? 
YES  
#§DEC-LAR-DL§#                                                                                                                                                                     
 
ANNEXES 
LIST OF ANNEXES  
Standard 
Detailed budget table/Calculator (annex 1 to Part B) — mandatory (n/a for concept note) 
Annual activity reports (annex 3 to Part B) — mandatory, if required in the Call document (n/a for concept note) 
Annex - Letters of Support 
 
Special 
Other annexes (annex X to Part B) — mandatory, if required in the Call document (n/a for concept note) 
 
HISTORY OF CHANGES 
VERSION PUBLICATION  
DATE CHANGE 

Call: LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
EU Grants: Application form (LIFE SAP and OAG): V2.0 – 01.05.2022 
65 
1.0 15.04.2021 Initial version (new MFF). 
2.0 01.05.2022 Change of document short name. 
Clarifications in the Important Notice (language, font size, concept 
notes, etc). Minor adaptation of structure (section 3.2 becomes section 
3.3). Minor clarifications regarding other sections. Addition of 
declaration on SoE. 
Consolidation, formatting and layout changes. Tags added. 
 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
1 
PARTICIPANT INFORMATION  
(To be filled in by the participant s and uploaded as part of the application. To add information for more participants, copy the table as 
many times as necessary. This section is not bound by any page limit. ) 
 
PROJECT 
Project name and acronym:  ENERgy coopERation for Growth, Innovation, and Zero Emissions 
in Industrial Parks — ENERGIZE+ 
 
PARTICIPANT 1 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS (IRIS) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
IRIS is an advanced engineering company based in Barcelona (Spain), which specializes in the manufacture of 
photonics and artificial intelligence solutions for the control of industrial production processes in real -time. Our 
ambition is to be the first choice for industries who want to transition their production models to Industry 4.0 and 
circular paradigms. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs more than 65 staff with a turnover of 
approx. €4M.  
Under the Visum® brand, we manufacture end-to-end solutions to improve quality and control production processes in 
a wide variety of industries. Our systems based on NIR spectroscopy, Hyperspectral imaging, Raman spectroscopy 
and Machine Vision provide real -time information and results. Visum® brings the laboratory to the production line. 
Moreover, we perform research into computational and mathematical sciences, software and hardware technologies, 
communications, digital services, and digital engineering across technologies and industrial sectors.  
We are leading the way in advancements in computing for enabling smart manufacturing thanks to applying Artificial 
Intelligence and Machine Learning techniques for data -driving industrial processes, and connecting upstream and 
downstream processes and the entire value chain. Our R&D Vision is to use our R&D+I capabilities and R&D projects 
to capitalise the knowledge, to create new products to the market and to develop new applications, to keep our 
competitiveness up to date and open new markets.  
As a highly qualified engineering company, with experience in the development of ICT solutions for energy 
cooperation and Cloud Solutions to support community building and stakeholder’s platform, IRIS will support the full 
deployment of the main project output: the development of the ENERGIZE+ digital hub. 
Website: www.iris-eng.com  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Mc Nerney OONAGH, Female, Director and Co -founder of IRIS. Hons. Degree in International Business 
(University of Stirling).  
She set up IRIS in 2007, with co -founder Colm Digby, with a vision to accelerate the transitioning of new technologies 
out of the lab and into industry. She is passionate about converting research and development into business. Over the 
years she has been a fundamental driver in the evolution of IRIS towards the development of spectroscopy-based 
advanced monitoring solutions and in harnessing the power of process data to provide industry with knowledge and 
intelligence. With a background in Business, she is a marketing enthusiast and a believer in the power of digital 
marketing and branding to help companies to reach new global levels. Prior to IRIS, Oonagh spent 15 years working 
with industry, technology institutes and Business Development Agencies in the areas of technology transfer, 
innovation, business development and industry foreign direct i nvestment. Expertise in new product development, 
leadership of applied R&D, commercialization, branding and marketing. She is a visionary and an out-of-the-box 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
2 
thinker and she supports a fearless and confident investment culture. 
Sanchez MANEL, m ale, Software developer at IRIS and part of INCUBIS team. Degree in Informatics 
Engineering and Diploma in Computer Systems (Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya).  
Having worked over 20 years in the field of information technology in different companies he has reported both 
organizational and management experience. He has great experience in analysis of customer needs and project 
management, as well as Unix and Windows system administrator for 10 years. As a software engineer, he has done 
many projects using several languages: C, C++, C#, ASP, ASP.NET, PHP, Java, Javascript, SQL. Starting MEAN 
stack. He uses design patterns like: MVC, subject -observer, status, representative, factory, facade, etc. GUI design 
experience in both desktop and web (responsive) and in conformance to web content accessibility levels. UML design. 
Great experience in MS SQL Server and Mysql databases. He has experience in CAD/CAM and artificial vision control 
quality systems too. He enjoys analyzing projects with both customers and team members in order to get the best 
solution. During the execution of INCUBIS he was part of the software team dedicated to the project.  
Torres ALBERT, male, PMO Manager & Project coordinator of INCUBIS. Masters in Industrial Engineering  
(Polytechnic University of Catalonia in Barcelona ). Postgraduate in Project Management ( University of 
Barcelona) and Postgraduate in Business Innovation (University of Catalonia). 
He spent 5 years as being member of the International Project Office of LEITAT Research Centre, where he deployed 
the knowledge and experience of managing and coordinate Public Funded Research Projects under the different 
financial International, National and Regional schemes: H2020, ERA -Nets, JTIs, CIEN, RIS3CAT, etc. sharing 
experiences with the top R&D performing entities around Europe. At IRIS, he is leading the PMO Office with a team of 
seven Project Managers. Moreover, contributes on business strategy development and commercial decision -making, 
sharing his experience in risk management and portfolio management. 
Poch ALEXANDRA, female, Innovation & Project Manager and part of INCUBIS team , Degree and Master in 
Chemical Engineering (Institut Químic de Sarrià). 
She is interested in energy efficiency, sustainable processes, circular economy and environment. She is a EU project 
manager with almost 6 years of experience in seeking funding opportunities for R&D and innovative project ideas at 
ZABALA INNOVATION. She has prepared more than 10 project proposals per year at EU, national and regional level. 
She has a vast knowledge on a wide range of EU programmes: H2020, LIFE, CEF, Innovation Fund, among others. 
She is experienced in the management of large EU projects in the energy and digital sectors. During the last 3 years 
she has been working at IRIS as Innovation & Project Manager and participated in the execution of some EU projects 
from different areas, tackling issues such as Industrial Symbiosis and Energy Cooperation. In fact, she participated in 
the execution phase of INCUBIS. 
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ INCUBIS: “An Industrial Symbiosis Incubator for Maximizing Waste Heat/Cold Efficiency in Industrial Parks 
and Districts” (GA: 894800; call topic: H2020 -LC-SC3-EE-2019). The role of IRIS in INCUBIS was, apart 
from coordinator, linked to the development of a virtual platform hosting a range of tools and modules 
enabling the delivery of the incubators’ services. 
▪ SHAREBOX: “Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources” (GA: 680843; call topic: 
H2020-SPIRE-06-2015). Development of an ICT platform for the flexible management of shared process 
resources that will provide plant operations and production managers with the robust and reliable information 
that they need in real -time in order to effectively and confidently share resources (plant, energy, water, 
residues, and recycled materials) with other companies in a symbiotic eco -system. It included an Energy 
Module specialised on energy-based symbiosis (including heat and electricity).  
▪ REDOL: “Aragon's REgional Hub for circularity: Demonstration Of Local industrial -urban symbiosis 
initiatives” (GA: 101091668; call topic: HORIZON -CL4-2022-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-10). IRIS role in this 
project was linked to the development of an in -line monitoring system to identify different types of MMPP 
waste coming from the packaging sector.  
▪ ISH4C: “Sustainable Circular Economy Transition From Industrial Symbiosis to Hubs for Circularity” (GA 
signature process; call topic: HORIZON -CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-37) IRIS role in this project is 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
3 
building a user-friendly, scalable and adaptable digital collaboration platform for circularity hubs.  
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 2 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): Institut Català d’Energia (ICAEN) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
The Catalan Institute for Energy (ICAEN) is the entity of the Government of Catalonia responsible for developing and 
carrying out the Catalan energy policy, especially in the field of energy efficiency and renewable energy. 
The mission of the energy policy of the Government of Catalonia is to achieve an economy and a society of low 
energy intensity and low carbon emission, innovative, competitive , and sustainable in line with the European 
objectives. 
ICAEN develops programs to promote RES and energy efficiency in all economic sectors: industry, transport, primary 
and buildings. ICAEN is in charge of buildings Energy Performance Certification in Catalonia and leads the Energy 
Efficiency Plan of the Catalan Government buildings. 
In addition, ICAEN is involved and works jointly with the local community in the development of energy efficiency 
actions in municipal buildings, public lighting or efficient mobility. Likewise, ICAEN collaborates with other Ministries of 
the Catalan Government to develop transversal actions such as the National Agreement for the Energy Transition of 
Catalonia, the Action Plan for Energy Efficiency in Industry, the Catalan Strategy for Energy Renovation of Buildings 
or the Biomass Strategy. 
The action of ICAEN is completed, among other key lines of work, with the perspective and planning of the energy 
future, the commitment decided for renewable energies as a strategic option of present and future for the region, the 
effort to inform and train in the field of energy to citizens and professionals and the joint work with companies, 
organizations and professional associations, 
ICAEN works in many areas: 
▪ Promotion of energy efficiency and renewable energies in all economic sectors and citizens of Catalonia. 
▪ Advice in the field of energy to the industry, building, transport and primary sectors and citizens. 
▪ Energy statistics of Catalonia. 
▪ Catalan energy prospective and planning. 
▪ Integration and coordination of Catalan energy planning with other Catalan sectorial planning and policies 
(environment, urban planning, climate change, transport, housing, agriculture, forestry, etc.) 
▪ Legislative and regulatory proposals within the framework of the competences of the Catalan Government. 
▪ Development of sectorial energy policies, in collaboration with the different Ministries of the Government of 
Catalonia. 
▪ Management and coordination of the Energy Efficiency Plan in the buildings of the Government of Catalonia. 
▪ Promotion of a consolidated market for energy service companies under EPC model. 
▪ Energy Performance Certification of buildings. 
▪ Development of campaigns and actions of information, training and promotion in the field of energy aimed at 
both companies and professionals and citizens in general. 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
4 
▪ Promotion of the participation and networking of entities and professional associations in the field of energy 
in Catalonia. 
▪ Development of cooperation projects at national and international levels. 
As mentioned before, ICAEN leads and Coordinates the Energy Efficiency Plan of the Catalan Government buildings. 
The Plan is mainly implemented under an EPC -ESCO model. ICAEN has developed a guide for tendering Energy 
Performance Contracting with guaranteed savings in the buildings and has advised the tendering of different EPC 
contracts in several buildings of the Catalan Government. This project can take advantage of this knowledge and 
experience that matches with the main goals and tasks of the project. 
Website: https://icaen.gencat.cat  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Granollers JOSEP MARIA , male, Project manager in International projects , Master degree (Polytechnic 
University of Catalonia) 
Engineer by Barcelona’s Technical School of Industrial Engineering at Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC) and 
Master in Air Conditioning and refrigeration at UPC. More than ten years of experience in the field of energy services. 
Assuming different positions within ICAEN, as a technical manager in a program for improving energy efficiency in 
Catalan medical centres and as a head of Energy Efficiency Program for public buildings. Currently focused on 
specific projects in developing strategies to foster energy renovation in Catalan buildings  
Chàfer MARTA Marta, female, International action technician, PhD (University of Perugia and the University of 
Lleida) 
PhD (2021) in engineering by a Joint PhD between the University of Perugia and the University of Lleida. Architect 
(2017) at the University of Rovira i Virgili, and Building Engineer (2010) at the University of Lleida. During the PhD 
also collaborated in the EU project HYBUILD (H2020), which developed two innovative compact hybrid 
electrical/thermal storage systems for stand -alone and district-connected buildings. Participated in other national and 
local projects. Co-author in the IPCC Working group III in chapter 9 of Buildings. Since 2022 joining ICAEN, the work 
is focused on two EU projects: TIMEPAC and ePLANET (H202 0). The first is regarding the future and enhanced EPC 
of buildings, and the second aims to facilitate the adoption of coordinated energy transition actions by the European 
public sector. 
Escursell ORIOL, male, International action technician, PhD (University of Bath) 
Environmental Scientist by the Autonomous University of Barcelona, with a master in Renewable Energies and 
Sustainability by the University of Barcelona, and a PhD under the centre for Sustainable Chemical Technologies of 
the University of Bath sponsored by the FIRE Marie Curie fellowship and the company Tetra Pak. The PhD analyzed 
an industrial food process to improve its sustainability and analyse any trade -off derived from the changes in the 
process. Since joining Institut Català d’Energia  (Government of Catalonia) in 2021 his work has focused on 
implementing a combined repository of building information, energy efficiency actions, and energy consumption, along 
with several functionalities for energy savings quantification and energy efficiency investments planning all under the 
projects BIGG and EN-TRACK (HORIZON 2020).  
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ Towards innovative methods for energy performance assessment and certification of buildings - 
TIMEPAC 
Rationale: Project based on exploring the potential of energy certification 
Data generated in the overall energy performance certification process, from generation to storage, analysis 
and exploitation, and throughout all the building lifecycle (design-construction-operation) 
Buildings as part of a built environment, connected to energy distribution and transport networks 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
5 
Buildings as dynamic entities, continuously changing over time. 
▪ Building Information aGGregation, harmonization and analytics platform - BIGG 
Horizon 2020, December 2020 to November 2023 
BIGG Data Reference Architecture 4 Buildings for 1) collection/funneling, processing and exchanging data 
from different sources (smart -meters, sensors, BMS, existing data sets); 2) An interoperable buildings data 
specification, BIGG Standard Data Model 4 Buildings, based on the combination of elements from existing 
frameworks and EC directives, such as SAREF, INSPIRE, BIM, EPCHub that will be enhanced to reach full 
interoperability of building data; 3) An extensible, open, cloud -based BIGG Data Analytics Toolbox of service 
modules for batch and real -time analytics that supports a wide range of services, new bu siness models and 
support reliable and effective policymaking. 
These solutions will be deployed and tested cross pilot and country validation of at least two business 
scenarios in Spain (Catalonia) and Greece. 
▪ Energy efficiency performance -tracking Platform for benchmarking savings & investments in 
buildings 
Horizon 2020, November 2020 to October 2023 
EN-TRACK builds on an existing infrastructure enabling massive data gathering, making the data 
comparable and interoperable with other existing databases, analysing this data and offering relevant results 
to key stakeholders. This will support better (more informed, more transparent and faster) decision -making, 
contribute to the de -risking of investments in energy efficiency in buildings and facilitate process of closing 
investment deals. 
Enabling interoperability with most currently active databases and tools (DEEP, eQuad, EnerInvest, etc.) will 
lead to an unambiguous data exchange-based services ecosystem with low transactional costs. This is a big 
step towards making energy efficiency investments a mainstream activity of the financial sector. 
The EN -TRACK consortium is a team of 7 from 5 EU countries that includes data and analytical skills, 
buildings access, leading figures in the energy efficiency financing field, links to the key initiatives (DEEP, 
EEFIG, etc.), and professional communications skills. 
▪ ePLANET.  European Local Public Authorities Network for driving the Energy Transition 
Horizon 2020, September 2021 to August 2024. 
ePLANET builds on an existing infrastructure enabling massive data gathering, making the data and 
measures comparable and interoperable with existing local initiatives (CoM, Clean Energy for EU Islands 
Initiative) and regional/national plans, analysing this data and offering relevant results to key stakeholders. 
This will enhance decision -making -more informed, more transparent and faster decisions -, contributing to 
improved monitoring and verification schemes. Enabling harmonisation of plans and interoperability across 
the local and regional authorities to joint application of ETM favouring a more efficient use of public spending. 
ePLANET will develop a proof of concept over three regional pilots (Girona, Crete and Zlín regions), to 
ensure the correct deployment of developed tools and to fit the real needs of public authorities in the energy 
transition. The project will leverage existing initiatives (CoM and ManagEnergy) in which the project partners 
have strong influence (ICLEI and FED in particular). 
▪ Energy Efficiency with Performance Guarantees in Private and Public Sector — GuarantEE.  
Horizon 2020-EE-2015 – grant agreement number 696040.  
Within guarantEE, 14 experienced partners will develop innovative business and financing models for 
performance-based ESCO projects. For rented facilities, the aim is to develop and test solutions adequately 
sharing costs and benefits between user, building owner and ESCO (triple-win approach).  
With a special focus on private sector. 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
6 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 3 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): Estrats Consultoria Estratègica, societat limitada (ESTRATS) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
ESTRATS is an engineering consultancy specialized in the design of innovative solutions for sustainable energy 
transitions. Based near Barcelona (Spain), we foster innovation to empower companies, public authorities and citizens 
from all around Europe on energy transition and climate resilience. Our holistic approach is based on tackling 
technical, social and strategic aspects in parallel to find the most social and environmentally sustainable solution 
facing any specific challenge.  
We offer the following services: 
▪ Technical consultancy: climate positive buildings, energy communities, renewable energy sources, zero -
emission buildings. Energy assessments, energy simulations & monitoring.  
▪ Strategic consultancy: definition of energy transition and climate adaptation plans for local and regional 
authorities, mapping of energy resources, definition of innovative services and business models in the 
building and energy sectors, energy transition and sustainable urban planning, definition and deployment of 
innovative solutions for urban environments including viability assessments. 
▪ Social engagement: Capacity building activities, co -design strategies, awareness raising strategies. 
Communication and engagement with the community and stakeholders. Special focus in rural communities’ 
engagement strategies.  
▪ Scientific communication: identification, sharing and dissemination of innovative and interesting outcomes, 
with a clear scientific perspective.  
Our team has a diverse blend of expertise, stemming from various disciplines such as engineering, research, and 
communication. It possesses substantial technical and strategic knowledge in the realms of energy transition and 
sustainability in the built environment, energy efficiency in buildings, renewable energy, energy communities, user 
engagement strategies and scientific dissemination.  
Website: www.estrats.cat  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Barrachina Salleras  OLGA, Female, expert, MSc Industrial Engineer (ETSEIB, Polytechnic University of 
Catalonia) and MSc Energy efficiency and renewable energy (ETSEIT, Polytechnic University of Catalonia) 
Expert in the field of energy and sustainability in buildings and urban environments. She has always pursued her 
professional career in the energy efficiency field, with almost 20 years of expertise. She started working on the 
buildings energy efficiency sector, but the last 10 years she has specialized on consultancy, engineering and 
innovation around sustainable and healthy built environments. Part of her work has focused on the  design and 
promotion of innovative energy and environmental strategies to foster energy transition combining technical, strategic, 
communication and participatory skills. 
She has developed l arge skills in Energy Transition strategies, being involved in the definition of several SECAP 
(Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan) for Spanish towns, performing different tasks from the first mapping of 
the available resources to the final creation of energy communities. Some of them are: Renteria (Bask country) (2021 -
2022), Sant Pere de Torelló (Catalonia) (2020 -2021), Albons (Catalonia) (2020 -2021) and Prats de Lluçanès 
(Catalonia) (2020-2021). She has also participated on the design of the solut ions for Santander city Strategy Plan for 
2055. (Cantabria- Spain-2022) 
She has managed the AIGUASOL’s company communication strategy (2019-2022), where among other materials she 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
7 
led the preparation of specific communication campaigns for the promotion of energy communities, energy efficiency 
or energy efficiency business models , among others . She was responsible for the scientific communication and 
dissemination of NanoSen-AQM project (Interreg SUDOE, 2018-2021). She has also been involved in the definition of 
communication tasks for projects ProGETonE (H2020, 2017-2022) and ePLANET (H2020, 2021-2024). 
Among the most relevant projects related with energy communities she has worked on are VILAWATT (2016 -2020), 
with the co -creation of the innovative UIA project, and developing (through deep energy renovation studies) and 
deploying (Capacity building and engagement) the energy community. She co-leaded the definition and deployment of 
the Energy Community of Mataró city (2019), focused mainly on the energy poverty citizens. In 2020 was on the team 
that defined the guidelines for “Leader Ripollès “ to create rural energy communities in Catalonia (Spain) based on a 
practical example on the city of Sant Pere de Torelló.  She was involved in part of the communication campaigns of 
the JoinEnergy tool (2018 -2020), designed to promote, create and self -manage new energy communities. In 2022 
participated in the definition of a report with specific guidelines to create rural energy communities in different regions 
of Spain (project for the Spanish federation of Municipalities - FEMP). Finally, since January 2023 has been actively 
involved in the creation and management of a citizen energy community co operative in a small town of Catalonia, 
Sant Vicenç de Castellet.  
Verdaguer Rubinat SEGIS, Male, expert, MSc engineering (ETSEIB, Polytechnic University of Catalonia); MSc 
materials engineering (EEIGM, Institute National Polytechnique de la Lorraine) 
He is a senior consultant specialized on the promotion of innovative energy and environmental strategies to get a 
better urban & built environment. He has been working actively since 1999, combining engineering, consultancy and 
research activities around sustainability in urban environments. Since 2007 he has focused on the deployment of 
innovative strategies to promote sustainable (environmentally & economically) urban environments, including zero 
energy buildings, positive energy urban districts and energy communities.  
During last years he has also been co-leading the strategic design of innovative energy-related governance structures, 
like the Clustering Governance for public authorities (ePLANET project, 2021 -24) and the Public Private Citizens 
Partnership for the management and coordination of deep energy renovation strategies (VILAWATT project, 2017 -
2021). He has also co-led the definition of the Energy Community of Mataró city (2019), focused mainly on the energy 
poverty citizens. He is accredited as E nergy Expert Advisor by the Catalan Government (ACCIO, 2023) and is 
member of LIMA Association since 2017. 
He has also large experienc e in communication and dissemination activities, including leading ZEROHUB’s company 
communication strategy (2014-2018) and LIMA Association (2020-ongoing), and has been involved in the definition of 
communication strategy at AIGUASOL company (2018 -20). He has also been leading the communication and 
dissemination actions in different EU -funded projects, like ePLANET (H2020, 2021 -2024) and ProGETonE (H2020, 
2017-2022). He has also been co -leading the LIQUENS initiative (www.liquens.cat, 2015 -2020), an air quality 
awareness-raising tool for urban environments, including communication and citizen engagement strategies. 
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
Always with our holistic approach tackling the technical, the social and the economical aspect, ESTRATS team has 
participated with technical, community engagement or scientific communication roles  in different projects (EU funded 
and private) , including projects on energy communities design and implementation, energy transition and climate 
adaptation plans definition, amongst others. Here below, main roles of ESTRATS team on different projects: 
▪ ePLANET (H2020, 2021-2024, Nº 101032450) 
ePLANET project aims at facilitating and ease the deployment of coordinated energy transition actions by the 
public sector, using the most innovative tools in artificial intelligence and big data together with an innovative 
clustering governance to boost Energy Transition Plans at the municipal level.  
Roles within the project: coordinator  of the Communication and Dissemination work package  leading most of 
the Communication and Dissemination activities, including the definition of C&D Plans and the production of 
different videos for scaling -up and replication. Strategic expert co -leading the d efinition of innovative 
governance strategies of public authorities (clustering governance) for enhanced energy transitio n. Running 
capacity building activities for local authorities in Catalan pilot. The ESTRATS team is participating under the 
auspices of the LIMA Association.   
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
8 
▪ Development of innovative energy communities’ models (local funded, 2018-23) 
Strategic assessment for the creation and development of innovative energy communities in urban and rural 
areas, including review of success case studies and best practices, mapping of resources, and definition of 
roadmaps and action plans. Examples: Sant Vicenç de Castellet citizen energy cooperative (2023); FEMP 
Energy Community Guidelines (2022); Leader Ripollès Energy Community, with a focus on rural energy 
communities (2020); Mataró Energy Community, with a mixed public -private-citizens partnership targeting 
energy poverty (2018-2020). 
▪ ProGETonE (H2020, 2017-2022) 
ProGETonE project developed an integrated approach to tackle two important needs in existing buildings: 
safety upgrades to face future earthquakes in seismic zones and nearly zero energy consumption. 
Roles within the project: coordinator of the Communication and Dissemination work package, leading most of 
the Communication and Dissemination activities including workshops and thematic webinar’s cycle. 
Technical expert on deep energy renovation, including energy assessments for nearly zero energy 
consumption approaches, LCA and LCC analysis. Relevant role on the design of measures to overcome 
legal and financial barriers. The ESTRATS team has participated under the auspices of the LIMA 
Association. 
▪ VILAWATT (Urban Innovative Action, 2017-2021). 
VILAWATT promoted a very innovative way to foster energy transition through the creation of a Public 
Private Citizen partnership, managing residential deep energy renovation and energy community creation 
together with a complementary energy currency. 
Roles within the project:  Strategic expert, leading the definition and deployment of innovative governance 
structures, including the innovative “Public Private Citizen Partnership” initiative. User engagement expert, 
leading the citizen engagement and awareness raising strategies, including workshops for co -creation and 
involvement strategies. Technical expert leading the deep energy renovation strategy, including energy 
simulations, design of energy scenarios and validation of technical implementation. The ESTRATS team has 
participated under the auspices of the LIMA Association. 
▪ SECAP’s Spanish towns (local funded, 2018-2022) 
Definition of the energy transition and climate adaptation measures of several SECAP’s, performing different 
tasks from the analysis of the emissions inventory, the first mapping of the available town resources, the co-
creation sessions to define the most relevant actions to the final publication of the report.  Including Barcelona 
Energy Transition Strategy (Catalonia, 2018 -19), Santander city Strategy Plan 2055 (Spain, 2022), Renteria 
(Basque country, 2021-22), Sant Pere de Torelló ( Catalonia, 2020-21), Albons (Catalonia, 2020-2021) and 
Prats de Lluçanès (Catalonia, 2020-21). 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 4 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): Three O’clock (3OC) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
Three o'clock (3OC) is a French agency for social impact founded 2020. The 3OC’s mission is to create innovative 
solutions that effectively address real societal needs through the application of participatory design. The agency has 
worked in 15+ projects and has developed a powerful and well-established approach, combining in -depth user 
research with active stakeholder engagement. This process helps to gain deep insights into people's behaviours and 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
9 
needs, empowering all relevant and involved stakeholders to co -design and co -create innovative solutions alongside 
researchers and entrepreneurs.  
Our role in the ENERGIZE+ project revolves around the three core areas of focus of 3OC, which are Communication, 
Education and Awareness, and Business Model Design. Moreover, 3OC has facilitated more than 50 workshops and 
stakeholder events. The team members are certified in Climate Fresks, Lego Serious Play, and Business Model 
Innovation methods, which are integral parts of many implemented activities. These methodologies and tools will be 
brought to the project. 
Website: https://threeoclock.co  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Sanvicente ESTI, female, co-founder, Ph.D. in Energy and Environment. 
Focuses her work at the intersection of engineering with social sciences, with a particular focus on collaborative and 
participatory energy projects. She has more than 12 years of experience in urban -related projects and has been 
involved in more than 20 European projects under H2020. Before joining Three o'clock, Esti spent more than three 
years at LGI Consulting, where she supported the Strategy & Innovation business unit director. She also dedicated 
three years to developing innovation projects in the Bas que Energy Country, Spain. Esti started her career as a 
researcher at the joint laboratory EDF R&D - "Bâtiments Haute Efficacité Énergétique" in Lyon (France) and at the 
University of New South Wales in Sydney (Australia). Esti holds a Ph.D. in energy and environment and an MSc in 
Industrial Engineering, majoring in renewable energy systems. Beyond her academic accomplishments, Esti holds 
certifications in Business Model Innovation from Strategyzer and La Fresque du Climat (The Climate Collage 
Association). 
Glumac OLGA, female, Participatory Design lead, Ph.D. in Design from the University of Porto. 
Is a dedicated professional specialising in co -creation, public participation, and civic engagement. Olga leverages her 
expertise to drive social innovation in projects focused on ecological transition and the environment. She actively 
engages with EU-funded initiatives, playing a role in facilitating co -design experimentation in innovation labs aimed at 
co-creating and testing new solutions for urban areas and neighbourhoods. With her strong academic background and 
practitioner mindset, Olga is a catalyst f or collaborative problem-solving, working closely with diverse stakeholders to 
foster inclusive decision-making and knowledge transfer processes. Olga operationalises these processes through the 
strategic application of service and learning design methodologies, ensuring that the generated results are not only 
innovative but also feasible and scalable in real -world contexts. Recognising the importance of knowledge 
valorisation, Olga actively promotes the sharing of best practices and lessons learnt from par ticipatory design 
endeavours in academic and industry-related public events as a speaker and an author of scientific papers. 
Boo EVA, female, co-founder, Service design Specialist. 
She has 11 years of experience in urban related projects in the mobility, energy and construction sectors working in 
different companies in Spain, France and the United States. During these years, she has led +100 assignments 
encompassing strategy, marketing, innovation management & design of new products & services and participated in 
more than 20 European projects under FP7 and H2020. Eva has an MSc in Industrial Engineering, majoring in 
construction and industrial systems from UPV (Spain) and ESTP (France) and a Master’s in international business 
management and operations from ICEX (Spain & US). She is a certified LEGO Serious Play facilitator, in Business 
Model Innovation by Strategyzer and La Fresque du Climat (Climate Collage Association). She is an expert for 
Climate KIC (Energy & Mobility), EIT Urban Mobility and a pre -selected expert for the European Commission on 
Energy efficiency.  
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ RES4CITY (HEUROPE) aims to enhance the development of sustainable renewables and fuel technologies 
in cities by co-designing an innovative educational programme with stakeholders and promoting sustainability 
and circularity. Our role: set up and coordinate an Innovation and Stake -holder Network and raise awareness 
among students by organizing and facilitating Climate Fresk workshops in universities. Duration: 2022-2025. 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
10 
▪ ONEPlanET (HEUROPE) will develop a decision support tool and capacity building materials to help African 
Public Authorities and energy stakeholders to better understand the interactions be -tween Nexus sectors. 
Our role: Co -design of capacity building strategy and material in three case studies, engagement with 
stakeholders, design user experience of the platform. Duration: 2022-2025. 
▪ NEUTRAL PATH (HEUROPE): Positive Energy Districts in two lighthouse cities Zaragoza and Dresden, plus 
direct replication in three EU cities Gent, Vantaa, Istambul. Our role: Co-design of Climate City Contracts and 
design and management of the Climate neutral labs in the cities, engagement in pilots. Duration: 2023-2027. 
▪ D4RUNOFF (HEUROPE) will develop novel detection methods and sensors to improve monitor -ing of water 
management systems. It will also design a multi -criteria methodology and an AI -based platform. Our role: 
Leading the social engagement of the three pilot sites and ensure that the results of the project have an 
impact on society and achieve market uptake. Duration: 2022-2025. 
▪ ePLANET (H2020)  puts into practice via new multi -level clustering governance within the public sector 
employing the most innovative tools in AI and big data to leverage and exploit the available energy data to 
boost energy transition plans. The project will first develop a proof of concept in regional pilots (Girona, Crete 
and Zlín), with a subsequent focus on extending these tools and the methodology across Europe. Our role:  
Duration: 2022-2025. 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, pleas e describe 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 5 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): Simbiosi Simbiosy Industrial S.L. (SYM) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
Símbiosy is a consultancy company that acts as a facilitator in industrial symbiosis projects, providing territorial 
entities with the tools and the methodology to implement circular economy strategies and identify synergies among 
key stakeholders within a network (companies, public authorities, research institutions, etc.). The overall goal is to 
improve the resource efficiency and the competitiveness of the industry sector.  
As a result of years of experience facilitating industrial symbiosis projects, the team at Símbiosy has developed a 
methodology to launch and promote circular, collaborative projects, which serves as a facilitation/implementation 
guide addressed to any coordinating entity of industrial symbiosis projects.  
Facilitating and managing industrial symbiosis projects involves analysing the industrial ecosystem, identifying 
potential network synergies, engaging and building capacity of key stakeholders, facilitating collaboration among 
them, and creating a common action plan, which is always followed by a monitoring process for each of the industrial 
symbiosis projects. This ensures a proper comparison and quantification of the network performance.  
In the last years, Símbiosy has given support in the fist stages of analysis and definition of energy communities in 
industrial parks of Catalonia, working closely with stakeholders to build capabilities that may ensure their 
development.  
Website: www.simbiosy.com  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Kuchinow VERONICA, female, co-founder and CEO, engineer. 
Eco-entrepreneur, with more than 20 years experience in industrial symbiosis, recycled products and waste 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
11 
management. Before working at Símbiosy, she founded ZICLA and worked as Technical Director at ACYCSA. She 
holds an Agricultural Engineering Degree from the University of Lleida and has a rich academic and professional 
background in business management and design, innovation and communication skills carried out in Spain and China. 
She has been also President of the Energy and Waste Commission of the Official College of Agricultural Engineers of 
Catalonia, member of the Circular Economy Bureau of the Metropol itan Area of Barcelona, industrial sustainability 
Professor at IQS, Congress Curator at the Circular Economy European Summit, and member of various business 
associations and working groups in circular economy, such as the 22@Network and the PEIC (Promotion of Regional 
Smart Energy). 
Lluis ANNA, female, co-founder and CEO, engineer. 
Specialist in energy -waste-water synergies for sustainable grid solutions, Anna has been involved in different 
environmental public projects during the last 23 years. From project manager to company director, Anna has had 
different technical and managing positions and has developed an open and systemic view to find solutions for waste, 
energy and water management problems. Waste -to-energy approaches, biomass -biogas energy grids, and agro -
industrial synergies are some of the latest projects she has been working on. Anna is Agricultural Engineer and holds 
a Master Degree in Energy Management. She has been also Technical Director of the Energy and Waste Commission 
of the Official College of Agricultural Engineers of Catalonia, Circular Economy Commission Coordinator of the Reus 
Chamber of Commerce and Board Member of CMES (the collective for the new transition energy model). 
Santana ALVARO, male, consultant, engineer.  
Industrial ecologist and graduate in engineering in industrial design and product development. Álvaro is a junior 
consultant highly specialized in calculations and product characterization based on eco-design. With an education that 
includes a master's degree in industrial ecology and a degree in industrial design engineering and product 
development, has acquired a extensive knowledge in circular systems. During his formative period in Sweden, he was 
part of the Student Association for Sustainability from the university, where he collaborated on several projects for the 
community educational and also worked with an NGO. Later, he practiced for one start-up in London, where he put his 
knowledge in Life Cycle Analysis into practice (LCA) and other methodologies related to sustainability. Álvaro has 
been an active collaborator of Símbiosy for two years, contributing his expertise in industrial ecology and eco -design 
to many of the organization's projects. His dedication and knowledge contribute significantly to the success and 
effectiveness of targeted initiatives towards a more sustainable and circular future. 
Alvarez CHRISTIAN, male, consultant, engineer.  
Industrial ecology specialist, he is usually involved in the analysis of opportunities, definition of projects and new 
business models. Christian  is a dynamic and entrepreneurial professional, with a highly versatile profile. With an 
experience of more than 20 years, he has worked to help industrial players a develop sustainability strategies as a 
source of innovation and business growth, especially in the plastic and packaging sector. With a background in 
industrial engineering in electrical systems, master's degree in history of the science, MBA in Business Management 
and Post Graduate in Efficient Energy Management, Chr istian has participated in several projects that promote 
ecology and competitiveness in industry. In recent years, he has been an assiduous participant in industrial symbiosis 
projects, contributing his knowledge as a technical specialist in energy efficiency and industrial ecology. 
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ INSIGHT (Erasmus+): development of a professional profile (the industrial symbiosis facilitator) and the 
training curriculum necessary for it. This role is of relevance in the case of energy communities in industrial 
areas 
▪ INCUBIS (Horizon2020) Industrial Symbiosis Incubator that aims to maximize the valorization of waste 
heat/cold in industrial parks and districts. This project provides support to organizations that act as facilitators 
in identifying, developing, and delivering energy symbiosis opportunities. The project delivers a range of 
tools, methods, and services to candidate facilitators to help them identify and develop energy symbiosis 
opportunities and build capacity at all levels to achieve sustainable growth of energy symbiosis uptake. 
▪ Bufalvent (local project in Manresa -Catalonia) First industrial symbiosis project in an industrial park in 
Catalonia. One of the outputs of the project has been the creation of the energy community within some of 
the industries of the park, which is currently under development with our assistance. 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
12 
▪ Energy communities (local project in Barcelona’s Metropolitan Area) Dissemination and boosting of energy 
communities through a process of information and awareness raising campaign aimed at citizens and 
companies. 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 6 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): Energetická Agentura Zlínského Kraje, o.p.s. (EAZK) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
Energy agency of the Zlín Region (EAZK) is non-profit organisation. It is a regional energy agency established in 2006 
and 100% owned by the Zlín Region. EAZK was primarily established as an implementing tool of the Zlín Region 
energy policy. The Zlín Region is a frontier region with both agriculture and industrial tradition and a great density of 
settlements. There are 307 towns and villages (municipalities) there. The area of the Zlín Region is 3.964 km² with the 
population of 582.555 inhabitants (2020)  and EAZK also supports both the region and the municipalities to gain 
financial sources from existing funds to implement  EE measures and increase the RES share on energy supply in the 
Zlín  Region.  
EAZK operates within the whole area of the Zlí n Region which is identical with NUTS3 -CZ072. The EAZK is a project 
partner with a great potential to address various target groups as the agency provides energy management for more 
than 150 organisations established both by the Zlín Region and particular municipalities. 
Energy agency operates also as an independent advisor for municipalities of the Zlín Region in their process of 
development of their own SEAPS. The agency acts as a negotiator between politicians and municipalities on one side 
and consultancy companies, central heating systems operators and energy suppliers on the other side. Expected 
results include new/improved municipal Energy plans for increase of energy efficiency, and RES utilization, balanced 
and reliable energy supply. 
Thanks to its nature EAZK has the accessibility to all reliable regional databases and documents on the potential of 
the Zlín Region. EAZK also participates in suggesting and implementation of strategic documents and policies of the 
Zlín Region in the field of energy, environment, and innovations. Representatives of the agency are involved in the 
process of consultation and suggesting of national legislative documents and policies as members of various 
committees and working groups both on regional and national level.  EAZK disposes of a rich experience in the field of 
defining the needs of towns and villages of the Zlín Region  on both local and regional level. This experience has been 
gained during 16 years of agency activities when many conceptual documents both for region and municipalities were 
developed and implemented with considerable contribution of EAZK.  
EAZK is actively involved into the process of implementing the EU regulations into the Czech legislative framework 
which is currently ongoing. EAZK understands d eveloping the energy communities and related business model as the 
process involving more sectors, including public, private or citizens  and EAZK is keen to be an active part of setting 
the functional business models for energy communities with all the regional background and experience it dispose 
with. 
Website: www.eazk.cz  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Knotková MIROSLAVA, female, Senior Expert 
Miroslava has been working as a director of the EAZK since 2007 and she has an outstanding experience in 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
13 
implementing of 1 4 international energy and environmental developing projects, especially in the Intelligent Energy 
Europe programme but also INTERREG IVC, INTERREG CENTRAL , INTERREG EUROPE and HORIZON2020. She 
has altogether 30 years of experience in the public sector in the field of energy planning, GIS, and development of the 
projects in energy efficiency and RES field. She is reputable energy specialist and as a such she is a member of 
various working groups focused on energy and programmes supporting s ustainable energy on both regional and 
national level.  
Perutka TOMÁS, male, EU projects manager, economic expert 
Tomas has been working for the EAZK Since 2007 in charge of European Affairs in the regional and local energy. It 
includes the management of European funded projects as well as the follow up of all the relevant EU policies in the 
field of sustainable energy and environment. He has an outstanding experience with regional and EU projects 
management and implementation. He has implemented, as a project and financial manager, altogether 1 4 
international projects, especially in the Intelligent Energy Europe programme but also INTERREG IVC, INTERREG 
CENTRAL, INTERREG EUROPE and HORIZON2020. He has a very good knowledge of the  Zlín Region as so far he 
has been working for the Zlín Region in the field of strategic planning, energy planning and RES and EE project 
implementation for last 18 years. 
Vidomus JAN, male, technical expert, energy expert  
Jan has been working for EAZK since 2009 as the technical expert and energy specialist. With his technical 
background as an energy engineer, he plays very important role related to technical aspects of initiation, realisation 
and implementation of EE and RES projects as well as in energy planning on both regional and local level for all the 
relevant EU policies in the field of sustainable energy and environment. He has and outstanding experience with 
regional and EU projects implementation, he has implemented, as a technical expert, altogether 1 4 international 
projects, especially in the Intelligent Energy Europ e programme but also INTERREG IVC, INTERREG CENTRAL , 
INTERREG EUROPE and HORIZON2020. He is the  main coordinator of the energy management provided to all the 
organisations established by the Zlín Region and he was also the coordinator of the EAZK for the developments 
Energy concept in the Zlín Region. 
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ LC DISTRICTS 
The overall objective of LC Districts is to improve regional development policies and programmes in the 
areas of building renovation and construction of energy efficient buildings, creation and renovation of district 
heating and other urban renovation actions, in order to facilitate the transition to low -carbon districts and 
municipalities. The interregional learning process took place around three thematic areas:  
a) Information and assessment methodologies and services for the design and implementation of low -
carbon districts and municipalities.  
b) Information and assessment structures at the municipality and district level;  
c) Policies and programmes governance and management. 
▪ BOOSTEE-CE 
The BOOSTEE -CE (Boosting Energy Efficiency in Central European Cities through Smart Energy 
Management) project developed and implemented technical solutions, strategies, management approaches 
& financing schemes to achieve higher Energy Efficiency (EE) in public buildings. This was achieved through 
a transnational cooperation and using geospatial data, smart energy management tools and energy audit to 
facilitate the implementation of EE buildings. The final aim was to improve the governance of EE in existing 
public buildings (within Pilot Actions) and ultimately reduce energy consumption. The pro ject consortium 
involved 7 Central Europe countries, with 13 project partners. 
▪ DATA4ACTION 
The general purpose of DATA4ACTION was the establishment of a long -term data exchange models in 
sustainable energy planning, through a cooperation between public authorities and energy data providers. 
Long – term collaboration models were implemented through bilateral data exchange cooperation 
agreements and with the development of twelve regional observatories, representing more than five 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
14 
thousand municipalities. Data4Action put an emphasis on 4 activities: it improved conditions for data 
exchange, it mobilized key actors and facilitated their cooperation through the creation of new observatories, 
and it involved local authorities in the implementation and the monitoring of their Sustainable Energy Action 
Plans. 
▪ COOPENERGY 
COOPENERGY aimed to foster the development of collaboration models in sustainable energy planning 
between the regional and local public authorities to lead the transition towards low carbon communities and  
regions. The project mobilized 8 regional public authorities to work hand in hand with the local authorities and 
demonstrate their collaboration by developing Multi -Level Governance (MLG) models that support the  
creation of mutually beneficial Sustainable Energy Action Plans (SEAP). Sixty good practices on MLG 
models in sustainable energy planning were identified. Those good practices, together with t echnical 
workshops organised during the project aimed at strengthening the capacity of public authorities, supported  
the partners in the development of robust MLG models for the review or development of their sustainable  
energy plans. 
As a result, 11 beneficiary regions collaborated  with project partners to implement collaborative models at  
regional level in sustainable energy planning. 
▪ CEPREC 
The project Introduction of Regional Energy Concepts (CEP -REC) had the target to support the use of 
renewable energy sources and increase energy efficiency in Central Europe. As the use of renewable energy 
sources must be implemented mainly on the regional level, the regions are key actors in this development. 
Regional Energy Concepts brought many chances for a good development of renewable energies and 
energy efficiency. Within the project CEP -REC Regional Energy Concepts were elaborated for nine pilot 
regions in the eight countries from the Central Europe Programme, including the Zlín Region. 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 7 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): EnGreen s.r.l. (EnGreen) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
EnGreen is a consulting firm specialized in off -grid and grid -connected renewable energy systems, with solid 
experience in Europe, Africa and Latin America. Thanks to its research -oriented team, EnGreen has established 
during last years different Renewable Energy Communities in Italy becoming a leader actor in the sector. EnGreen 
has validated different financing mechanisms for making RECs profitable and efficient. Furthermore, EnGreen is 
currently testing and researching new technological solutions to be integrated in buildings and for improving energy 
efficiency. EnGreen is currently involved in more than 20 Ren ewable Energy Community projects, which can be 
leveraged for any research-oriented project. 
Website: www.engreensolutions.com  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Gambino VALERIA, female, senior expert, Construction Engineer  
Valeria is a Construction and Architectural Engineering with a PhD in Off -grid Renewable Energy Systems, thanks to 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
15 
she had the possibility of working on sustainable business modelling for energy systems. Her competences merge 
together capacities both in construction sectors as well as in energy sector. She has about 16 years of experience in 
the energy sector and she positively closed many different project, both dealing with technical and financial 
challenges. Her experience in profit and no-profit sectors led her to be familiar with public private partnerships and her 
academic background is helping her in identifying innovative solution to complex problems. She has on her track 
records different publications/activities related to business modelling and productive use of energy: i) RE -thinking 
Access to Energy Business Models ii) What does it take to accelerate investment in integrated WEF projects? A 
comprehensive analysis of Business models and financing mechanism for the development of the water -energy-food 
nexus approach iii) Productive Use Energy Business Models in Mozambique 
Tacconelli CARLO, male, senior expert, Environmental Engineer  
Carlo has a Ph.D. in Distributed Energy systems for Rural Electrification, and about 16 years of experience in the 
energy sector. In his track records there are many different experiences in energy related technical and socio -
economic assessments, larger part of these in Europe and Africa. He has active collaborations with many international 
bodies (WB, EU, USAID), with whom conducted different assessment all over the world. He is a recognized expert 
and evaluator for Innovate UK and lecturer for different e -training programms (teaching related to energy sector and 
minigrids).etc. He is now the promoter at EnGreen of th e REC division, which as launched more than 20 REC 
projects. 
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ Val.Zer - Design and settlement of Vallevignale Renewable energy Community in Abruzzo, Italy 
▪ LEAP-RE OptiMG – Design and implementation of WEF based mini grid projects 
▪ Ilumina Project  - Access to energy for local development and women empowerment in Mozambique. 
Installation of 200 kWp solar PV with storage, diesel backup and LV distribution smart grid 
▪ Energy efficiency for buildings - 20 confirmed feasibility studies for REC constitution in Italy, study ongoing 
and interventions on 45 buildings via systems revamping (PV, storage, heat pumps, thermal solar) 
▪ Business modelling in Mozambique  - Feasibility study for rural electrification options of 11 remote 
communities in Mozambique, including energy needs assessment, engineering, business modelling and 
assessment of the regulatory framework, environmental impact assessment 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 8 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): European Federation of Agencies and Regions for Energy and the 
Environment (FEDARENE) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
FEDARENE is the collective voice on the energy transition for regions and local/regional energy agencies. 
FEDARENE’s members drive the energy transition and climate action in their territories through ambitious policy 
development and strategic facilitation actions. Since 1990, FEDARENE is: 
▪ A leading partner for actors involved in local energy demand and supply; 
▪ An initiator of ideas; 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
16 
▪ A forum for promoting cooperation and sharing of experiences; 
▪ An information and advice centre. 
The federation counts over 80 members in 24 EU countries. Most members are local and regional Energy Agencies 
but an increasing number of regional authorities are joining the network in search of a representative thematic network 
on EU energy and climate issues. 
FEDARENE promotes the initiatives taken by its members at the European level but also brings the local and regional 
dimensions into European debates. It organises and coordinates, on a regular basis, working groups where 
participants exchange ideas, experiences and best practices. The FEDARENE office promotes local and regional 
energy transition programs and policies through its communication channels including a website (www.fedarene.org) 
constructed as a repository of solutions from across Europe; highly followed social media accounts enabling to reach 
and inform a large community of stakeholders; a bi -monthly newslett er ("Bulletin") informing regions and energy 
agencies across Europe; multiple publications, policy recommendations, briefing and magazines strengthening 
bottom-up dialogue and interregional transfer of knowledge.   
FEDARENE organises multiple capacity -building workshops and working groups (online & in -person) focusing on 
areas such as: acceleration of energy transition; project/program development and upscaling; energy communities 
facilitation; investment stimulation; integrated renovation services; energy transition narratives development; circular 
economy; climate adaptation strategies; energy data collection, sustainable energy policies and/or financing. 
FEDARENE is involved in numerous European initiatives and projects covering a wide range of topics including 
energy communities; peer learning on innovative financing; energy performance certification; energy & climate data 
collection for informed policymaking; renovation one -stop shops; low -temperature district heating; renewable energy 
communities; climate leadership; green hydrogen on islands; energy efficiency narratives and sustainable energy 
policies. 
FEDARENE is also part of the secretariats running 4 key initiatives of the European Commission: ManagEnergy, 
European City Facility, the European Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy and the Energy Communities 
Repository. 
Website: https://fedarene.org  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Bossio ÉLODIE, Female, Deputy Director, Senior Expert, Master Degree 
Elodie has been working for more than 15 years in the design and implementation of EU projects that aim at 
facilitating the exchange of knowledge and experience, and at building the capacity of regions, provinces and energy 
agencies to succeed in their energy transition from a technical and financial point of view. During her professional 
career, she has gained expertise in coordinating capacity -building and technical assistance programmes across the 
EU in many renowned EU initiatives such as the Covenant of Mayors, the EU City Facility and the Energy 
communities’ repository. She supports the director on the overall management of the federation’s team and activities. 
Pricken CLÉMENCE, female, Expert, Master in Public Policy and Human Development (United Nations 
University – MERIT and Maastricht University) 
Clémence has a background in European political sciences with a Master in Public Policy and Human Development 
co-delivered by the United Nations University – MERIT and Maastricht University. She then complemented her 
academic career with an Executive Master in European Politics and Communications. She has worked as a 
communication and project officer in the field of the circular economy and innovative resources management in 
European cities and regions at ACR+, for almost 2 years. She is now involved in FEDARE NE as a Project Officer in 
various European Projects on building renovation, district heating and cooling, and spatial planning such as 
HIROSS4all, RELaTED, QualDeEPC, IN-PLAN, and ConnectHeat.  
Watzak-Helmer MATTHIAS, male, Senior Expert, Master of Science Degree 
Matthias is leading the climate adaptation work within the FEDARENE team and has more than ten years of 
professional experience in the energy, climate, and environment sector, backed by a Master of Science degree in 
energy engineering. He gained a deep understanding of implementing and funding regional energy and climate 
actions ranging from long-term strategy development to the implementation of concrete pilot measures. He conceived 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
17 
expert knowledge among others in renewable heating and cooling solutions, energy efficiency measures and emission 
reduction and climate adaption strategies. He has overseen national and international projects with a focus on climate 
adaptation, spatial planning as well as environmentally friendly and energy -efficient solutions for cities and regions 
including MIP4Adapt, REGILIENCE, ePLANET, ConnectHeat, Urban Learning, klimaaktiv renewable heat, Smart City 
Wien framework strategy, Green Energy Lab Spatial Energy Planning, etc. Matthias is fluent in English and German. 
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy - Europe 
The Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy  is now the world’s largest movement for local climate and 
energy actions, bringing together over 10 000 signatory local authorities, as well as supporting organisations 
who strive to fast - track local climate and energy action and go beyond the EU’s 55% greenhouse gas -
reduction target by 2030. FEDARENE coordinates the central helpdesk of this European Covenant, providing 
administrative and technical support related to all steps of the Covenant process to local authorities in 
Europe. FEDARENE is also in charge of the liaison with the more than 200 provinces, regions and energy 
agencies, which are technically and financially helping local authorities to develop and implement their action 
plan. 
▪ ManagEnergy 2-4 
ManagEnergy is the European Commission initiative for helping  regional and local energy stakeholders to 
become leaders in the energy transition and to increase sustainable energy investments in regions and cities. 
Under the latest contract, FEDARENE supported the organisation of Master Classes (tailor -made 3 -day 
programme in Brussels, delivered by leading energy experts and targeting senior and management level 
energy agency staff), Expert Missions (providing know -how to energy agencies in the field of energy 
efficiency financing in their own region/city) and Networki ng Events (annual networking events are organized 
to increase cooperation, knowledge and peer exchange between energy agencies across Europe). 
▪ European City Facility 
The European City Facility (EUCF) is an initiative aiming to trigger investments in sustainable energy. The 
Facility will support more than 200 municipalities, local authorities and their groupings (from all the EU 
member states and UK) for the development of robust and mature investment concepts, through tailored, fast 
and simplified financial support, capacity building activities and related services.  
EUCF finances activities such as feasibility studies, market analysis, energy audits, stakeholders analysis, 
risk analysis, etc. through a lump sum of 60.000 Eur. 
▪ Energy Communities Repository 
The Energy Communities Repository is an initiative on behalf of the European Commission to assist local 
actors (including citizens, local authorities, and businesses) with setting up and advancing clean energy 
projects driven by energy communities across Europe. The Repository aims to increase awareness, 
understanding, and engagementaround the topic of energy communities. To this end, it will analyze existing 
national legislations, including enabling and supporting frameworks, for energy communities and provide 
guidance to the Member States, regulators, EU policymakers, and financing institutions based on ide ntified 
best practices. The Energy Communities Repository will provide direct technical assistance, online twinning, 
and peer-learning activities, as well as capacity-building webinars and workshops. 
▪ ConnectHeat 
The ConnectHeat project will develop an enabling policy framework for the development of community 
energy initiatives, aiming at decarbonising the heating and cooling (H&C) sector, in 7 target areas located in 
selected countries within a wide geographical spread (BE, BG, ES, HR, IT, DE, PT) and, thanks to an 
ambitious dissemination and replication package, also across the whole EU. 
ConnectHeat will overcome a major barrier in the H&C sector, where community energy has been so far the 
almost exclusive preserve of electricity, also because of a lack of comprehensiveness in the transposition of 
the RED II Directive in several Member States. Thanks to structural cooperation with key stakeholders at the 
local and transnational levels, and also thanks to the transfer of knowledge and best practices, project 
activities will culminate in the implementation of 7 real-life pilot cases of H&C community energy. 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
18 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
PARTICIPANT 9 (use same partner numbering as on Submission System screens). 
Legal name (short name): Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz (EI-JKU) 
DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANT 
Provide a short description of the participant, with an explanation on how it matches its main role and tasks in the proposal. 
As a non-university research institution, the Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz (EI -JKU) has a multidisciplinary structure: 
the inter - and transdisciplinary cooperation of the three departments of the Energieinstitut – Energy Economics, 
Energy Law, Energy Technology – enables a comprehensive and interdisciplinary analysis of the future topic of 
energy. New challenges require new approaches, partly with new and partly with tried and tested instruments. In 
particular, we pursue a holistic, multidisciplinary approach to the development of the energy system. 
The EI-JKU demonstrates significant expertise in the field of industrial symbiosis and collaboration, particularly in the 
context of the energy sector. They are key partners and leaders in a wide range of research and development 
projects, focusing on the active development of the energy system. Annually, the institute engages in about 100 R&D 
projects at both national and international levels, indicating a broad scope and impact of their work. 
Their projects include a focus on industrial processes and the circular economy, addressing critical aspects like 
energy consumption, the development of new processes, and enhancing energy efficiency. One specific project 
highlighting their expertise in industrial -urban symbiosis is the IEA DHC TS7, running from 2022 to 2025. This project 
underscores their commitment to integrating industrial processes with urban systems, promoting sustainable and 
efficient energy use. 
Website: https://energieinstitut-linz.at  
KEY STAFF 
Provide a short description of the profile of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the proposed activities. 
Simon MOSER, male, Key Researcher, Economist 
Simon Moser, a key researcher at the Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz, has a background in economics with a focus on 
environmental and industrial economics. Simon completed his doctoral thesis in energy policy and is actively involved 
in national and international projects. His research primarily explores energy market designs and models for the 
cooperation of market actors in a transforming energy system. His expertise encompasses several key areas, 
including process heat, waste heat, district heating, industrial decarbonization, regulation, and industrial symbiosis.  
Andrea KOLLMANN, female, Key Researcher, Economist 
Andrea is t he Principal Research Coordinator and a Key Researcher at the Energy Institute at the Johannes Kepler 
University Linz and have extensive experience with large -scale research projects, both in Austria and in Europe. 
Currently, she coordinates the H2020 projects GREENFOOT (#893858) and DIALOGUES (#101022585) and is a 
work package leader in the H2020 projects ENCHANT (#957115) and frESCO (#893857). She regularly publishes in 
the field of Energy Economics with a focus on energy decision -making processes of households, indi viduals, and 
businesses. 
PROJECTS OR ACTIVITIES  
List of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal. 
▪ The HeatHighway project coordinated by the Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz is a significant initiative in the 
EU Grants: Participant Info (LIFE): V1.0 – 15.04.2021 
19 
realm of energy supply, particularly focusing on supra -regional heat transmission networks. This project is 
distinguished by its use of multiple waste heat sources, standing out in terms of the number of participants 
involved, its interregional scope, and the level of interaction between different entities. HeatHighway has 
been recognized for its innovative approach, as evidenced by receiving a state prize, highlighting its 
contribution to progressing energy supply methods in Upper Austria. The project also  involves numerous 
cooperation partners and is supported by the Climate and Energy Fund, the Land OÖ, and NEFI – New 
Energy for Industry. A virtual demonstrator of this ongoing research is displayed at Ars Electronica, and 
additional information about the project is planned to be broadcast and published, further underlining its 
significance and innovative nature. 
▪ IEA DHC TS7 project , "Industrial-Urban Symbiosis," is focused on optimizing the energy systems of district 
heating and industry. Traditionally, these systems have been optimized separately, but this project aims to 
demonstrate the benefits of integrating them. A key component is the use of waste heat from production 
processes in district heating, which contributes to a sustainable heat supply. The project explores how 
industrial companies can externally provide waste heat when it's not used internally, provided the feed -in is 
economically viable. The goal is to showcase the synergy effects and potentials arising from the coupling of 
industry and district heating networks, thereby encouraging more extensive use of waste heat. The 
Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz is collaborating on this project to gather international practical examples and 
to determine how these industrial symbioses can be initiated, as well as the business models behind them. 
The project runs from November 1, 2022, to October 31, 2025, and is funded by the BMK under the IEA 
Forschungskooperation - IEA Ausschreibung 2022 program. 
▪ frESCO (H2020, GA# 893857): frESCO aims to engage with ESCOs and aggregators and enable the 
deployment of innovative  business models on the basis of novel integrated energy service bundles that 
properly combine and remunerate local flexibility for optimizing local energy performance both in the form of  
energy efficiency and demand side management. 
▪ eCREW (H2020, GA# 890362): eCREW coordinates and supports the roll -out of an innovative 
scheme of household cooperation in energy management. These are Community Renewable 
Energy Webs (CREWs), in which households jointly exploit household -level electricity generation 
and battery storage capacities and optimise energy efficiency and expenditures. The key purpose 
of CREWs is to support the transition of passive consumers to active participants in the local 
energy system through informed decisions and collective actions. 
▪ S-PARCS (H2020, GA#785134): The S-PARCS project, coordinated by the Energieinstitut an der JKU Linz, 
aimed at reducing energy costs and consumption in industrial parks, while simultaneously increasing on -site 
renewable energy production. The project involved a pre -assessment of seven lighthouse parks across 
Spain, Portugal, Italy, and Austria, revealing a high potential for joint energy actions. A consortium, including 
five research organizations, one engineering company, and one industry association, collaborated  to share 
knowledge on appropriate technologies, novel business models, and collaborative actions. This collaboration 
was geared towards helping the parks develop an 'Energy Collaboration Plan' and acquire the skills needed 
for lasting sustainable impact. The project ran from March 1, 2018, to June 30, 2021, and was funded by the 
European Union under the Horizon 2020 program. 
AFFILIATED ENTITIES / ASSOCIATED PARTNERS 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by affiliated entities or associated partners? If yes, please describ e 
the entity / partner, their link to the participant, and describe and justify the tasks foreseen to be performed by them. 
N/A 
 
 
HISTORY OF CHANGES 
VERSION PUBLICATION  
DATE CHANGE 
1.0 15.04.2021 Initial version (new MFF). 
   
LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 1          
_____________________________________________________________________________________      
 
LETTERS OF SUPPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS — Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses 
 
Index 
 
1. Economy Development Service of the Vilafranca del Penedès Council          3 
2. El Prat de Llobregat City Council               4 
3. The Slavičín City Council                 5 
4. The deputy governor of the Zlín Region for strategic development, tourism, and 
subsidies                   6 
5. Business Association of the Industrial Park of Bufalvent             7 
6. Business Association of the Industrial Park of Els Dolors             8 
7. Business Association of the Industrial Park of El Pont Nou             9 
8. Business Association of the Industrial Park of Els Trullols                      10 
9. Holešov Strategic Industrial Zone               11 
10. Business Upper Austria – OÖ Wirtschaftsagentur GmbH                                 12 
11. Ceramica Elias, S.A.                14 
12. Proisotec Energia, S.L.               16 
13. Ramon Caus, S.A.                17 
14. Array Plàstics, S.L.                18 
15. CNA Group                 19 
16. Granollers Mercat                21 
17. Texknit, S.A.                 23 
18. Barcelona Logistic Centre                          24 
19. AH-ENERGY, s.r.o.                25 
20. A.SPIRE Association                26 
21. ADEPRO                 27 
22. BTH Slavičín, s.r.o.                29 
23. BLAUFABRIC, S.L.               30 
 
 
Vilafranca del Penedès, november 14th 
 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY 
SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41, 
08940 Cornellà de 
Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Rosa Figueras Mas, in my quality of head of Economy Development Service of the 
Vilafranca del Penedès Council, 
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHN OLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-
CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transitio n of European businesses” and “Scope B: 
Fostering energy cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of of suppo rt to companies in the circular economy, 
entrepreneurship and improvement of business compet itiveness. In terms of circular economy and 
business competitiveness we are promoting strategies for the creation of energy communities.  
The ENERGIZE+  Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the 
use of renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of Vilafranca del Penedès Council, and 
will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation. 
  
In particular, Vilafranca del Penedès Council, is g lad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project 
and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project.  
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. 
We understand that this letter of support is non-bi nding and simply demonstrates recognition of the 
importance and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
 
MARIA ROSA 
FIGUERAS MAS - 
DNI 77307060N 
(AUT)
Firmado digitalmente 
por MARIA ROSA 
FIGUERAS MAS - DNI 
77307060N (AUT) 
Fecha: 2023.11.16 
08:37:40 +01'00'
3
 
El Prat de Llobregat, 9 November 23 
 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Ms. Esther Garcia, in my quality of publi c water and energy local councilor of the El Prat d e 
Llobregat City Council, 
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHN OLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-
BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of providing water supplies to the city through this public company, also 
providing rewenable, clean energy to its citinzens and companies located in El Prat thanks to the laun ch of 
the Local Energy Community, where the City Council has the leading role. 
The ENERGIZE+  Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoi ng activities of El Prat de Llobregat City Council and will 
align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation. 
  
In particular, El Prat de Llobregat City Council is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will 
participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to  development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the out puts of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities  related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to ca ncel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non-bindi ng and simply demonstrates recognition of the impor tance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
ESTHER GARCIA 
FERNANDEZ - 
DNI 47189155D 
(TCAT)
Firmado 
digitalmente por 
ESTHER GARCIA 
FERNANDEZ - DNI 
47189155D (TCAT) 
Fecha: 2023.11.09 
09:30:00 +01'00'
4
5
Elektronický podpis - 1.11.2023
Certifikát autora podpisu :
Jméno : Lubomír Traub, MSc.
Vydal : PostSignum Qualified CA 4
Platnost do : 3.6.2024 14:18:24-000 +02:00
6
 
Manresa, 8th November 2023 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Bernat Ladron de Guevara Esquius  in my quality of president of the Business Association of 
the Industrial Park of Bufalvent, declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in 
implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023 ” call 
topic “LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and 
“Scope B: Fostering energy cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of providing energy efficiency services to companies in Bufalvent, thanks 
to which one of the first energy communities within an industrial park in Catalonia has been deployed, called 
Manresa I·lumina. We strive to continue developing it and set an example to be replicated across the country. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of the Business Association of the Industrial 
Park of  and will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy 
cooperation.  
In particular, the Business Association of the Industrial Park of  Bufalvent is glad to provide support to the 
ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the 
involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non -binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
39370052D 
BERNAT LADRON 
DE GUEVARA (R: 
G60088044)
Firmado digitalmente 
por 39370052D BERNAT 
LADRON DE GUEVARA 
(R: G60088044) 
Fecha: 2023.11.10 
13:51:13 +01'00'
7
 
 
     
       
           Manresa, 8th November 2023 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Santi Serarols Beltran in my quality of president of the Business Association of the Industrial 
Park of Els Dolors , declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS  in 
implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023 ” call 
topic “LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and 
“Scope B: Fostering energy cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of providing energy efficiency services to companies in Bufalvent, thanks 
to which one of the first energy communities within an industrial park in Catalonia has been deployed, called 
Manresa I·lumina. We strive to continue developing it and set an example to be replicated across the country. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of the Business Association of the Industrial 
Park of  and will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy 
cooperation.  
In particular, the Business Association of the Industrial Park of  Els Dolors is glad to provide support to the 
ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the 
involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non -binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
39363156J 
JAIME 
SERAROLS (R: 
G64313653)
Firmado digitalmente 
por 39363156J JAIME 
SERAROLS (R: 
G64313653) 
Fecha: 2023.11.10 
14:06:10 +01'00'
8
 
 
     
       
           Manresa, 8th November 2023 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Sebastià Catllà Calvet in my quality of president of the Business Association of the Industrial 
Park of El Pont Nou , declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS  in 
implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023 ” call 
topic “LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and 
“Scope B: Fostering energy cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of providing energy efficiency services to companies in Bufalvent, thanks 
to which one of the first energy communities within an industrial park in Catalonia has been deployed, called 
Manresa I·lumina. We strive to continue developing it and set an example to be replicated across the country. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of the Business Association of the Industrial 
Park of  and will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy 
cooperation.  
In particular, the Business Association of the Industrial Park of El Pont Nou is glad to provide support to the 
ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the 
involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non -binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
39279191K 
SEBASTIAN 
CATLLA (R: 
G64930670)
Firmado digitalmente 
por 39279191K 
SEBASTIAN CATLLA (R: 
G64930670) 
Fecha: 2023.11.10 
14:03:17 +01'00'
9
 
 
           
 
           Manresa, 8th November 2023 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Xavier Padró Ros in my quality of president of the Business Association of the Industrial Park 
of Els Trullols, declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation 
of the ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-
CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering 
energy cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of providing energy efficiency services to companies in Bufalvent, thanks 
to which one of the first energy communities within an industrial park in Catalonia has been deployed, called 
Manresa I·lumina. We strive to continue developing it and set an example to be replicated across the country. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of the Business Association of the Industrial 
Park of  and will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy 
cooperation.  
In particular, the Business Association of the Industrial Park of  Els Trullols is glad to provide support to the 
ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the 
involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non -binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
39369820F 
XAVIER 
PADRO (R: 
G65560682)
Firmado digitalmente 
por 39369820F 
XAVIER PADRO (R: 
G65560682) 
Fecha: 2023.11.10 
13:58:49 +01'00'
10
INDUSTRY SERVIS ZK,A.S. 
Holešov 11.11.2023  
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
Hereby, I Radovan Macháček, in my quality of the mayor Chairman of the Board of Directors of the of Holešov 
Strategic Industrial Zone,  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS  in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-
BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies”. 
The Holešov Strategic Industrial Zone is a project of the Zlín Region and is interested in the ongoing energy 
transformation with the particular interest in energy communities. Within the industrial zone there is a 
technological park located, involving pro duction halls, laboratories, office and training spaces and 
background services for entrepreneurs in the industrial zone. The technology park is primarily intended for 
innovative and start-up companies that are looking for support and quality facilities for the implementation of 
their projects. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of the Holešov Strategic Industrial Zone and will 
align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, Holešov Strategic Industrial Zone is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will 
participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing a regional insight valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary, and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non -binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
Ing. 
Radovan 
Macháček
Digitálně podepsal 
Ing. Radovan 
Macháček 
Datum: 2023.11.11 
07:22:14 +01'00'
11
 
 
 
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41,  
08940 Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona                                                                     Linz, 09.11.2023 
 
 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. DI (FH) Christian Altmann, MBA in my quality of authorized officer of Business Upper 
Austria – OÖ Wirtschaftsagentur GmbH,  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-
2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and 
“Scope B: Fostering energy cooperation among companies”. 
Business Upper Austria – OÖ Wirtschaftsagentur GmbH is active in the field of company 
settlement and we thereby intensively strive to support sustainable energy solutions, including 
the efficient cooperation of companies. Business Upper Austria is an innovation driver and the 
first contact partner for companies for their investment and innovation projects. We help steer 
economic and research policy. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and 
the use of renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial 
areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of Business Upper Austria – OÖ 
Wirtschaftsagentur GmbH and will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim 
of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, Business Upper Austria – OÖ Wirtschaftsagentur GmbH is glad to provide support 
to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this 
project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps 
and Action Plans 
● Providing regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between 
the regions 
12
 
 
 
 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any 
time. We understand that this letter of support is non-binding and simply demonstrates recognition 
of the importance and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely 
 
 
DI (FH) Christian Altmann, MBA 
Authorized officer 
 
Unterzeichner ppa. Christian Altmann
Datum/Zeit-UTC 2023-11-09T16:45:40+01:00
Prüfinformation Signiert mit PrimeSign, einem Produkt der PrimeSign
GmbH. Informationen zur Prüfung finden Sie unter
http://www.signaturpruefung.gv.at
13
 
 
 
 
El Bruc, November 8th 2023 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Carlos Garcia Solanas, in my quality of CEO of the Ceramica Elias SA,  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-
BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering 
energy cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of fabrication of ceramic tiles and we are an energy intensive industry. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use 
of renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of Ceramica Elias SA and will align with the 
vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, Ceramica Elias SA is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as 
a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the 
regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non-binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
 
 
14
Your Sincerely, 
 
Carlos Garcia Solanas 
CEO 
Ceramica Elias SA 
Afores 1 
08294 El Bruc (Spain) 
www,ceramicaelias.com 
15
Cornellà del Terri, 8-11-2023
To: 
Mr. Albert Torres
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona
LETTER OF SUPPORT
Hereby, I Mr. Marc Masó in my quality of Technical Director of the Proisotec Energia SL declare our interest
in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project
submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting 
the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy cooperation among 
companies”.
Our organization is active in the field of energy efficiency and energy renewables projectes in Catalonia and 
Spain in the Industrial and Third sector.
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas. 
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of PROISOTEC ENERGIA and will align with 
the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.
In particular, PROISOTEC ENERGIA is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate 
as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern: 
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans
● Providing regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non-binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative. 
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you.
Your Sincerely,
Marc Masó 
Varés / 
num:17489
Firmado digitalmente por 
Marc Masó Varés / 
num:17489 
Fecha: 2023.11.08 15:10:07 
+01'00'
16
17
 
 
Folgueroles 
 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Guerau Carné in my quality of General Manager of Array Plàstics, S.L.  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-
BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of energy consumer industry. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of Array Plastics, S.L. and will align with the 
vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, Array Plàstics, S.L. is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as 
a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non-binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
 
Guerau Carné 
Array Plàstics. S.L. 
33940152H 
GUERAU 
CARNE (R: 
B60188638)
Firmado digitalmente 
por 33940152H 
GUERAU CARNE (R: 
B60188638) 
Fecha: 2023.11.09 
11:45:45 +01'00'
18
 
CNA GROUP  c/ Ter, 2 ▪ Apartado 9 ▪ 08570 TORELLÓ (Barcelona – SPAIN) Tel. +34 938 594 100 ▪ Fax +34 938 594 101 ▪ www.cnagroup.es ▪ info@cnagroup.es 
REGISTRO MERCANTIL, TOMO 34123, FOLIO 187, HOJA B 242283, INSCRIPCIÓN 1ª – NIF ES B62734983 REGISTRO MERCANTIL, TOMO 34123, FOLIO 187, HOJA B 242283, INSCRIPCIÓN 1ª – NIF ES B62734983 
   To:  Mr. Albert Torres IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41, 08940 Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona    LETTER OF SUPPORT  Hereby, I Mr.David Sala , in my quality of co-director of R+d  of the CNA group where Cata plastics belong,  declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy cooperation among companies”.  Our organization is active in the field of sustainability development by producing household appliances that consume less energy and reduce the carbon footprint to reach the neutral target . The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.   The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of CNA group and Cata plastics will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.   In particular, CNA group and Cataplastics is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  ● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action Plans  
19
 
CNA GROUP  c/ Ter, 2 ▪ Apartado 9 ▪ 08570 TORELLÓ (Barcelona – SPAIN) Tel. +34 938 594 100 ▪ Fax +34 938 594 101 ▪ www.cnagroup.es ▪ info@cnagroup.es 
REGISTRO MERCANTIL, TOMO 34123, FOLIO 187, HOJA B 242283, INSCRIPCIÓN 1ª – NIF ES B62734983 REGISTRO MERCANTIL, TOMO 34123, FOLIO 187, HOJA B 242283, INSCRIPCIÓN 1ª – NIF ES B62734983 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project ● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project ● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We understand that this letter of support is non-binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you.  Your Sincerely,    David Sala Co-Director R+D 
20
  
 
Granollers Mercat 
Can Muntanyola, cami del mig 22 
Granollers (Barcelona) 
Spain 
Jordi Táboas Suárez 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Jordi Táboas Suárez, in my quality of Director of the Granollers Mercat,  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS  in 
implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project  submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy 
Transition Call 2023 ” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean 
energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of  economic promotion of industries and 
companies placed in Granollers industrial areas. One of the main active areas is to 
promote circular economy focusing on energy , water and reso urces  vectors, and  
proposing and implementing projects and services which the industries cooperation 
enables the whole project or increase the economic parameters. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency 
measures and the use of renewable energy through the establishment of 
collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing ac tivities of  Granollers Mercat  
and will align with the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving 
energy cooperation.  
In particular, Granollers Mercat is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project 
and will participate as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular 
the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy 
Roadmaps and Action Plans 
● Providing regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of 
knowledge between the regions 
21
  
 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to 
cancel it at any time. We understand that this letter of support is non -binding and 
simply demonstrates recognition of the importance and support to the ENERGIZE+ 
Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating 
with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
 
JORGE 
TABOAS 
SUAREZ  - DNI 
46334802Z
Signat digitalment 
per JORGE TABOAS 
SUAREZ  - DNI 
46334802Z 
Data: 2023.11.13 
10:08:23 +01'00'
22
23
 
 
 
 
 
      Barcelona, 9th November 2023 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Santiago Bassols Villa in my quality of general director of the Barcelona Logistic Centre , declare our 
interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the ENERGIZE+ Project submitted 
to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy 
transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in pursuing the objective of achieving energy savings in warehouses, offices, and logistics 
centres. For this reason, it promotes technologies that enable the reduction of energy consumption and encourages 
energy audits so that companies can reduce associated costs. We also give support to all those projects that promote 
circular and collaborative economy, exploring also the idea of creating an energy community. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of the Barcelona Logistic Centre of and will align with 
the vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, the Barcelona Logistic Centre is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate 
as a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We understand 
that this letter of support is non-binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance and support to the 
ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
37666176L 
SANTIAGO 
BASSOLS 
VILLA (R: 
G60498854)
Firmado digitalmente por 37666176L 
SANTIAGO BASSOLS VILLA (R: G60498854) 
Nombre de reconocimiento (DN): c=ES, 
o=BARCELONA-CATALUNYA CENTRE 
LOGISTIC, title=ADMINISTRADOR, 
sn=BASSOLS VILLA, 
givenName=SANTIAGO, 
serialNumber=IDCES-37666176L, 
cn=37666176L SANTIAGO BASSOLS VILLA 
(R: G60498854), 2.5.4.97=VATES-
G60498854, 2.5.4.13=Acta de Fecha: 
14-02-2013 
Fecha: 2023.11.13 16:28:57 +01'00'
24
           AH-ENERGY, s.r.o.,  Zahradní 1312, Malenovice, Zlín 763 02   
 
 
Zlín 10.11.2023 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
Hereby, I Mário Holík, in my quality of the executive director of the company AH-ENERGY, s.r.o.,  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS  in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-
BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies”. 
AH-ENERGY, s.r.o. i s interested in topics related  to the ongoing energy transformation  with the particular 
interest in energy communities . The company AH -ENERGY, s.r.o. specializes in the operation and 
maintenance of energy equipment. The spectrum of activities includes comprehensive services in the field of 
energy equipment and engineering networks. Operation, standby, maintenance and repair of electricity, heat, 
gas, water, sewage networks and technological equipment such as boiler rooms, electrical substations, gas 
regulation stations, wastewater treatment plants, water treatment plants, etc . We provide above mentioned 
services also for the Science and technology park belonging to Slavičín municipality, wh ich declared the 
support for ENERGIZE+ Project as well. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of  AH-ENERGY, s.r.o. and will align with the 
vision of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, AH-ENERGY, s.r.o. is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as 
a SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing a regional insight valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary, and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non -binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
25
26
 
 
Albacete a 13 noviembre 2023 
 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39 -41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr. Pedro Jesús Sáez Cruz in my quality of president of the ADEPRO,  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS  in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-
BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of ADEPRO is currently developing the shared self-consumption project 
(energy community), and providing transfer to the companies located in the ROMICA industrial park, through 
the following actions:  
1.- Promote personalized photovoltaic solutions including maintenance, 
processing, subsidies and financing. 
2.- Extend and accelerate the use of renewable energies to the companies of the Romica Industrial Estate. 
3.- Promote the implementation of charging points for electric vehicles. 
4.- Collaborate to achieve economic and environmental savings for companies and the 
whole of society. 
5.- Increase the competitiveness of companies. 
6.- Jointly highlight the industrial, energy and sustainable component of the 
Polígono and its companies, supporting the promotion of renewable energies, specifically 
photovoltaic. 
7.- Advice on reducing polluting emissions and reducing the carbon footprint 
carbon. 
8.- Energy consulting to achieve: 
 Energy savings. 
 Energy efficiency certification. 
 Improve power depending on consumption. 
27
 Optimization of industrial plants. 
 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of ADEPRO and will align with the vision of 
supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, ADEPRO is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a 
SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non -binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
52527161Z 
PEDRO JESUS 
SAEZ CRUZ (R: 
G02302610)
Firmado digitalmente 
por 52527161Z PEDRO 
JESUS SAEZ CRUZ (R: 
G02302610) 
Fecha: 2023.11.13 
11:01:39 +01'00'
28
29
 
Barberà del Vallès, 14th November 2023 
 
To:  
Mr. Albert Torres 
IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS 
Ctra. d'Esplugues, 39-41, 08940 
Cornellà de Llobregat, Barcelona 
 
 
 
LETTER OF SUPPORT 
 
Hereby, I Mr.Xavier Torra, in my quality of Administrator of BLAUFABRIC SL,  
declare our interest in fully supporting IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS in implementation of the 
ENERGIZE+ Project submitted to the “LIFE Clean Energy Transition Call 2023” call topic “LIFE-2023-CET-
BUSINESS: Supporting the clean energy transition of European businesses” and “Scope B: Fostering energy 
cooperation among companies”. 
Our organization is active in the field of manufacturing of technical fabrics. 
The ENERGIZE+ Project will support foster the market uptake of energy efficiency measures and the use of 
renewable energy through the establishment of collaborative approaches in industrial areas.  
The project's objectives are in line with the ongoing activities of BLAUFABRIC SL and will align with the vision 
of supporting industrial areas with the aim of achieving energy cooperation.  
In particular, BLAUFABRIC SL is glad to provide support to the ENERGIZE+ Project and will participate as a 
SUPPORTING STAKEHOLDER in this project. In particular the involvement will concern:  
● Participation in workshops and meetings related to development of the Policy Roadmaps and Action 
Plans 
● Providing an regional insights valuable to the outputs of the project 
● Consulting the reports and outputs of the project 
● Participation in study visits and other activities related to exchange of knowledge between the regions 
The participation in ENERGIZE+ Project is voluntary and we reserve the right to cancel it at any time. We 
understand that this letter of support is non-binding and simply demonstrates recognition of the importance 
and support to the ENERGIZE+ Project initiative.  
We hope for a positive evaluation of your proposal and look forward to collaborating with you. 
 
Your Sincerely, 
39352357R 
XAVIER 
TORRA (R: 
B63455042)
Firmado digitalmente 
por 39352357R 
XAVIER TORRA (R: 
B63455042) 
Fecha: 2023.11.14 
17:23:44 +01'00'
30
Proposal ID
SEP-210996005
Call for Proposal
LIFE-2023-CET
Topic
LIFE-2023-CET-BUSINESS
Type of Action
LIFE-PJG
LIFE Programme – Application Forms (Part C – KPI)
Horizontal KPIs for all LIFE applicants (Mandatory to report on all the KPIs of this section).
Innovation
Is your project proposal developing,
demonstrating and promoting
innovative techniques and
approaches?
  Yes
  No
Governance
Is your project proposal improving
governance through enhancing
capacities of public and private actors
and the involvement of civil society?
  Yes
  No
Plans & strategies
Is you project proposal implementing
key plans or strategies?
  Yes
  No
Catalytic effect - Financial
Will your project trigger additional
investments?
  Yes
  No
Catalytic effect - Spatial
Will the results of your project be
replicated beyond its intended
geographical scope?
  Yes
  No
Catalytic effect - Thematic
Will the results of your project be
replicated (transferred) beyond its
intended thematic scope?
  Yes
  No
Catalytic effect - Societal
Will your project :
a) Contribute to the development of new or existing national
legislation, policies, regulations, incentives and voluntary
commitments?
b) Achieve a step-change in more effective compliance with
and enforcement of Union environmental and climate
legislation and/or in policy implementation?
c) Achieve a step-change in awareness and support of
environmental and climate matters?
d) Establish a new macroregional  or national model of
cooperation (networking)?
  Yes
  No
Rio markers for climate, biodiversity and air quality
Please indicate if your proposal:
• Has climate change/ biodiversity/ air quality as their
primary objective
• Has climate change/ biodiversity/ air quality as their
secondary objective and provide substantial contributions to
these objectives
• Does not contribute significantly to climate change/
biodiversity/ air quality
Climate change
Primary Objective
Biodiversity
Not contributing
Air quality
Secondary Objective
Clean Energy Transition – Specific KPIs (Please report on KPIs you consider relevant).
Primary Energy Savings
Please enter the Primary Energy Savings in GWh/year triggered by the project
Project-End Value
8
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
50
Unit
GWh/year
Submitted 16-11-2023 14:13:41 LIFECETKPI v3 Page 1
Final Energy Savings
Please enter the Final Energy Savings in GWh/year triggered by the project
Project-End Value
3.4
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
20
Unit
GWh/year
Renewable Energy generation
Please enter the Renewable Energy generation  in GWh/year triggered by the project
Project-End Value
3
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
10
Unit
GWh/year
GHG emissions
Please enter the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in tons of CO2 equivalent per year (tCO2eq/year) triggered by the
project
Project-End Value
930
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
4,500
Unit
tCO2eq/year
Investments in sustainable energy
Please enter the amount of cumulative invstments in sustainable energy triggered by the project
Project-End Value
10
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
50
Unit
mEUR
Legislation And policy
Please enter the number of legislation, policies or strategies created/adapted [to include sustainable energy issues] at any
governance levels due to the project
Project-End Value
3
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
10
Unit
Number of documents
Innovation Uptake 1
Please enter the number of products (goods or services), processes and methods launched into the market by the project
Project-End Value
5
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
10
Unit
Number of products /
processes / methods
Innovation Uptake 2
Please enter the number of real life implementation sites carried out by the project
Project-End Value
4
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
30
Unit
Number of real life
implementation sites
Skills
Please enter the number of market stakeholders trained with increased skills and competencies on energy issues due to the
project
Project-End Value
400
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
2,000
Unit
Number of people trained
Communication
Please enter the number of stakeholders reached through media and events during the project
Submitted 16-11-2023 14:13:41 LIFECETKPI v3 Page 2
Project-End Value
1,000
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
2,500
Unit
Number of people
Employment
Please enter the number of jobs created in FTE
Project-End Value
4
 5 years beyond Project-End Value
40
Unit
FTE
Submitted 16-11-2023 14:13:41 LIFECETKPI v3 Page 3
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)