2.1  
a) Unique contribution of project results to: (1) the outcomes specified in this topic 
Researchers and regulators understand the environmental impact of pharmaceuticals: The science-based 
impact of pharmaceuticals. This understanding can be used for informing, prioritizing and facilitating decision  
making in relation to the environmental sustainability of medicinal products and measures for reducing resource use, 
emissions and levels of pharmaceutical residues in the environment in keeping with the Pharmaceutical Strategy for 
Europe, the European Gre en Deal, and the Zero Pollution Action plan. As described we are adopting a holistic  
lifecycle assessment approach to the understanding of pharmaceuticals across their lifecycle- during: 
Production- discharge from manufacturing plants, as well as the energy and resource consumption and carbon 
footprint of pharmaceutical manufacture, use/consumption, and disposal, and fate and impacts in the 
environment). A key feature in ETERNAL approach, will be its holistic assessment of the whole system in  
relation to the impact of manufacturing a pharmaceutical: considering and assessing the environmental impact 
of each drug's life-cycle, from discovery through to production- also considering such aspects as plant cleaning 
and the entry of cleaning solvents into the environment - and formulation, supply chain and logistics and  
packaging. 
Use/consumption- Medicines also enter the environment through human excretion via wastewater. Current  
wastewater treatment plants are unabl e to completely destroy or remove pharmaceuticals. Consequently,  
pharmaceutical residues can re-enter terrestrial systems, spread to surface waters and agricultural lands, and can 
ultimately end up in drinking water, and build up in vegetables and fish. 
Disposal- Another route of pharmaceutical entry to the environment is through improper disposal of unused  
medicine in, e.g. toilets or sinks, domestic waste to landfills. 
The ETERNAL project will:     environmental hazard information to  
identify APIs and residues/metabolites that present the greatest and widest risk to aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 22 of 45 
 
 
and to identify the usage, lifecycle, fate and hazard drivers of risk for these highest ranked substances, considering 
releases through the chain of production, use and disposal as described above, and using life cycle assessment  
approaches to consider the incidental impacts of medicinal production such as solvent use and disposal dur ing 
production;       e ecotoxicity tools (bioassays) for quantitative assessment of the fate and effects of classic and 
-variable exposures as would be expected to occur in the  
e risk analysis, taking into consideration eventual mixture scenarios, and 
providing assistance in the implementation of pharmaceutical regulation. 
Public authorities inform pharmaceutical strategies and policies based on scientific evidences : The goal of  
ETERNAL is to take actions to reduce the risk from pharmaceu ticals in the environment. This requires the  
involvement of all relevant stakeholders along the entire life cycle, including Member State competent authorities, 
the pharmaceutical industry, medical and veterinary professionals, patients, farmers and the water industry, with the 
shared goal of building a more sustainable, resource-efficient and circular economy. During the project execution 
and linked to each case study, ETERNAL will generate different scientific evidences. To have a clear vision and to 
carry out the studies following the same rules for all case studies, ETERNAL will follow mainly the principles of  
atom economy, waste prevention, reduce derivates, energy efficient design, less hazardous chemical synthesis, safer 
chemical design, safer solvent and auxiliaries and design for degradation of green chemistry from DOZNTM 2.0 tool 
from Millipore. In WP4 studies to assess the impact of integrating new scientific knowledge into the ERA and LCA 
of pharmaceuticals will be carry out and to share with JRC. All this data generated will be integrated and managed 
by INLECOM to be correctly communicated to relevant stakeholders along the entire life cycle. 
We have embedded a series of strategies in our project approach in order to improve uptake of evidence in to policy 
and in future strategies. On the one hand, we will identify and participate in open consultation strategies of the  
European Commission and other strategy and policy developers. A good example is the consultation strategy for 
the evaluation and revision of the general pharmaceutical acts under the Pharmaceutical Strategy for Europe 
in the framework of Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use and 
Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 laying down procedures for the authorization and supervision of medicinal products 
for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency. This strategy is an ambitious, long- 
term project in the area of health, intended to make the Euro pean pharmaceutical system more patient - 
centred, future-proof and crisis-resistant, and to ensure that all possible views are well reflected and to ensure  
transparency and accountability, consultations with various categories of stakeholders are being held to inform 
 by capturing evidence and views from 
a broad range of interested stakeholders all levels of the value chain and the public, allowing them to provide 
relevant information on the problems presented and on potential ways forward. During the ETERNAL project we 
will identify open consultations in relevant policy and strategy developments in order to contribute. Based on research  
findings and experience in t he field of evidence -based policy making and strategy development, we will take  
references from successfully implemented evidence-based approaches, such as ROMA (RAPID Outcome Mapping 
Approach)33 that has been field tested through more than 40 workshops and training courses worldwide. 
In addition, we will also aim to improving the technical capacity of policy -makers through informative working 
sessions to inform them about the scientific evidence findings of ETERNAL (which we will organize through our 
Change Lab in Task 5.3.2). We will also dedicate effort towards the suitable packaging and presentation of our  
research findings and ensure their wide dissemination (also using social networks) to Public Authorities- European 
Medical Agency and Nati onal Medicines Agencies, Member State Health Ministries, Health Technology  
Assessment (HTA) bodies, Ethics Committees and national competent authorities, the Pharmaceutical 
Committee, and its Working Groups , Safe and Timely Access to Medicines for Patients (STAMP) expert  
group, among others- to ensure that the scientific evidence generated in ETERNAL is made available for use by 
public authorities so that it can be used to inform future pharmaceutical strategies and policies in the field of Green 
Pharmaceuticals. The cooperation with the JRC and the participation of partner Asphalion in the consortium will  
combine the necessary guidance, experience and pathway to engage with and disseminate to these public authorities. 
Researchers, innovators, and pharmaceutical industries develop and produce greener pharmaceuticals that 
are either greener by design, intrinsically less harmful  for the environment,  and/or use greener and 
economically more sustainable manufacturing processes to produce pharmaceuticals : We are mobilizing a  
research-industry-compliance cocreation process in order to innovate in the Green Pharmaceuticals field culminating 
in the scaling up of process innovations to quantified sustainability impacts and productivity improvements: 
Table 9- ETERNAL green pharmaceutical technological innovations and their sustainability impacts 
Pharmaceutical Process: HME (hot melt extrusion-Angelini Pharma) 
Product: Medicine containing Ibuorofen and/or trazodone 
Quantified Sustainability impacts:                 
continuous process will lead to the elimination/potential avoidance of various steps reducing from 67% (best case: comprising 
also the potentially avoided step of film coating) to 50% (worst case) of the current estimated energy consumption. *Information 
based on internal data (2020, Ibuprofen production volumes) 
 
33 John Young et al. (2014). Rapid Outcome Mapping Approach (ROMA): A guide to policy engagement and influence. London: Overseas Development Institute. 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 23 of 45 
 
 
Productivity Improvements: 
Design for Energy Efficiency: 
 
 
 
 
 
Improvement in the excipients and percentages will be conducted in WP1 and very high impacts expected 
Pharmaceutical Process: Discontinuous Synthesis (batch reaction) using Isobutyl and acetone (Angelini) 
Product: Trazodone API (Antidepressant widely used all over the world and it is also the flagship product of the Angelini Fine 
Chemicals Plant) 
Quantified Sustainability impacts: -60% increase in 
recycled and reu 
*based on 
internal data and on current production volumes (2020) 
Productivity Improvements: upgrade recovery process via implementation of a C- 
ification 
of acetone /isobutyl alcohol mixtures. 
Pharmaceutical Process: Rapid microfluidic mixing combined with Diafiltration (RJ) 
Product: Liposome's nanoparticles 
Higher encapsulation efficacy of this production technique (50%-60%) compared with 
traditional methos (10- from 30 to 40%;  
toxicological and safety profile. Reduction of 0,436 kg CO2eq using bioEtOH instead of ethanol. 
Productivity Improvements: Application of continuous process linked with diafiltration (reduction of processing steps) 
Pharmaceutical Process: Quotient Science continuous systems 
Product: Synthesis of novel APIs 
Quantified Sustainability impacts:  Waste reduction from 20-30%; energy consumption reduction : 25% (calculated using  
ASPEN HYSYS). 
Productivity Improvements: 
to PAT technologies. 
Pharmaceutical Process: Genome engineering for strain optimization, bioprocessing intensification and microjet reactor 
technology (MJR) for  downstreaming processes  (MyB) 
Product: Rapamycin or Sirolimus biosynthesis and its green purification 
Quantified Sustainability impacts:   Removing at least 10 hazardous side products using genome engineering (e.g. nigericin, 
 
mentation time reduction (up to 20%) 
and at least 30% energy saving 
Productivity Improvements 
energy consumption 
Pharmaceutical Process: Membrane purification (AstraZeneca) 
Product: applicable to numerous (to be selected) 
Quantified Sustainability impacts: waste 
-suitable 
 
>1Mt scale: Projected savings of >50Mt of solvent per Mt API produced for each project. 
(2) the wider impacts, in the longer term, specified in the respective destinations in the work programme 
Calls for proposals under this destination are directed towards the Key Strategic Orientation KSO-A: 
an open strategic autonomy by leading the development of key digital, enabling and emerging technologies, 
-2024. 
ETERNAL focuses on research and innovation activities that will enable  
compliance with the objectives of the European Green Deal , whereby we will define greener processing routes 
for a range of widely used drugs at European and global level resulting in a reduction in the use of chemical solvents, 
as well as the substitution of chemical solvents for green alternatives, reduction in the energy consumption and carbon 
footprint thanks to process intensification, as well as a reduction in the presence of toxic carcinogens and other 
harmful compounds in the environment. Thanks to the participation of 5 European headquartered pharmaceutical 
companies we set out a credible pathway for contributing to maintaining an innovative, sustainable and globally 
competitive health Thanks to the green chemistry, mechanochemistry (process intensification), continuous 
manufacturing, and digital enabling technologies (PAT and Digital Twins for increased process efficiencies and 
Quality/Green/Safety-by-Design strategies), ETERNAL will contribute to a Health industry in the EU that is 
more competitive and sustainable, assuring European leadership in breakthrough health technologies- a new 
paradigm of Green Pharmaceuticals- and strategic autonomy in essential medical supplies and digital technologies, 
contributing to job creation and economic growth, in particular with small- and medium-sized enterprises 
In relation to job creation, the cumulative FTE jobs that will be created as a direct result and implementation 
of the ETERNAL innovations across the consortium has been estimated at a total of at least 50 new positions (by 
Reduction in energy kwh kwh/tonne 
current process 1221 2443 
eliminated steps (worst case) 618 1237 (50%) 
eliminated steps (best case) 831 1661 (67%) 
 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 24 of 45 
 
 
2025 to implement the project), and the longer-term job creation opportunities through the implementation and uptake 
of the ETERNAL R&D Roadmap across the wider European pharmaceutical industry has been estimated at 
300-500 by 2030, and 1000+ by 2050 (jobs in R&D, process engineering, compliance, production, sales marketing). 
ealth industry is working more efficiently along the value 
chain- such as for example thanks to our innovation in relation to the digitization of data flows in chemical process 
design and manufacturing between CDMOs and pharmaceutical companies between organizations to enable effective 
collaboration between organizations enabling efficient and effective project management- from the identification of 
needs to the scale -up and take -up of solutions (thanks to our cocreation process involving research -industry- 
compliance- at national, regional or local level, in cluding through early engagement with patients, health care  
providers, health authorities and regulators (thanks to our Change Labs as well as the multi -actor and multi - 
stakeholders approaches that embedded in the ETERNAL project) ensuring suitability and acceptance of solutions 
European standards, including for operations involving health data, ensure patient safety and quality of 
healthcare services as well as effectiveness and interoperability of health innovation and productivity of innovators , 
and ETERNAL has included the UNE (representing CEN-CENELEC) to lead standardization activities to support 
the translation of the R&I findings into marketable solutions, ensuring compatibility with market conditions and  
increasing transparency for prospective customers, and in disseminating the project results, getting feedback from 
the stakeholders organized in standardization and contributing to the development of new standards by forwarding 
inputs from ETERNAL developed technologies. 
Target groups that will benefit: Pharmaceutical industry- access to knowledge and technological innovations; 
Policy makers/Regulatory authorities- scientific evidence for decision making; Research- access to data; 
Citizens- information in order to be more responsible citizens, environmental protection  Healthcare practitioners- 
access to greener alternatives; Standardization bodies- information about the project results towards the 
development of new standards. 
b) Requirements and barriers that may determine whether the desired outcomes & impacts are achieved 
Requirements: On the one hand, there are numerous political, regulatory and consumer/market requirements 
that serve as drivers for the adoption and impact of the outcomes of this project. From the political side, the Zero 
Pollution ambition for a toxic-free environment, as expressed in the European Green Deal, aims to protect both public 
health and ecosystems through avoiding negative effects of chemical substances, including certain pharmaceutical 
residues, on air, soil and water. The recently adopted Farm to Fork Strategy includes the target to reduce overall EU 
sales of antimicrobials for farmed animals and in aquaculture by 50% by 2030, thus reducing this source of  
environmental contamination. Other initiatives, including the 8th Environment Action Programme , the Circular 
Economy Action Plan , the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability  and the Biodiversity Strategy, the Action Plan 
against the rising threats from Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR), are all drivers for an overall shift to a production 
and consumption of resources, materials and chemicals, which is safe and sustainable by design and creates the lowest  
possible impact on the environment, including considering pollutants of emerging concern. From a regulatory 
context, assessment of the environmental impact of medicinal products is now a legal obligation in the EU, and must 
be performed to evaluate and limit potential adverse effects of medicines on the environment. The environmental 
risk-assessment (ERA) of medicinal products is to be performed by companies during the development of new 
medicines. The results are submitted to the European Medicines Agency for evaluation in conjunction with the  
scientific data on quality, safety and efficacy required to support the request for marketing authorization of medicinal  
products intended for human or veterinary use via the centralized procedure. Policy evolutions in relation to e.g.  
procurement policy to encourage greener pharmaceutical design and manufacturing, extended producer responsibility  
towards supporting action to improve the efficacy of water treatment (link with Water Framework Directive),  
emission of pharmaceuticals to water being considered as a possible Key Environmental Issue when reviewing Best 
Available Techniques Reference Documents under the Industrial Emissions Directive for relevant sectors, will all 
serves as drivers for the adoption of the ETERNAL green innovations by the pharmaceutical industry. With regards 
to consumer/market requirements, new global research conducted by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU),  
commissioned by WWF, shows a staggering 71% rise in popularity of searches for sustainable goods over the past 
five years, with continuing growth during the COVID-19 pandemic -awakening. 34 
Consumer behavior plays a critical role in driving change and demonstrating care for nature. This pressure has  
compelled brands to make and keep substantial sustainability commitments. In the food, cosmetic and natural 
pharmaceutical industries, the number of companies committed to sourcing practices that protect biodiversity  
increased by 45% from 2016 to 2020. 
Barriers: Potential barriers exist. For example, r 
 
nitions and metrics. Although GC can be cost-effective, it still requires upfront investments and 
shift from highly capital intensive infrastructure. In the pharmaceutical industry, one of the biggest barriers to  
adoption of new, greener routes for existing APIs is the hurdle of validation. This is a very real barrier and is a 
 
34 https://www.wwf.eu/?3383891/Public-concern-grows-over-nature-loss 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 25 of 45 
 
 
deterrent for most companies. A key ambition in overcoming this barrier is to engage in a dialogue with Regulators 
whereby re-validation of greener routes is encouraged, of 
course, without compromising safety. 
c)   . 
ETERNAL, by bridging a Knowledge gap that can inform a long -term industry, research and policy strategy in  
relation to: a) an improved understanding (new tools and methodologies) of the environmental impact of 
pharmaceuticals across their lifecycle (as well as understanding the ecotoxicity impacts of chemical mixtures in the 
environment); b) advancing a green chemistry, mechanochemistry and digitalization roadmap with a clear post - 
project exploitation plan to reach the market and deploy the innovations across Europe (and globally); c) informing 
policy and contributing to sustainable and digitally-enabled manufacturing standards; d) having catalyzed enduring 
social innovation initiatives, we will deliver impressive long-term impacts. 
Looking specifically at one of the technologies being researched and piloted in ETERNAL as an example (this and 
all the other ETERNAL technological innovations will be presented in Whitepapers during the project, whereby we 
create a vision for their potential scale and significance through pan-European adoption), Hot Melt Extrusion has 
been well explored and documented as a steady, solvent-free, fast and cost-effective manufacturing method for the 
production of a broad range of pharmaceutical dosage forms, including oral, topical film, implants and ophthalmic 
inserts. It has been demonstrated to be a robust method of producing a number of drug delivery systems, and there 
is growing interest in HME technology as it is appropriate for both elevated and very powerful  low-dose 
compounds, as well as the equipment is commonly accessible. As a s olvent-free, robust, quick, and  economy-
favored manufacturing process for the production of a large variety of pharmaceutical dosage forms ,  , it hold 
tremendous potential to contribute to the cost-effective production of generic drugs in Europe; this is important in that 
generic drugs need to be delivered to market affordably, and the ability to lower manufacturing costs for drugs such as 
Ibuprofen would increase  the competitiveness of Europe as a viable  manufacturing base. The Covid -19 crisis  has 
reinforced the need for Europe to increase the competitiveness of manufacturing for shortening supply chain, and securing 
local supply. Moreover, the use of HME for the cost-competitive manufacture of non-generic drugs, such as 
Trazodone, would help to lower the costs of these non-generics making them more affordable, with a high societal impact 
for European citizens. From the sustainability context, we know from partner Angelini Pharma, just how pressing 
the sustainability driver is: the opportunity to switch for the current batch processes that are currently used for 
medicines containing Ibuprofen and Trazodone, represent a very high energy consumption due to these processes 
currently being discontinuous. Changing to a continuous HME process will yield a tremendous green impact, only 
considering Ibuprofen production (based on Angelini consumption 1200 KWh and taking only one work shift and 
1732 days/year of production) from 8.32 million (worst scenario) to 11.14 million (best scenario) KW/year could be 
saved. Extrapolated to European potential energy savings (based on a modest 10x), this would equate to 83.2-111.14 
KW/year. 
Measures to maximize impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication 
ation including communication activities 
We outline hereunder our planned measures to maximize Plan for the 
. This first version of the Plan will be further 
detailed in D5.2 (at M6) and periodically updated according to the progress and emerging results of the project. We 
will ensure that we pick up and consider any changes in the stakeholders, work context and potential use of results 
during the project lifetime, and that we periodically report updates to our Plan. 
Continuous results assessment and value proposition design: The results of our project will be considered as any 
tangible or intangible outputs of the action, such as data, knowledge, information and technology, whatever their  
form or nature, whether or not they can be protected, and which can create impact during and/or after the EU funding  
procedure. An ongoing activity that will accompany the R&D work will be to continually assess and catalogue the 
project outputs as they emerge, to establish the valuable key results and to consider their unique selling points (USPs)  
towards our different target groups. 
Communication Plan and Toolbox : We have defined a strategically holistic approach to our communication  
activities in line with clear communication goals and objectives, centered around promoting our project, generating 
awareness among our target multi-stakeholders (industry, researchers, policy makers, practitioners & 
citizens/consumers) about the sustainability impacts of greener pharmaceuticals and the role and benefits for each of 
the multi-actors, and finally, mobilizing their participation in our Change Labs. The high societal relevance of  
ETERNAL will be emphasized in relation to its role in addressing the increasing problem of environmental pollution 
due to pharmaceuticals throughout their lifecycle, tapping into the increased citizen/consumer, market and industry 
awareness ( eco awakening ) in our current Covid-19 era, and especially for mitigating future environmental/climate 
change risks. In line with our multi -actor and multi -stakeholder approach, our communication activities will  
effectively establish engagement with the pharmaceutical industry, the research/scientific community and health  
professionals, without whom an effective reduction of the impact of pharmaceuticals on the environment 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 26 of 45 
 
 
cannot be achieved at EU level 35 . A Communication Toolbox for achieving our communication goals &  
objectives will be designed, consisting of: 
Visual identity and brand - we have already worked on a preliminary project logo during the bid preparation phase, 
and during project implementation we will make any necessary changes/improvements to this logo, and we will  
also validate and widely promote a project mantra/tag line/brand claim in order to effectively communicate a  
memorable brand value 
Project website - a key vehicle for the project communication and dissemination effort, which will make all the  
public results of the project freely available for public access and consultation. 
Informative material in printable (banners, posters, flyers) & multimedia (videos, digital flyers) formats 
Content (blogs x 12, newsletters x 8, white papers x 4) 
Social media, especially LinkedIn & Twitter where we will create campaigns for our different target audiences 
Articles and publications in online/offline magazines and blogs. 
Timely press releases (issued through relevant press channels, incl. the European Commission News Section) to 
coincide with significant (newsworthy) project achievements, outputs, and milestones. 
Standardization activities: Standardization in R&I projects supports the translation of the R&I findings into  
marketable solutions. ETERNAL will build upon existing standards during the development of the novel processes 
ensuring compatibility with market conditions and increasing transparency for prospective customers. ETERNAL 
TC 1 
Twins) 
. This will support the dissemination of the project and its results, getting feedback from the stakeholders  
organized in standardization and to contribute to the development of new standards by forwarding inputs from  
ETERNAL developed technologies. UNE, representing CEN-CENELEC, will lead these activities. 
Dissemination of the Project Results: In line with our above-stated strategy for Open Science Practices, we will 
ensure the early and wide dissemination or public disclosure of all the non -confidential project results, via appropriate  
means, including open access scientific publications and data repositories. Whereas Communication is about raising 
awareness about the project and its results, our Dissemination Plan is about making the results available for  use, 
enabling their use and uptake by specific audiences, which may use these results in their own work (e.g. scientific 
community, industrial or other commercial actors, policymakers, professional organizations). The main goals are to: 
Identify the results to disseminate and transfer the knowledge and results to the stakeholders that can best make use 
of it; Identify the appropriate dissemination channels; Maximize the impact of research, whereby we enable the value 
of our results to be potentially wider than the original focus; Monitor and evaluate the effects of the dissemination 
activities. The main dissemination tools/channels, among others, that we will use are: 
-Scientific publications (8-10) in relevant journal s, e.g., Int. J. Env. Res. and Pub. Health; Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res.;  
Reactive & Functional Polymers; Frontiers in Microbiology; Cat. Sci. & Tech.; ACS Env. Sci. & Tech.; Microbial Biotech;  
Production Planning and Control; Env. Toxicology and Chemistry; Chemosphere; Env. Pollution; Ecotoxicology; Science of 
the Total Environment; MDPI Pharmaceutics; J. Drug Delivery Sci. & Tech.; Int. J. Cancer; Nature Nanotech.; Env. Science: 
Nano; Env. International; Science; ACS Sus. Chem. & Eng. Sust. Chem. & Pharmacy 
-Participation in (a) science conferences and (b) industry events , (at least 10 -12 events) e.g. (a) EUROTOX Congress ; 
EPHAR; IUTOX International Congress of Toxicology , SETAC Events and Conferences ; Int. Conf. on Env. Pollution , 
Medicinal Prescriptions and Pharmaceutical Waste; Int. Conf. on Risk Assessment of Pharmaceuticals in The Environment  
(ICRAPHE); Global Conference on Pharmaceutics and Novel Drug Delivery Systems; ARC Industry Forum Accelerating  
Industrial Digital Transformation and Sustainability; (b) CPhi Worldwide; BIO-Europe; Pharmapack; Expopharm; 
Pharmatech and Ingredients; Achema; Chemspec Europe  
-Share results on online media (research data, software, reports) 
-Organize training and workshop sessions (target: at least 4) 
-A final project event to demonstrate to potential users/customers. 
Exploitation actions: The main goal of the exploitation plan is to make use of the results for societal, scientific,  
business & even political purposes (e.g. value & impact of ETERNAL for addressing the increasing problem of  
environmental pollution due to pharmaceuticals throughout their life cycle). Our exploitation actions include: Patent 
publications; Utilizing the project results in further research activities other than those covered by the concerned  
project (or use of the results for academic purposes (PhD, post-PhD...); Developing, creating and marketing a product or 
process, or creating and providing a service - see our Business Model Canvas below and our preliminary Go to  
Market (GTM) strategy; Licensing and technology transfer; Information and support for evidence-based 
policymaking (by facilitating access to data and knowledge to regulators, environmental organizations and policy 
makers, ETERNAL will contribute to an improved new standard for environmental protection across Europe). Table 
11 summarizes the core exploitation intentions of each of the partners. 
Table 11- Exploitation Intentions 
Exploitation Intentions 
AIMPLAS To use the purification routes (for recycling) and synthesis with greener solvents in future research areas. Continue collaborating 
with the pharmaceutical industry thanks to the knowledge acquired during the projects in continuous processing technologies. 
MyB To use the case study as PoC for a platform approach to produce greener API, especially of natural substance origin, by using 
 
35 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-dangersub/pdf/Progress_Overview%20PiE_KH0320727ENN.pdf 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 27 of 45 
 
 
 
biotechnological approaches and continuous downstreaming processes. To initiate collaboration to exploit MyB`s continuous manufacturing 
technologies within pharma industry. 
RJF To use the case study to develop greener nanoparticle production methods at pilot scale, with an scalable industrial GMP methodology, 
using new solvents, recycling solvents as well as non-capsulated drugs. Optimize and standardize processes within the project ecosystem. 
Angelini Pharma Further scale up the Green Solvent routes and the Hot Melt Extrusion processes in their plants and secure compliance in 
order to progress to live production. 
QS Exploit digitalization of process research and development and digital twin approaches to the robust and sustainable scale up of future 
medicines, selecting processes and solvents that are Sustainable by Design 
AZ Use the ETERNAL membrane case study as the basis for scale up of membrane based processes for the production of API. Publications 
for both the membrane case study and digital workflow. Further development of the digital workflow 
IRIS Scale up of the PAT+AI platform & extension to additional processes & applications. Optimization of Digital Twins towards full 
commissioning at each plant. Use of ETERNAL case studies as Application Notes/Testimonials for sales and marketing effort. Publications 
in relation to the Holonic Reference Architecture (HRA) in the field of IMS specially tailored for continuous manufacturing processes. 
EE Scale up implementation of Data Analytics with pharmaceutical clients to show sustainable pathways. Improve energy KPI performance 
data that is available from production equipment, Improved communication with production and energy utility teams 
BOKU To test novel green solvents currently investigated in our laboratories for the substitution of toxic and environmentally-unfriendly 
organic media currently used in the pharmaceutical industry and to use the in-house developed biocatalyst technology for the detoxification 
of wastewater and residual pharmaceutical intermediates. 
BRITEST As specialists in capturing manufacturing process understanding through guided facilitations using proprietary tools and 
methodologies with project teams, Britest intends to further develop their process understanding based methodologies for guiding research 
progress, scale-up risk assessment. 
UKCEH Development of tools for assessing the environmental fate, hazard and risks of pharmaceuticals, and residues/metabolites, 
including approaches for regulatory  assessment and environmental management. These tools will support effective assessment of 
pharmaceutical fate under different environmental conditions, assessment of species vulnerability and prediction of mixture effects. 
ASPHALION Increased business opportunities and growth due to enhanced notoriety as a regulatory expert consultancy, and increased 
network across the pharmaceutical sector. 
INLECOM Know-how in the synthesis of polymers. Development of a methodology for the technologies Technical , social, and 
environmental Impact Assessment. Patent Submissions of the technologies and techniques developed in the project 
UAVR Use the case studies for comparative assessments, data-driven predictions from experimental data, following a bottom-up (individual 
substances to mixtures at a lab scale) approach and a top-down (case study samples from an industrial environment). Development of 
ecotoxicity tools to assist in the OECD Draft TG for the assessment of endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) using invertebrates. 
SAAR To use developed here genome engineering platform for scalable supply of bioactive industrially relevant natural products to enable 
reasonable and cost and energy-effective development timelines for pharmaceutical industry. 
UNE Participation of UNE as standards body will increase the exploitation possibilities for the other partners by using the benefits of 
standardization. This will reinforce the relevance of the European standardization system and its recognition as an effective exploitation 
channel towards the European R&I community. 
Business Model and Go-to-Market strategy: In 2017, the worldwide pharmaceutical market revenue was USD  
1143 billion and will reach USD 1462 billion in 2021 36. We have used the Business Model Canvas approach to 
focus our draft plan of the dissemination and exploitation of the outputs of the ETERNAL project. This first version 
of the BMC (Table 12) is a common Canvas for the project, however in Task 6.4 each of the industry partners will 
develop their own BMC based on the results that they will be commercializing or adopting. These BMCs will be  
delivered at Project Interim and in the latter phase of the project they will be further elaborated into Business Plans 
that will be delivered at project end. Table 12- Business Model Canvas 
 
36 González Peña, O.I.; López Zavala, M.Á.; Cabral Ruelas, H. Pharmaceuticals Market, Consumption Trends and Disease Incidence Are Not Driving the Pharmaceutical Research 
on Water And Wastewater. Int. J. Environ. Res., Public Health 2021, 18, 2532. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18052532 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 28 of 45 
 
 
Strategy for IP Management: Our strategy for the management of intellectual property (IP), is on the one hand, to 
ensure Freedom to Operate (FTO), and, on the other hand, to adequately protect our results as relevant to ensure 
the commercial exploitation of the project. We have conducted a first patentability study (using patent libraries- 
EPO and WIPO) to identify potential IPR issues with existing technologies and patents, and we have established our 
FTO and differentiation points. We have a clear understanding and agreement among the partners in relation to  
Background IP- ownership of Background remains with the current owners and is not affected  by the project & access  
rights to Background needed to implement the project is provided royalty free, and if needed for exploitation of the 
project results it will be either royalty free or under fair and reasonable conditions. Each partner has declared their 
Background IPR (will be formalised in the Consortium Agreement) and necessary access rights. Each partner has 
provided an initial Background IPR statement (Table 12), which will be included in the Consortium Agreement 
(and updated as relevant). We confirm no Background IPR is needed from Third Parties external to the consortium. 
Regarding our strategy for knowledge management and protection, we aim to file new patents that will come as a 
result of the project, with a clear ownership strategy- developers own their results, and joint development will 
result in jointly owned patents. If one of the parties participating in the project wishes to proceed with the protection of 
the results through a patent or other forms of industrial property rights, the others, if not interested in co-ownership, will 
transfer their share of ownership of the patent under conditions to be defined on a case-by-case basis. We will also 
follow other protection paths as appropriate, such as trademarks, copyright, Knowhow, Trade Secrets, etc. Table 13 
below summarizes the key knowledge items that we expect will be generated during the project, the foreseen  
protection measures, the owner(s) and access rights to this key knowledge (this will be included and managed in a 
consortium agreement that will be generated and signed by all partners if our project is selected for funding, and the 
final Results Ownership List will be included in the Final Periodic Report to reflect any updates). 
Table 13- Summary of the IP strategy 
 
Knowledge Item Foreseen Protection Owner(s) Post-project Access Rights 
Technologies based on micromixers 
developed by MyB 
Patent/Utility models MyB Collaboration with CDMOs, academia & 
RTOs 
Product based licensing to the pharmaceutical 
industry partners 
RJF nanoparticles synthesis Patent/industrial 
Secret 
RJF Collaboration agreements with partners inside 
and outside the consortium. 
Membrane based processes to produce 
API 
Industrial Secret AZ Collaboration agreements with partners inside 
and outside the consortium. 
Development of tools for assessing the 
environmental fate, hazard and risks of 
pharmaceuticals, & residues/metabolites 
Patent/Utility model UKCEH Services to pharmaceutical companies and 
other type of chemical companies. 
containing APIs 
using HME 
Industrial 
Secret/Patent 
Angelini Collaboration with CDMOs, academia and 
RTOs 
Development of ecotoxicity tools to 
assist in OECD Draft TG for assessment 
of endocrine disrupting chemicals 
(EDCs) using invertebrates. 
Peer reviewed papers UAVR Services to pharmaceutical companies and 
other type of chemical companies. 
Genome engineering platform for 
scalable supply of bioactive industrially 
Patent/Utility models SAARS Collaboration agreements with pharmaceutical 
partners inside and outside the consortium 
New purification routes (recycled 
solvents) and synthesis with greener 
solvents. 
Patent/Utility models AIMPLAS Collaboration agreements with partners inside 
and outside the consortium (academia, RTOs, 
pharmaceutical companies, etc.) 
Photonics analyzers + ML model 
combination 
Patent/Utility models IRIS Preferential access to the pharmaceutical 
industry partners 
Digital Twin builder tools Copyright (& 
software source 
code) 
IRIS Preferential access to the pharmaceutical 
industry partners 
Holonic Reference Architecture (HRA) Open Access 
(Publications) 
IRIS Free/Open Access 
ETERNAL brand Trademark All Free usage of the Trademark by the partners 
based on an agreed strategy 
 
 
 
 
  

Page 30 of 45 
 
 
 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
3 Quality and efficiency of the implementation