3.1 Work plan and resources 
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan 
The ETERNAL workplan has been designed to allow us, over the course of 4 years, and in an application-oriented 
approach to develop, test, optimize, scale-up and validate (from TLR3 to TRL6), the following innovative and 
scalable technologies that are -by-    -by-                          -  
pharmaceutical manufacture (and that are also less environmentally harmful during use and disposal): HME (hot 
melt extrusion); Discontinuous Synthesis (batch reaction) using Isobutyl and acetone; Rapid microfluidic mixing 
combined with Diafiltration; Modular flow reactors continuous systems; Genome engineering for strain 
optimization, bioprocessing intensification and microjet reactor technology (MJR) for downstreaming processes; 
Membrane purification. 
WP1 (Green innovation in pharmaceutical manufacturing) focuses on the R&D phase to bring the technologies 
from TRL3-4, and WP3 (Industry cocreation lab: Pilots) will further scale up to TRL5-6. WP2 (Digitalisation for 
competitive & scalable methods of production) will develop digital technologies (digital work flows for chemical 
data, PAT and Digital Twins) to facilitate the process develop and understanding. In parallel, WP4 (Environmental 
assessment & ecotoxicity studies) will, in addition to performing environmental risk and life cycle analysis within 
ETERNAL case studies, will also bridge the current knowledge gaps in relation to the environmental concentration 
and resulting levels of risk of pharmaceuticals already in use, and in particular, building knowledge of the impact 
of molecules on the environment through the eco-toxicity studies for improved management of environmental risk 
and for designing of new molecules.  From a multi -stakeholder and a social innovation perspective, WP5 
(Communication, Dissemination &  Change labs),  will ensure  we engage decision -makers from the  wider 
pharmaceutical industry, public authorities, healthcare practitioners as well as citizens themselves towards an  
integrated movement behind catalysing not only the adoption of green pharmaceutical technologies, but also  
promoting an enabling regulatory environment, as well as paving the way forward for changing social norms for 
save consumption and disposable of pharmaceuticals (and also considering gendered innovation aspects). Finally, 
WP6 (Project Management and Pathway to impact) will ensure we encase the project in a robust and 
comprehensive project management framework, that in addition to project monitoring, tracking and risk 
management, also encompasses data management, management of Open Science, Standardization activities, as  
well as preparation for the post-project exploitation phase towards further scale up industrial deployment of the  
results, and ensuring wide adoption a cross the EU of the ETERNAL outputs for environmental and competitiveness  
impacts across the European pharmaceutical industry. 
Graphical presentation of the components showing how they interrelate (Pert chart or similar) 
 

 
 
 
 
  
                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                           
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                           
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
 
 
 
 
 
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
                                          
 
 
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                         
 
 
                
 
 
                        
 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 32 of 45 
 
 
Table 3.1a: List of work packages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table 3.1b: Work package description 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objectives: Goal is to perform R&D work TRL3-TRL4 of the project case studies in preparation for the piloting of the 
technological innovations in industry in WP3 (there will also be an inter-relationship with WP2, whereby the aim will 
be to develop PAT and digital twins to understand the processes and facilitate their upscaling); To apply continuous 
methods to reduce energy consumption and solvents,  both in the synthesis of APIs and medicines production; To  
improve or develop new purification routes for solvents recovery (recycling). To develop greener nanoparticle  
manufacturing methods that provide nano formulations of the same quality as classic methods. WP1 is linked to Task 
2..6 Compliance by design. 
Description of work (where appropriate, broken down into tasks), lead partner and role of participants 
 
Task 1.1.1. Preliminary evaluation & status quo on HME. A review of the state of the art will be performed with the 
intention to apply this technology to more pharmaceutical products owned by Angelini (to go beyond the case study 
developed). Chemical -physical properties of the compounds will be investigated to verify suitability for HME  
technology. Current manufacturing processes medicines that contain Ibuprofen and Trazodone will be analysed in depth for 
changing to continuous manufacturing (HME). In addition to the study on the active ingredient, research activities on 
polymers, excipients and plasticizers potentially usable in extrusion processes will be carried out. Task 1.1.2  
Preformulating trials and formulation trials:  First laboratory tests p erformed on Ibuprofen and Trazodone:  
Compatibility studies (API and excipients); Thermal characterization of API: polymer: plasticizer mixtures; Extrusion 
trials of different preliminary mixture (DoE based on screw configuration, screw speed, throughput and temperature 
profile); Chemical-physical analyses on preliminary extrudates; Definition of the composition; Stress tests; Trials of 
tablet compression or filling in capules;12 month prestability study. Task 1.1.3.Analytical development & stability 
studies: develop new pharmaceutical process regarding new formulations, dedicated analytical support (both physical 
and chemical) focused on trials and analysis is needed. Indeed, analytical data on the quality and properties of the  
product are necessary to gain the detailed process knowledge. Several instruments such as HPLC, Dissolution  
apparatus, X-ray diffractometer, will be used for this study. Main analytical activities include Analytical development; 
In parallel analytical methods will be developed, depending on product specifications. The analytical procedures will 
provide an acceptable accuracy & precision over the specified range ; Raw materials, half -processed and finished  
products will be analysed and selected prototypes will be also investigated using a stress test protocol; Stability-At the 
end of the previous studies, 12 months prestability of drug product will be performed at ICH conditions. 
 
This task will focus on the synthesis of trazodone (antidepressant API) T1.2.1. Recycling Solvents: the synthesis of 
trazodone implies the use of 2k tons of solv ents per year. The solvents used in the process are acetone and isobutyl  
alcohol. To improve the current system for the distillation and to capture impurities and reagents (Angelini will follow 
the ICH quality guidelines), the following steps will be carried out: Preliminary in silico assessments and simulations 
of the distillation ; Laboratory trials (using equipment and pilot/real mixtures): considering previous simulations,  
AIMPLAS will implement at laboratory scale the better combination of filters to separate both solvents and to capture 
the impurities (including Chitosan for capturing impurities). Together with BOKU, the degradation of those substances 
will carry out using enzymatic steps. The  quality of purified solvents will be evaluated by Angelini by gas 
chromatography (GC) optimizing the filtering sequence if it is needed. T1.2.2. Greener alternatives: The synthesis of 
trazodone at laboratory scale using more sustainable alternatives will be carried out. Biobased solvents will be studied 
(e.g. ethyl lactate, to replace acetone, 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MeTHF) to replace isobutyl). Biobased alternatives, 
e.g. acetone could be supplied by Caldic -produced through fermentation of sugars from renewable resources, and free 
of all carcinogenic aromatic impurities (e.g. benzene) that are commonly found in traditionally sourced materials. Trials will 
be done at AIMPLAS facilities & Angelini will oversee quality evaluation of obtained trazodone (HPLC analysis). 
Task 1.2. Case Study II (Angelini Pharma): Better use of solvents (recycled and Greener alternatives) (Leader: 
Angelini Pharma Participants: AIMPLAS, BOKU). 
Task 1.1 Case Study I-(Angelini Pharma) : Continuous manufacturing method-Reduction in energy 
consumption (Leader: Angelini Pharma Participants: AIMPLAS, EE). 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 33 of 45 
 
 
 
Task 1.3 Case Study III (RJ): Better use of   solvents   (reduction   or   elimination). (Leader:   Reig 
Jofre Participants:AIMPLAS, BOKU, UAVR). RJF will oversee developing greener methods to produce Liposomes at 
laboratory scale. Using liposomes, the bioavailability of API is achieved. This results in a reduction of the required 
dose to achieve the same pharmacological effect. Reducing the dose and increasing bioavailability increases drug 
absorption and reduces excretion from the gastrointestinal tract. On a large scale this leads to a reduction of metabolites 
excreted into the environment. One of the objectives of this task is to increase the encapsulation efficiency of the API, 
selected, valpronic acid and other hydrophilic drugs. The increase of encapsulation efficiency could be achieved by 
the proper selection of formulation excipients, optimization of process parameters and the selection of more advance 
manufacturing methods. T1.3.1. Microfluidic manufacturing methods: JF will focus on this technology as it allows 
continuous and scale-up-reproducible production of liposomes, using ethanol as organic solvent. Also, the 
encapsulation efficacy of this production technique is usually higher, around 50-60% for hydrophilic compounds. RJF 
will test the micro mixing technologies from MyBiotech and will compare them with other microfluidics technologies 
available on the market. The integration of an on-line particle size analyser at the exit of the microfluidic device and 
before the entry in the diafiltration device will improve the continuous process production (developed in T2. 5); T1.3.2. 
Liposome production with greener solvents: the propose is to test the use of a better toxicological and safety profile 
(ethyl lactate, ethyl piruvate, DMC, etc.) during liposome production, to check if they are able to keep the liposome 
desired properties (i.e. hydrodynamic diameter, encapsulation efficiency..). One of the final steps on the liposome 
production is their purification, where the organic solvent, the non-encapsulated drug, and excipients (i.e. excess of 
surfactants, coating agents) are eliminated. T1.3.3. Physico-chemical characterization: An extensive Physico- 
chemical characterization will be performed at RJF in terms of: Encapsulation efficiency of different active 
pharmaceutical ingredients by liquid chromatography (HPLC); Hydrodynamic diameter and surface charge or Z- 
potential of nanosystems by Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS);- Study of different thermal events by Differential 
Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). Analysis of residual solvents by Gas Chromatography (GC); Other analytical techniques 
(TEM, ICP- ; T1.3.4. Treatment of the aqueous solution residue: this residue from the diafiltration could be 
recycled in the following loops of nanoparticle purification to reduce even more the waste generated. Alternatively, this 
aqueous solution with the unloaded drug, solvent residues, and nanoparticle excipients, could be extracted with 
AIMPLAS methodologies using Chitosan or functionalized SBA-15 or MCM-41 to reduce the environmental impact. 
The previous standard manufacturing methods, the optimized production methods and the generated waste will be sent 
to UAVR to compare the ecotoxicological profiles. Once determined, the best formulation will be produced in a higher 
scale in WP3 and by continuous production, with the particle size analyser and the diafiltration technologies coupled. 
Task 1.4 Case Study IV (QS): Continuous Greener-by-Design synthesis methods (Leader: QS Participants: 
AIMPLAS, BOKU)  
The multistep case study will need some improvements in following processes at low TRL to scale up afterwards in 
WP3.Task 1.4.1. Intensification of Bromination reaction: this process will be improved reducing the use of toxic and 
corrosive reagents and the high risk of runaway reactions as well as the initial % of Br. On the other hand, the stirring 
parameters (speed, temperature etc) will be adjusted, and the outlet purified.  Task. 1.4.2. Amination reaction:  the 
reactor configuration (type and geometry), flow rate, solvent ratio/NH3 and residence time will be optimised . Task 
1.4.3. Thermal Rearrangement: this step it is difficult to control and will need special attention. Other problem faced 
will be the by-product formation and the low yield. 
Task 1.5 Case Study V (MyB): Continuous manufacturing: greener synthesis of toxic side products 
(Leader: MyB. Participants: AIMPLAS, BOKU).  
T1.5.1 Strain characterization: MyB will use established protocols by SAAR for the cultivation of Streptomyces 
rapamycinicus following strain optimization via genome sequencing. First, precultures are set up in 100 ml flasks in 
batch operation. Main cultures (250 ml flasks) are inoculated from these, which are then cultivated for  several days. 
Samples are taken regularly to analyze oxygen consumption, growth, substrate consumption, by-product and product 
formation. T1.5.2 Process development fermentation:  the process optimization will include the use of  alternative 
substrates, the feeding of supplements, temperature, pH and feeding strategies. New findings as well as from  product 
purification are continuously incorporated into the process design, as some process strategies may be implemented on 
a laboratory scale but are not scalable or can  make purification more difficult. MyB will test various methods of 
purifying Rapamycin to avoid high solvent volumes and to achieve the highest possible purity (using e.g 
chromatographic methods: Ion exchange chromatography, flash chromatography). Attempts are also being made to  
isolate rapamycin using membrane filtration and low-temperature crystallization. The efficiency, yield and capacity of 
the methods are compared and analyzed from an ecological and economical point of view. The industrial upscaling is 
already planned at this level and the production and energy costs of an industrial system are calculated. With the help 
of these evaluations, an SOP for the purification of Rapamycin is created. T1.5.3 Fermentation: The fermentation 
process at lab scale will be transferred to pilot scale (15L) and used to produce 100 mg of pure rapamycin . The process 
will be documented and benchmarked (iterative process optimization will be done if it is needed). Parameter to be  
studied will be stirring speed, pH, feeding strategies and media compositions. MyB will include economic aspects in 
the up scaling. In the next step, on a larger scale, direct and indirect measurements provide information about the current  
state of the production culture, which is eminently important for assessing the strains and the production process. This 
data is analyzed and the parameters in the process are further optimized so that an efficient, ecological, economical and 
largely automated production process is designed. The parameters to be examined here are pH value, oxygen  
concentration, nutrient composition, stirring speeds, culture duration, temperature as well as inoculation quantities and 
cell phenotype. At the same time, the findings of product purification are included and integrated into the process. 
Further down streaming processes to purify rapamycin will include flash chromatography, cross-flow filtration and 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 34 of 45 
 
 
crystallization of rapamycin. Quantification of rapamycin and eventual by-products/impurities will be performed by 
HPLC analysis. 
 Task 1.6. Case Study VI (AZ): solvents purification (Leader: AZ Participants: AIMPLAS, AUVR, BOKU)             
Task 1.6.1. Case Study Selection: AstraZeneca will identify a suitable project that would traditionally use the approach 
of distillation to remove solvent and a crystallization to form the pure product. The initial process will be assessed for: 
energy consumption; solvent use in volumes (PMI metric); % of theoretical product yield in waste streams. The process 
will be assessed for switching to greener solvents or those from a bio-based source. The life cycle assessment of solvents 
will  be  considered  to  include  the  full  CO2  footprint  of  each  solvent.;  Task  1.6.2. Membrane  Selection and 
Modelling: A range of membranes will be tested for use in organic solvent nanofiltration (OSN) to assess their 
suitability for the removal of solvent and purification of product. We envisage that several different membranes will be 
required with differing molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) ranges. An initial membrane is required to retain the API 
and reject the solvent and impurities. Lower MWCO membranes will be required to purify the solvent ready for reuse. 
Process Analytical Technologies (PAT) e.g. IR or Raman- will be developed in T2.4 for analysing the raffinate and 
filtrate to develop an efficient continuous OSN process. A digital twin of the membrane processes will be developed in 
Task 2.3 to help inform the development and scale up of the process; Task 1.6.3. Evaluation of recovered 
solvent: Solvent recovered from the membrane process will be fully analyzed and compared to the purchase 
specification to understand how it has changed throughout the reaction and recovery process. The solvent will be 
subjected to the reaction/membrane recovery iteratively n times (n defined by point at which solvent cannot be used or 
stop at 10 cycles if solvent is still valid). Throughout the iterative cycle the yield of the main reaction, the quality of the 
API and the quality of the solvent (impurity level) will be tracked. This will inform the theoretical number of times 
solvent can be reused to remain acceptable to regulatory authorities and inform the KPI on sustainability improvement. 
Task 1.7 Technologies to reduce the impact of the end-of-life pharmaceuticals (Leader: BOKU Participants: 
AIMPLAS) Various enzymatic systems developed by BOKU, alone, and in combination with chemical mediators will 
be implemented to purify wastewater and organic media from residual synthesis byproducts and end of life 
pharmaceuticals. This technology will avoid the dispersion of residual pharmaceuticals in the environment while 
allowing the reuse of the water stream or organic media thanks to the selective removal of the undesired 
compounds. This task will be supported by AIMPLAS using green degradation and capturing routes. 
Deliverables: D1.1 Report on Case Study I: Continuous manufacturing method -Reduction in energy consumption  
(M12/24); D1.2 Report on Case Study II: Better use of solvents (recycled and greener alternatives) (M12/24); D1.3 
Report on Case Study III: Better use of solvents (reduction or elimination) (M12/24); D1.4 Report on Case Study IV: 
Continuous Greener-by-Design synthesis methods (M12/24); D1.5 Report on Case Study V: Continuous 
manufacturing- greener synthesis of toxic side products (M12/M24) ; D1.6 Report on Case Study VI: Solvents  
purification (M12/M24): D1.7 Report on technologies for reducing impact of the end of life pharmaceuticals (M30) 
 
Objectives: (1) Review of SoA of PAT and Digital Twin adoption in European Pharmaceutical industry and create a 
SWOT analysis to feed into an Opportunities Roadmap that also takes account of the regulatory hurdles, as well as  
recommendations for a favorable/enabling regulatory framework, without compromising safety. (2) Develop a digital 
workflow for efficient chemical process data transfer between organizations to reduce the Full Time Equivalent (FTE) 
effort required in the processing and documentation of this work. (3) Define Holonic Reference Architecture in the field 
of Intelligent Manufacturing Systems (IMS) specially tailored for continuous manufacturing processes (promoted as a 
standard for holonification procedures in pharma).(4) Architect and build the Holonics multi-agent based Digital Twin 
builder tool and to use the tool to build Digital Twins of the selected processes that are being researched in WP1 &  
scaled up in industry in WP3.(5) Develop PAT+ML platform for enabling real-time monitoring of the selected case 
studies & develop respective chemometric/Machine Learning models for each. 
Description of work (where appropriate, broken down into tasks), lead partner and role of participants 
 Task 2.1 Opportunities and Barriers for Digitalization of the European pharmaceutical industry  
We will perform an up-to-date review of the current state of the art in relation to the adoption of Process Analytical  
Technology (PAT) and Digital Twin technology in the European Pharmaceutical industry. Based on the findings we 
will perform a SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) in relation to the digitalization innovation 
in the industry in Europe as a means for developing and implementing greener processes. The more optimized process 
and the more accurate process control, the less waste generation. In particular, we will map the opportunities and their 
potential impacts. In addition, an assessment of the regulatory implications and hurdles currently posing a barrier t o 
digitalization. Recommendations will be made towards a more favorable/enabling regulatory framework, without  
compromising access to safe and effective medicinal products. Leader: IRIS. P: QS, AZ, ASPHALION, Britest 
 Task 2.2 Digitization of data flow in chemical process design & manufacturing (Leader: IRIS. P: AZ, QS)  
A well-defined digital workflow for efficient chemical process data transfer between organizations will be developed, 
whereby we will implement a data-integrity-compatible shared database suitable not only as a structured data repository but 
also as a source of cured data for any further data mining task and provided with smart contracts capabilities. The 
workflow will be mapped to digital solutions which will be developed and assessed to reduce the FTE effort required 
in the processing and documentation of this work, and data analytics tools will be developed to enable effective  
collaboration between organizations enabling efficient and effective project management and ensuring by-design full 
 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 35 of 45 
 
 
compatibility (user-friendly) with the audit procedures according to the regulatory framework, in agreement with Task 
2.6. As such, un this task we will: build guidelines for effective and generalizable digital data transfer; implement the 
digital workflow in a software toolkit enabling application across the pharmaceutical development industry; test the  
digital workflow between ETERNAL partners enhancing the collaboration; AZ test workflow with CDMO partner on 
pharmaceutical development projects over 2-year period. 
 
The key requirements for monitoring and control of continuous processes will be studied, taking into account: system 
structure, production objectives/constraints, process coupling, product routing variables, controlled/manipulated  
variables, production control strategy, and typical industry cases. With these requirements in mind a thorough state of 
the art review will be conducted in order to analyze the most influential and referent works in the HMS research and 
industrial field, whereby flexibility, diagnosability, scalability and integrability will be key features. The metamodel 
for HRA will be de fined together with the set of holonification strategies required for building digital twins of  
continuous manufacturing processes using the proposed HRA. The HRA will be inspired by ANEMONA type of holons  
but extended with continuous process key requirements. The specific holons and relations will be designed to support 
process industry plant/unit specification, and provide the capabilities for diagnosability, scalability and integrability. A 
set of guidelines or holonification strategies will be defined in order to help the system developer during the design of 
continuous process manufacturing systems. These strategies will rule how the industry plant/unit components together 
with data flows, plant wide and local control objectives, mathematical and optimization tools, and communication with 
PLCS-SCADA, DSCs, Process Analytical Technology and LIMS, Enterprise Information Systems, any external  
databases, etc. should be virtualized by means of holons and relations provided by the HRA. U sing the HRA, the  
software tools required for the holonification of the continuous processing components in a Digital Twin builder will 
be implemented. The tools will follow the specification of the HRA and will provide the software encapsulation  
facilities in order to virtualize the industrial plant/continuous process. 
 
Using the Digital Twin builder tool from T2.3, Digital Twins of the industry case studies that are being researched and 
developed in WP1 and scaled in industry in WP3 will be built (on the data availability and the real correlation between 
the variables), namely: digital twin of the membrane processes for AZ (Case Stud y VI) will be developed in  
coordination with Tasks 1.6.2 and Task 3.7. for informing the development and scale up of the process. Data from lab 
development trials with a range of membranes and flow rates can be used to support building of the digital twin together  
with fundamental understanding of the underlying physics. The goal of the digital twin will be to allow efficient scale 
up of the membr ane process further reducing the energy requirement. A Digital Twin will be developed of the RJ  
process (Case Study3 developed in Task 1.3 and upscaled in Task 3.4), in order to reduce the probability of out of  
specifications failures in batches in a futur e industrial process, shorten batch release times, and reduce the use of organic  
solvents and energy required in the manufacturing process. Finally, a Digital Twin of the Continuous Greener -by- 
Design synthesis methods of QS (Case Study 4) will be developed in conjunction with Task 1.4 and 3.5. 
 
Based on the Quality-by-Design (QbD) and Continuous Manufacturing requirements of the industry partners that will 
be studied in Task 3.1, the enabling PAT solutions will be developed, whereby the most appropriate photonics analyzers 
(IR, Raman) and third party analyzers (e.g. particle size distribution analyzer) will be selected and adapted by IRIS in 
keeping with the monitoring requirements and the industrial integration requirements (optical engineering, building of 
probes, etc.) for real-time and simultaneous measurement of diverse Critical Quality Attributes (CQAs) and Critical 
Control Parameters (CCPs). Appropriate Machine Learning and Deep Learning techniques will be defined for building 
models that process the multivariate data from the selected analyzers, which may also be fused with data from  
monovariate sources sensors (traditional sensors, such as e.g. pressure) and for running the Digital Twin of the selected 
processes. This task will develop the PAT solutions: for analyzing the raffinate and filtrate to develop an efficient  
continuous OSN process for AZ linked with Task 1.6.2 (based on inline IR or Raman); the improvement of the  
continuous process production an on-line particle size analyzer will be integrated at the exit of the microfluidic device 
and before the entry in the diafiltration device (for RJ linked with T1.3.1); PAT will also be implemented in the QS  
case study (link T1.5) 
 
This task will inform the development work in relation to the regulatory compliance implications regards future live 
production as such as will ensure that we adopt a compliant-by-design approach to the development work in a cocreation 
process related not only to the digitalization innovations of this work package, but also the green chemistry,  
mechanochemistry and continuous manufacturing innovations that will be researched and developed in WP1 and scaled 
up to Pilots in WP3. As such, information on the latest developments in the scientific review, regulation and marketing 
-by- 
strategy in relation to the developments as part of the ETERNAL cocreation process. 
Deliverables: D2.1 Roadmap for adoption of PAT and Digital Twin Technologies (including regulatory compliance 
requirements) (M9); D2.2                                    -by- -drivers and roadmap of the possible 
regulatory pathways or relevant regulatory framewo  -by- ; D2.3 
Report on HRA and holonification strategy (M15)- Metamodel specification of the HRA with the set of holonification 
guidelines/strategies required for designing continuous process digital twins ; D2.4 Digital workflow in a software  
toolkit (M18/M45); D2.5 Holonics multi-agent based Digital Twin builder tool (M20) - Software tools set for the  
holonification/virtualization of the processing plant components; D2.6 Digital Twin of selected ETERNAL processes 
(M24/M45); D2.7 PAT+ AI Tools 
Task 2.6 Compliance-by-Design (Leader: Asphalion; Paticipants: Angelini, RJ,AZ,QS,MyB)) 
Task 2.5 Process Analytical Technology (PAT) and Machine Learning (ML) platform (Leader: IRIS. 
Participants: AZ, RJ, QS) 
Task 2.4 Development of Digital Twins linked to the Case Studies (Leader: IRIS. Participants: AZ, RJ, QS) 
Task 2.3 Holonics multi-agent based Digital Twin builder tool (Leader: IRIS. Participants: Britest, Pharma) 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 36 of 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objectives: Goal of this WP is to upscale the R&D case studies from WP1 (facilitated by the PAT and Digital Twin 
enablers from WP2) to pilots that are implemented (TRL5 -6) at the industrial sites of the participating pharma  
companies Facilitate the sharing of technical and scientific understanding between researchers and industry partners 
in a cocreation approach and coordinate the implementation of each of the industry case studies (pilots) Define and 
6 Complete a scale-up risk assessment for each 
Description of work (where appropriate, broken down into tasks), lead partner and role of participants 
 
 
This task will manage the industry -research co-creation process, which is a key driver of our project approac h, as 
described in Section 1.2. It will ensure the smooth coordination, implementation, tracking and reporting of each of the 
6 Industry Case Studies or Pilots that will be implemented in the subsequent tasks of this WP. Ground rules for pre - 
competitive engagement between industry partners and demarcation between the case studies will be agreed. Then we 
will define and manage the systematic engagement and actions between the researchers and industry partners to 
ensure the research effort in WP1 is led and guided by the needs, manufacturing process understanding and specification  
inputs from the industry partners according to their requirements. Guided facilitation sessions will be organized, with 
the first one in month 3 (and at least every quarter thereafter) to define and review the action plans, manufacturing  
process understanding and methodology for co -design, and for implementing industry inputs in WP1 for the R&D phase  
and for managing the upscaling to Pilots that will be implemented in this WP3. A whole system approach will be taken 
to ensure that additional impacts arising from e.g. product changeovers are considered by researchers and industry  
partners. As far as practicable, the session will be run as virtual meeting to minimize carbon footprint from task 3.1  
activities. Task 3.1 w ill extract common shareable science and lessons from across the case studies. From an  
operational perspective, this task will schedule access to facilities for process upscaling, monitoring and optimization 
for the smooth and timely implementation of each of the Pilots. From a strategic and business perspective, the success 
KPIs for each Pilot will be defined, the fulfillment of which will be tracked for each during the validation and impact 
assessment phase. Finally, the future scale-up risks and barriers associated with each of the Industry Pilots will be 
considered so that future mitigation strategies can inform the Business Plans for post-project exploitation that will be 
drawn up in T6.4. 
 
Task 3.2.1. Processing scalability: The formulation/s selected in WP1 will be scaled up to a pilot plant machine and 
theoretical scalability studies will be carried out at an industrial level, both from the point of view of product quality 
(specific mechanical energy and residence time) and energy calculation. Angelini will be supported by AIMPLAS and 
EE in processing scalability and energy consumption calculations respectively. The most promising semi -processed 
product will be produced in tablet form or filled in capsules. Manufacturing parameters will be investigated and  
optimized to get the best final prototype in term of physical -chemical properties and performance; Task 3.2.2.  
Analytical development & stability studies: Analytical development will continue during the phases of the sca le-up 
following same protocol as described in WP1. At the end of the previous studies, an evaluation of the stability could be 
carried out to confirm data obtained during the pre-stability study performed in the Pre-formulation trials (WP1). 
 
Based on WP1 results, Angelini  will perform the necessary engineering steps of the distillation unit and the  
implementation in the company, involving the following steps: Project engineering: this phase will be aimed at 
through typical mechanical and electric-instrumental changes in the column (i.e. by replacing the feeding pans, solvent 
recovery apparatus, etc.); Plant implementation: in this phase we plan to implement what engineered, through the  
collaboration with external providers.Testing of the n ew process in an industrial environment: by testing the new  
process, we expect to verify that the column correctly works, also through blank tests, and then by using real solvents' 
mixture. The new 
distillation unit will be used and tested at pilot scale for the synthesis of trazodone: the solvent(s) recycled will be used 
to produce trazodone on a lab scale, to test the final product quality, obtained through recycled solvent(s). 
 
RJF will produce the final nanoformulated optimized in WP1 and produce them in a bigger scale. The feasibility of the 
purification process by diafiltration will also be studied by purifying the nanoparticles on a larger scale. These methods 
will involve a reduction of solvent and/or energy requirements, as well as the use of less environmentally harmful  
solvents. Thanks to diafiltration, the used organic solvent and other impurities (surfactant, non-loaded drug substance) 
will be separated. The separated solvent and impurities will be sent to AIMPLAS in order to capture the impurities (for 
example non-encapsulated active ingredient). RJF will also perform the purification of nanoparticles produced by  
sonication. The ecotoxicity of the aqueous waste will be compared between classic and greener optimized methods 
Task 3.4 Industry Pilot III (RJ): Better use of solvents (reduction  or elimination).  (Leader: Reig Jofre 
Participants:AIMPLAS, BOKU) 
Task 3.3 Industry Pilot II (Angelini ): Better use of solvents (recycled solvents and solvent substitution) 
(Leader: Angelini .Participants: AIMPLAS, BOKU). 
Task 3.2 Industry Pilot I-(Angelini) : Continuous manufacturing method-Reduction in energy consumption 
(Leader: Angelini Pharma Participants: AIMPLAS, EE). 
Task 3.1 Management of cocreation cycle: Industry requirements, codesign, success KPIs & validation, Impact 
Assessment, Future Scale-up Risks & Barriers (Leader: BRITEST. Participants: Angelini, RJ, QS, AZ, AIMPLAS, 
BOKU, EE, IRIS) 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 37 of 45 
 
 
Based on the information obtained in WP1, RJF will apply the PAT (developed in Task 2.5) and digital twin  
technologies (built in Task 2.4) with IRIS and the use of these technologies will be a step forward in the safe by design 
(SbD) and quality by design (QbD) of the process. 
 Task 3.5 Industry Pilot IV (QS): Embed green chemistry into the synthesis (Leader: QS. P: AIMPLAS, BOKU) 
Target is the production of >1 kg/day of the substance (HNK) at a concentration of 2.0 M for daisy chaining; this  
amount is representative of the rate of production targeting for application of flow chemistry, appropriate in size design 
and efficient because of the exploitation of their remaining stocks of materials for long process robustness trials.  
Previous work, fruit of Flowinova project, has allowed to evaluate the critical points: In the stage 1 of bromination, the 
focus has been on the quenching which undergoes incompletely, and Zaiput separation which is not efficient for high 
flow rates; In the stage 2 of amination, which consist in a series of steps, several limitations and optimizations have  
been identified, i.e. (i) the selection of a suitable reactor which allows a perfect mixing is crucial so both design and  
flow have to be perfectly defined, (ii) t he ratio substrate/ammonia has to be also optimised taken into account that  
higher ratios have shown greater conversions being a concentration of 2.4 M an interesting staring point although some 
precipitation of solids has been observed in product collection so this aspect is something to evaluate and improve. The 
increase of the residence time has been also evaluated but darker colouration and more problems in the separation stage 
have been identified: In the stage 3 of solvent swap, a cascade of CSTRs are required in which dichloromethane and 
ve been 
evaluated and the empirical data have been compared with theoretical values generated by modelling. The design of 
the modular flow reactors in Eternal project will be based on Flow Chemistry fully monitored and it will consist of:  
Self-contained system with its own PLC and safety systems; Typically 2 pumps, one TCU & one reactor; Aim for the 
 
length in a temperature controlled bath so we can finetune residence time. 
Task 3.6 Industry Pilot V (MyB): Continuous manufacturing: greener synthesis of toxic side products (Leader: 
MyB. Participants: AIMPLAS) 
MyB will generate final manufacturing protocol and a batch record to produce Rapamycin with optimized fermentation 
and downstreaming methods in WP1 and produce them in a bigger scale. The demonstration of high purity Rapamycin 
production by using only water as solvent during biotechnological process and the feasibility of the recovery and  
purification process (downstreaming) by MJR will also be studied at larger scale. These methods will yield reduced use of 
solvent and/or energy, as well as the use of less environmentally harmful solvents. The organic solvent waste and  
other impurities from downstreaming will be separated. Fo r batch release, MyB will rely on its already existing  
pharmaceutical quality management system based on GMP regulations where the IPC, QC and batch release methods 
developed will be employed. 
 Task 3.7. Industry Pilot VI (AZ): Better use of solvents (recycling) (Leader: AZ. Participants: AIMPLAS)  
Task 3.7.1 Process translation to an industrial setting: The membrane processes defined in WP1 will be scaled up to 
a Kilo lab scale using the digital twin from WP2 to support the translation to an industrial setting. The process  
performance will be monitored using P  
energy consumption will be collected. Task 3.7.2 Reuse of solvents: The quality of the recovered solvent at the kilo 
scale will be fully assessed with particular scrutiny regarding any potential genotoxic impurities. The recovered solvent 
will be used in a second Kilo batch, with attention on any changes in the process performance or product quality. The 
amount of solvent recovered and the number of times it can be recycled will be defined informing a full life cycle  
analysis of the solvent in the process, and subsequent energy and waste savings. 
Deliverables: D3.1 Report on the initial (month 3) guided facilitation sessions capturing objectives for Pilots, current state 
of process understanding, gaps and actions required (M4); D3.2 Summary of quarterly progress against actions, KPI tracking 
(from M9); D3.3 Report on Pilot I: Continuous manufacturing method-Reduction in energy consumption (M45); D3.4 Report 
on Pilot II: Better use of solvents (recycled and greener alternatives) (M45): D3.5 Report on Pilot III: Better use of solvents 
(reduction or elimination) (M45); D3.6 Report on Pilot IV: Continuous Greener-by-Design synthesis methods (M45); D3.7 
Report on Pilot V: Continuous manufacturing- greener synthesis of toxic side products (M45); D3.8 Report on Pilot VI: 
Solvents purification (M45); D3.9 Scale-up risk assessments for each Pilot (M46) 
 
Objectives: Review the approaches used for the environmental risk assessment (ERA) and life cycle assessment (LCA) 
of pharmaceuticals within the EU in the context of the most up to date scientific knowledge, and to identify novel  
scientific aspects that may be incorporated into assessment tools; Use existing ERA tools, monitoring data &  
environmental hazard information to conduct a ranking exercise to identify the current in -use pharmaceuticals that 
present the greatest & widest risk to aquatic & terrestrial ecosystems & to identify the usage, life cycle, fate & hazard 
drivers of risk for these highest ranked substances; Assess & incorporate novel scientific aspects (e.g. environmental 
medium impacts on fate) into ERA tools & approaches & conduct specific comparative modelling exercises to assess 
the usefulness of such novel aspects; Provide experimental and modelling support, via comparative ERA and LCA, for 
the project case studies; Engage with the European Commission's Joint Research Centre (JRC) in the field of new 
approach methodologies for ecotoxicity assessment. 
Description of work (where appropriate, broken down into tasks), lead partner and role of participants 
 Task 4.1 Knowledge gap identification & prioritization strategy (Leader: UKCEH. Part.: UAVR, ASPHALION)  
We will conduct an assessment of the approaches used for the environmental risk assessment (ERA) and life cycle 
 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 38 of 45 
 
 
 
assessment (LCA) of pharmaceuticals and their production processes within the EU, in the context of the most up to 
date scientific knowledge of the factors influencing pharmaceutical impacts in the environment. The workflow will: 1) 
Review current ERA requirements for pharmaceuticals and assess approaches against the most up to date scientific  
knowledge on aspects of pharmaceutical exposure and effects, e.g. influence of  pH on dissociation and consequent  
bioavailability/exposure mechanisms; 2) Assess life-cycle approaches for evaluating the overall toxicological footprint 
for the production, use and disposal of pharmaceuticals and other chemical classes, to assess their v alue for comparative  
green chemistry assessment; 3) Undertake a gap analysis of current ERA and LCA frameworks based on the knowledge  
gained in 1) and 2), and identify areas where new knowledge could be used to improve existing tools and approaches 
for regulation; 4) Develop a research roadmap for the integration of scientific and regulatory knowledge into  
pharmaceutical risk assessment for fate modelling, bioavailability assessment and receptor identification, for regulatory  
testing and assessment. 
 Task 4.2 Exposure and ecotoxicological gap filling (Leader: UKCEH. Participants: UAVR):  
Conduct a set of focused studies to assess the impact of integrating new scientific knowledge into the ERA and LCA 
of pharmaceuticals. Key aspects to be addressed will cover known emerging gaps in current ERA and LCA  
methodologies, including gaps identified in T4.1. We will conduct 1) Targeted fate and exposure modelling studies to 
assess data availability and model suitability for pharmaceutical fate and transport for exposure assessment using  
existing modelling tools and approaches. The assessment will include identify the current knowledge based on releases 
from different usage scenarios including point source release to wastewater, distributed releases and direct 
environmental input; 2) Studies to assess how new scientific knowledge (e.g. on endocrine disruption, mixture effects) 
on pharmaceutical exposure, uptake and risk identified in Task 4.1 may be integrated into ERA and LCA, including  
where appropriate the generation of new experimental data to support this; 3) Develop an environmental mode of action  
(MoA) catalogue for common pharmaceuticals & assess MoA conservation across species, using knowledge of species 
traits (including receptor conservation derived from genome sequence data) and develop a simple open-source pipeline 
for MoA assessment for ecotoxicological species. 
 Task 4.3 Risk assessment of existing pharmaceutical compounds (Leader: UKCEH. Participants: UAVR)  
We will use selected spatiotemporal exposure and effects modelling tools (identified in Task 4.1), existing monitoring 
data available from national river and groundwater monitoring programs available in Europe (e.g. UK and Portuguese 
chemical investigation programs, NORMAN Network datasets) and published environmental hazard data for 
pharmaceuticals, to conduct a ranking exercise to identify the in -use pharmaceuticals that present the greatest and widest  
risk to aquatic (and where possible terrestrial) ecosystems. To conduct this ranking exercise we will: 1) collate usage 
information and metabolism data to model the environmental fate of high -use pharmaceuticals at European scale to 
model predicted environmental concentration (PEC) ranges for water, sediment and soil environments; 2) Catalogue 
existing surface and groundwater monitoring data and compare these measured to modelled concentrations to derive 
the best reasonable assessment of median and 90 th percentile concentrations for each assessed pharmaceutical; 3) collate  
available hazard information to catalogue the relative toxicity o f pharmaceuticals for different taxa in relation to  
receptor-based predictions of MoAs for taxa based on receptor conservation; 4) Integrate the available modelling and 
monitoring data, hazard information and MoA into a mixture effect modelling framework to assess the contribution of 
individual pharmaceuticals and similar compounds to mixture risks in the environment. 
 Task 4.4 Environmental risk and life cycle analysis within ETERNAL case studies Leader: UAVR. P: UKCEH). 
Work here task will provide relevant ERA & CLA analyses of the case studies to provide information on degree of  
change to environmental & life cycle impacts possible from adoption of proposed process modifications. Includes 1) 
experimental studies to gap -fill data requirements for ERA/LCA of active ingredients & byproducts in case study  
processes, 2) comparative application of existing ERA/LCA approaches to analyse risks & impacts of current  
production & use scenarios & scenarios incorporating changes to production processes proposed in the case studies, 3) 
comparative applic. Of adjusted ERA/LCA approaches developed in T4.2 & applied to existing compounds in T4.3. 
Gaps in data requirements for ERA/LCA of existing & proposed case study processes will be addressed by generation 
of new characterisation and ecotoxicity datasets where necessary, for new proposed compounds, and where appropriate for 
production byproducts. Generate data and follow workflows according to the guidance provided by the European 
Medicines Agency (EMA) on ERA of medicinal products for human use. Take all compounds through both Phase I & 
Phase II risk assessments, to provide data for performing more advanced fate and impact modelling according to  
T4.3.Tests we will conduct comprise: 1) physico-chemical property tests: water solubility (following OECD TG 105), 
octanol/water partitioning (OECD 107), dissociation in water (OECD 112), adsorption-desorption in soil and sludge 
(OECD 106), biodegradability (OECD 301), degradation in soil (OECD 307) as well as the ultraviolet -visible 
absorption spectrum (OECD 101) and vapour pressure (OECD 104) tests if appropriate; 2) aquatic and sediment toxicity  
tests: algae growth inhibition using Raphidocelis subcapitata and following OECD 201 with adaptations and the  
methodology described in Eisentraeger et al. ( 2003); Daphnia sp. reproduction (Daphnia magna, OECD 211); fish 
early life stage toxicity ( Danio rerio Fish Embryo Toxicity test to assess egg unviability & malformations , OECD 236); 
sediment-water toxicity (Chironomus riparius, OECD 218); 3) activated sludge respiration inhibition test (OECD 209). For 
aquatic toxicity, Fish Sexual Development Test (OECD 234) will be deployed for early life-stage effects and potential 
adverse consequences, and Daphnia Multigeneration Test (Draft OECD TG) for multigenerational impacts. Also 
perform tests in soil (chronic earthworm toxicity test, OECD 222, and a soil microbial diversity assay conducted using 
an established amplicon sequencing approach (Read et al 2016). Soil testing will provide hazard data relevant to an 
exposure pathway resulting from the input of human pharmaceuticals to land via sewage sludge application. Further 
work on physicochemical characterisation will be performed if outcomes of gap analysis in T4.1 indicate that such  
additional characterisation is useful for performing more advanced exposure/fate assessment. In particular, if 
knowledge of dissociation constants is indicated for a dissociating compound, we will quantify these using UV-visible 
adsorption spectroscopy and/or potentiometric titration, as appropriate. For each case study, we will derive, in 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 39 of 45 
 
 
consultation with industrial partners, usage and emissions estimates for environmental fate estimation of active  
ingredients, byproducts and associated solvents for current production processes, and for production modified according 
to the goals of the case study work. We will then use the existing and adjusted ERA and LCA approaches outlined in 
T4.3 to provide comparative risk and life cycle assessments for each case study. This will provide both state of the art 
and beyond state-of-the- 
 (Leader: AIMPLAS. Participants: 
UKCEH, UAVR, ASPHALION) 
 
senior scientists from JRC from fields of ecotoxicity (& in particular in relation to the mix of chemicals) & scientific 
evidence for policy making (including new approach methods to regulatory authorities). Fluid collaboration with the 
JRC will ensure we build on existing JRC work in relation to ecotoxicity testing of pharmaceuticals (it is noteworthy 
that one of our contacts in the JRC is the European Coordinator of a network of 35 GLP compliant laboratories from 
across the EU). Involvement of the JRC will centre on capacity building, knowledge building, advisory capacity, and 
communication with policy makers. 
Deliverables: D4.1 Research roadmap and inventory of tools for the integration of existing knowledge into pharma 
risk assessment (M15); D4.2 ; D4.3 Report on exposure and 
ecotoxicological gap filling: targeted modelling and experimental studies, mode of action catalogue (M36); D4.4 
Report on environmental risk assessment of existing pharmaceutical compounds (M42); D4.5 Report on 
environmental risk assessment & life cycle analysis within ETERNAL case studies (M48) 
 
Objectives: A targeted, tailored external communication campaign raising awareness with and engaging target  
stakeholder groups, to catalyze participation for change: Timely and effective dissemination of the project  publishable 
results, making them openly available for use in the academic, research and industrial communities; Define a roadmap 
for and to pilot elements of coordinated measures catalyzing behavioral change in industry, regulatory, healthcare and 
public actors towards sustainable provision and use of medicines; Effectively manage a ed  
and produce a public report on Gender Dimension impacts of our approach 
Description of work (where appropriate, broken down into tasks), lead partner and role of participants 
Task 5.1 Communication activities for engaging and mobilising the participation of our target groups (Leader: 
BRITEST. Participants: All partners will contribute) 
A comprehensive communication plan will be elaborated for the project duration and beyond. Physical and digital  
communication assets will be based upon a defined brand identity (logo, fonts, usage guidelines). These will include 
the project website, key facts presentations and infographics, leaflets, an exhibition banner and posters, press releases 
at kick-off, mid-term and at end of project, regular news updates as blog articles, and annual project newsletters.  
Communications resources will be housed in an electronic repository in the project website (D5.1) for use by all  
partners. Communication campaigns will be delivered to our identified target audiences (Pharmaceutical industry,  
Citizens, Policy Makers, Research Community, Healthcare Services/Practitioners). A public-facing on-line catalogue 
of content (blog articles, press releases, public deliverables, etc.) will be available on the website and will be diffused 
through our social media channels (LinkedIn, Twitter) supported by the Marketing and Communication Departments 
of the partners. Full use will be made of EC channels (e.g., Horizon Results Platform, CORDIS Success Stories), and 
we engage with other relevant EC funded projects working under this call, and any other related topics and themes to 
identify synergies in communications activities in order to increase audience reach and impact. 
Task 5.2 Dissemination of the project results to industry, research and policy makers ( Leader: BRITEST.  
Participants: All partners will contribute) 
The primary goal of the dissemination activities will be the diffusion of the project results into the academic, research 
and industrial communities. participation in prioritized dissemination and networking events will be actively mapped, 
monitored and evaluated through a shared database of dissemination activity (face to face and virtual, trade f airs, 
exhibitions, workshops, seminars, scientific conferences, round tables, etc.) One special conference session and at least 
one scientific/technical workshop will be (co-)organised as part of identified high profile conferences over the project 
lifetime. Scientific publications will be prepared for submission to open access peer reviewed journals and conferences 
(at least 8-10 conferences papers and 10-12 peer reviewed publications are expected over the project lifetime). Project 
results will be made available for use in teaching (for example through visiting industrial lecturers), in course material 
and as a subject for theses in universities. Industry training materials will be developed and training sessions will be 
delivered to industry to coincide with the implementation of the industry upscaled processes and demonstrators. 
Targeted placement of articles and features in relevant trade & industry focussed publications and mainstream popular 
press will be undertaken. A targeted stakeholder engagement event aimed at the priority triple axis of pharma industry, 
regulatory bodies, and healthcare authorities will be arranged by the end of M18 to introduce the 
 
Task 5.3. Final project public dissemination project event for all interested stakeholders will be held at M42. 
 Task 5.3 Change Labs (Leader Britest. All partners involved).  
In this task, we will run a series of Change Labs targeted at promoting behavioral change among business decision 
makers, policy makers, healthcare practitioners and consumers in view of their potential role in sustainable 
 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 40 of 45 
 
 
manufacturing, facilitation, use and disposable practices in line with a green pharmaceuticals strategy. Each Change 
lab will be managed in its own subtask, as follows: Subtask 5.3.1 Business: Green Pharmaceuticals and CSR We will 
target and manage engagement with at least 500 decision makers from across the European Pharmaceutical industry 
from promotion/generation of awareness about ETERNAL and the role that they can play towards responsible green 
pharmaceutical strategies in their companies (embedded in their wider CSR). Leads will be developed to participants 
in demos/trainings/one-on-one follow-ups and    -project 
exploitation phase, whereby we aim to have secured at least 20 Expressions of Interest from the pharma industry for 
varying levels of involvement in scale-up/out work, additional pilots,       - of the technological innovation 
outputs of the project, or other involvement in our Future R&D+I Green Pharmaceuticals Roadmap. Leader: BRITEST. 
Participants: All partners will contribute . Subtask 5.3.2 Policy makers: regulatory as an enabler vs. a barrier to green  
innovation We will reach out to and engage with policy makers and standards bodies. The overall goals are to ensure 
a regulatory framework that enables green innovation, and to ensure that the new/additional science base generated in 
relation to the ecotoxicity and the environmental impact of pharmaceuticals can have an impact in forming policy  
priorities and decision making processes. We will formulate content in the shape of policy whitepapers, and we will 
to promote policy behavioral 
compromising patient/consumer safety). Leader: 
ASPHALION. Participants: UNE, BRITEST Subtask 5.3.3 Healthcare practitioners: ambassadors for Green 
Pharmaceuticals, Sustainable Use & Disposal We will reach out to the healthcare system and practitioners in view of 
their pivotal role in pharmaceutical use (prescriptions) and as key influencers towards informing and educating  
consumers towards safe disposal. Leveraging the reach of organizations like Healthcare Without Harm we will work 
with a pilot study group to codesign a Greener Pharmaceuticals Pledge / Safe Disposal Ambassadors program geared 
towards educating patients as to the importance of safe disposal of unused medication, prescribing green 
pharmaceuticals (where available and in keeping with safety and prescription requirements), responsible prescribing of 
drugs, and in particular antibiotics (in order to mitigate the hazards posed by increased Antimicrobial Resistance).  
Leader: BRITEST. Participants: all. Subtask 5.3.4 Consumers: social innovation and behavioural change for  
sustainable and safe use & disposal Discovering what current behaviors, facilities & arrangements are in place for  
consumers to safely dispose of unused medicines; running focus groups to understand the barriers/challenges, raise  
awareness of the negative impact of incorrect disposal and generate practical ideas of how to improve things; piloting 
these ideas and others to determine feasibility and potential impact; identifying the elements of a future social media 
                         , and performing a pilot social media campaign with  
impactful infographics, with cooperation with SIGRE (NGO working  in promoting the proper environmental 
management of household leftover medicines & raise public awareness of risks stemming from the inappropriate  
disposal of pharmaceutical waste), as well as engagement with initiatives such as #medsdisposal; and delivering a  
roadmap for larger scale deployment of effectives initiatives. Leader: BRITEST. Participants: IRIS 
 Task 5.4 Gendered Innovation (Leader: AIMPLAS. Participants: All partners contribute)   
In this cross-cutting task we will focus on managing and implementing a approach to the work 
plan (as discussed in Section 1.2), whereby we will employ methods of sex, gender, and intersectional analysis as a 
possible source for new knowledge creation. Public interest Gender dimension Report (D5.5 on how gender  
dimension has been integrated across all project stages and the main results and outcomes from a gender perspective. 
Deliverables: D5.1 Project identity, website, and social media presence (M3); D5.2 Plan for dissemination and 
exploitation including communication activities (M6); D5.3 Progress report on implemented communication activities 
and Dissemination Plan updates (M18/36/48); D5.4 Change Labs Impacts- publication showcasing the Change Labs, 
participation, and impact (M42); D5.5 Gender Dimension Report (M44) 
 
Objectives: (1) Manage project resources, risk & contingency planning, and ensure the work is delivered to the highest 
quality in fulfilment with the project objectives and in keeping with the planned budget and schedule, and promote fluid  
collaboration, facilitate cross-team, interdisciplinary collaboration and communication among the internal team; (2)  
Manage and implement an IP strategy for protection of our novel results through patents, utility models, trade secrets, 
as well as trademarking the ETERNAL brand; (3) Draw up, maintain & implement a robust Data Management Plan 
that complies with FAIR practices; (4) Ensure the project adheres to the principles of Open Science; (5) Manage the 
collaboration and linkage with the relevant research and innovation projects, initiatives and networks for mutual impact and 
for avoiding R&I duplication and overlap: (6) Design a post-project exploitation strategy for further scale up of the project 
results, in planning the Go to Market (GTM) strategy, the business models for monetization, business plans and target 
Time to Market (TTM) for the commercially exploitable resu lts; (7) Draw up Future Research and Innovation  
Roadmap for continuing the greening of the European Pharmaceutical industry and for contributing to its 
competitiveness; (8) Provide starting information to other WPs to ensure compatibility & interoperability with what 
already exists in the market through standards; (9) Contribute to development of new standards to facilitate market 
acceptance of the project results. 
Description of work (where appropriate, broken down into tasks), lead partner and role of participants 
Task 6.1 Project Management: structure and procedures (Leader: AIMPLAS. Participants: ALL): AIMPLAS will 
lead partners in project monitoring & control (to ensure workplan is delivered according to schedule, budget and 
 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 41 of 45 
 
 
 
expected quality), risk management (based on the initial risk identification reported in Table 3.1e, which will be  
managed and updated based on a continuous culture of risk management for early identification and risk mitigation), 
as well as fulfilment of contractual requirements with the EC. AIMPLAS will lead this task and all partners will be  
involved to ensure the robust management of resources. Each partner will ensure effective use of their own resources 
through careful internal project management. Int ernal reports will frequently be prepared by WP leaders (every 6  
months) to fuel the contractual reporting to the EC. To ensure sound governance of the project, a Project Management 
Board (PMB) will be appointed (with one senior representative of each part ner). This Board will be chaired by the  
Project Manager, Dr. Raquel Llorens Chiralt from the Health Group of AIMPLAS, and will meet every 6 months 
to manage project oversight, review, and planning, as well as for taking decisions of strategic importance to the  
consortium (each Partner will be assigned a vote, and decisions will be taken based on simple majority). The Project 
Management Board will manage the engagement with the External Stakeholders Group of additional multiactors 
(water treatment companies, solvent recycling companies, Novartis, JRC). As described in Section 1.2, to promote the 
seamless integration of the inter-disciplines mobilised in our workplan, an Interdisciplinary Strategic Committee (ISC), 
involving senior researchers from each of the different expert teams across the partners will be established and will  
assume responsibility for the definition of the internal working strategies for the consolidation of the interdisciplinary 
R&D programme with the aim of by minimising redundancy, balancing diversity and complementarity, and capitalizing 
on synergies in information, knowledge, cultures and techniques. The ISC will be chaired by the experienced Senior 
Innovation Specialist, Rob Peeling (Britest), & report to the Project Management Board every 6 months. 
Task 6.2 IPR Management, Data Management & Open Science. (Leader: INLECOM. Participants: ALL): This task 
is divided into three inter-related subtasks: Subtask 6.2.1 IPR Management and Technology Watch: The outputs/results 
generated by the project will be analysed as they emerge. Up-to-date reviews of the state-of-the-art and patents will be 
performed periodically to continually confirm Freedom to Operate (FTO) and the novelty of the Key Exploitable  
Results (KERs). A review and analysis of the most appropriate IPR tools to protect the different research results will 
 
Subtask 6.2.2 
Data Management and FAIR compliance: Sound data management in compliance with FAIR practices. A formal FAIR 
and GDPR compliant data management plan (DMP) (D6.2) will be drawn up, maintained and implemented, which will 
outline: which data will be generated during research; metadata, standards and quality assurance measures; plans for 
sharing data; copyright and intellectual property rights of data; data storage and back-up measures; data management 
roles and responsibilities. The DMP will evolve during the lifetime of the project in order to present the status of the 
project's reflections on data management. Subtask 6.2.3 Open Science: Management of the adherence of our project to 
the principles of 'open science', whereby we will ensure: 1) Early and open sharing of research; 2) Promote open access 
to research data and other related research outputs; 3) effective research output management; 4) implementation of  
measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs; 5) the meaningful involvement of all relevant knowledge actors 
including citizens, civil society and end users in the co-creation of content, as well as Citizen Science 
Task 6.3 Collaboration and Linkage with other relevant projects ( Leader: AIMPLAS. Participants: ALL) : 
ETERNAL will outline and enlarge the list of European projects related to Green Pharmaceuticals calls in order to find 
synergies and collaboration opportunities. Additionally, any partner participating or cooperating in national or  
international projects related to the lines and impacts of this project will notify the Project Coordinator (Dr. Raquel  
Llorens, AIMPLAS) & Dissemination manager (John Henderson, Britest) 
Task 6.4 Exploitation and business planning (Leader: INLECOM. Participants: ALL: exploitation strategies will be 
further developed for each of the case studies and technological innovations and corresponding business plans will be 
drawn up. The Business Model Canvas (BMC) will be used as a lean tool for facilitating business model development. 
A first draft of a BMC has been created at proposal stage (see Table 12). However, this current version has bundled all 
the business cases into one BMC, and as such during project implementation phase, each business case owner will  
further develop their own BMC and will iterate out to a more complete business plan, which will also consider the  
financing route towards deployment to ensure a competitive Time to Market (TTM). 
Task 6.5 Recommendations for a Future Research and Innovation Roadmap (Leader: AIMPLAS. Participants: 
ALL).: Map out Roadmap for post project scale up of the technological innovations from the project, & the further  
research and innovation opportunities identified over the 4 years of the ETERNAL project, along with the future funding  
and investment requirements and plans, the regulatory and other barriers that still need to be addressed, with a few to 
ensuing the continuity and extension of the ETERNAL R&D efforts for long-term impact. 
 Task 6.6 Standardization activities (Leader: UNE. Participants: ALL)  
Subtask T6.6.1: Analysis of the applicable standardization landscape (M1-M6): Based on the needs and activities of 
the WPs, the relevant standardization landscape together with applicable standards will be identified. The results of this 
subtask will be the basis for the contribution to standardization and the dissemination of the project and its results. 
Subtask T6.6.2: Contribution to the ongoing and future standardization developments (M7-M48): The possibility and 
the extent to which a contribution to standardization can be made will be investigated through interacting with the  
relevant technical standardization committees, disseminating the project and getting feedback from their members. The 
main outcome is contribution to the development of new standards in topics related to green solvents and 
their production. Depending on the ongoing works of the committees around the midpoint of the project, this may  
involve providing information, participating in ongoing works, submitting proposals for the modification of existing 
standards or promoting the elaboration of new standards like technical specifications (TS). The development of fast- 
track standards like CEN Workshop Agreements (CWA) is usually the best-suited option in the frame of a Horizon 
Europe project. 
Deliverables: D6.1 Project Management Tool (M1)- online collaboration tool; D6.2 Data Management Plan (M6)- 
contractual deliverable; D6.3 Internal Project Progress Report- including Risk indicators and Risk assessment (M9)- 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 42 of 45 
 
 
 
internal reports delivered at M9/18/27/36/48 thereafter- will feed into the formal contractual reporting to the EC; D6.4 
IPR, Data Management and Open Science Report (M24/48); D6.5 Business Plans for the key exploitable results 
(M24/M48); D6.6 Future Research and Innovation Roadmap (M48); D6.7 Report on the standardization landscape and 
applicable standards (M6); D6.8 Report on the contribution to standardization (M12, M30, M48) 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables. 
Del. # Deliverable name WP 
number 
Lead 
participant Type Dissemi- 
ation level 
Delivery 
date 
D1.1 Report on Case Study I: Continuous manufacturing method-Reduction in energy consumption 1 ANGELINI R RES M12/24 
D1.2 Report on Case Study II: Better use of solvents (recycled & greener alternatives) 1 ANGELINI DEM RES M12/24 
D1.3 Report on Case Study III: Better use of solvents (reduction or elimination) 1 RJ DEM RES M12/24 
D1.4 Report on Case Study IV: Continuous Greener-by-Design synthesis methods 1 QS DEM RES M12/24 
D1.5 Report on Case Study V: Continuous manufacturing- greener synthesis of toxic side products 1 MyB DEM RES M12/24 
D1.6 Report on Case Study VI: Solvents purification 1 AZ DEM RES M12/24 
D1.7 Report on technologies for reducing impact of the end of life pharmaceuticals 1 BOKU DEM RES M12/24 
D2.1 Roadmap for adoption of PAT and Digital Twin Technologies (including regulatory compliance 
requirements) 2 IRIS R PU M9 
D2.2 -by- -drivers and roadmap of the possible regulatory 
-by- 2 IRIS R PU M12 
D2.3 Report on HRA and holonification strategy 2 IRIS R RES M12 
D2.4 Digital workflow in a software toolkit 2 IRIS DEM RES M18/45 
D2.5 Holonics multi-agent based Digital Twin builder tool 2 IRIS DEM RES M20 
D2.6 Digital Twin of selected ETERNAL processes 2 IRIS DEM RES M24/M45 
D2.7 PAT + AI Tools 2 ASPH. DEM RES M30 
D3.1 Report on the initial (month 3) guided facilitation sessions capturing objectives for Pilots, 
current state of process understanding, gaps and actions required 
3 BRITEST R RES M4 
D3.2 Summary of quarterly progress against actions, KPI tracking 3 BRITEST R RES M9 
D3.3 Report on Pilot I: Continuous manufacturing method-Reduction in energy consumption 3 ANGELINI DEM RES M45 
D3.4 Report on Pilot II: Better use of solvents (recycled and greener alternatives) 3 ANGELINI DEM RES M45 
D3.5 Report on Pilot III: Better use of solvents (reduction or elimination) 3 RJ DEM RES M45 
D3.6 Report on Pilot IV: Continuous Greener-by-Design synthesis methods 3 QS DEM RES M45 
D3.7 Report on Pilot V: Continuous manufacturing- greener synthesis of toxic side products 3 MyB DEM RES M45 
D3.8 Report on Pilot VI: Solvents purification 3 AZ DEM RES M45 
D3.9 Scale-up risk assessments for each Pilot 3 BRITEST  RES M46 
D4.1 Research roadmap and inventory of tools for the integration of existing knowledge into pharma 
risk assessment 
4 UKCEH R PU M15 
D4.2  4 AIMPLAS R PU M24/48 
D4.3 Report on exposure and ecotoxicological gap filling: targeted modelling and experimental 
studies, mode of action catalogue 
4 UKCEH R PU M36 
D4.4 Report on ERA of existing pharmaceutical compounds 4 UVAR R PU M42 
D4.5 Report on environmental risk assessment and life cycle analysis within ETERNAL case studies 4 UKCEH R PU M48 
D5.1 Project website 5 BRITEST DEC PU M3 
D5.2 Plan for dissemination and exploitation including communication activities 5 BRITEST R SEN M6 
D5.3 Progress report on implemented communication activities and Dissemination Plan updates 5 BRITEST R CO M18/36/48 
D5.4 Change Lab Impacts summary 5 BRITEST OTHER PU M42 
D5.5 Gender Dimension Report 5 AIMPLAS R PU M44 
D6.1 Project Management Tool 6 AIMPLAS OTHER CO M1 
D6.2 Data Management Plan (DMP) 6 INLECOM DMP PU M6 
D6.3 Internal Progress Report, including Risk indicators and Risk assessment 6 AIMPLAS R PU M9/18/27/36 
/48 
D6.4 IPR, Data Management and Open Science Report 6 INLECOM R CO M24/48 
D6.5 Business Plans for the key exploitable results 6 INLECOM   M24/48 
D6.6 Future Research and Innovation Roadmap 6 AIMPLAS   M48 
D6.7 Report on the standardization landscape and applicable standards 6 UNE R PU M6 
D6.8 Report on the contribution to standardization 6 UNE R PU M12/30/48 
Table 3.1d: List of milestones 
Ml # Milestone name Related 
WP(s) 
Due 
date 
Means of verification 
1 Pilot KPIs revised in line with process understanding, 
gaps and actions required 
WP3 M4 Consensus between industry and research partners on reports (D3.1) 
from initial guided facilitation sessions 
2 Compliance implications of Case Studies/Pilots WP1, 2, 3 M12 Report on the regulatory and compliance requirements (D2.2) 
3 Existing knowledge integrated into pharma risk 
assessment 
WP4 M15 Research roadmap & tools for fate modelling, bioavailability 
assessment & receptor identification, regulatory testing & 
assessment (D4.1) 
4 6 Green Innovation Case Studies scaled to TRL4 WP1 M24 All technologies successfully validated at lab scale (D1.1-D1.6) 
5 1st iterations of Digital Twins for 3 case studies WP2 M24 Virtual replicas of Case Studies 3, 5 and 6 
6 First iterations of the Business Plans for the Key 
Exploitable Results 
WP6 M24 Business Model Canvas and first iteration of business plan 
completed by each commercial partner in the project 
7 Effective technologies validated for reducing impact of 
the end of life pharmaceuticals 
WP1, WP4 M30 Verified through ecotoxicity assessments 
8 Ranking of in-use pharmaceuticals posing greatest & 
widest risk to aquatic (and terrestrial) ecosystems 
WP4 M42 Reports on ERA of existing pharmaceutical compounds 
9 Scientific evidence effectively communicated to 
relevant policies and strategies 
WP5 M42 Participation in consultations reported (via Change Lab impact 
reports- D5.4) 
10 The 6 ETERNAL Green Innovations have been 
successfully piloted to TRL6 
WP3 M45 Technologies demonstrated in industrially relevant 
environment at each Pharma site 
11 Roadmap for post-project scale up towards 
commissioning and deployment 
WP2, WP4, 
WP6 
M48 Risk assessments, compliance and environmental impact reports 
qualify each Pilot for further scale up 
Table 3.1e: Critical risks for implementation.  
Description of risk (indicate level of (i) likelihood, and 
(ii) severity: Low/Medium/High) 
WP (s) 
involved 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Failure to accomplish deadlines and EC procedures leading 
to delays (likelihood: low, severity: medium) 
All Experienced Coordinator that will keep continuously updated about new procedures. Use 
digital tools to facilitate engagement, cooperation & visibility 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 43 of 45 
 
 
 
 
Complexities and challenges posed by the R&D phase of the 
ETERNAL green technologies pose delays that have a 
knock on effect in WP3 (or prevent implementation  of 
industry Pilots). (likelihood: medium, severity: medium) 
1, 3 Early identification of problems or challenges will ensure that the multi -disciplinary 
research-industry teams can have working sessions to discuss how to overcome 
problems/challenges. Modifications to timings will be made as appropriate. The digital  
twinning will help to mitigate such challenges by helping to understand (and predict 
behavior) of complex processes with multivariate parameters. 
Lack of available process data for building the digital twins 
(likelihood: medium, severity: medium) 
2 Use of dummy data for developing a first version of the models to make them ready to 
process real data when available from WP1 & subsequently WP2. 
Regulatory compliance poses challenges/barriers for the 
future developments (likelihood: low, severity: high) 
1, 2, 3 Early assessment of compliance implications will ensure timely identification of barriers. 
Meetings will be held with the experts from Asphalion and researchers to review 
compliance issues and plan out research requirements. It is already confirmed that none 
of the technologies will present a No/Go. 
Inability to achieve effective and timely information an 
feedback flows (likelihood: low, severity: high) 
3, 1 Mitigated by Cocreation Management in M3 that from project outset will organize 
working sessions. Individual meetings between pharma companies and research team will 
foment focused channels for information flow. 
Cooperation does not materialise with JRC 
(likelihood: low; severity: medium) 
4 We already had a working meeting with JRC and identified key researchers who are aware 
of ETERNAL and have confirmed their interest in being involved. Early engagement 
with JRC prior to signature of Grant Agreement should ensure timely 
cooperation with JRC. 
Insufficient open availability of usage and life data, e.g. 
disposal amounts) for medicinal products 
(likelihood: low; severity: medium) 
4 Open and maintain communication and networking channels with industrial partners and 
to leverage the assistance of partners in obtaining required data, including the generation 
of specific confidentiality agreements regarding data use if and when appropriate 
Lack of participation of target actors in the Change Labs 5 Improved information campaigns will be designed (in consultation with the behavioral 
/marketing/humanities experts Britest has reserved subcontracting budget for) 
IPR/innovation conflicts which could hinder cooperation as 
well as post project exploitation (likelihood: low, severity: 
high) 
5 IPR rules already understood and principles agreed. Solid Consortium Agreement will be 
signed clear rules, Background included/excluded, clear IPR ownership & consensus and 
conflict resolution mechanisms through the IPREB, external arbitration if necessary. 
Partners not committed, under-performing, lack capabilities 
or leaving leading to delays or work not done (likelihood: 
low, severity: medium) 
6 Partners have a strong network of contacts that can replace such a partner and the RTOs 
have broad capabilities to fill any temporary gaps. Regular communication & monitoring 
of consortium status: early anomaly detection 
Insufficient cooperation among Partners, and inability to 
effectively manage the inter-disciplinary opportunity 
(likelihood: low, severity: medium) 
6 Frequent meetings to keep partners connected. Strong and proven Organizational 
structure to ensure workflow, with then inclusion of the Interdisciplinary Strategic 
Committee (ISC) and experienced Chair. 
Project outcomes are not compatible with existing market 
procedures expressed through standards. 
(likelihood: low, severity: high) 
6 A detailed overview on the relevant standards will be prepared at early project stage and 
will considered throughout the development of the tools and processes. 
Future standards will exclude or limit the applicability of the 
new tools and processes. 
(likelihood: low, severity: high) 
6 The project and its results will be disseminated to the relevant standardization technical 
committees. Based on the planned project outcomes, a broad contribution to future 
standardization will be made. 
Table 3.1f: Summary of staff effort 
 
 
Participant Number/Short Name: 7/BRITEST 
 
 
 Description of tasks and justification 
Subcontracting 61,400 Hire of specialist consultant facilitation and human behavioural expertise to deliver subtasks 5.3.3 and 5.3.4 
services) 
 
       
 
 
  
 
  
     
     
 
 
  
 
  
     
     
     

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 44 of 45 
 
 
       
 
 
  
 
  
     
     
       
     
     
       
 
 
     
     
   
 
 
 
   
 
     
     
 
 
 
    
    
 
     
     
e.g., internally invoiced goods and services)- Not applicable.