3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
Bringing together public and private organisations across Europe and mobilising a cocreation among research actors 
from a complete European industry value chain is key for the interdisciplinary and systems approach needed for 
creating a Green  Pharmaceuticals movement  in Europe.  ETERNAL unites a  world class consortium of  16 
organisations from across 7 countries from Europe - 6 Member States (Spain, Italy, Ireland, Germany, Austria,  
Portugal) and 1 Associated Country (UK). The team pools together complementary expertise and competencies of 
partners representing academic/research and industrial excellence in their respective fields, consisting of academic 
universities and research institutes (AIMPLAS, BOKU, UKCEH, UAVR), leading pharmaceutical industries 
(MyB, ANGELINI, REIG JOFRE, QUOTIENT SCIENCE, AstraZeneca), technology SME (IRIS), environmental 
engineering and consulting SME (ENVIROEYE), chemical process design SME (BRITEST), an SME 
International Scientific and Regulatory Affairs consultancy (ASPHALION) and standards body (UNE), as well 
as an SME innovation services enabler in the fields of Intellectual Property, Open Science  and Data  
Management. In addition, we will also involve the EC (JRC) in the field of new approach 
methodologies for ecotoxicity assessment; we have already outreached to them and they will engage duly with the 
or their 
involvement and we have included a Task in our workplan for managing this). 
The consortium represents a complete storyboard of actors for implementing the project workplan and for fulfilling 
its objectives and impacts. Figure 3 maps each partner in relation to their core role in the project, which reinforces 
how each partner is relevant and complementary and that there are no knowledge/competence gaps in the consortium. As 
a condition to generate growth, there is solid industrial/commercial involvement. This allows us to implement a 
research-industry cocreation, whereby the industry partners enable a full innovation cycle. They inform their  
requirements to the research and technology providers based on their case study applications for research codesign, 
scale-up, piloting and validation in industry (and tracking pre-defined KPIs). The industry partners (4 corporates and 
5 SMEs) represent the value chain of upstream pharma (QS) and downstream (RJ, AZ, MyB) manufacturers, as well 
as technology (IRIS, MyB) and service providers and consultancies (Britest, EE, INL, ASP) who together will ensure 
a pathway for the protection, further development and industrial implementation and compliance of the innovations, 
as well as their wider deployment in the pharmaceutical industry across Europe. ETERNAL is considered highly 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 45 of 45 
 
 
strategic for assisting them in gaining a competitive edge and in being a pioneering group in driving forward European  
green pharmaceutical leadership and competitiveness. Each industry participant will be able to grow their businesses 
and competitiveness in line with their position on the value chain. 
 
Figure 3- The core role of each member of the ETERNAL consortium 
The consortium unites a strong understanding of gender issues and inclusiveness, and has an equitable Gender 
dimension: Project Coordinator, Dr. Raquel Llorens Chiralt is an experienced and leading engineer from AIMPLAS, and 
there is a strong participation of other female researchers, engineers, technol ogists, industrialists, business experts  and 
entrepreneurs, as well as policy influencers. Moreover, the majority of our partners either have a formal Gender 
Equality Plan (GEP) in place in their organisations or are in the process of implementing one. 
Regarding the critical infrastructure being mobilised by each partner, as this is a project that involves considerable 
process innovation, access to the relevant laboratory, pilot and industrial facilities is vital. Major infrastructure and 
facilities that will be made available to the project include: Hot Melt Extrusion Pilot process, clean rooms and reactors  
(AIMPLAS, Angelini); Established PQMS, GMP compliant continuous manufacturing equipment, fully equipped 
labs for API, (nano)pharmaceuticals and end-product characterization, IPC, QC and batch release (MyB); 
Spectroscopy and optics laboratory and Chemical Analytic Laboratory (IRIS); UKCEH possesses specialist, fully- 
equipped laboratories for ecotoxicological and analytical chemistry research including analytical facilities for organic 
chemical analysis in surface waters, soils and sediments (GCMS, LCMS, TOF -GCMS)-analytical chemistry  
laboratories are accredited to ISO 17025:2017 for many of the analyses undertaken; Reactor for synthesis of APIs, 
filtration systems etc (QS, RJ, Angelini, AZ). 
Regarding adequacy of resources to fulfil their role , each partner is experienced in building budgets and in 
planning forward required resources. This has been done using a bottom -up methodology, aligning the necessary 
resources with the level of work to be done. There is a logical budget distribution among the partners. Each has  
mobilised the necessary personnel resources/person months (Table 3.1f: Summary of staff effort) and 
infrastructure to get the job done in a competitive timeframe. These reflect the realistic staff effort required to deliver 
the project objectives, and have been costed up based on actual costs for researchers, engineers, developers and other 
professionals for each partner organisation. These personnel costs are in line with average staff costs within the  
sectors and reflect the differences in cost of living between the different participating EU regions. Equipment costs 
included in the project are for depreciation only, and as relevant partners have budgeted and itemised this equipment 
services) and 
 
for travel to allow for mobility of developers and industrialists between sites (and a high level of virtual engagement 
will supplement face to face meetings. Partners have budgeted for diverse goods and services, such as funds for 
Laboratory and Prototyping consumables, publishing in Open Journals, Patenting fees (attorney and application  
costs), Subscription to Conferences and Events, among others (itemised in Table 3.1h). 
In short, the partners have worked very closely together in numerous working sessions to codesign the workplan 
and its associated budget. All partners are motivated to contribute a clear value to the project in keeping with their 
positioning on the scientific, technological or pharmaceutical value chain, each is performing a synergistic and  
complimentary role, and has the necessary resources and budget to be able to implement this role. 
Other countries and international organisations:  ETERNAL consortium has strong linkages in research and  
innovation with many other national, European and international projects around the world. New relations and 
collaborations will be forged with other relevant projects over the course of the project with the view to maximising 
synergies and establishing enduring international scientific relationships.