1.1 Objectives and ambition 
Access to safe, qualitative and effective pharmaceutical treatments must remain fully available to citizens and  
animals. This comes to light during the ongoing COVID -19 pandemic probably more than ever, including the 
need for sustainable supply chains and consumption patterns. At the same time, it must be avoided that there 
is an undue impact of pharmaceutical residues on the environment. Indeed, as highlighted by the pandemic, our 
health and well-being strongly depend on a healthy environment1. 
 
1 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-dangersub/pdf/Progress_Overview%20PiE_KH0320727ENN.pdf 
Boosting thE reducTion of the EnviRonmeNtal impact of phArmaceuticaL products throughout 
their entire life cycle. 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 2 of 45 
 
 
In view of an expected increase in medicine consumption in Europe (and indeed worldwide) due to rising demand 
from ageing populations and a general growing dependence on pharmaceutical drugs, pharmaceuticals are a priority 
area from an environmental health perspective. One area of growing concern stems from the presence of 
pharmaceutical residues that can enter the environment  at all  stages of their  life cycle (via effluents  from 
manufacturing, natural excretion, or improper disposal), and can accumulate in fish, vegetables, livestock, and end 
up in drinking water. Indeed, more than 770 pharmaceuticals and their metabolites have been found in the  
environment worldwide and there is concern about the potential consequential harm to human he alth and the  
environment. Alarm was raised several years ago over the unexpectedly lethal effect of the painkiller diclofenac on 
vultures in Asia, which were exposed to it via the carcasses of cattle treated with it. More recently, the unexpected 
presence of nitrosamine impurities in some medicines  has highlighted the importance of a sound system for detecting  
quality problems and of compliance man agement. Nitrosamines are chemical compounds classified as probable  
human carcinogens on the basis of animal studies. 
On 11 March 2019, the Commission adopted a strategic approach to pharmaceuticals in the environment (as required 
by Article 8c of Directive 2008/105/EC as amended by Directive 2013/39/EU). The approach covers all phases of 
the lifecycle of pharmaceuticals, from design and production through to use and disposal . To address such  
problems and abate these concerns, the ETERNAL project aims to: 
a) boost the reduction of the environmental impact of pharmaceutical products by advancing a roadmap of  
technological innovations in the fields of biocatalysts, carcinogenic impurity capture, substitution of non- 
recycled solvents, correct treatment of recycled solvents, membrane technology, continuous 
manufacturing processing and digitalization towards a) green production methods and b) a one-step disposal 
where drugs are fully metabolised in the body and break down immediately and harmlessly in the environment. 
This work will be performed in an industry-research-compliance codesign space that addresses the 
pharmaceutical industry (including SME) needs from the outset, to ensure that the project scales up deployable 
technical solutions and relevant data, and that also integrates the regulatory perspective. 
b) increase the understanding of the environmental impact and toxicity of pharmaceuticals among industry, 
the research community and regulators to inform pharmaceutical strategies and policies based on scientific  
evidence. A key feature will be a holistic full systems approach, considering the full life cycle impact, from  
manufacture onwards (also considering such aspects as plant cleaning and the entry of cleaning solvents into the 
environment, supply chain . Thus, among industry, academia and risk assessors , the need to assess the  
environmental impact of pharmaceuticals from a whole life cycle perspective (including for example, the risks 
of other chemicals and byproducts at the production stage, and end-of-life considerations), will be highlighted. 
c) create an opportunity to catalyse behavioural change or social innovation by: 
i. informing consumers/patients about safe disposal methods for unused or expired medicines. Whilst  
pharmaceutical residues can enter the environment during the production, consumption and disposal,  
incorrect disposal of household pharmaceutical waste is considered the second major pathway into 
the environment; European citizens do not know how to dispose of unwanted medicines safely, their  
common disposal practices being toilet, sink and household rubbish2. 
ii. promoting the choosing of the least environmentally-hazardous medicines among healthcare 
practitioners, as well as sensitizing around the area of improved prescription accuracy (according to 
the , 30-40% of antibiotics are misused or wrongly diagnosed), which ensures we also  
integrate the public health perspective. 
Within this framework, Table 1 outlines the measurable and verifiable objectives of the ETERNAL project: 
Table 1- Measurable and verifiable objectives of the ETERNAL project 
Objective 1: To launch a cocreation lab to ensure the mobilization of an industry-research-compliance partnership that 
facilitates codesign in an application-industry oriented R&D initiative 
Scoping sessions between the research -technological development teams and the pharmaceutical industry hosts  of the 6  
Case Studies to codesign the application-oriented developments (building on the initial Case Study descriptions outlined in 
Section 3.1b) 
Definition of the specifications, industry requirements, business/environmental impact KPIs and regulatory compliance  
requirements for each of the Case Studies to inform the R&D (TRL3 -4) and further scale up (TRL5 -6) of the ETERNAL  
green chemistry, mechanochemistry and digitalization innovations (WP1, WP2, WP3). 
Objective 2: To reduce the use of solvents and increase of green solvents (Final TRL 5-6) 
Reduction in solvent use thanks to the inclusion of continuous technologies and new synthetic routes (WP1/WP3. The  
objective will be validating in case studies of MyB, RJF, QS). The reduction of solvent is linked directly to the technology 
applied and its complexity. It is expected a reduction between 20 -40% considering each case study. The reduction will be  
confirm comparing the new process with traditional ones. 
Application of greener solvents (biobased solvents and ionic liquids, e.g. ethyl lactate and others) in new synthesis routes  
applied by pharmaceutical companies (WP1/WP3): case studies of RJF, MyB and QS. In case of solvent substitution is 
expected to replace the 100% of the solvent used by a greener or biobased alternative 
 
2 https://pharmaenvironment.org/#I-am-a-pharmaceutical-manufacturer-what-can-I-do 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 3 of 45 
 
 
Objective 3: To optimize solvent recycle/recovery options for processes with potential carcinogenic impurities like 
nitrosamines. (TRL5-6) 
This objective is linked to WP1/WP3 and specifically to case studies of AZ, Angelini Pharma 
Application of membrane technology and other technologies for solvent swaps, purification and product recovery resulting in  
lower energy consumption. Increase of 15-25% of recycled isobutyl, and up to 90% in case of Astra Zeneca solvent. 
Objective 4: To apply mechanochemistry  in the production of pharmaceutical products (HME) (TRL5-6) 
Linked to WP1/WP3. Angelini Pharma´ case study. Application of Hot Melt Extrusion in the obtaining of pharmaceutical 
formulations for immediate or modified release- ADS (amorphous solid dispersions) and CSD (crystalline solid dispersions). 
The validation of this objectives will be provided after the analysis of the product quality (comparison with batch process). 
Objective 5: To develop more eco-efficient purification/capture  routes (for solvents and wastewater) with biobased 
products (TRL3-4) 
Linked to WP1/WP3. Case studies: JRF, Angelini Pharma, AZ, QS  
Enzymatic degradation of molecules at their end-of-life (waste efluents) 
Capture of   
chitosan. 
Validated by analysis of intermediate of final products along the process line. 
Objective 6: To develop innovative workflow digitalization, Process Analytical Technology (PAT) and Digital Twin 
solutions to enable Quality by Design and Continuous Manufacturing for  competitive  and scalable  methods  of 
production 
Develop digital workflow for efficient chemical process data transfer, capturing & transferring of FAIR data between  
organisations to enable faster development of scalable methods using fewer resources (20-50%) 
Development of a versatile Process Analytical  Technology and Machine Learning Platform that can enable a Quality -by- 
Design (and Green -by-Design) approach to increase process understanding and facilitate the scale up of the innovative  
ETERNAL processes.  
Architect a multi -agent Holonics -based Digital Twin framework for increased process understanding, optimisation,  
predictive capability, a by -design link between process variables and environmental impact KPIs and dynamic control of  
continuous manufacturing processes in the pharmaceutical industry, which will be implemented and validated on selected 
ETERNAL case studies.  
Objective 7: To scale up the innovations in 6 industrial pilots hosted in pharmaceutical partners (TRL5-6) 
Scale up the green chemistry, mechanochemistry and continuous process innovations at the sites of the participating 
pharmaceutical companies: i) HME (hot melt extrusion); ii) Discontinuous Synthesis (batch reaction) using recycled Isobutyl  
and acetone and/or substitution by greener or biobased alternatives; iii) Rapid microfluidic mixing combined with Diafiltration; 
iv) Modular flow reactors continuous systems; v) Genome engineering for strain optimization, bioprocessing intensification  
and microjet reactor technology (MJR) for downstreaming processes; vi) Membrane purification. Validation: feasibility of the 
process, quality of the products obtained, evaluation of final ERA. 
Objective 8: To assess the regulatory implications of the adoption of the innovations and to ensure a pathway to 
compliance 
First-hand information on the latest developments in the scientific review, regulation and marketing authorisation procedures 
-by-  developments as part of the 
ETERNAL cocreation process 
Objective 9:  To  generate  new  scientific  knowledge  on  the  environmental  fate  and  eco-toxicological  effects  of 
pharmaceuticals 
Conduct an assessment of the approaches used for the environmental risk assessment (ERA) and life cycle assessment  
(LCA) of pharmaceuticals within the EU in the context of the most up to date scientific knowl edge, and to identify areas  
of novel science which may be incorporated into ERA/LCA  tools and processes. 
Assess and incorporate novel scientific aspects (e.g. environmental medium impacts on fate) into ERA tools and approaches and 
conduct specific comparative modelling exercises to assess the usefulness of such novel aspects. 
Use existing & updated ERA tools, monitoring data & environmental hazard information to conduct a ranking to identify  
the current in-use pharmaceuticals that present the greate st & widest risk to aquatic & terrestrial ecosystems & to identify  
the usage, life cycle, fate & hazard drivers of risk for highest ranked substances. 
Provide experimental and modelling support, via comparative ERA & LCA, for the project case studies, including  
comparative modelling studies to assess the environmental and life effects of modified production processes and new  
compounds. 
Cooperate with E     Joint Research Centre (JRC) in new approach methodologies for ecotoxicity assessment. 
Objective 10: To catalyse behavioural change, participation and social innovation for reducing the environmental 
impacts of pharmaceuticals in terms of safe use and disposal 
Target industry decision-makers to promote the ETERNAL innovations and their future adoption (20 EOIs) 
Propose strategies for educating/informing consumers/citizens towards responsible and safe disposal of unwanted 
medicines (and Pilot Infographic  campaign on social media) 
Inform and equip Healthcare practitioners to enable and promote the prescription of sustainable drug options where  
available (30 Pilot Group) 
Outreach to Regulatory bodies and influential policymakers (10+ consultations) to disseminate project findings on the 
environmental impact of pharmaceuticals, and ensure that public authorities can inform pharmaceutical strategies & polices  
based on scientific evidences. P     encourage re-validation of greener routes for 
overcoming the regulatory (validation) barriers to the adoption of new, greener routes for existing APIs 
 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 4 of 45 
 
 
The following diagram maps shows our objectives are pertinent to the work programme topic: 
Figure 1- Mapping of how the ETERNAL objectives are pertinent to the work programme 
Going beyond the state-of-the-art 
Problem: The manufacture of chemicals has the potential to generate significant amounts of waste by-products and 
pollutants, such as contaminated solvents, depleted reagents, and air pollutants. Pharmaceutical manufacture can be 
a significant contributor to these factors. Table 2 reveals that the manufacture of pharmaceuticals generates more  
waste and by -products compared to all  other chemical sectors. While the  stringent medical  and regulatory  
requirements in relation to pharmaceutical purity naturally lead to more waste per kilogram of product compared to 
the manufacture of less sophisticated compounds of less stringent purity, it still underlines the challenge and 
opportunity for improvement presented by the pharmaceutical industry. 
Table 2- Comparison of chemical industry sectors by quantity of by-product produced by kg of product 
Industry Sector Product Tonnage Kg by-product/kg product 
Oil Refining 106-108 ~0.1 
Bulk chemicals 104-106 <5 
Fine Chemicals 102-104 5-50 
Pharmaceuticals 10-103 25-100 
ETERNAL Technological Innovation that goes beyond the SoA:  Table 3 provides a summary of how our  
technological innovations in the fields of Green Chemistry, Mechanochemistry, and Continuous Manufacturing  
advance the current State-of-the-art and will scale up ground breaking approaches for : 
Table 3- ETERNAL Technological Innovations, SoA and SoA advancement 
Purification of Pharmaceutical Solvents: As solvents still have a great influence on the quality of the final products, it 
can be very difficult to find suitable replacements. It is important to identify solvents for a process that can be easily 
recovered, separated, and purified for reuse.3 
SoA: Drug Delivery Systems: In recent decades, the exploitation of new drug delivery systems (DDS) has grown  
significantly. Between 1980 and 2010, the second generation of DDS started to focus on green nanotechnology 4. The next  
generation needs to advance much further in this aspect in order to maintain the quality of these nanosystems by using non- 
toxic excipients and greener chemistry. Due to the high surface -to-volume ratio, when the dimensions of a material are  
reduced down to the nanometer scale, the macroscopic properties can change considerably. This makes them especially 
interesting in the field of DDS as they allow the permeation in different biological membranes, the stability of different 
 
3 Verghese , G. ( 2003 ) Pharm. Technol. Eur. , 27, 116   130 
4 Kinam Park, The Controlled Drug Delivery Systems: Past Forward and Future Back, Journal of Controlled Release (2014), doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.03.054 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 5 of 45 
 
 
drugs and consequently the bioavailability and/or efficacy of different drugs to be increased. While a lot of information 
exists on methods of production and characterization of nanoparticles at laboratory scale, there is a need to develop methods 
based on green chemistry to carry out the industrialization and scaling up of these systems in a sustainable way5,6. 
SoA ADVANCEMENT:  There are many types of nanoparticles (inorganic nanoparticles, polymeric nanoparticles,  
nanostructured lipid carriers, liposomes, dendrimers, nanoemulsions). Many methods of nanoparticle production, such as 
emulsion solvent evaporation, nanoprecipitation or liposomes thin film hydration involve the use of organic solvents (e.g. 
dichloromethane, Ethyl acetate, Acetone or Chloroform). A greener nanoparticles production alternative is rapid 
microfluidic mixing. In this method, organic and aqueous phases are mixed in a micrometer channel continuously. In this 
way, nanoparticles are obtained quickly, with less energy, reproducibly and efficiently . In addition, due to its high  
miscibility in water, the solvent used for this method is usually ethanol, a greener solvent choice. This is important, as in 
the pharmaceutical industry the choice of organic solvent is an increasing concern due to the limitations resulting  
from human and environmental safety. As such, the goal today is to develop sustainable protocols, with greener solvents 
that are less harmful to the environment and to the worker. There are different alternatives in the literature regarding the  
use of biosolvents7. Another option for greener methods in nanotechnology is tangential flow filtration or diafiltration. 
Compared to conventional purification methods, which involve extensive solvent washing, dialysis, centrifugation, or  
fractional crystallization, diafiltration is a much more sustainable method. Filtration by continuous flow through a nano 
porous or ordered mesoporous silicates as matrices for removing toxic and hazardous APIs are an interesting material that 
can be functionalized to remove a specific API. Highly ordered mesoporous silicates such as MCM (Mobil Composition of 
            have long been recognized as very  
promising materials with a rich variety of applications. The most important MCM materials are: MCM41 and SBA15. They  
show ordered arrangements of channels and cavities of different geometry confined between walls built up from SiO2 units.  
Among the numerou s applications of mesoporous materials, they have been shown a good separation technology and  
wastewater treatment technology for pharmaceutical companies and solvent recycling. These materials are 8 described as 
biodegradable and biocompatible.9 The porous network can serve as a reservoir for the accommodation of drug molecules 
or API due to its uniform pore size and highly ordered nanochannels. It is possible to modulate the specific surface,  
concentration of silanol groups that enables chemical functionalization with different organic molecules to capture the toxic 
molecules under specific conditions. 
Continuous processing: The petrochemical industry tends to operate continuous processes, whereas the fine chemical and 
pharmaceutical industries predominantly use less efficient batch manufacturing methods. The principal advantage of stirred  tank 
reactors is versatility, because virtually any kind of chemical process can be accommodated. However, the inherent  
versatility of the stirred tank often increases the vulnerability of the process chemistry. Continuous processes operate in 
highly automated production plants incorporating numerous digital and analog control loops. The data stream obtained  
from the various control elements (process factors) provide valuable Process Analytical Technology (PAT) information  
that is continually logged to a central Process Control System (PCS). Instruments can also be incorporated into the process 
streams to provide on-line analytical information (Process responses). The combination of the process factors and response 
data can be used to confirm that the plant is operating under steady state conditions. 
SoA: API production - several companies have changed their type of processing to synthesize different APIs using  
continuous processing due to the benefits of enhanced yield, safety, quality, and new chemistries that are not feasible in  
batch equipment, in addition to environmental benefits. The benefits are particularly pronounced in the production of  
oncolytic drugs and highly potent compounds, which require increased containment control to ensure the health and safety 
of the workers manufacturing the product, such as e.g. cGMP  manufacture of prexasertib monolactate monohydrate,  
pyrazole etc. The differences in manufacturing relate to the application of continuous processing for intermediate products, 
to carrying out crystallization and other downstream process in a continuous or discontinuous manner and of course on the 
reactor type10. 
The use of two technologies, membrane separations and intermittent flow reactors, is emerging, both of which provide 
further process intensification and process miniaturization. An alternative to crystallizations or distillations to remove 
unwanted compounds from a process stream is membrane separation . The development of more selective membranes can  
catalyze the use of this technology. In the case of intermittent flow reactors, their use can avoid several problems faced by 
continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) or plug flow reactors (PFRs) (e.g. blockage for reactions in which solids form,  
sufficiently mixed of liquids and solids throughout the length of a PFR if the required reaction time is long). The concept 
of mobile on-demand continuous plants is to offer the ability to miniaturize API production to produce oral or topical liquid 
doses of medicines from a continuous process. Everything is included in a single portable unit (PFA tube flow reactors,  
back pressure regulators, membrane liquid -liquid separation units, buffer tanks, precipitation tanks, filters, semi -batch 
crystallizers, and formulation vessels11 
Despite the advances that have been made in the continuous production of APIs, there is still a long way to go to offer  
robust and reproducible solutions that avoid blockage or sedimentation in the lines.12 
SoA: Medicine production - Regarding the processing to obtain the different types of dosage in the pharmaceutical  
industry, discontinuous process must be avoided as much as possible to reduce the energy consumption and solvent 
 
5 Rohini Kanwar, et al. ACS Omega Green Nanotechnology-Driven Drug Delivery Assemblies, 2019 4 (5), 8804-8815 DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00304 
6 Hutchison, James. (2008). Greener Nanoscience: A Proactive Approach to Advancing Applications and Reducing Implications of Na notechnology. ACS nano. 2. 395 -402. 
10.1021/nn800131j. 
7 Sangeetha Kumaravel, Prabaharan Thiruvengetam, Subrata Kundu, Chapter 6 - Biosolvents as green solvents in the pharmaceutical industry, Editor(s): Inamuddin, Rajender Boddula,  
Mohd Imran Ahamed, Abdullah M. Asiri, Green Sustainable Process for Chemical and Environmental Engineering and Science, Elsevier, 2021, Pages 105 -149, ISBN 9780128218853, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-821885-3.00007-4 
 
9 V. Ambrogia, L. Perioli, et al., Improvement of dissolution rate of piroxicam by inclusion into MCM-41 mesoporous silicate, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 32 (2007)216-222 
10 Christopher L. et al. Continuous Manufacturing in Pharmaceutical Process Development and Manufacturing.Annual R. of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering 2018 9:1, 253-281 
11 Adamo A, et al. 2016. On-demand continuous-flow production of pharmaceuticals in a compact, reconfigurable system. Science 352:61 67 
12 Page T, et al. 2015. Equipment and analytical companies meeting continuous challenges. May 20 21, 2014 Continuous Manufacturing Symposium. J. Pharm. Sci. 104:821 31 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 6 of 45 
 
 
 
use, the raw materials, to increase the reproducibility and the bioavailability of the drug. Hot melt extrusion  (HME) is a 
successful technology for a large spectrum of applications (e.g., drug delivery systems, taste masking of drugs, solubility  
enhancement of poorly water -soluble compounds, etc. The development of melt extrusion process in pharmaceutical  
manufacturing operations was first introduced by Breitenbach. However, Follonier and his coworkers first examined the  
hot-melt technology to manufacture sustained release polymer -based pellets of various freely soluble drugs 13. The  
pharmaceutical application of this technology has marked a significant impact mainly in the area of dissolution 
enhancement of poorly water-soluble drugs, taste masking of bitter active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), sustained and 
controlled release drug delivery, so lid-state cocrystals, oral films, and most recently continuous manufacturing by  
embracing quality by design and process analytical technology14. The primary use of HME is the enhancement of solubility 
and bioavailability (BA) through the manufacturing of amorphous solid dispersions (ASDs), as indicated by the multiple  
papers and patents15. This need derives from the evidence that more than 50% of active pharmaceutical ingredients currently 
explored in drug discovery and development belongs to the biopharmaceutical classification system II (BCS class II),  
characterized by poor water-solubility, hence leading to formulations with low bioavailability 16. Current interest in HME 
is growing rapidly with >500 papers published in the scientific literature during the past decade and more and more HME- 
based drug products appearing in the pipeline of many pharmaceutical companies 15. Recently approved oral HME-based 
medicines are e.g. Maviret® (2017, EU ), Venclyxto® (2016, EU). Thanks to flexibility of HME technology in drug  
delivery, much research is ongoing in academia & industries to promote the commercialization of such products. The  
restrictions of conventional drug delivery techniques are provoking  researchers to restructure them, resulting in a high  
number of patents in the field of HME. In short, HME has emerged as a pioneering manufacturing technology for  
pharmaceutical industries, and its use is growing due to its unit operation, cost -effectiveness, solvent -free nature, &  
continuous manufacturing vs. conventional techniques. By minimal modifications of the equipment design and of few  
processing conditions, a myriad of different dosage forms for various applications can be developed. Being a continuous  
manufacturing process, it ensures similar quality outcome, automation potentiality and allows real -time monitoring 17. 
Further work is required to optimize the formulation design of amorphous solid dispersions and their processing to address 
the challenges of low -solubility medicines. Together with HME, other techniques such as co -spray drying and printing  
technologies are emerging. HME and spray drying provide an advantage of improving bioavailability of poorly soluble 
drug substances, whereas printing technologies offer an alternative to compression to manufacture oral dosage forms. 
SoA ADVANCEMENT: API production : ETERNAL will develop a greener API synthesis method by using the microjet 
reactor technology (MyB). This is a continuous manufacturing method which enables unlimited scale up. The microjet  
reactor is based on impinging jets principle and can be easily coupled with potential other components that might be needed 
for API synthesis (such as UV light, Temperature environment, Cooling/Heating jacket etc.). Owing to this highly efficient 
mixing caused by the kinetic energy of the impinging jets, most processes are already shown to take place more efficiently. 
Additionally, the microjet reactor technology has a carbon print close to zero, does not emit any energy or exhaust and 
has excellent LCA results. The API to be synthesized can be further formulated into nano- or microparticulate formulations 
by using other innovative proprietary continuous manufacturing technologies to increase the bioavailability of the API & 
decrease the environmental burden caused by the excreted amount that might end up in soil & wastewater treatment, as  
well as to allow the recovery of organic solvents & re-use them to make the process even greener. RJ will also use Microjet 
reactor and another microfluidic technologies to produce liposome nanoparticles. In the case of the API S.rapamycinicus  
(SAAR) genome sequencing will be employed to optimize API producing strains to reduce hazardous side products,  
increase yield & potency. Biotechnological processes reply on water as solvent, thus offer greener API synthesis strategies. 
Medicine production (Angelini, AIMPLAS). Angelini will adapt the HME technology to their products (Ibuprofen and 
trazone) which have never been processed by this continuous technology in the company. The company is seeking higher 
reductions in energy consumption, raw materials, handling operations and waste products. 
Digitalization as an innovation enabler: A key feature of our technological innovation in ETERNAL is that we 
will use digitalization as an enabler for facilitating the process understanding and scale up. Digital technology 
offers a clear opportunity to gain a competitive advantage through manufacturing efficiencies and productivity gains 
18. In the context of digitalization as an enabler for competitive and scalable methods of production, there are 
three key areas of opportunity that will be advanced: Digitalization of data flows in chemical process design and  
manufacturing with CDMOs to facilitate and speed up collaboration on the drug development and manufacture value 
chain, and also to ensure data is managed in formats whereby it is available for processing, use, and searchability 
- As such, we will implement a data-integrity-compatible shared 
database suitable not only as a structured data repository but also as a source of cured data for any further data mining  
task and provided with smart contracts capabilities. 
In the early stages of development, chemical processes for the production of new chemical entities focus on speed of 
delivery rather than long term sustainability or economics. This often results in the commercial manufacturing  
processes to be sub-optimal, with environmentally challenging solvents and catalysts. By adopting a smarter, data 
driven approach to process development, a better choice of synthetic route, reagents and solvents can be evaluated. 
 
13 Mohammed Maniruzzaman, Joshua S. Boateng, Martin J. Snowden, Dennis Douroumis, A Review of Hot-Melt Extrusion: Process Technology to Pharmaceutical Products, 
International Scholarly Research Notices, vol. 2012, Article ID 436763, 9 pages, 2012. https://doi.org/10.5402/2012/436763 
14 Mohammed Maniruzzaman, Jaywant Pawar, Chapter 33 - Hot-melt extrusion: a versatile technology, Editor(s): Adeboye Adejare, Remington (Twenty-third Edition), Academic 
Press, 2021, Pages 645-653, ISBN 9780128200070, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820007-0.00033-7. 
15 Marta F. Simões, Rui M.A. Pinto, Sérgio Simões, Hot-melt extrusion in the pharmaceutical industry: toward filing a new drug application,Drug Discovery Today, Volume 24, 
Issue 9, 2019, Pages 1749-1768, ISSN 1359-6446, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2019.05.013. (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359644618304768 
16 Patil H, et al. Hot-Melt Extrusion: from Theory to Application in Pharmaceutical Formulation. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2016;17(1):20-42. doi:10.1208/s12249-015-0360- 
17 Srushti Tambe, Divya Jain, Yashvi Agarwal, Purnima Amin, Hot-melt extrusion: Highlighting recent advances in pharmaceutical applications, Journal of Drug Delivery Science 
and Technology, Volume 63, 2021, 102452, ISSN 1773-2247, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2021.102452 
18 https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/gx/en/insights/2016/digitization-in-pharma/digitization-in-pharma.pdf 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 7 of 45 
 
 
Combining this process understanding with a library of digitally characterized equipment systems, to create Digital 
Twins and then using these to control and monitor kilo scale production will ensure the most optimal and least  
environmentally harmful pharmaceutical process can be developed by first intent, increasing the adoption of greener 
chemistry. Ad hoc combinations of process analytical technologies (PAT) tools and data-driven models (digital 
twins) will represent a major advance in terms of minimizing the required Quality-by-Design effort as well as gaining 
a comprehensive understanding of the process as a whole by unveiling hidden facts and properly quantifying complex  
relationships among the key process variables. PAT -based process monitoring and control solutions facilitate the  
availability of real-time high quality informative data, not only for developing the models, but also for controlling 
the process by taking into account what takes place within and outside the design space. Likewise, a holonic (agent- 
based) approach for developing the digital twin models will provide a flexible architecture that facilitates further 
scale up in the production stage. In terms of mitigating the environmental impact of the process, the associated KPIs 
can be incorporated by-design in the model in order to carry out off-line simulations as a tool for more realistic LCA 
(Life-Cycle Assessment). 
Advancing in understanding the environmental impact of pharmaceuticals : Advances in analytical science have  
identified pharmaceuticals as environmental contaminants. Due to their wide use, pharmaceuticals and their  
residues/metabolites may enter surface waters via wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) after human use (domestic 
and hospitals) or enter soils if sewage sludge produced during wastewater treatment is applied to agricultural land. 
Emissions from production processes may include active pharmaceutical ingredients, but also potentially harmful 
solvents, or byproducts of the production process. As examples environmental contamination by active 
pharmaceutical ingredients, measured cytarabine environmental concentrations have been found to be up to 441 ng 
L-1. Drinking water treatment can partly, but not completely, remove such substances.19 Thus, even in tap water some 
pharmaceutical residues such as clobrifinic acid have been detected at concentrations of up to 270 ng L-120. In contrast 
to the amount of available analytical data, information on ecotoxicological effects of residues are sparse21. 
Due to their specific mode of action and the fact that they are intentionally designed to exert an effect on humans  
(and in some cases other species), active pharmaceutical ingredients and their residues could be as relevant for  
ecosystem effects as pesticides, given both are designed for their biological effects that may spill over into effects on 
other mammals, vertebrates, invertebrates and even potentially plant species. Currently the mode of action of  
pharmaceuticals is not always well enough understood comparatively across species to make statements about the 
nature of these potential environmental effects19,20. However, the development of new resources including exposure 
modelling, adverse outcome pathway approaches and toxicokinetic-toxicodynamic approaches offers the potential to 
fill this gap. To assess how these new approaches may best be deployed to support environmental assessment for  
pharmaceuticals, an in -depth assessment is needed to review and assess their appli cation within a risk -based 
approach. The available evidence regarding pharmaceuticals in the environment includes the results of several Union - 
funded projects, such as Knappe, Poseidon, Endetech, Pharmas, Cytothreat, Radar, Demeau, DePharm, Pharm AD, 
Solutions. These projects have to date focused on specific pharmaceuticals and individual aspects of fate and hazard. 
However more information is still needed to understand and evaluate certain pharmaceuticals as regards their  
environmental concentrations and the resulting levels of risk within a full life-cycle context. Such development 
should include also  resulting from the combined presence of mixtures of pharmaceuticals 
and other chemicals in the environment. Critical reasons that underlie the current knowledge gaps in understanding 
the ecological impacts of pharmaceuticals are twofold: 1) many pharmaceuticals were put on the market several years  
ago, at which time they were not subject to an environmental risk assessment as part of the authorization process.  
This means that there are major data gaps for key fate & hazard relevant properties for these older substances; 2)  
monitoring conducted for pharmaceuticals in the environment is very limited (although selected substances are 
monitored in surface & groundwaters under the Water Framework Directive). There is also limited monitoring of 
"hotspot" locations, such as those affected by hospital and wastewater effluents. Even less is known about  
concentrations in sewage sludges and soils, and about the presence of antimicrobial resistant microorganisms and 
antimicrobial resistance genes across environmental compartments. 
While progress has been made, as an environmental risk assessment must now be carried out for all active  
pharmaceutical ingredients, more timely availability of a complete assessment for human medicinal products could 
facilitate the timely introduction of appropriate risk management measures. ETERNAL will make a key contribution 
to identifying those pharmaceuticals that pose the greatest risk throu gh their individual presence in the  
environment, so that risk management efforts can be targeted. We will conduct a large-scale risk assessment and 
compound prioritization exercise using existing and new monitoring, ecotoxicity and physicochemical 
characterization data. We will also review risk and life cycle assessment approaches against the latest scientific  
knowledge, select and perform priority modifications to existing tools and approaches, and test the influence of these 
on risk predictions. Thus, for pharmaceuticals already on the market without an environmental risk assessment,  
ETERNAL will generate new science-based knowledge to guide industry in targeting environmental risk 
 
19 Ternes, T.A., Bonerz, M., Schmidt, T., 2001. Determination of neutral pharmaceuticals in wastewater and rivers by liquid chromatography /electrospray tandem mass 
spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. A 938, 175 /185 
 
21 Cleuvers, Michael. (2003). Aquatic Ecotoxicity of Pharmaceuticals Including the Assessment of Combination Effects. Toxicology letters. 142. 185-94. 10.1016/S0378- 
4274(03)00068-7. 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 8 of 45 
 
 
management measures to specific compounds. Furthermore, from a practical point of view, a systematic 
 forms a strong basis for improved management, protection and 
remediation of critical environmental resources (both aquatic and terrestrial), employing risk assessment methods 
and reducing uncertainties regarding new pharmaceuticals that require regulation. 
pharmaceutical production, including aspects such as reductions in the use of solvents and the generation of  
harmful byproducts during the production process. We will apply risk and life cycle assessment tools to the  
ETERNAL case studies, performing underpinning physicochemical and ecotoxicological characterisation of 
compounds, and pro  
production processes, relative to the current situation. In doing this, ETERNAL will generate predictive 
frameworks that may be employed by industry to assess the environmental improvements to be expected by 
 
R&I Maturity : Table 4 positions the TRL levels of the core components of our Technological Innovations,  
distinguishing the TRL level at the start of the project, versus the expected TRL at project completion. 
Table 4- TRL positioning of the work 
Proposed work TRL at project start TRL at project end 
Membrane technology for solvent 
swaps, purification, and product 
recovery, AZ case study. 
Technology has been brought to TRL4 via a R&D 
collaboration between partner QS & University of 
Nottingham 
At the end of the project the technology will reach 
TRL 6-7. 
HME in the obtaining of medicines 
(Ibuprofen and trazodone)-Angelini 
Pharma case study 
The processing of the drugs proposed is new for 
Angelini Pharma but starts from a TRL 2-3 due to 
the knowledge of the technology acquired in a 
regional project. 
It is expected to reach a TRL 5-6 thanks to the 
collaboration established with AIMPLAS. 
Microjet reactor for synthesis of APIs 
(RJ and MyB case study) 
Microject reactor will be used in different 
synthesis, liposomes and API proposed by MyB 
which has a high experience with this technology. 
A starting point will be 3-4 
It is expected to reach TRL 5 for RJ case study 
and up to 6 for MyB case study. 
Solvent substitution by greener or 
biobased ones. 
Despite to consider the similar polarity and carbon 
footprint for the solvent replacement, products 
obtained from those synthesis need to be validated 
in terms of quality. It will start from TRL 2-3 
It is expected to reach TRL 5-6 
Multi-step production of API using 
modular continuous processing with 
automated control (QS case study) 
The approach of compacting the synthesis process 
will start from TRL 3, optimizing different steps 
which need improvements. 
TRL 6 is expected by the end of the project 
Data-integrity-compatible shared 
database 
The  combination of these 
technologies is currently at TRL3. 
available ICT TRL5-6 undergoing further development but 
beginning to be demonstrated on a wider range of  
projects (software toolkit to begin testing in a wider 
industrial setting). 
Process Analytical Technologies 
platform augmented with AI 
IRIS IR platform of SWIR analysers (TRL7) and 
the augmentation with AI is at TRL4 
TRL6 for the selected 
ETERNAL project 
applications in the