1.2 Methodology 
Overall methodology 
Description of the overall methodology,  including the underpinning concepts, models  & assumptions 
According to the Pharmaceutical Strategy for Europe : A new EU approach is needed to ensure we have a strong, fair  
competitive and green industry that delivers for patients, and which draws on the potential of the digital transformation of 
health and care, driven by technological advances in fields such as artificial intelligence and computational modelling. 
We need well-functioning international supply chains and a well performing single market for pharmaceuticals, through 
an approach that covers the entire lifecycle of pharmaceutical products, from production to distribution, 
consumption and disposal. ETERNAL will mobilize a multi-stakeholder (industry, research, academia,  policy, SMEs 
and citizens) and inter-disciplinary approach (green chemistry, mechanochemistry, process engineering,  environmental 
engineering, environmental chemistry, ecotoxicity, biobased materials, circular economy, digitalization,  scientific and 
regulatory affairs, social sciences and humanities) in order to address the increasing problem of environmental pollution 
due to pharmaceuticals throughout their life cycle and to pioneer  a new competitive and  leadership opportunity for 
Europe in the field of Green Pharmaceuticals. 
Technological innovation for increasing sustainability along the entire lifecycle of pharmaceutical products: 
The technological innovations that will be researched and developed over the course of the ETERNAL project, and 
which focus on three pillars: 1) Green Chemistry; 2) Mechanochemistry; and 3) Digitalisation, as key enabling 
technologies for increasing the sustainability of the entire lifecycle of pharmaceutical products. 
Green chemistry: Green chemistry is the concept of developing chemical products and processes that minimize the 
use and generation of hazardous substances, reduce waste, and reduce demand on diminishing resources. Paul  
Anastas and John Warner introduced the concept, which means during the application of chemistry techniques and 
the methodology, always we need to thi nk about the possible option to reduce or eliminate the generation of products,  
feedstock, byproducts, reagents, and solvents etc. which are hazardous to both humans and environments. In  
synthesis, the solvents are used in a large quantity and to overcome this situation, the feasible way is to reduce hazard 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 9 of 45 
 
 
related to them by substituting with the safer option. Anastas and Warner developed the framework that has served 
as the foundation for the green chemistry movement. That framework proposes 12 complementary principles around 
resource efficiency and risk (human health and environmental) minimization, targeting a lifecycle perspective (e.g., 
raw materials extraction, chemical production, and end -of-life bioaccumulation and biodegradation). Ultimately,  
these 12 principles were adopted by the Green Chemistry Institute (GCI)(2) at the American Chemical Society (ACS).  
The 12 principles are as follows: (1) waste prevention, (2) atom economy, (3) less hazardous synthesis, (4) design of 
benign chemicals, (5) use of benign solvents and auxiliaries, (6) energy efficiency, (7) use of renewable feedstocks, 
(8) reduce derivatives, (9) use of catalysis, (10) design for degradation, (11) real -time analysis for pollution  
prevention, and (12) accident prevention Mill  
                          -first Quantitative Green Chemistry Evaluator that evaluates the relative 
greenness of chemicals and chemical processes against the 12 Principles of Green Chemi 
scientists now have access to calculate the green scores of their own processes and products. 
The manufacture of drugs generates more waste and by -products in comparison to the oil refining, bulk, and fine  
chemicals industries. Pharmaceutical industries need to reduce their E -factor through the replacement of toxic or  
fossil-based solvents. A life cycle study of waste produced from many Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API)  
manufacturing facilities estimated that up to 80% of their waste is solvent related. Addressing the selection, use, 
recovery, and disposal of solvents will contribute dramatically to alleviating this problem. While not the only means 
for greening pharmaceutical manufacture, solvent considerations will appear frequently in the case histories of drug 
process development. The Green Chemistry Expert System (GCES) offers guidelines and support information for 
devising a green-chemistry process. Some solvents such as acetic acid, 1 -butanol, propyl acetate, water have  
been recognized as green selection and provide a means for choosing environmentally friendly solvents for 
manufacture. Several case studies of green processes in pharmaceutical development have been described in recent 
years (e.g. phosphodiesterase (V) inhib  
as the last step and utilized the relatively benign reagents t-butanol and its potassium base, while the chlorosulfonation 
was moved earlier into the synthesis. This permitted the inherent purification of the workups in the steps after the  
sulfonation to remove the toxic residues. The final step could now also be run in high concentration, further  
minimizing solvent waste. 
Mechanochemistry: 25% of pharmaceuticals produced in the chemical industry contain an amide bond. Such 
pharmaceuticals include e.g. drugs for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases (atorvastatin or Lipitor), analgesics 
(Ibuprofen analogs), antibiotics (penicillin and chloramphenicol or Oftan Akvakol), as well as cancer drugs  
(methotrexate and, inter alia therapeutic peptides such as carfilzomib (KYPROLIS)). Until now, such drugs have  
conventionally been produced in the chemical industry using solvents. A mechanochemical process involves grinding 
of chemical substances without the need to use solvents. This means, however, that no toxic waste characteristic of 
solvent-based production is generated, and in addition, the whole process can take place tens of times faster (e.g. the 
required active ingredient is created within an hour, whereas the analogous solvent -based reaction requires 24 -hours). 
Carcinogenic impurities: Another problem is the possibility of capturing carcinogenic impurities like nitrosamines, 
that can get incorporated into the drug substance and drug product basically through process formation 
Digitalization as an enabler for competitive and scalable methods of continuous manufacturing and 
production: Three key areas of opportunity that will be advanced during the ETERNAL project: 
Digitisation of data flows in chemical process design and manufacturing with CDMOs: Many scientific companies 
outsource packages of research to contract development & manufacturing organizations (CDMOs). During such  
projects a high volume of primary data is produced by the CDMO but the data transfer process is not standardized, 
requiring significant resource for processing and reporting. Often data transfers are still manual, requiring drag and 
drop of files via shared folders, or in some cases transcription of key results into reports. Too much time can be spent 
on just transferring data and not stopping to analyze and understand the results. This carries the potential for loss of 
some primary data. When new manufactures are required but team members have changed at both companies the  
corporate memory can be incomplete resulting in repeated work and missed opportunities. 
There is an opportunity to digitize this process to ensure that data generated are transferred in real time and to ensure 
that all data generated is F.A.I.R. (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) minimizing the need for any  
experiments to be repeated. Greater control over data should result in more sustainable faster development of scalable  
methods of production. Da ta from every experiment can contribute to the fundamental understanding of our  
processes, supporting the formation of digital twins and predictive modelling. 
To develop a well-defined digital work flow for data transfer we will build guidelines for effective and generalizable 
digital data transfer. Implementation of the digital workflow will be via a software toolkit enabling application across the 
pharmaceutical development industry. 
Process Analytical Technology as enabling technology for Quality-by-Design and Continuous Manufacturing: As 
opposed to using batch-based systems, the future of many processes within complex manufacturing industries lies in 
continuous processing- which is characterised by connected operations, during which each unit immediately 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 10 of 45 
 
 
feeds the following one without any interruption22. The implementation of a continuous manufacturing strategy 
requires the adoption of a holistic, quality centric Quality by Design (QbD) approach to product development and 
process design for transitioning from batch to continuous processing. As opposed to the traditional Quality by Testing  
(QbT) approach, which involves testing the material being processed after every manufacturing stage to ensure that 
the critical quality attributes (CQAs) are in line with specifications (involving the lengthy stoppage of production to 
collect samples for offline testing in analytical  laboratories make it impossible to implement  a continuous 
manufacturing process), QbD is a responsive system, featuring the real-time monitoring of product CQAs and 
adjustment of critical process parameters (CPPs) , allows plant operators to o btain consistent and quality  
compliant products while reducing the likelihood of rework or rejects. 
QbD is based on the principle that product quality should be designed into the process, rather than tested in stages 
and corrected afterwards; it requires a scientific yet pragmatic approach that considers both the process and product 
to enable the design of effective, real -time quality control strategies 22. In this way, it is possible to achieve a  
predefined quality objective; that is, delivering products that consistently meet or exceed the required quality  
standards. A key enabler for QbD is PAT, as it provides a systematic structure for measuring product quality in real- 
time, facilitating process understanding and ultimately controlling the process to ensure product quality. PAT uses a 
range of spectral (multivariate)- based on photonics analyzers located at multiple points within a continuous process- 
and univariate data sources together with prediction engines to make real-time product quality predictions to achieve 
a holistic, QbD quality system. In ETERNAL the paradigm will also be extended to incorporate, in addition to product  
quality, -by-  principles for ensuring that greener synthesis routes can be designed and once established  
(and validated), in the manufacturing stage, the process can be controlled in real-time to also ensure the process stays 
within these greener routes, while at the sa me time ensuring product quality. In a novel approach, environment 
impact KPIs will be merged with the process control parameters in order to use the digital twin (discussed below) 
for a comprehensive optimization (optimizing not only the process but also the impact in a common framework). As 
such, an optimization engine will be implemented as a module, based on Monte Carlo, Variational Calculus or  
Lagrange Multipliers, as the best way to identify efficient trade-offs. 
The PAT tools will either be the proprietary IRIS NIR analyzers, a combination of monovariate sensors in a common 
machine learning framework (soft -sensing), the integration of third parties analyzers or a combination of any of these  
scenarios. For example: in the Reig Jofrè case study, a particle size distribution analyzer from a third party could be 
the main PAT resource; a combination of soft-sensors, and an IRIS' NIR analyzer could be the right PAT solution in 
Quotients case study; a NIR analyzer or Raman analyzer will be used for the AZ case study. 
Digital Twin technology as a means of improving process times, the use of raw materials and the energy consumption for 
greater environmental efficiency: A Digital Twin is a virtual model of a process, product, or service23. The pairing of 
the virtual and physical worlds enables the analysis of data and monitoring of systems, and of process performance so 
that optimizations can be made at low risk and cost, and that data and monitoring systems can be analysed to avoid  
problems before they even occur thereby preventing downtime. Digital Twins can also allow new developments and 
process innovations to be modelled by using digital simulations, to foster new opportunities23. 
By integrating in-line sensors at each step in the process, data can be collected that allows an understanding of what 
is happening in a process in real -time. By combining this data with physical, chemical and biological models a digital  
twin of a pharmaceutical process can be built, which is a live virtual replica of the physical process that enables  
optimization of operations and the simulation of changes, providing new insights for development and full control 
over the pharmaceutical manufacturing process. 
Traditional simulation models are mainly based on mathematical expressions derived from first principles and rather 
simple empirical data. While such simulations work very well in the case of systems that are governed by the Laws 
of Physics, that are incapable of comprehending the full complexity of systems that behave according to more  
complex laws, such as those in biochemistry. A multivariate data driven approach (which may also be combined 
with some first -principles-based expressions in a hybrid concept) is more fit -for-purpose for developing more  
reliable models. Indeed, this is what a digital twin is.  In the widest sense, a digital twin can be capable of  
comprehending highly complex systems by splitting the entire system model in "agents", i.e., agent-based digital 
twins. For example, simulation of the chemical mixing process enables multiple variants to be monitored, ensuring 
that the right mix is always used in live production, reducing waste, driving significant cost savings and also helping 
to bring new drugs to market faster. 
The Holonic Manufacturing Systems (HMS) approach will be used in the ETERNAL Digital Twin developments. 
A HMS is formed by autonomous entities that cooperate proactively to reach a common goal. These entities are  
labelled holons and, through aggregation relationships, they can form groups to form the so-called holarchies. The 
grouping of various holons or holarchies with the objective of carrying out a productive process is called a Holonic 
Production Unit (HPU). The principal attributes of holons are: autonomy, cooperation, proactiveness, and reactivity. 
Other key characteristics are the distribution of intelligence and self-similarity to build complex structures from 
 
22 https://manufacturingchemist.com/news/article_page/Why_you_need_PAT_to_move_from_batch_to_continuous_processing/153593  
23 Taylor, C. (2018) What is bioprocessing digital twin?, Exputec, at: https://exputec.com/what-is-a-bioprocess-digital-twin/ 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 11 of 45 
 
 
simpler systems. Essentially HMS represents a methodology, tools and norms to design manufacturing control  
systems that are flexible and reconfigurable. HMS is already showing evidence of application in industrial systems. 
While the largest volume of research is centred on discrete manufacturing systems, and there have been only a few 
works in which the holonic approach was applied in the Process Industries or in continuous processes, the flexibility 
and simple reconfigurability afforded by the bottom -up design philosophy and distributed control of HMS holds  
tremendous opportunity for its adoption for Digital Twinning in complex continuous manufacturing processes in the 
Pharmaceutical industry, and could play a key role in helping the industry respond to the challenges not only of more 
sustainable manufacturing and the efficient use of energy and resources, but also faster time to market, mass  
production personalisation trends, rapid response times, shorter product life cycles, among others, which require  
greater flexibility, agility, reconfigurability, decentralisation and also supplier integration. In ETERNAL, we will  
define a new Holonic Reference Architecture in the field of Intelligent Manufacturing Systems (IMS) specially 
tailored for continuous manufacturing processes (and also suited to semi-continuous and batch processes), the 
methodology of which will be promoted as a standard for holonification procedures in industry. On the other hand, 
we will develop a holonics -based digital twin builder platform based on holonification and multi -agent based  
software tools in order to facilitate the adoption of the digital twin concept in the pharmaceutical manufacturing  
industry and map out how the sector can take advantage of this particular crest of the digital transformation wave, 
identifying the requirements, barriers and opportunities. 
In addition, we have selected from among the case studies, for example, due to the complexity and multivariability 
of the development and scale up of membrane technology in pharmaceutical processing (Case study VI) for the  
energy efficient recovery and purification of solvents, and for purification to remove potential mutagenic impurities, 
we will build a Digital Twin of the process in order to demonstrate how it can facilitate process scale -up and 
optimisation (and it will also enable future monitoring and control of the process when it goes into live production). 
Likewise with Case Study V  (Modular flow reactors continuous systems) and Case Study III ( Rapid microfluidic 
mixing combined with Diafiltration). 
Cocreation Lab of Industry case studies:  We will implement a Cocreation Lab for ensuring an industry/application  
oriented R&D effort that allows for a full innovation cycle of codesigning (research-industry-compliance codesign) 
the green innovations, scaling up, testing and validating them in the pharmaceutical industry, as well as performing 
an environmental and business KPI impact assessment, as well as defining the optimization work and 
recommendations of the future post-project scale up towards commercial adoption and market deployment Testimony to 
the very strong pharmaceutical industry participation and interest in the ETERNAL project, we have planned 6  
industry case studies in our work plan, each of which is presented in a summary factsheet as follows: 
 
CASE STUDY I (ANGELINI PHARMA): Continuous Manufacturing method. HME  Hot Met Extrusion. 
Aim: Asessing the feasibility of producing the medicinal products containing Ibuprofen and Trazodone through a continuous 
process that uses hot melt extrusion technology. The schematic shows the steps avoided using this technology. 
Business drivers for applying this process & expected KPIs: To reduce 
energy consumption. Energy saving is to be calculated during the project,  
by comparing the traditional process vs continuous process using HME  
(Preliminary information based on similar processes 
analysed in literature): 
significant reduction of production steps (as per 
schematic above) 
shorter processing times  
smaller facilities 
reduction/elimination of water 
increased worker health & safety  
simplified formulation recipe (less 
raw materials) 
improvement of fundamental 
properties of drug and finished 
medicinal product 
real-time monitoring using 
PAT tools 
Main activities: Pre-formulation & formulation development; Analytical 
development & pre-stability studies; Exploration of an inline NIR analyzer as a PAT tool 
Main result: Prototype ready for scale-up (expected TRL 5-6) 
 
CASE STUDY II (ANGELINI PHARMA): Solvents & green chemistry (at Industrial Operations/APIs production plant in 
Aprilia) 
Aim: Investigating better use of solvents (increased quantity and quality of recycled solvents) in the 
manufacturing process for the production of trazodone 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 12 of 45 
 
 
 
Business drivers for applying this process & expected KPIs: To reduce the environmental impact (Energy KPI //Co2 KPI 
/Cost KPI / Toxicity KPI). 
Increased amount of isobutyl alcohol acetone recycled and reused in  
the production process of trazodone (from  50% to 65%, which 
corresponds to 118 tons)- using the International Protocol for 
Measurement & Verification (IPMVP)  
Increased amount of acetone Isobutyl alcohol recycled & reused in  
the production process of trazodone (from 90% to 95%). 
Future replacement of 100% of current actual solvents (acetone and 
Isobutyl alcohol) by greener (e.g. Ethylene lactate, methyl acetate  
et) options or biobased  solvents. 
Capture impurities and unreacted formulation components during  
production and in waste  products. 
Main activities: Preliminary study; Laboratory trials: from lab to pilot; Project engineering & production; Plant Implementation 
& testing of the new process in industrial environment; Impact & feasibility assessment  
Main result: New process tested in industrial environment (expected TRL6) 
 
CASE STUDY III (Reig Jofre): Solvent's purification & continuous manufacturing. Better user of solvents (reduction or  
elimination) in the Liposome manufacturing (encapsulation of valpronic acid and other hydrophilic APIs) process at the pilot  
plant located in Sant Joan Despi, Barcelona. 
Aim: To replace discontinuous by continuous  
process and reduce energy consumption, waste  
generated, and to use less environmentally 
harmful solvents during the production of 
greener nanoparticles.  
Business drivers for applying this process &  
expected KPIs:  As nanotechnology emerges  
from discovery to the real application phase,  
environmental impact and greener scale up 
methods need to be developed. Targets: Use of  
harmful organic  solvents should  be a voided; 
Greener and continuous new methods require  
less production  steps; Diafiltration allows to 
separate and capture non encapsulated drug, 
organic solvent and  excipients; Optimization 
through PAT technology (particle size analyzer) 
& digital twin to enable the development of greener by design methods; Reduced excretion of active ingredients by increasing 
bioavailability thanks to nanoencapsulation;  Reduction of dosage and reduction of the active ingredient consumption. 
Main activities: Production of nanoparticles in pilot plant by greener continuous methods, study of their physico-chemical 
characteristics to assure the nanoparticle quality, and evaluation of the production waste ecotoxicological profiles. 
Main result: Greener nanoformulation methods, ready to scale up (expected TRL 5)). 
 
 CASE STUDY IV (Quotient Sciences): Continuous processing and solvent purification and 
 greener-by-Design synthesis methods (optimized through digital twin & and PAT technology)  
AIM: Transform multi step discontinuous process into 
continuous processing systems, to enable greener kilo scale 
production of novel APIs. To boost the change in multi-step synthesis through robust 
continuous processing to synthetize novel APIs. 
Business drivers for applying 
this process & expected 
KPIs:Scale up to kilo scale the  
multi-step production of API 
using modular continuous 
processing with automated control; Optimization through digital twin  
& and PAT technology allow to enable the development of Greener - 
by-Design methods. 
Main activities:  Scale up of Modular flow reactors in a continuous  
system; Develop a robust process and  development platform to enable  
the generation of a Digital Twin (combined from a process model and  
a library of equipment models) which is used to control the small scale, 
kilo production of new drug substances (Integrate appropriate PAT 
technology into QS library of continuous manufacturing equipment such as NIR; Create virtual Digital Twins for example API 
synthesis from QS a hybrid digital twin will comprise of first principle models with data driven models; Demonstrate utility  of 
Digital Twin to control & monitor kilo scale manufacture of API at QS) 
Main result: Kilo scale multi-step production of API using modular continuous processing with automated control. 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 13 of 45 
 
 
 
CASE STUDY V (MyBiotech) Continuous 
Manufacturing method - Develop a platform for  
decreasing toxic and bioactive side products during
 fermentative         production of 
pharmaceuticals and to develop a green 
downstreaming process by using continuous 
technologies 
AIM: Using genome engineering to remove 
biosynthetic genes and gene clusters responsible for  
the synthesis of toxic side products in the fermentation  
broth of rapamycin producer Streptomyces 
rapamycinicus. 
Business drivers for applying this process & 
expected KPIs: Most of the natural bioactive 
ingredients producers synthesize the number of 
undesired toxic side products, which need to be 
removed during the purification process using organic solvents and multistep chromatography. E.g. rapamycin apart from the  
valuable target compound synthesizes over 50 complex, often hazardous small molecules (e.g. nigericin, azalomycin, 
steffimycin, granaticin, lydicamycin and many others) which need to be removed during purification process involving hundreds of 
tons of organic solvents. Moreover, after purification these molecules are released in the environment causing toxic effects  to 
nature. This is possible to reduce the volume of organic solvents during the purification process of rapamycin via cleaning  the 
metabolic profile of the producer. In addition, after the deletion of corresponding gene clusters producer strains having less 
metabolic burden and have much better growth and production characteristics. This enables to shorten the fermentation time  
and volume and thus save the energy as well. For downstreaming, we will use our proprietary Micro -Jet Reactor (MJR)  
technology. This is a continuous downstreaming technology for simultaneous cell rupture and extraction. We will use the  
fermentation broth without any pre -processing step. We can specifically adjust process parameter such as pressure, flow rate,  
temperature and nozzle diam eter to obtain the most ecological, economical and efficient process. Due to the small reaction  
room, we can significantly reduce the solvent amount, but also the extraction steps. Further downstreaming processes to purify 
rapamycin will include flash chromatography, cross-flow filtration and crystallization of rapamycin. 
Main activities: Lab scale metabolic profiling of the rapamycin producer strain;  Technology adaptation for genome engineering 
of S.rapamycinicus; Removing at least 10 hazardous side pr oducts using genome engineering; Development of simplified  
downstream processing  with less organic solvents on a lab scale; Pilot scale demonstration of the technology 
Main result: New strain and process tested on the pilot scale environment (expected TRL5-6) 
 
 CASE STUDY VI (AstraZeneca): The application of membranes to pharmaceutical processing  
Aim: Develop the use of membranes in pharmaceutical 
processing for: i) The energy efficient recovery and purification 
of solvents; ii)  Applying membrane purification to remove  
potential mutagenic impurities; iii) The recovery of product  
from waste streams reducing ecotoxicity 
Business drivers for applying this process & expected 
KPIs:Distillations are used in pharmaceutical manufacturing to 
reduce solvent volumes in reactors and to purify solvents for  
further use through fractionation. These unit operation are 
highly inefficient requiring long plant residence time, and high  
amounts of energy for heating and cooling. Options for using  
distillation to purify solvents can also be limited where 
contaminants have a similar boiling point to the solvent. 
Replacing distillations has the potential to dramatically lower  
energy consumption for solvent recovery and purification, 
while presenting new options to remove impurities (literature examples of 200 fold reduction in energy use) 24. The use of  
membranes is also compatible with continuous processing. 
As the quality of APIs is extremely important to guarantee patient safety, it is key that potential mutagenic impurities (PMI s) 
are avoided and can be removed or purged during purification. The use of membranes offers an orthogonal approach to  
crystallisation and chromatography. Crystallisation can occlude structurally similar fragments or elemental impurities that could be 
removed by membranes. It is estimated that chromatographic purification generates >300kg/kg of solid waste compared to  a 
membrane purification. 
Waste streams from production  e.g., mother liquors from crystallisations or aqueous waste from washes  can often still contain 
high amounts of API. Membranes can be applied to both recover the valuable API, while reducing the toxicity of the  waste 
streams. 
KPIs: Energy reduction for solvent recovery of >95%; Reduction of residual API in waste streams by >90%; Process Mass  
Intensity reduction for purification process by >90%; Quality of solvents recovered  suitable for reuse in a pharmaceutical  
process; Roadmap for translation of the technology to AZ commercial products, produced on >1Mt scale. Projected savings of 
>50Mt of solvent per Mt API produced for each project. 
Main activities:  A suitable project will be identified to develop and exemplify the use of membranes as follows: Lab based  
research on the processes to introduce  membrane solvent recovery, purification and product recovery; Development of digital 
 
24 Livingston, A. G. et al. Sustainability assessment of organic solvent nanofiltration: from fabrication to application. Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4440 4473 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 14 of 45 
 
 
 
twins for the membrane processes; Exploration of spectroscopy-based PAT tools for controlling the process in terms of yield 
increasing and waste reduction; Lab scale trial of the processes as proof of concept; Translation to kilo lab scale productio n. 
Main result: Our initial research and trial will validate the use of membranes at a lab scale. The translation to kilo manufacture 
will demonstrate the use of membranes in an industrially relevant environment (TRL5). 
Taking the environment, from a lifecycle perspective, more into account through the design and 
manufacturing stages: It has been well documented that in the last two decades, increases in pharmaceuticals  
consumption can be partially attributed to climate changes25. Such increases in pharmaceutical consumption will 
drive an increase in their manufacture. Eventually, in the absence of risk management and associated measures, this 
is likely to result in increasing levels of APIs, metabolites and by-products in aquatic and terrestrial environments,          
due          for example to   partial/incomplete   removal in wastewater treatment plants26. 
Concerns regarding  interest 
in sustainable development, have impelled the industry to incorporate green engineering and chemistry in  their 
pharmaceutical production processes. 
Gaps: Many pharmaceuticals lack measured fate, exposure, and effect parameters relevant for environmental risk 
assessment, and for deriving characterization factors in life cycle assessment. Lack  of knowledge on, and  
consideration      of, compound      modes      of      action (e.g. endocrine      disruption,      antimicrobial resistance) 
within risk assessment. Little to no consideration of the influence of environmental chemistry (e.g. aquatic 
pH and organic matter) on exposure and impacts. Little to no cons ideration of whole life cycle  approaches to 
environmental risk within current assessment procedures. Little to no consideration of the influence of time-variable 
exposure in surface waters on ecological impacts. 
ETERNAL aims to contribute to sustainable development of pharmaceutical manufacture, use and disposal, by using and 
promoting full life cycle approaches covering design, manufacture, usage and disposal, assessing the environmental 
risks of not only the API and residues/metabolites, but other chemicals and byproducts of the production process. 
This type of approach is essential to take into consideration the types of green manufacturing  approach under 
consideration by the pharmaceutical industry, as evidenced by the range and scope of case studies being undertaken 
within ETERNAL. Specific application of our risk and life cycle assessment approaches to the  ETERNAL case 
studies is a key element of the proposed work and will provide industry and policymakers with key examples of how 
whole life cycle assessment may be used to evaluate the changes in environmental impacts expected  due to the 
introduction of green manufacturing processes. 
New approach methodologies for fate, ecotoxicity and risk asse ssment: Since the early 1990s, knowledge of  
increasing pharmaceutical inputs to the environment has driven collaboration between environmental chemists and 
toxicologists to develop assessment approaches to address the risks posed by such compounds to human  and 
environmental health27. The European Union noted the need to address water contamination from pharmaceuticals 
in Water Framework Directive (WFD) and Environmental Quality Standards Directive. As such, the European  
Medicines Agency (EMA) has created guidelines for the environmental risk assessment (ERA) of medicinal products for 
the aquatic environment and human health protection. Current development of ERA strongly relies on traditional trial 
and exposure testing methods. Though most ecotoxicity studies follow standards required for ERA approaches (e.g. 
OECD), advances in research require new types of exposure-response relationships. 
Within the ETERNAL project, we will: a) Develop and/or update tools for assessing the environmental fate, hazard 
and risk of pharmaceuticals that take account of the most up to date scientific knowledge on compound behavior in 
the environment, including approaches for regulatory assessment and environmental management. These tools will 
support effective assessment of pharmaceutical fate under different environmental conditions, appraisal of species 
vulnerability to c ompounds, and prediction of the impact of compound mixtures; c) Deploy ecotoxicity tools  
(bioassays) to allow a quantitative assessment of potential  harmful effects of pharmaceuticals present in the  
environment by using existing test guidelines or assisting in the development of new ones (OECD Draft TG for the 
assessment    of    endocrine    disrupting     chemicals     using     invertebrates) to provide a     collection of data on 
pharmaceuticals (aiming at filling in the identified gaps, e.g. endocrine disruption), thus supporting data -driven 
predictions from experimental data. 
Mobilisation of a multi -stakeholder approach: ETERNAL brings together academia and technology institutes, the  
private sector, civil society participation and pathways to policy in an effective multi-stakeholder approach, whereby 
each stakeholder is complementary and mutually responsive to each other in addressing the complex development 
challenges and catalyzing an enduring Green Pharmaceuticals movement that will have a h igh impact on the  
environment, people and society as a whole. Key to ensuring the success and endurance of a multi -stakeholder 
approach is the ability to obtain a collective-impact approach, where each party has its return of investment  
aligned with a shared mission. 
The ETERNAL multi-actor approach on the one hand addresses pharmaceutical industry (ANGELINI, RJ, QS, AZ, 
including SMEs-MYB) needs by ensuring they are mobilized in an application/Case Study oriented cocreation with 
the research (AIMPLAS, BOKU, USAAR, UKCEH, UAVR, as well as  with whom 
we have established an engagement) and the technological and service SME partners (IRIS, BRITEST, 
 
25 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11270-014-1896-y 
26 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0147651315300038?via%3Dihub 
27 https://www.springerprofessional.de/en/fate-and-effects-of-anticancer-drugs-in-the-environment/17534290 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 15 of 45 
 
 
ENVIROEYE)- (who benefit from the development of new solutions for the pharmaceutical industry) to ensure that 
deployable technical solutions are researched and developed, and then deployed at each industry site in order to fulfill  
manufacturing and business KPIs. In turn, the regulatory compliance and standards requirements (ASPHALION, 
UNE) are assessed  to ensure the solutions are commercially deployable in the 
future, and that findings in relation to a favourable regulatory environment for promoting the uptake of the  
innovations are communicated to regulatory bodies and policy makers for long -term impact. The environmental  
impact- ecotoxicity (UKCEH, UAVR), carbon footprint- (ENVIROEYE) of the innovations are assessed to confirm 
the KPIs established at the outset, and also taking into account the public health perspective (JRC). In addition, data 
in relation to ecotoxicity studies (UKCEH, UAVR) is openly made available (via Open Science and robust Data  
Management- Inlecom) for informing pharmaceutical and policy priorit ies and decision making. Finally, via an  
External stakeholder group, we are complementing the consortium with important actors, such as water treatment 
companies (Letters of Intent- LOI- have been signed with FACSA- integral cycle of water and Global Omniu m- 
wastewater treatment company, and UKCEH also have an established record of conducting research on behalf of UK  
Water Industries Research Ltd, an industry body supporting research and innovation jointly owned by the major UK 
regional water companies). We will also engage with solvent recycling companies for ensuring extended pathways 
to impact for the project outputs. We have also a LOI with SIGRE- NGO that guarantees the proper environmental 
management of household packaging and leftover medicines and raises public awareness about the risks stemming 
from the inappropriate disposal of pharmaceutical waste. 
Change Labs:  added-value in the ETERNAL approach for fomenting participation in positive multi - 
stakeholder behavioural change: A unique feature of our project is the Change Labs, whereby we will promote and 
facilitate social innovation, participation and behavioural change  involving our  different multi -stakeholders. 
Complementing the   technological innovations towards more sustainable manufacture and use of 
pharmaceuticals, ETERNAL will also catalyze behavioural change at the business/industry, policy, practitioner and 
consumer levels. Our project communication activities will be focused on effectively engaging these groups, creating  
awareness about the negative environmental impacts of pharmaceuticals across their entire lifecycle, as well as  
informing about the role th at each of these actors can play in the Green Pharmaceuticals movement for positive  
impact. The ETERNAL Change Lab will develop a roadmap (elements of which will be piloted) for EU -wide 
behavioural change, defining the steps and infrastructure needed, and scoping/piloting initiatives and campaigns for 
action including Letters of Intent (Business), Participation in Working Groups (Policy), Pledges/Ambassadors  
(Practitioners), and Consumers Participation Challenge. We will leverage expertise from the Social S ciences and 
Humanities (SSH) disciplines in order to understand social innovation aspects, in relation to how to effectively  
communicate, engage and mobilise the different actors in impactful and sustained behavioural change. As such, one 
of the work packages of our work plan is dedicated to the management, implementation, and impact tracking of the 
social innovation Change Lab, which will consist of the following broad activities and expected impacts: 
Table 5- ETERNAL Change Labs of social innovation (SI) case studies and their potential impacts 
Social Innovation Case study Description 
Business: Green Pharmaceuticals and CSR : Influencing pharmaceutical industry decision makers towards adopting and  
investing in the ETERNAL technological innovations: a) Generating awareness among industry decision makers (production  
managers, sustainability managers, etc.) about the ETERNAL techn ological innovation Case Studies and their strategic and  
environmental impacts. A key approach will be to create a powerful association between the Green Pharmaceuticals and Corporat e 
Social Responsibility (CSR); b) Disseminating the results of the ecotoxi city and environmental assessment of pharmaceuticals  
towards industry decision makers to inform action planning, prioritization and decision making with regard to green 
pharmaceutical innovation and investments 
Expected impacts: 500 decision makers will be  targeted from the EU pharma industry - reached through a mix of channels (email,  
LinkedIn, face to face engagements through meetings, conferences, exhibitions)- leads added to (GDPR compliant) database for 
continued engagement; Interested leads further engaged with to participate in demos/webinars/events ; 20 EoIs from industry  
decision makers interested in further involvement  (future pilots, scale up, pre-orders, etc.) 
Policy makers: regulatory  as an enabler vs. a barrier to green innovation: Influencing policy  
 
Engagement with policy makers (via participation in Working Groups, and through pathways that will be paved via the JRC,  
Asphalion and UNE) in order to 1) provide scientific evidence and approaches to support understanding of the environmental  
exposure and ecotoxicity of pharmaceuticals (including the impacts of mixtures in the environment) and 2) promote change in 
- 
processes towards greener routes (without impacting on consumer safety). 
Expected impacts: Scientific evidence base for assisting policy makers in prioritizing future regulatory approaches for 
pharmaceutical and prioritization of substances for screening and detailed assessment; Organization 
; Evidence of progress towards removal of one of the biggest 
obstacles blocking investment in green innovation- the regulatory hurdles in validating process modifications 
Healthcare practitioners: ambassadors for Green Pharmaceuticals and Sustainable Use & Disposal: As key influencers on 
pharmaceutical use, we will target a pilot group of healthcare practitioners (via organizations e.g. SIGRE & Healthcare Without 
Harm,) to raise awareness about ETERNAL and highlight the tremendous potential of practitioners as advocates for positive  
environmental impacts through patient education. With this group we will co-design a Greener Pharmaceuticals Pledge/Safe 
Disposal Ambassadors program geared towards a) educating patients as to the importance of safe disposal of unused medication, 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 16 of 45 
 
 
 
 
b) prescribing green pharmaceuticals (where available and in keeping with safety & prescription requirements), c) responsible 
prescribing of drugs, and in particular antibiotics (to mitigate hazards posed by increased Antimicrobial Resistance).  
Expected impacts: 30 practitioner pilot group will be recruited to co-design a Greener Pharmaceuticals  Pledge / Safe Disposal 
Ambassadors program toward patients/consumers  
Consumers: towards a Safe Med Disposal Challenge:  As negative environmental impact of pharmaceuticals ca n arise from  
the incorrect disposal by patients/consumers of unused pharmaceuticals, this Change Lab will bring together academic experts in 
behavioral change and social media, with pharma and healthcare industry voices, CSOs/NGOs (such as SIGRE) and members of 
 
about the issue, informing/educating about safe medical disposal schemes, safe disposal points, etc. We will also engage with  
existing campaigns such as #medsdisposal (EU healthcare, industry and student organizations) that raises awareness on how to  
dispose of unused or expired medicines appropriately in EU, bringing information on current EU disposal schemes in one place. 
Expected impacts: Co-design focus groups, workshop and campaign concepts 
: User -centric development and validation  
can play an important role in speeding up effectively the innovation process through addressing the actual  
user needs (European Commission, 2009). Whereas users are typically seen as a subject in traditional resear ch, 
they are seen as co-creators of innovation in a Living Lab approach . Our approach ensures that we bring the  
research and the industry partners together in the creative process from the outset in order to discover new and  
emerging requirements, expectations, industry decision making and investment motivations, regulatory requirements, 
among others. In this way, we will pave the way forward for bridging the innovation gap between technology  
development and the uptake of new products and services involving all relevant players of the value network through 
engagement between the innovation creators (RTOs and technology SMEs), the innovation adopters (pharma  
industry), stakeholders (regulatory bodies and policy makers) as well as citizens (consumers). We will also allow for 
the early assessment of the environmental and socio -economic implications of the outputs by performing impact  
assessment work. 
In compliance with the  
principle, Table 6 outlines how our project activities contribute to 5 of the 6 environmental 
objectives listed in the Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on 
the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088  
(Taxonomy Regulation), and we also confirm that our action does not significantly harm any of the 6 environmental 
objectives. ETERNAL contributes to the EU  in the Environment (which is 
a cross cutting priorities of this call topic) and in particular with Section 5.2 of COM(2019) 128 final that aims to 
 
 
 
 
How ETERNAL makes a substantive contribution to the 6 Environmental Objectives 
Climate change mitigation 
reduce greenhouse (GHG) emissions along the pharmaceutical value chain, and in particular in improving energy efficiency, 
especially thanks to intensified processes. 
Climate change adaptation: ETERNAL will make a positive contribution to climate change adaptation by promoting the 
adoption of greener pharmaceutical processes, in contributing recommendations to policy makers towards a more favorable 
regulatory framework in order to break down the barriers to innovation in the industry, as well as by inciting social  
innovation in relation to positive behavioral change at the industry, practitioner and consumer levels. 
Sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources: Between 30-90% of an oral dose can be excreted as an 
active substance in urine and faeces 28. We will contribute to preventing pharmaceuticals and their residues entering the  
water supply and spreading to surface wa ters and agricultural lands through wastewater effluent and sludge materials. When  
present in water and soils, released pharmaceuticals can end up in drinking water and transfer to and accumulate in plant  
and animal species (include those used for human consumption). Through these routes, humans can be unintentionally  
exposed by consuming contaminated water and food. As well as human exposure,  concentrations of pharmaceuticals present  
in the environment can have adverse effects on plants, animals and microorganisms. Given the biologically active nature of 
pharmaceutical there is concern regarding the effects of continuous, long -term exposure of humans and wildlife to low  
concentrations of pharmaceuticals that enter into the environment. 
Transition to a circular economy: ETERNAL will integrate circular economy in the product life cycle including materials 
and product design, manufacturing, and supply. It will focus on the product design using PAT and digital twin (selection of 
less harmful raw materials, study of alternative routes of synthesis etc.) new ways of minimizing waste and turning waste 
into resources (application of purification technologies for solvents, membranes and green substances to capture impurities 
and reagents (AZ, JR, Angelini), changing manufacturing technologies by continuous ones to reduce energy consumption 
and raw materials (Angelini, JR, QS, MyB) maximize medicines' value, studying their quality and stability using, and enable 
sustainability throughout the entire supply chain. All pharmaceutical companies have also included in their environmental 
Strategies the reduction of CO2 emissions, energy, water and gas consumption etc. 
Pollution prevention and control: The majority of pharmaceutical residues from industry production- leftovers not 
 
28 https://ec.europa.eu/health/files/environment/study_environment.pdf 
manufactur 
  
Table 6- 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 17 of 45 
 
 
 
properly disposed of or those that pass through the human body-end up in wastewater treatment facilities. At present, most 
wastewater treatment facilities are not able to completely degrade or retain these substances, the remainder, even if heavily 
diluted, can find their way into rivers or agriculture fields and cause permanent damage to organisms. Moreover, antibiotics 
in the environment can promote the development of antibiotic-resistant pathogens. ETERNAL will contribute to reducing 
this pollution at th                                 
pharmaceuticals that degrade more readily, to harmless substances, in wastewater treatment plants and the  environment; 
2) increase the understanding of & reduce the impact of pharmaceutical substances on the environment; 3) tackle improper 
disposal of antibiotics through social innovation, consumer awareness and the meds disposal campaign for high impact, e.g. 
each year in UK alone some d medicines go unused and are ultimately discarded29. 
Protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems : Loss of nature is also increasing our vulnerability to  
pandemics, undermining efforts to tackle the climate crisis, and threatening livelihoods. There is overwhelming evidence  
that traces of pharmaceuticals in the environment, in particular in water and soil, could have an adverse impact on wildlife 
such as fish, birds, and insects and knock -on effects on wider ecosystems, including antimicrobial resistance 30. With  
thousands of pharmaceuticals in use globally, many of which are designed to have biological effects at low concentrations, 
pharmaceuticals have the potential to have potent effects on wildlife and ecosystems. Animals and other organisms that are 
exposed to pharmaceuticals in water, soil, or even by feeding on medicated animals can experience behavioral, 
physiological, and histological effects. For example, a decline in populations of dung beetles is thought to be at least partly 
attributable to the use of anti -parasitic pharmaceuticals, including ivermectin in livestock. This has consequences for  
nutrient cycling, and other indirect effects on ecosystems including rare bat and bird species may also be significant . By 
promoting and enabling an enduring Green Pharmaceuticals movement anchored in technological innovation (as well as  
future roadmap for continuity towards industry adoption of the innovations), increased pharmaceutical ecotoxicity data,  
compliance and policy contributions, and social innovation, ETERNAL will make a lasting contribution to protecting our 
ecosystems from the adverse impacts of pharmaceutical manufacture and use. 
Challenges and how they will be overcome: A key challenge to a codesign/cocreation approach, for performing 
ERA and LCA in relation to the case stud production process and API changes and also to relates to the potential  
unwillingness of industry to share product/process information and data that is considered business sensitive. In order 
to overcome this, our approach is to only share industry information that is needed to perform the research and with 
the core actors (research -technology-industry) involved in each case study. As such, our Cocreation approach will be  
implemented at a single company level in terms of the scoping sessions to codesign the solutions for each specific 
Case Study. That said the industry partners are willing to identify sufficient information that is non-confidential in 
order to communicate the results/impacts in an Open Science approach and to contribute to the Open Data generated 
by the project. 
In addition from a technical perspective, we could meet challenges in relation to the membrane technology for solvent  
swaps, purification, and product recovery not providing the expected quality, and we will strive to overcome by  
improving the purification steps and incorporating membranes with a special coating to increase their selectivity.  
Knowledge of companies, technology centers and universities makes it possible to overcome this challenge.  
Moreover, it might be the case that the encapsulation effectiveness does not reach the expected target, in the synthesis 
of Liposome nanoparticles to encapsulate APIs. Different technologies will be tested based on microfluidics,  
including Microjet reactor technology, to help to overcome this lack of effectivity should it occur. 
Feed in from national or international research and innovation activities: Work across Europe is ongoing on a 
variety of interlinked topics, from greener manufacturing, and pollution abatement over a reduced use of veterinary 
pharmaceuticals to enhanced wastewater treatment. The Pharmaceutical Strategy for Europe focuses on availability, 
affordability, sustainability and security of supply of pharmaceuticals, as well as enabling innovation. It also includes  
actions referring to the environmental aspects of production, use and disposal of medicines. In March 2019, the  
Commission adopted the European Union Strategic Approach to Pharmaceuticals in the Environment (PiE), which 
focuses on actions to address the environment al implications of all phases of the lifecycle of (both human and  
veterinary) pharmaceuticals, from design and production through use to disposal. In addition, we will build on  
existing efforts that are generating data and data tools in the area of Pharmaceuticals in the Environment (PIE). For 
example, the European Medicines Agency is updating guidelines on Environmental Risk Assessment for human  
medicinal products (Section 5.3.1). 
Importantly, as expected by the call topic we will cooperate with the   
Centre (through a dedicated task in the work plan- Task 4.5). At proposal stage, preliminary meetings have been 
held with two senior scientists from the JRC from the fields of ecotoxicity (and in particular in relation to the mix of 
chemicals) and scientific evidence for policy making (including new approach methods to regulatory authorities). 
During the project, we will cooperate with the JRC in the field of new approach methodologies for ecotoxicity  
assessment (and it is noteworthy that one of our contacts in the JRC is the European Coordinator of a network of 35 
GLP compliant laboratories from across the EU). 
Table 7 provides a non-exhaustive list of national and international research and innovation activities whose 
results will feed into the project. Links with projects will be established via the ETERNAL partner who forms part 
 
29 https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/1350234/1/Evaluation_of_NHS_Medicines_Waste web_publication_version.pdf 
30 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-dangersub/pdf/Progress_Overview%20PiE_KH0320727ENN.pdf 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 18 of 45 
 
 
of these project teams, as well as via the Coordinators (managed through Task 6.3- Links with relevant national and 
international research and innovation activities). 
Table 7- National and international research and innovation activities that will be linked with ETERNAL 
Intelligence-led Assessment of Pharmaceuticals in the Environment (iPiE): Develop frameworks that utilize information from  
toxicological studies, pharmacological mode of action and in silico models to support intelligence-based environmental testing 
of pha rmaceuticals in development and to prioritise legacy pharmaceuticals (those authorized prior to 2006 enactment of  
Medicines Agency requirements) for targeted environmental risk assessment and/or environmental (bio) monitoring. Published 
databases on environmental risks of pharmaceuticals. 
Prioritisation and Risk Evaluation of Medicines In the EnviRonment ( PREMIER). Funded under IMI (Innovative Medicines  
Initiative). Ongoing: 01/09/2020- 31/08/2026: A framework for assessing and characterizing the environmental risks of APIs, 
which could be used to prioritize   
Assessment (ERA), as well as for picking up potential environmental risks in new APIs that are still under development. 
Development of a publicly available database. 
One Health European Joint Programme (OHEJP)- . Partnership between 44 acclaimed 
food, veterinary & medical laboratories and institutes across 22 EU 
approach to addressing the existing and emerging threats of antimicrobial resistance , whereby several antimicrobial  
(antibiotic & antifungal) pharmaceuticals from the treatment of humans and animals have been found in water and soil: their  
presence may play a role in accelerating th e development, maintenance and spread of resistant bacteria and fungi. One Health  
approach had previously already taken account of the interconnection between human& animal health, now also encompasses 
the environmental dimension, recognizing it as another link between diseases in humans & animals & potential source of new 
resistant microorganisms. 
NanoHarmony- Towards harmonized test methods for nanomaterials. H2020 project. Ongoing: 01/04/2020-31/03/2023: 
Focusses on OECD TGs and GDs, the collection and use of available data and information to support the finalization of the test 
method development and to organize a sustainable network for the needed exchange, also for future regulatory development 
needs. Method development coming out will be used for the ecotoxicological assessment of nanoparticles/drug delivery systems from 
the case studies work. 
CHRONIC- Chronic exposure scenarios driving environ -Curie, Ongoing: 
01/03/2021-28/02/2025: Support improved decision -making in risk assessment based on uncertain and potentially conflicting  
information, and in the development of scientifically -based monitoring strategies. CHRONIC will link in its paradigm shift in  
ERA methods and practices needed to deal with current and future contaminant challenges, and we will have access to its tools 
and approaches to identify relevant non-standard modes of toxicity for low chronic chemical exposure and integrate these with 
environmental stressors, laying the basis for an integrated approach to environmental risk assessment that includes non-standard 
yet ecologically relevant endpoints and low chronic exposure as key elements. 
EMPHASIS Effects of marine pharmaceuticals in zebrafish and ZFL cell line, Funded by FCT -Fundação para a Ciência e  
Tecnologia. Ongoing: 20/07/2018-19/07/2022: Provide information on the ecotoxicological effects of clinic pharmaceuticals  
(antineoplastics) and potential novel compounds with anticancer properties using in vitro and in vivo models, as well as provide 
robust information linking different organizational levels for use in regulatory risk assessment. 
VitroTox Linking in vitro to in vivo toxicity of pharmaceuticals: an integrative approach. Funded by FCT. Ongoing: 
29/03/2021-28/03/2024: Develop chromatographic methodologies for the quantification of specific groups of pharmaceuticals 
(antineoplastics, antibiotics) in aquatic and biological samples, assess the joint ecotoxicological effects of such pharmaceuticals 
and advance in the use of predictive toxicology using modelling approaches as well as, assist in the implementation of 
antineoplastics and antibiotics EU regulations. 
ERCITE Emerging Risk of Chemical in the Environment. Funded by UKRI/NERC. Ongoing. 01/09/19-30/06/2023: The 
Emerging Risks of Chemicals in the Environment program aims to conduct research to predict how the environment and its 
 
effects of mixtures, the second on the large-scale risk of trace chemical and pharmaceutical in wastewater for biodiversity. 
We will also engage and network with other important and relevant initiatives, such as the AMR Industry Alliance 
(one of the largest private sector coalitions set up to provide sustainable solutions to curb antimicrobial resistance, 
with over 100 biotech, diagnostics, generics and research-based pharmaceutical companies and associations joining 
forces), the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Initiative (a group of pharmaceutical and healthcare companies who share 
a vision of better social, health, safety and environmental outcomes in the communities where they buy), the Eco- 
Pharmaco-Stewardship (EPS) initiative 
(Inter-Association Initiative on 
Pharmaceuticals in the Environment (IAI 
PIE) combining the expertise of the 
Association of the European Self -Medication 
Industry (AESGP), the European Federation 
of Pharmaceutical Industries and 
Associations (EFPIA), the European Generic  
and Biosimilar medicines association (EGA), 
and the IChemE, IMechE and ISPE 
Sustainability in Pharma joint initiative in  
order to address the emerging environmental 
concerns, considering the entire life-cycle of 
the medicine and addresses the roles and  
responsibilities of all parties involved 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 19 of 45 
 
 
including public services, the pharmaceuticals industry, environmental experts, doctors, pharmacists, and patients). 
Interdisciplinarity: ETERNAL mobilizes 
expertise and methods from numerous 
distinct disciples to expand the frontiers 
Fig. 2-   Interdisciplinary approach 
of knowledge. While interdisciplinary R&D improves creative performance and the potential for breakthrough  
innovations being generates (they often result from bringing together previously unrelated ideas and recombining  
them in new ways to create original products or processes), interdisciplinary R&D projects are more complex to 
manage31. The disciplines that are being brought together and integrated in the ETERNAL project are as follows  
(Fig. 2): API production, Green Chemistry, Mechanochemistry, Digitalization, Regulatory Compliance, 
Environmental Risk & Lifecycle Assessment, Ecotoxicity, Policy, and Social Science & Humanities. In order to 
include an Interdisciplinary Strategic Committee, involving senior researchers from each of the different expert 
teams. This Committee will be responsible for the definition of the internal working strategies for the consolidation 
of the interdisciplinary R&D program with the aim of by minimizing redundancy, balancing diversity and 
complementarity, and capitalizing on synergies in information, knowledge, cultures and techniques. This 
Committee will overcome communication barriers, ensure the seamless transfer of strategic information across the 
disciplinary teams, improve the risk management and Scientific and Technical decision-making process. As such, 
Rob Peeling as a Senior Innovation Specialist from Britest, with a strong process and cross-disciplinary 
understanding and with 30+   as a specialist in capturing manufacturing process understanding 
through guided facilitations, makes an ideal chair of this Committee (supported by the Project Coordinator). 
Moreover, this role is very compatible with Britest s role as leaders of the cocreation process (research-industry- 
compliance) that will be a pillar of the project methodology. Regarding the tools and methods that we will employ 
in order to enable the fluid convergence and intersection of these disciplines towards the successful accomplishment 
of the project objectives are: codesigned work plan (all teams and disciplines have been involved in defining the 
work plan, and in identifying the necessary interactions required among the various disciplinary teams) and the 
subsequent cocreation/codesign approach that will be implemented in the project using the Living Lab methodology 
that will involve codesign/scoping sessions and other tools to ensure cross-disciplinary of knowledge and information 
from industry to the research and technology providers to ensure we arrive at technically deployable solutions that 
meets the expectations of industry digital collaboration and knowledge management tools (for merging formal- 
dynamic Gantt and project task, milestone, risk and output management in line with the workplan), and informal 
collaboration methods (communication tools, chats, forums, shared repositories, document collaboration tools) 
plenary meetings (every 6 months); thematic working sessions (at least monthly); informal breakout meetings and 
sessions (as often as needed)- agile minutes template to be completed for every meeting and session) knowledge 
exchange, demonstration and training sessions- internal sessions for promoting cross-disciplinary knowledge 
exchange & training across the different interdisciplinary teams. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender dimension: Gendered Innovations harness the creative power of sex, gender, and intersectional analysis for 
innovation and discovery, and considering these approaches may add valuable dimensions to research, in that they 
may take research in new directions (which would have not have unveiled themselves had we not have considered 
 
31 https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/15567027.pdf 
32 https://leru.blogg.lu.se/files/2015/06/LERU-Note-2013-Essential-SSH-Research-for-the-Societal-Challenge-Secure-clean-and-efficient-energy.pdf 
Integration of social sciences and humanities: 
environmentally responsible manner is not only an important technical challenge, but also devising the industry and 
consumer motivation, policies, legislation and economic tools that will enable this to be done in an effective and  
politically, socially, culturally and ethically acceptable manner is an equally great challenge. Research in social  
sciences and humanities is essential to probe these deeper issues and develop the tools for tackling them. Indeed, the 
challenges Europe faces are fundamentally human in nature  understanding individual and collective human  
behaviour is therefore crucial32. As such, socio-economic science and humanities (SSH) are identified as a cross - 
cutting priority in this call topic. The ETERNAL project, as part of a holistic approach, mobilizes SSH disciplines in 
the running of a Change and Participation Living Lab (WP5) which cross-cuts the work plan as a cross-cutting issue 
to green pharmaceutical investments, as well as how policy/the regulatory landscape influences decision - 
making. Indeed, as discussed regulatory compliance is a key barrier to innovation, and there is an opportunity to 
-validation of 
greener routes is encouraged (without compromising patient safety), which will involve behavioral change at the  
policy and the industry level. Social sciences and humanities can also provide better understanding of how  
can be positively influenced. This work will include contributions from the social and behavioral sciences 
non-vocational and 
vocational subjects), Business and administration (management, investment analysis marketing, public relations, 
. SSH will also be used in the Gender dimension work. 
ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 20 of 45 
 
 
gender dimension). We include a   in our project (man aged in Task 5.4). We will  
employ methods of sex, gender, and intersectional analysis as a possible source for new knowledge creation, to ensure  
that important aspects such as gender equity and a gender perspective are considered, whereby the role of women in 
the Greening of the Pharmaceutical industry will be empowered and acknowledged, in terms of female scientists,  
researchers and engineers involved in the innovation generation process, female senior business professionals  
involved in industry decision making, and female leaders from the value chain and from stakeholder organizations 
and initiatives, and female participation, capacity building and influence over policy and financial mechanisms. 
We will perform a Gender Analysis (which will involve SSH disciplines) to study how, from the Social Sciences 
and Humanities perspective, the behavioral implications as a result of the participation of women in decision-making 
and leadership positions and how this may influence investments  in environmentally sustainable pharmaceutical 
developments, and how it could also influence on paving the way to truly equitable healthcare. Indeed, the business 
case for promoting gender equity is now widely accepted; diversity has been a focus for compa nies and investors 
alike for nearly a decade, with e.g. the UK's 30% Club having been launched in 2010, and France having gender  
quotas for boards since 2011. As such, the implications of gendered decision-making in sustainable innovation would be 
valuable and pioneering to study. Any potential effects of pharmaceuticals and ecotoxicity aspects that could have 
different health implications and effects based on gender (e.g. pregnancy and nursing mothers) will also be  
considered, and will inform our research and the future research roadmap that will result from this project. Our D&E 
(Dissemination and Exploitation) outputs will ensure gender inclusive language and images, as well as specific 
results and which are or should be taken into account in its applications. Gender stakeholders in the field, as well as 
women from intersectional groups from the pharmaceutical industry and stakeholder and value chain will be  
considered as participants and targets of the D&E activities. We will produce a publicl y available Gender dimension 
Report (D5.5) that will describe how gender dimension has been integrated into the project across all its stages and 
what the main results and outcomes from a gender perspective have been. 
Open Science Practices: Open science practices (i.e. an approach based on open cooperative work and systematic 
sharing of knowledge and tools as early and widely as possible in the process) will be implemented as an integral  
part of our proposed methodology and for increasing our chances of delivering our objectives, as follows: 
Early and open sharing of research: Publications will be made in open access journals (as opposed to hybrid  
journals) and we will ensure early sharing of publications (pre-prints) to satisfy open access requirements and to enable 
a faster way of sharing knowledge via deposit in repositories. Participation in open peer-review will also be encouraged. 
Open access to research data and other related research outputs (e.g. to software, algorithms) will be promoted  
following the principle 'as open as possible, as closed as necessary' (and our strategy is to ensure that Open Science and 
IPR Management and closely linked, whereby we will aim to timely identification and protection of sensitive IP) and  
operated in parallel with a robust strategy for ensuring commercial exploita tion, protection of personal data or  
confidentiality/security are not jeopardized. 
Research output management: All research outputs will be documented by the generators (researchers) of the outputs 
and aspects such as ownership, novelty, IPR protection, etc. will be established in a timely manner and knowledge, data 
and information that is available for open dissemination will be confirmed. 
Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: Relevant technical standards will be adhered to in order to 
ensure that scientific information, publications, data and other outputs from our project, as well as the metadata about 
them, is available for re-use in the long term. This will involve the use of persistent and unique identifiers, of certified 
repositories that are compliant to the standards of the European Open Science Cloud and in compliance with the FAIR  
principles for the management of research data produced by projects. 
Involving all relevant knowledge actors including citizens, civil society and end users in the co-creation of content, 
as well as Citizen Science: a key feature of our workplan is our Change Living Lab, whereby we aim to involve Citizen  
participation for impact in relation to the important role of the citizen in preventing the unsafe disposal of unwanted 
drugs- citizens will be made aware of their important role in positive change, they will be educated as to the impacts  
and empowered to be shareholders through behavioral change. 
Data Management and management of other research outputs:  Data Management is  an integral part of the  
research process for our project and Table 8 provides an overview of how data/ research outputs will be managed in 
line with the F.A.I.R. principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable). Building on this outline, we will 
develop a full Data Management Plan (DMP) that will be ready by M6 as Deliverable 6.2 of the project. It will be a 
living document in which information can be made available on a finer level of granularity through updates as the 
implementation of the project progress and when significant changes occur. Our plan will essentially specify what 
data is generated by the project (purpose of the data collection/generation and its relation to the objectives of the  
project), whether and how it will be exploited or made accessible for verification and re -use, and how it will be  
curated and preserved to ensure our data/research outputs are findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable.  
Moreover, in view that many scientific companies outsource packages of research  to contract development &  
manufacturing  (CDMOs), this involves a high volume of primary data being produced by the CDMO. 
Currently the data transfer process is not standardized, requiring significant resource for processing and reporting. 
Often data transfers are still manual, requiring drag and drop of files via shared folders and potential loss of some 
primary data. In ETERNAL (through Task 2.2), we will digitize this process to ensure that data generated are 

ETERNAL (HORIZON-HLTH-2021-IND-07-01) 
Page 21 of 45 
 
 
transferred in real time, and ensuring that all data generated is F.A.I.R. This will minimize the need for any  
experiments to be repeated, and greater co ntrol of data should result in more sustainable faster development of  
scalable methods of production. 
Table 8- Summary of data management and management of other research outputs 
Types of data/research outputs and their estimated size: We will describe the types and formats of data the project will 
generate/collect (e.g. indicators of stress (measurable factors); The origin of the data; Expected size of the data; From  
whom it might be useful ('data utility'). Data outputs from our project will include experimental data, observational data, 
images text and numerical data, and combination with, and provenance of, existing data as relevant. Of relevance for our 
project, are e.g. the four domains of master data in pharmaceutical regulatory processes: substance, product, organisation 
and referential (SPOR) master data. 
Findability of data/research outputs We will ensure we make the data readily findable through trusted repositories, 
and we will define types of persistent and unique identifiers (e.g. digital object identifiers). 
Accessibility of data/research outputs We will ensure we make the data openly accessible, as early as possible in the 
project & in keeping with robust IPR management (data that is linked to IP will be available after IP protection mechanisms 
are in place). Provisions will be made for providing controlled access to restricted data for verification purposes. 
Interoperability of data/research outputs We will ensure the interoperability of the data through standards, format and 
vocabularies for data and metadata, e.g. the standards developed by European and international standardization 
organizations like CEN and ISO) for the identification of medicinal products (IDMP). The participation of UNE 
(representing CEN & CENELEC), in our consortium is a significant asset. 
Reusability of data/research outputs Increase data re-use (through clarifying licenses). Where relevant we will allow 
data sharing and reuse through Creative Commons and Open Data Commons licenses. Use of tools/ software/ models for 
data generation and validation/interpretation /re-use. 
Curation and storage/preservation costs Through Task 6.2 we will perform Data Management work under the leadership 
 
experienced IT Senior Executive, who spent 25+ years at IBM, Mr. O 
perform this role of data management and quality assurance. Moreover, all partners have allocated resources (personnel  
involvement and costs for making data FAIR) in their budgets to participate in Data Management under the guidance of  
the Data Manager. In  relation to long -term preservation of the data we have budgeted a reasonable amount for this to  
contribute to long term preservation. 
Data Security We will ensure (through the use of trusted repositories) that data is secure: including mechanisms for data 
recovery, as well as secure storage and transfer of sensitive data. 
Regulatory and Ethical aspects  We will ensure all regulatory and ethical aspects in relation to Data Management are  
fulfilled. Compliance requirements for industry in relation to data will be adhered to all times (and the presence of  
ASPHALION-who are experts in the field of regulatory and compliance in the pharmaceutical industry- in the consortium 
is a key asset). We will also ensure full compliance with General Data Protection Regulation for any personal data gathered. 
2. Impact