3.1 Work plan  
The overall structure of the work plan: The workplan foresees 8 WPs (Fig 19). 
WP 1 deals with project coordination and management (Fraunhofer). WP 2 will perform tracer development (KIT), 
and Tracer Based Sorting (TBS) trials at the already existing pilot sorting line of POLY.  VIS/NIR-emitting tracers 
will be used to test-wise mark food packaging items as mono- and multi-layered (MLC) food packaging waste. KIT 
develops specialized markers, with regards to exci-
tation and emission wavelength, quantum yield, 
particle size, luminescence lifetime, optical perfor-
mance, and concentration. The integration of tracers 
will primarily take place via printing inks on pack-
aging items. Likewise, the tracers will be well wash-
able from the packaging by a deinking process . 
Routes for tracer recycling are examined. In the first 
part of the project, until the packagings with inte-
grated markers are availab le, IRIS will apply Sen-
sor-Based-Specification (SBS) as an off- line char-
acterisation approach for the current un-traced MLC 
to be delivered by SUEZ, a company operating pro-
cesses for collection, sorting and recycling of waste 
packaging. These approaches will provide substan-
tial information on the presence of different poly-
mers and other constituents and its composites and 
will be used to suggest suita ble recycling process 
parameters. This will also be applicable for the case 
of the non-marked post-industrial (pi) and post-con-
sumer (pc) waste in the future and guide recovery of 
currently unused EoL packaging fractions . EoL 
packaging waste based on the novel food packaging 
concept of WP5 will be mixed into real packaging 
waste streams provided by SUEZ and further sorted 
by POLY with novel TBS sorting devices in order 
to separate specific plastic packaging fractions stream consisting of multi-layer food packaging only. SUEZ, special-
ized on collection and valorization of waste plastic packaging, will source packaging waste samples from their exist-
ing sorting and plastic recycling lines check market acceptance of food packaging with secondary raw materials.  
 
In WP 3 a “food-grade only” plastic waste stream separated in WP 2, and consisting of different mono - and multi-
layer materials, will be subjected to innovative post-sorting processes incl. decoloration and delamination (UGENT) 
and deodourization (KREYEN). Downstream, UM and Fraunhofer will perform mechanical recycling (melt filtra-
tion and re-compounding) if applicable, and solvent-based physical recycling, if multi-material MLC are present or 
higher purification (CreaSolv®) is required. Tracer marked packaging items from TBS sorting are well defined and 
their recovery processes can be adjusted accordingly, with respect to no-marked items results of SBS will guide the 
adjustment of suitable recycling process parameters. Finally, combinations of pre-treatment and recycling processes 
will be tested in different set-ups to validate economic viability and the required removal of NIAS and IAS.  
WP 4 will perform food safety assessments based on analytical and experimental migration testing and mathematical 
migration modelling at Fraunhofer with the recovered materials in WP 3 and selecting materials suitable for devel-
opments in WP 5. Materials not suitable for food packaging will be separated and tested for non-food flexible pack-
aging. 
In WP 5 AMCOR, Fraunhofer  will focus on modern circular design (“Design4Circular food packaging”) ap-
proaches to design a new flexible packaging structure based on a mono -material multi-layer (PE based) with PE 
PCRs, and on recyclable functional barrie r systems (e.g. SiO x). Printing of tracer -inks will be included. Deinking 
tests of WP 3 will result in proposals for new ink designs that are easier deinked and/or delaminated if needed 
(UGENT, SW). This allows production of cleaner recyclates ready for closed loop recycling. 
WP 6 demonstrates: (1) Beneficial effects of advanced sorting, purification and recycling technologies of WP2, WP3 
on PE PCR yield and purity qualities, (2) applicability of such PE PCRs in mono-material based flexible packagings, 
as designed in WP5 based on migration models of WP4, (3)  beneficial effects of these new mono -material based 
laminates on the performance of sorting, purification & recycling processes, on resulting PCR quality and circular 
use. Demonstration activities will be organised in 3 Loops, starting from Month 13.  
Fig 19. CIRCULAR FoodPack - Pert diagram (WP Leader) 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 47 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
Loop 1 (Fig 20) will receive real flexible packaging waste of 
about 1000 kg, not containing tracer marked packaging yet 
(SUEZ). By NIR -separation of flexible packaging low in PE 
content, SUEZ will generate a fraction of flexibles with PE and 
other polymers, thus a multi-layer flexible fraction without 
differentiation of food and non- food packaging items . These 
MLC films will be characterised by an off-line SBS tool (IRIS). 
The application here would be home & personal c are (HPC) 
products, since a PCR without definition of food grade cannot be 
used for food packaging. 
 
In Loop 2 (Fig 21), SUEZ will collect the input waste of NES-
TLE customers in a Business-to-Business (B2B) material recov-
ery approach (~ 200 kg in total) that returns empty to NESTLE 
food packs to a NESTLE factory after use, guaranteeing 99% 
content of food packages. This material is converted into food 
grade PE PCR and considered for new food packaging.  
 
Loop 3 (Fig 22) will demonstrate food pack sortings by TBS 
(POLY); e.g. 350 kg of tracer marked food packs sorted out 
from a total of 1400 kg packaging waste (1000 kg is real waste, 
400 kg is tracer marked). The sorted waste will enter into recy-
cling processes, in each Cycle. PE PCRs are applicable in lami-
nates, if the y comply with the envisaged maximum residual 
NIAS/IAS levels (WP4). NESTLE will test-wise apply the new 
material in food packaging systems and demonstrate technical 
feasibility for sensitive dry food. Packed items will be used for 
shelf life, health safety studies at Fraunhofer, NESTLE. Loop 
3 will undergo two Cycles; Cycle 2 with the food packagings of 
novel mono-material laminates: NESTLE products (with trac-
ers) will undergo TBS, recycling, PCR characterisation, re-use: 
Circular use in food packaging will be demonstrated. 
 
WP 7 will address life cycle assessment (LCA), and costing 
(LCC), including aspects such as recyclate quality, market size 
and balance between food loss and packaging design. The as-
sessment of new technologies in function of a sustainable de-
velopment as exemplified in EU policies will be performed. 
Detailed assessment of environmental (full LCA) aspects for 
food packaging recyclates will be initiated, following EU 
guidelines for circular economy assessment and consumer 
safety aspects for development of sustainable and safe flexi-
ble packaging, measuring contribution to circular economy 
will be included by UGENT, ECOZEPT, IRIS, NTUA.  
 
WP 8  will cover innovation management, exploitation, eco-
nomic assessment (full cost of ownership, business plans), 
communication to promote public awareness of the circular 
economy concept and focus on interaction with wider stake-
holders and EAB ( Fraunhofer, BayFOR). It will care about 
dissemination to raise awareness from early on to maximize 
wide uptake of results. Based on desk research and multi-stage 
interviews with packaging experts and consumers, market re-
search and a SWOT analsysis will be performed by 
ECOZEPT, following by exploitation plans developed using 
the Business Model Canvas by NTUA to identify feasible busi-
ness opportunities and marketing strategies to ensure a market 
acceptance of the CIRCULAR FoodPack technologies.
Fig 21. Loop 2 - food packaging, B2B collection 
Fig 22. Loop 3 - CIRCULAR FoodPack technologies 
Fig 20. Loop 1 – Circular Use in HPC 
  

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 48 of 100] 
CE-SC5-24-2020 
Timing of the different work Packages and main tasks - Gantt chart 
 
 
 
 
WP Leader Task participants 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
WP1 Project Management and Coordination Fraunhofer
T1.1 Implementation of efficient management and support structures BayFOR Fraunhofer D
T1.2 Day-to-day project management and coordination Fraunhofer All D
T1.3 Reporting, financial management & controlling Fraunhofer All
T1.4 Monitoring & ensuring progress as well as risk management through scientific coordination Fraunhofer All
T1.5 Data Management Fraunhofer All D D
WP2 Collection & Sorting POLY
T2.1 Analysis of SOA ML food packaging in EU waste, collection, sorting, recycling, mat. sourcing SUEZ POLY, IRIS D D
T2.2 TBS tracer development KIT POLY D
T2.3 Optimisaton of TBS tracers and their integration in ML food packs POLY KIT, AMCOR D
T2.4 Development of TBS sorting machine for conventional NIR sorters and TBS trials POLY SUEZ, KIT D D
T2.5 Design, optimisation and building of HSI monitoring solution for ML identification IRIS POLY, SUEZ, KIT D D
WP3 Purification and Recycling of Flexible Packaging UGENT
T3.1 Characterisation and qualification of waste plastics Fraunhofer AMCOR-G, UGENT, KREYEN, SIEGWERK, SUEZ D
T3.2 Washing and deodorization KREYEN UGENT, Fraunhofer D
T3.3 Delamination and deinking UGENT SIEGWERK, AMCOR-G, Fraunhofer D
T3.4 Dissolution based purification: CreaSolv® process Fraunhofer UGENT, KREYEN D
T3.5 Mechnical recycling tests and application development UM Fraunhofer, SUEZ D D
T3.6 Process chain design UGENT Fraunhofer, KREYEN D
T3.7 Design for sorting and recycling guidelines UM Fraunhofer, SIEGWERK, KREYEN, AMCOR-G D
WP4 Analysis, Safety, Compliance Evaluation of Polyethylene Recyclates and Packaging Fraunhofer
T4.1 Regulatory assessment and compliance evaluation of the used raw materials Fraunhofer NESTLE, AMCOR, POLY, KREYEN, SIEGWERK D
T4.2 Analytical characterization and monitoring of recycling process quality and recycling products Fraunhofer NESTLE D
T4.3 Challenge test for demonstrating cleaning efficiency Fraunhofer WP3-participants D
T4.4 Development of analytical databased tools to demonstrate safety NESTLE Fraunhofer D
T4.5 Design and validation of functional barrier concepts for the use of PCR in food packaging Fraunhofer NESTLE, AMCOR D D
WP5 Design for Circular Food Packaging AMCOR-K
T5.1 Definition of specifications for the targeted products and a packaging concept NESTLE AMCOR, Fraunhofer, UM D
T5.2 Functional barrier layer combinations – Assessments with model contaminants Fraunhofer AMCOR, SIEGWERK D
T5.3 Film extrusion of PE-PCRs coming from WP3 and characterisation AMCOR-G Fraunhofer, UM D
T5.4 SiOx deposition and deinkable printing as functional barriers on PE-PCR films AMCOR-K AMCOR-G, Fraunhofer, SIEGWERK D
T5.5 Printing of registered tracers to enable identification and managements after use SIEGWERK POLY, AMCOR, KIT, Fraunhofer D
T5.6 Machinability of novel tracer prtinted mono-material laminates with PE PCRs during packing AMCOR-G NESTLE, AMCOR-K, Fraunhofer
WP6 Demonstration - Circular Use Fraunhofer
T6.1 Eco-design of prototypes in view of project technological developments AMCOR WP6-participants D
T6.2 Loop 1: PE PCRs from real pc-flexible waste, circular use in Home Personal Care (HPC) SUEZ WP6-participants D
T6.3 Loop 2: PE PCRs from B2B collected food packs, circular use in flexible food packaging NESTLE WP6-participants D
T6.4 Loop 3: PE PCRs from TBS-Sorted Waste, circular use in flexible food packaging POLY WP6-participants D
T6.5 Implementation by packing and lifetime tests, evaluation and guidelines for industrial take-up NESTLE AMCOR, Fraunhofer, UGENT, UM, ECOZEPT D
WP7 Comprehensive Sustainability Assessment and Decision-Support Tools UGENT
T7.1 Scenario definition and process flow schemes UGENT WP7-participants
T7.2 Mass and energy balances UGENT WP7-participants
T7.3 Comprehensive sustainability assessment: framework development and application UGENT WP7-participants D D
T7.4 Quality Assurance System (QAS) database and Decision Support System (DSS) tool IRIS WP7-participants D D
WP8 Market Analysis, Exploitation, Dissemination and Communication NTUA
T8.1 Market analysis and identification of stakeholders’ preferences, acceptances and expectations ECOZEPT NTUA, all D
T8.2 Exploitation of Results, Innovation Management and Technology Transfer NTUA ECOZEPT, all DD DD
T8.3 Dissemination and communication and development of CIRCULAR FoodPack’s brand identity BayFOR All D D
T8.4 Continuous dissemination and interaction with the scientific and industrial community BayFOR Fraunhofer, all
D
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
D D
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 49 of 100] 
CE-SC5-24-2020