1.2 kg CO2 / kg PE71  
Reduction by 35% 
0.5-0.7 kg CO2 / kg PE PCR69,70 
Reduction by 70% 
2.1.2 Further substantial impacts 
Reducing the volume of plastics sent to landfill and incineration. In Europe, 7.2 million tonnes of plastics are sent 
to landfill annually and 12.4 million tonnes are incinerated for energy recovery. 72 The l ong-term persistence of 
plastics in the environment is exacerbated by their cumulative effect. Recognized as one of the major international 
environmental challenges by the European Environment Agency (EEA) 73, plastics account for 89 –95% of marine 
litter. This currently includes all MLC packaging. The sorting and upcycling technologies developed by CIRCULAR 
FoodPack will shift this post-consumer packaging from linear, environmentally unattractive options to effective 
recycling, which is vastly preferable and also introduces  a true circular economy for these products. The shif t from 
incineration with energy recovery to material recycling could result in a reduction of 3.3 tonnes CO2 equivalents per 
tonne of MLC flexible packaging waste. This includes the benefit gained from replacing virgin granules with recycled 
counterparts. Here , 90% of PE  from currently un- used packaging waste sorting fractions entering the recycling 
facility will be mechanically recycled to granules while the residues of the recycling process are incinerated. This 
avoids the emission of 3.1-5.0 million tonnes of CO 2 equivalents per year corresponding to the entire estimated 
volume of the MLC flexible packaging market in Europe (1.5-1.8 million tonnes per year)74.  
Additionally, CIRCULAR FoodPack will significantly help to reduce the amount of plastic leaking from controlled 
waste management systems, thus reducing environmental pollution and improv ing ecosystem resilience. This will 
benefit consumers by providing access to a healthier environment and therefore food that contain s lower levels of 
microplastic fragments and harmful substances leaking from plastic waste. 
 
Reducing the volume of export ed plastic waste. Despite the 2018 import ban in China, it has remained common 
practice to ship ‘unrecyclable’ plastic waste halfway across the globe, primarily to South-East Asia, where its ultimate 
fate is unclear. By increasing the value of MLC packaging waste, CIRCULAR FoodPack will make it more attractive 
to manage the waste regionally and recycle it within the EU rather than exporting it. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
69 The Association of plastic recyclers APR,LCAs for post-consumer recycled resins: PET, HDPE and PP, 2018 
70 Based on Ecoinvent Data: 0.69 CO2 eq. for rPE versus 2.28 kg CO2 eq. for 1 kg virgin LDPE 
71 Values from the study of CE Delft on mixed plastic (DKR350) in NL (2019) 
72 The Circular Economy for Plastics, A European Overview, Plastics Europe, 2019.  
73 Source: State of Europe's seas, EEA Report No 2/2015, ISSN 1977-8449 
74 CEFLEX, Designing for a Circular Economy: Recyclability of polyolefin-based flexible packaging, 2020.  
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 31 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
Industry growth and job creation.  The circular economy unlocks tremendous potential for the development of 
innovative new materials. The global paradigm shift from the take-make-dispose linear model towards a c ircular 
model represents a unique opportunity for Europe and the European process industries to kick-start a world leading 
competitive circular economy with significant economic, environmental and societal benefits. To increase the 
innovation capacity of the industry, the approach is to capitalise on a valuable opportunity for the EU plastic recycling 
industry and end- user industries to replace currently-used virgin materials. The closed loop will also provide the 
industry with an opportunity to obtain value from waste rather than paying for disposal. CIRCULAR FoodPack is a 
timely development that will enable the transition to a circular EU plastic industry. This will provide great business 
opportunities reinforced by increased visibility, and policy awareness and support for such solutions . Following 
current market trends for recycling and growth in the target end-use sectors, CIRCULAR FoodPack will achieve high 
market penetration to meet the targets of recycling 75% of plastics by 2030, leading to significant increases in revenue 
and more jobs on the waste provision and recycling levels of the value chain.  Significantly reducing the volume of 
waste plastics sent to landfill, incineration and export  creates an opportunity for the expansion of existing plastic -
recycling facilities and the building of new ones across Europe, leading to local job creation and economic growth. 
Typical recycling plants for  LDPE films have  a throughput of 10,000–20,000 tonnes per year and employ 20–40 
people. Based on the projected collection of 0.5 million tonnes of food-grade polyolefin flexible packaging feedstock 
in Europe, CIRCULAR FoodPack technology will lead to the construction of more than 25 new sites dedicated to 
food-grade recycled LDPE, directly creating ~500 new jobs as well as additional jo bs in plant construction and the 
supply chain. To avoid transporting  waste over long distances, the sorting and recycling facilities will be widely 
dispersed, including rural areas, also providing opportunities for SMEs. Further jobs will be created in the sector for 
new marking and sorting technologies. 
Furthermore, convertors would gain access to food-compliant PCRs allowing large segments of the food market to 
be served with PCR-containing packaging solutions, not only allowing Fast -moving Consumer Goods (FMCGs) to 
meet their sustainability targets and comply with new national and European legislation, but also preventing a return 
to paper/rigid/metal/glass packaging (which would until then offer a more circular approach but at the cost of a larger 
carbon footprint). The introduction of PE PCR content into mono-material flexible packaging solutions would further 
strengthen the oncoming investment wave with regards to (co)extrusion, converting and packaging capacity suitable 
for the production of mono-material packaging, resulting in several billions worth of capital and the direct and indirect 
creation of tens of thousands of new jobs in the converting industry over the next 5–10 years. 
CIRCULAR FoodPack will therefore support circular business models and a ssociated employment . While 
contributing to the implementation of the Circular Economy Action Plan, the Seventh  EAP, and the Commission 
Strategy on Plastics, the project will also help to implement priority goals in the field of green growth and resource 
efficiency in parallel with the overarching goals of EU 2020 Strategy to develop Europe in a smart, sustainable and 
inclusive way (Table 7). 
Table 7. Impact of CIRCULAR FoodPack on the EU 2020 strategy. 
EU2020 Priority EU Flagship CIRCULAR FoodPack Contribution 
Smart growth Innovation 
Union 
Creation of new market within the recycling sector including creation of jobs; 
facilitating technology upscale and uptake; increase EU industrial competiveness; 
technological leadership in circular economy 
Sustainable growth Resource 
efficient Europe 
Improvement of resource efficiency; essential  energy and CO2 savings in 
production of flexible food packaging;  reduction of waste and 
landfilling/incineration of valuable resources in line with EU policies; reduction of 
dependency on petroleum imports by replacement of petrochemical products with 
SRMs 
Inclusive growth Agenda for new 
skills and jobs 
Safeguarding and developing industrial safety to establish better working conditions 
and thus improving the quality of jobs in Europe 
 
The recycling sector and business models proposed by CIRCULAR FoodPack will increase GDP, create jobs and 
stimulate local economies. Today, the recycling sector offers a diverse range of jobs ranging from  low-skilled to 
highly-qualified positons, covering the collection, storage and handling as well as the processing and production of 
goods. Although Eurostat does not keep records of employment in the recycling sector, their conservative estimates 
indicated a continual increase in recycling-related employment between 2008 and 2015.75 An EC impact assessment 
of a legislative proposal on waste and recycling targets to 2035 predicted that up to 178,000 direct jobs could be 
created in the recycling-related employment sector. 76 CIRCULAR FoodPack will contribute to this development, 
with a significant share of highly-qualified personnel as usual for this sector, reflecting the development of innovative 
technologies and life-long-learning programmes for existing staff.   
Synergistic growth through scientific cooperation . CIRCULAR FoodPack is a Research and Innovation Action 
(RIA) and thus focuses on the technological aspects of realising the circular economy for plastics. Setting up a forum 
to exchange knowledge and experience with holistic projects also covering the social and political aspects of circular 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
75 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=SWD:2018:17:FIN 
76 EU Commission: Additional analysis to complement the impact assessment SWD (2014) 208 supporting the review of EU waste manag. targets. Brussels 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 32 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
plastics will embed the project within the value chain and broader developments in the field. This link will be made 
with the project MSCA-ITN-EJD C-PlaNeT (https://www.c-planet.eu/), which includes Fraunhofer as a partner and 
is coordinated by UGent. Likewise, CIRCULAR FoodPack will provide valuable input to existing industrial networks 
striving to increase the recycling of (flexible) packaging, such as CEFLEX, New Plastics Economy (Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation) and HolyGrail2.0. Several CIRCULAR FoodPack partners  are also partners in or consultant s to these 
global initiatives, providing a direct line for knowledge exchange. HolyGrail2.0 focuses on watermarking technology 
for food/non-food sorting, which is parallel to the envisioned developments in CIRCULAR FoodPack. HolyGrail2.0 
technology is currently at TRL7 and will be advanced to TRL8–9. The greatest weakness of watermark technology 
(a more or less 2D surface is required for scanning, which is not guaranteed in ‘crumpled’ waste) would be solved 
by the CIRCULAR FoodPack TBS technology (which does  not require flat surfaces for scanning), making the 
projects complementary rather than competitive. Exchange of knowledge between initiatives will help European 
industry to identify an optimal combination of technologies to further realise the circular economy for plastics.  
Input for standardisation and guidelines. The EC states that a vital aspect of moving forward with the European 
Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy is  the development and implementation of supporting standards and 
guidelines.77 There is the broad standard on the recovery and recycling of plastics (ISO 15270:2008) and specific  
standards for sampling and sample preparation (CEN 16010 and 16011), and the characterisation of mono-material 
plastic waste (EN 15342 to 15348), but no standards for the characterisation or recycling of MLC plastics.  
Likewise, existing design guidelines – often provided by industry associations such as PRE78 or CEFLEX79 – focus 
on obtaining as much mono- material waste as possible, based on the status quo that MLC is ‘unrecyclable’. 
CIRCULAR FoodPack will lay the foundations for the expansion of standards and guidelines for  the development, 
sorting and recycling of MLC plastic packaging. Although the guidelines will mainly apply in Europe, it is evident 
that many of the problems facing  Europe are replicated in other parts of the world, and guidelines  will be valid as 
long as local and regional differences are taken into consideration. In addition, there is a distinct contradiction in the 
objectives of waste management legislation (Directive (EU) 2018/851 on waste) obligating food packaging producers 
to increase recycling rates, while FCM Recycling Regulation (EC) No 282/2008 strongly emp hasises food safety, 
when new FCMs are made from post-consumer recycled FCMs. The EC is aware of this conflict80 and stakeholders 
agree that safety is more important than recycling targets. It is also clear that current recycling processes do not enable 
the purification of polyolefins  and the removal of contaminants of concern, in order to guarantee food safety.  
CIRCULAR FoodPack will provide  much-needed research in this area, offering scientific evidence for future 
legislation and standardisation covering the use of recycled polyolefins in food-contact applications. We will develop 
and validate novel tests for the compliance and safety assessment of polyolefin-based recycled materials in flexible 
food packaging, which will benefit EFSA  (responsible for ris k assessment at the  EU level), national monitoring 
authorities, and the EU legislat ure. The EU food and packaging industry will also benefit from  this support for 
compliance assessment.  
Cross-cutting priorities. Socio-economic science and humanities (SSH) , and gender aspects. The general public 
currently has a negative perception of plastic products in general , and it is often unclear which plastics provide 
different types of benefits for the protection of  goods. Non-Governmental Organisation campaigns broadcast the 
dramatic effects of plastic waste and litter ( especially media representation of  marine litter and micro-plastics). 
CIRCULAR FoodPack technology fulfils all the requirements for circular material flow, addressing plastic pollution 
in the envi ronment (land and sea) by implementing new sorting and recycling concepts.  CIRCULAR FoodPack 
includes an SSH dimension, specifically  market analysi s, business planning , and gender -relevant marketing 
strategies, These have been applied from the conception of the project, which will ensure project implementation in 
a stakeholder-driven approach to ensure acceptance by actors spanning the value chain, including consumers. This 
will encourage the purchase of products derived from SRM s and the collection of EoL packaging waste. T he 
influence of environmental factors on the selection of materials differs by gender as well as EoL concerns. We will 
address these issues in our s- LCA, as well as m arket research to gain insights into how consumers’ environmental 
values are shaped, allowing us to develop creative ways to engage with diverse audiences and communities about the 
societal challenges linked to limited resources and unsustainable consumption patterns. In addition to consumer 
perception studies, the project wil l implement a stakeholder -driven approach by conducting interviews with 
packaging experts such as packaging producers, food manufacturers, retailers, waste management representatives 
and recycling facilities on the perceptions and acceptability of the CIRCULAR FoodPack products. Furthermore, the 
project will host co -creation workshops with scientific, industrial and consumer communities as a systematic 
approach for stakeholder cooperation to discuss eco-friendly design, standardisation, incentive schemes and DSS.  
CIRCULAR FoodPack is  a model project in terms of  promoting women in science, and many female principal 
investigators (PIs) among the project partners already have prominent roles. Examples include (1) Prof. Kim Ragaert, 
leader of the CAPTURE platform and nominee for the Plastics Recycling Ambassador award; (2) Dr. Diana Kemmer, 
head of the “Product Safety and Analytics” d epartment and a certified food chemist with more than 15 year s of 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
77 European Commission, 2018. A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy. 
78 “https://recyclass.eu/recyclass/design-for-recycling-guidelines/.” [Online]. Available: https://recyclass.eu/recyclass/design-for-recycling-guidelines/. 
79 “https://ceflex.eu/guidelines/.” [Online]. Available: https://ceflex.eu/guidelines/. 
80 EU Commission: Study supporting the Evaluation of Food Contact Materials (FCM) legislation - (Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004), July 2020 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 33 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
experience at the Fraunhofer Institute for Process Engineering and Packaging (IVV); (3) Dr. Esra Kucukpinar, also 
from Fraunhofer IVV , who will co -coordinate the project and control the development of new recyclable mono -
material flexible packaging designs based on her >  15 years of experience in this field; and (4) Dr. Virginie 
Decottignies, head of the Material Recycling and Recovery Department at CIRSEE Material Cluster , and expert in 
waste characterisation and plastic recycling. When presenting the accomplishments of the project to industry and the 
public, their roles will be made prominently visible, without necessarily stressing their gender. This should contribute 
to the general public’s appreciation that it is perfectly normal for women to have a leading role in the sciences. A s 
such, our project will consider the relevance of the gender dimension in communication and training, to ensure the 
message of diversity in science reaches both males and females. This will help to educate both current professionals 
and the next generation of scientists  and engineers needed to realise the EU circular economy and maximise its 
creativity and innovation. The gender dimension of our consortium and our measures to align with Article 16 of the 
H2020 programme are presented at the end of Section 3.3.  
Contribution to improving innovation capacity and the integration of new knowledge ; dissemination of project 
outcomes to the current and next generation of the waste, recycling, converting and packaging end-users. 
The EU plastic strategy estimates that only 5% of the value of plastic packaging material rem ains in the economy, 
the rest being lost after a very short and single use  phase.81 As such, the CIRCULAR FoodPack technologies and 
innovations will allow the EU to reduce the annual €70–105 billion lost by not maintaining plastic within the circular 
economy. Although the generation of new knowledge is positive, industrial use increases its innovation capacity and 
realises impact. To ensure market-replicable innovation, the consortium ther efore unites actors across the industry 
value chain, which is necessary for market success, and the project has integrated a number of transversal activities 
such as environmental, regulatory, safety and techno-economic assessments. Finally, business planning activities will 
maximise the post-project exploitation of the results. The project gives trans-sectorial industry and transdisciplinary 
research and technology players an opportunity to collaborate and share in the technical knowledge and market 
expertise. Effective knowledge transfer from the RTOs (Fraunhofer, UGENT, UM, KIT, NTUA) to the participating 
enterprises, especially SMEs (POLY, KREYEN, IRIS, ECOZEPT) often lacking their own R&D capacities, will 
encourage the industry partners to carry forward the results post-project, which will increase the likelihood of market 
uptake. We have included Task 8.2 to ensure this seamless knowledge transfer.  
As discussed in the Ambition section, CIRCULAR FoodPack is founded on a unique patented process (with 
potentially patentable improvements), which together with the high added- value applications have great potential 
compared to existing processes and recycled products. The work plan includes all activities needed to maximise the 
post-project readiness of the process and to exploit the results in a short time, therefore making high-quality PE PCR 
available to feed the new value chains. 
Although the consortium focuses on PE -based packaging solutions for sorting, recycling and reuse in flexible 
packaging, the partners are nevertheless aware that the technologies, methods, concepts and innovative processes 
arising from the CIRCULAR FoodPack project will bring tremendous value to the plastic packaging industry as a 
whole, including rigid packaging and thermoformed trays, encompassing multiple polymer families such as PP, PS 
and PET, covering at least 30 million tonnes of the plastics used for packaging (17.8 million tonnes of this were 
collected as post-consumer waste in 2018)82.  
Based on this unexploited potential, CIRCULAR FoodPack’s objective is to increase joint research and innovation 
capacity within the industry, opening new market segments to replace currently used virgin materials. This closed 
loop will also change the perception of EoL plastics from a burden on society to a valuable Secondary Raw material 
(SRM) stream. This will be reinforced at the downstream level (SRM converters and end users), which will benefit 
from new products, revenues from their post-industrial wastes and lower landfill taxes. CIRCULAR FoodPack offers 
the European plastics processing industry an economically sound strategy to gain a strong foothold in the recycling 
of flexible packaging, which will lead to an invaluable head start in this global competition.  
2.1.3 Framework conditions and barriers / obstacles 
Framework conditions influencing the expected impact  
Expected legislation on the content of recycled plastics. There is currently a strong drive for legislative measures 
that would – directly or indirectly – support the uptake of recycled plastics into new resins or products, which would 
be in line with the European Strategy on Plastics. It is currently unclear whether this would be enacted in the form of 
a taxation on virgin resins (as planned in Italy)83, a taxation on packaging products not containing a minimum content 
of recycled plastics (as supported by Member S tates like Finland and Denmark), an obligatory recycled content in 
products (as already decided by the European Parliament for beverage bottles)84, or a combination of the above. In 
any case, when such legislation comes into force, this will increase  the demand for high-quality recycled plastics. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
81 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/news/first-ever-europe-wide-strategy-plastics-2018-jan-16_en 
82  Plastics – The Facts 2019, An Analysis of European plastics production, demand and waste data, Plastics Europe. 
83 https://www.reuters.com/article/us-italy-tax-plastic-tampons-idUSKBN1Y31UP  
84 EU Parliament, 2019. DIRECTIVE (EU) 2019/904 OF THE EU 1075 PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL, June, 2019 on the reduction of the impact 
1076 of certain plastic products on the environment. Off. J. Eur. Union. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 34 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
CIRCULAR FoodPack will help to meet that demand by making MLC plastics effectively recyclable and providing 
validated concepts for food packaging containing substantial quantities of PCR plastics. 
Food contact regulation for recycled plastics. FCM approval for recycled plastics – especially those other than PET 
– is currently difficult to obtain .85 No guidelines exist for flexibles, but it is common practice to build on existing 
guidelines, like the ones for PET. For example, EFSA has stipulated that the input stream for HDPE must be 99% 
pure in terms of utilisation as  FCM before becoming waste, which is st ricter than the 95% requirement for PET 85. 
This is mainly because  the industry was able to state  that all PET entering  the market was for food packaging, 86 
whereas this is not the case for HDPE. Flexibles are expected to fall under the same higher purity target because there 
are also flexible packaging products that are not FCMs. CIRCULAR FoodPack TBS technology can meet this 99% 
target, which has previously only been possible ( via the WRAP consortium) by  hand picking, 87 which is not 
economically viable in the EU. CIRCULAR FoodPack would therefore offer the first automated process that has the 
potential to achieve FCM compliant input streams for flexibles.  
The market price of oil. The crash in the oil price (May 2020) , caused by international market pressure and the 
COVID-19 pandemic, has placed immense strain on the recycling of plastics.88 As the oil price goes down, the price 
of virgin plastics declines accordingly, with more than a 30% decrease for PET and polyolefins. This results in a very 
strong competitive disadvantage for recycled pellets, which have a more or less fixed price determined by the costs 
of waste collection, sorting and reprocessing. For example, PET flakes for the production of polyester fibres fell 50% 
in price in May and June 2020. Even so, driven by some of the framework conditions mentioned in this section 
(pledges, drive for recycled content), the prices of food -grade rPET – the only plastic recycled at scale for FCM 
applications – not only remained stable but so did the demand. The CIRCULAR FoodPack TBS technology will help 
build a similar economy, which does not currently exist, for rPE. This new circular economy for plastics will be 
strengthened by a new wave of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) fees and (inter)national  taxes specifically 
derived from the arival of plastics containing non- recyclable/non-PCR materials on the market, compensating the 
pricepoint differential of virgin plastic (packaging) solutions. Over time, these new regulations may even be used to 
prevent non-sustainable packaging from entering the market in the first place. 
Public awareness and industry pledges. The public has a generally negative perception of plastic-based packaging 
systems and often does not understand the functions and benefits of plastic packaging. CIRCULAR FoodPack can 
help to improve this image by advancing the concept that the packaging material can be recycled rather than discarded 
after single use. Driven by public awareness and genuine willingness to ‘do bette r’, many companies have made 
formal pledges to either make their products recyclable or to increase the uptake of recycled content in their products. 
These pledges may be individual, via the EU’s Circular Plastic Alliance89 or bundled via network organisations like 
the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, which has more than 450 signatories to its Global Commitment to start building a 
circular economy for plastic s.90 The signatories include companies representing 20% of all plastic packaging 
produced globally, some of which are well-known consumer businesses such as L’Oréal, MARS, NESTLE, PepsiCo, 
The Coca -Cola Company, Unilever, the world’s largest retailer – Walmart, major packaging producers such as 
AMCOR and Berry Global , and two of the largest resource management specialists – Veolia and SUEZ. 
Approximately 60% of plastic packaging is reusable, recyclable or compostable today. The highest percentage of  
recyclable material is found in rigid plastic packaging, like bottles. The companies listed above are working towards 
the 2025 ambition level of 100% reusable, recyclable or compostable plastic packaging. This is increasing the demand 
for high-quality recycled flexible plastics, which CIRCULAR FoodPack will help to meet. Some companies, which 
are part of the New Plastic Economy alliance, are also members of the project consortium. (Table 8). 
Table 8. Commitments and planned actions of some top companies91 (NESTLÉ, AMCOR, SUEZ) partners in CIRCULAR FoodPack 
SUEZ (Volume of plastic processed): 150,000 metric tonnes  
Commitment: Triple the sorting and recycling infrastructure to reach 600,000 metric tonnes production capacity of high -
quality recycled plastics. Action: Implement new sorting strategies on selective collection waste to extract valuable PE fractions 
of flexible packaging from the light plastic fraction at sorting plants. Increase the performance of sorting lines. Implement new 
recycling plants dedicated to flexible PE fractions from packaging, including production lines dedicated to food-grade PE. 
AMCOR: (Plastic packaging volume): NOT DISCLOSED 
Commitment: (1) a full transition to recycle -ready structures by 2025; (2) introduction of recycled content back into our 
packaging solutions as much as possible; and (3) collaborate along the value chain to increase recycling rates. Action: (1) More 
than 100 Full time equivalents (FTEs) are working to phase out multi-material packaging solutions divided among four global 
inno-streams (long-term R&D trajectories). AMCOR  is part of EMF, Ceflex, New Plastic Economy, and Plastics Recyclers 
Europe, which support and implement “design for recycling” guidelines across the industry. (2) The implementation of recycled 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
85 De Tandt et al. Mechanical recycling of plastic food contact materials – a regulatory overview of the obstacles imposed by REACH and the FCM regulations 
for recyclers. In print, Waste Management 2020. 
86 EFSA CEF Panel, 2011. Scientific Opinion on the criteria to be used for safety evaluation of a mechanical recycling process to produce recycled PET intended 
to be used for manufacture of materials and articles in contact with food. EFSA Journal 9 (7:2184). 
87 Welle, F., 2005. Develop a food grade HDPE recycling process. 
88 https://www.icis.com/explore/resources/news/2020/05/19/10509185/recycling-chain-facing-deeply-challenging-times-investment-opportunities-remain 
89 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/circular-plastics-alliance_en, Webpage: New Plastic Economy 
90 https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/our-work/activities/new-plastics-economy/global-commitment.  
91 https://www.newplasticseconomy.org/assets/doc/GC-Report-June19.pdf 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 35 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
content back into packaging structures without compromising functionality and product safety. Both standard and advanced 
recycled PCR are being explored with sev eral tens of kilotonnes of material to be processed from 2021 onwards already 
allocated to various Amcor packaging solutions. 
NESTLE (Plastic packaging volume): 1,700,000 metric tonnes  
Commitment: None of the packaging, including plastics, ends up in landfill or in oceans, lakes and rivers. To reduce the use 
of virgin plastics by one third by 2025. Action:  100% of packaging is reusable or recyclable by 2025, shifting from virgin 
plastics to food-grade recycled plastics and accelerate the development of innovative packaging solutions.  
Barriers and obstacles 
Despite the innovation potential that CIRCULAR FoodPack creates, some obstacles could hinder the uptake of its 
technology. Successful uptake is based on three main pillars: (1) materials with better design in terms of functionality 
and recyclability, (2) conformity of PCR for food- contact applications, and (3) improved sorting of waste via 
economic recycling technologies. These three pillars will b e connected through the synergistic collaboration in 
CIRCULAR FoodPack, reflected in the WP structure and its possible interconnections. The value chain collaboration 
will guarantee that existing and acquired knowledge is shared among the consortium partners, resulting in a seamless 
exploitation. This will allow the consortium to meet increasing market and consumer demands for sustainable 
materials, as well as complying with regulatory obligations captured in various European directives and EU member 
states’ legislation.  
Potential competition with other TBS initiatives.  CIRCULAR FoodPack is not the only consortium proposing 
research into TBS. Others include the PRISM initiative in the UK, supported by WRAP, 92 and HolyGrail2.0, 
supported by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation.93 CIRCULAR FoodPack could be perceived as competing with these 
initiatives, but this is not the case. The CIRCULAR FoodPack and HolyGrail2.0 projects are complementary and this 
could help to overcome some of the weaknesses of the ‘invisible barcode’ technology. It is the consortium’s intent 
to exchange information and exploit synergies where possible, rather than enter into competition. This can be 
achieved by hosting joint workshops , e.g. during packaging fairs. Synergies may include: (1) exchange of  data on 
SBS system and TBS efficiencies, allowing each  initiative to further optimis e its technologies; (2) challenging the 
TBS approach (detectable regardless of object positioning) synerg istically with the ‘invisible barcode’ (possibl y 
unreadable on ‘crumpled’ items that are more prevalent in flexibles), to increase both yield and purity for the 
HolyGrail2.0 initiative; and  (3) comparing cost, ease of implementation, LCA and yield/purity scores for both 
initiatives. Project partner SUEZ, also involved in HolyGrail2.0, will promote data exchange between the consortia 
and arrange a test trial if possible. 
Chemical recycling. The rise of chemical recycling could be perceived as a potential barrier for the project. This 
alternative pathway for the recycling of plastics has gained momentum over the last few years because it is not subject 
to EFSA approvals with regard to food-contact applications. The second-generation feedstock derived from the chem-
ical recycling process is put back into the cracker to make wholly ‘new’ polymers. However, none of the chemical 
recycling technologies have proven industrial-scale viability thus far, in terms of economics and energy consumption. 
Material recycling remains a preferred pathway as it is more directly circular (polymer to polymer rather than polymer 
to fuel/naptha to monomer to polymer), so we do not foresee insurmountable competition, bu t rather a potential for 
complementarity, depending on process yields and footprints.94 Furthermore, there is a general consensus in various 
industrial consortia that material reycling should be the preferred option where possible and that chemical reycling  
should target only waste streams where material recycling is no longer an option. 
Legislative uncertainty with regard to FCM approvals.  European Recycling Regulation  (EC) No 282/2008 
emphasises food safety when new FCMs are made from post -consumer recycled FCMs. Even with CIRCULAR 
FoodPack’s expectation of being able to work towards the 99% purity on PE PCR, it may still remain very challenging 
to obtain approval for plastics other than PET for re-use in direct food-contact applications. This is evident from the 
lack of positive EFSA decisions on polyolefin (PP or PE) recycling processes and the complete lack of follow -up 
draft decisions by the EC . The lack of a clear step -by-step framework to obtain FCM approval for poly mers other 
than PET is an ongoing concern for the recycling industry. The lack of any legislative framework for the recycling 
of (PE) flexibles would be a barrier for the uptake of the (technically) food- grade recycled plastics produced by 
CIRCULAR FoodPac k. A recent EC report95 noted the contradictions between FCM r egulations and waste 
management legislation: “Safety requirements on recycled plastics under Regulation (EC) No 282/2008 may place 
restrictions on the recycling of FCM into new FCM; these restric tions depend on the polymer, the process, and/or 
intended use. Such restrictions may hinder efforts to increase recycling rates for FCM.” The report also stated that 
“although polyolefins have an important market position, current recycling processes do not enable a 
purification of polyolefins and removal of contaminants of concern. Industry considers that research is needed 
in this area.” This report is a sure sign that the EC  is not only aware of the current bottlenecks, but also willing to 
act upon them.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
92 https://www.letsrecycle.com/news/latest-news/funding-boost-for-invisible-barcode-plastics-sorting-project/ 
93 https://www.newplasticseconomy.org/assets/doc/Holy-Grail.pdf 
94 Schlummer e al. The role of chemistry in plastic recycling. Kunststoffe international 5/2020 
95 EU Commission: Study supporting the Evaluation of Food Contact Materials (FCM) legislation - (Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004), July 2020 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 36 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
Scalability. Scalability has been a massive hurdle for recycling technologies other than conventional mechanical 
recycling. Economically and environmentally viable scaling is still the major current constraint holding back the 
rollout of chemical recycling technologies. However, the main technologies proposed in CIRCULAR FoodPack can 
be complimentary (as a pre-treatment) to mechanical recycling and belong in the separate category of solvent-based 
recycling, in which the polymer chain is not broken up (as in chemical methods) but contaminants do not persist (as 
in mechanical methods). Solvent -based recycling is typically less challenging to set up in terms of (reactor) 
equipment and also less expensive to operate. Some (demonstrator) plants already use the CreaSolv ® technology, 
such as a demonstrator plant in Indonesia built in cooperation with Unilever, an industrial plant with a throughput of 
3000 tonnes per year under construction in the Netherlands for the recovery of PS from expanded PS insulation 
panels (start of operation: 2021), and a demonstrator with 200 tonnes per year nominal capacity set up in the European 
Multicycle project in Germany in summer 2020.  
Value chain readiness. The main commercial barriers f or the successful uptake of CIRCULAR FoodPack are the 
readiness of the value chains for a circular economy. Success requires political ambition and a solid legislative 
framework to push markets and industries from linear to circular economies. With the recently launched Green Deal 
and the 2020 launch of the European Plastic pact, a clear European framework is being built on the foundations of 
existing directives, pushing the market towards a more circular approach (Fig. 17). (1) At the sorting stage, there 
needs to be industry willingness to standardise certain aspects and likewise create efficiency. Packaging products and 
sorting factories cannot be equipped with several possible sorting technologies just because the industry is not willing 
to align. Several different sorting technologies could be combined so that each of them handles the sorting task at 
which they are best. TBS is one of the most promising next-generation sorting technologies, which could handle and 
sort all pac kaging products, such as non- food and food products, in a reliable and efficient manner. TBS should  
therefore be tested and improved under real conditions. A prototype could be implemented in a sorting plant as a 
demonstrator. The development of this techn ology is also linked to the real use of the tracers on packaging so that 
sorting strategies would initially be possible for the sorting of food-grade flexible packaging. (2)  De-inking and 
washing are also key steps to achieve high -quality PE PCRs, so the reactor technology would need to be adaptable 
to existing reactors or independently developed at least to TRL5–6 as a prototype for testing at an existing recycling 
plant with a dedicated process line. (3) The project 
is expected to deliver new and effective circular 
value chains with possible interconnections, which 
will supply PE PCRs to replace virgin plastics in 
flexible laminates for circular use in flexible 
packaging (given that packaging will be sortable as 
food and non-food waste). (4) From the perspective 
of packaging convertors, the potential negative 
effects of TBS tracers on the processing will be 
limited, because these substances can be mixed in 
into the ink/primer/adhesive system for application 
using current infrastructure. The main challenge 
will be industry alignment for the application of 
said tracers in practice and at scale, given the 
additional raw material costs. However, access to 
next-generation recycled materials could be 
granted exclusively to parties that apply the tracer 
during production, providing an excellent incentive 
for such a program. A clear bussiness case could be built on this basis, because the demand for such material would 
outweigh supply in the initial stages. The use of PCR material on existing lines will be challenging because the 
overall laminate might be food-contact compliant but the resin might not be. This means that production lines used 
for food production would need additional cleaning, or dedicated lines might be needed for PCR processing. Standard 
operating procedures may therefore be required across the industry to ensure product safety in all production runs. 
(5) The food industry should actively support the use of the laminates proposed herein. For NESTLE, this might be 
accomplished through the Golden Rules. To achieve wider acceptance by the food industry, these developments 
should be promoted through consortia such as the Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Food compliance will be 
demonstrated for PE PCRs from food packaging with functional barriers, leading to more data on existing solutions, 
confirming feasibility, and supporting EFSA’s food approval on PE PCRs. This point is necessary to develop  the 
market for food-grade PE PCRs, as requested by recyclers and brand owners. 
The value chain approach, supported by systematic training programmes, will also guarantee that selected knowledge 
sharing among the consortium  partners leads to  continuous exploitation to meet  the increasing market demand. 
Cooperation among the partners will be important , especially in the post -project phase, to realise the applicable 
business models.  
Fig. 17. CIRCULAR FoodPack – Successful Uptake. 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 37 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020