2.1 Expected impacts 
CIRCULAR FoodPack will become a key accelerator in the transition of the plastics industry to a circular economy 
by generating (1) solutions that will create impact in terms of structured knowledge and standardisation; (2) solutions 
that are technological or product innovations with a TR  L of 5 –6, which will be moved further towards market 
maturity and exploited commercially; and (3) significant advances in food-compliant recycling. 
CIRCULAR FoodPack will deliver results that achieve meaningful impacts for stakeholders in the plastics value 
chain, and for society and the environment in general. The c ore of the concept and work plan is the involvement of 
all partners along the value chain. This direct involvement is needed to enable co-creation and acceptance on the one 
hand and the timely uptake and implementation of project results on the other. The results, outcomes, and impacts of 
the CIRCULAR FoodPack project are summarised in Fig. 12. 
2.1.1 Expected impacts mentioned in the work programme 
(a) Increased yield and quality when sorting products made of composite or multi -layer materials ( SO1, 
SO2, SO5)  
Current sorting plants for post -consumer 
plastic packaging typically include 
several steps to separate mono-material 
plastics from mixed packaging waste, 
leading to a residue rich in MLCs . This 
fraction can represent 20–30% of all post-
consumer plastic waste 60 and is destined 
for incineration (Fig. 13) . CIRCULAR 
FoodPack will take on this rejected 
fraction (including existing stockpiles) 
and apply innovative sorting technologies 
to bring la rge amounts back into circular 
economy rather than keeping the linear 
model. The project’s sensor -based 
specification (SBS) for mixed waste will 
bring in a better inside into these rejects and help to select those that can significantly contribute to an increase of the 
net yield of such facilities. In addition, materials counteracting high yields in downstream PE recovery like PP based 
mono-films and MLP are detected. Although industrial implementation of innovative SBS in existing sorting lines is 
highly challenging, this is clearly targeted in the exploitation of CFP results. 
In terms of quality, one major challenge is that it is not yet possible to sort food packaging from non- food flexible 
packaging items, thus hindering the transition to circularity for ‘return to food contact’ applications. CIRCULAR 
FoodPack will overcome this obstacle by applying innovative tracer -based sorting (TBS) for  tracer marked 
packaging items, such as the food-grade mono-material multi-layer films developed and demonstrated in this 
project. 
At TRL  6, we expect to recover more than 90% (yield) of newly 
designed and tracer -marked food-grade packaging items from bulk 
EoL packaging at a sorting purity (quality) of < 1% non-food-plastics, 
which is a requirement to achieve EFSA approval for non -PET 
recycled FCMs.61 For existing stockpiles of untraced food packaging, 
SBS technologies and post -sorting treatments will allow more 
efficient separation and up-concentration of the MLC fraction. 
From post-consumer packaging waste entering sorting facilities, we 
will target fractions that are currently not well sorted due to the 
absence of advanced sorting technologies such as TBS, and also due 
to the lack of separate collection, purification, pre -treatment and 
recycling technologies to recover valuable PCRs. When launched on the market, such technologies will boost the 
recycling of flexible packaging waste from the current value of ~15% to > 50%.62 Materials from TBS will be suitable 
for any application (although food packaging is a primary target), whereas the CIRCULAR FoodPack SBS process 
cascades will provide high-quality raw materials for demanding non-food flexible packaging markets, including films 
and larger bags in the B&C industry, and packaging products for home and personal care.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
60 Communication with the project partner, SUEZ 
61 EFSA CEF Panel, 2015. Scientific Opinion on the safety assessment of the processes ‘Biffa Polymers’ and ‘CLRrHDPE’ used to recycle high‐density 
polyethylene bottles for use as food contact material. EFSA J. 13. https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4016 
62 Personal communication with CEFLEX. Boost is mostly related to enabling materials recycling from MLC rich flexible packaging waste < DIN A4   
Fig. 13. Mixed flexible plastics residue. 
Fig. 12. CIRCULAR FoodPack – Results, Outcomes, and Impact. 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 28 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
(b) Increased recycling of raw materials from products made of composite or multi-layer materials, in terms 
of volume and/or quality ( SO2, SO3, SO5)  
For the first time, CIRCULAR FoodPack will achieve the recycling of formerly ‘unrecyclable’ food-grade EoL MLC 
packaging waste by developing innovative plastic recycling approaches that recovers >  90% of PE from the input 
material, including multi- layered packaging films. In 
this respect polymer purity is not a single determining 
property but a more complex concept encompassing:  
(i) polymer -pure composition, achieved by the 
separation of non- target polymers by delamination, 
solvent-based purification and melt -filtration/re-
compounding, and supported by upstream grinding;  
(ii) lack of odour, achieved by washing and 
deodourization (e.g., as applied to flakes after de-inking 
and/or pellets after regranulation); and 
(iii) the lowest levels of IAS and NIAS, achieved by 
washing, de -inking and solvent -based purification and 
deodourization. 
As such, polymer purity cannot be attributed to a single 
treatment step, but is instead achieved by synergistically 
combining and optimising several aspects of waste treatment (Fig. 1 4). In CIRCULAR FoodPack, the resulting 
polymer purity will be > 99% and the technical quality of the recovered materials will be comparable to at least 90% 
of original raw materials. This is because CreaSolv ® treatment also eliminates downgraded products (oligomers) 
from use-phase and post-consumer waste treatment. Odour, IAS and NIAS levels will fall to a range that allows food-
safe re- application in mono- material multi-layer films produced during the project, mainly in combination with 
functional barriers. Accordingly, multi -layer polymers from food packaging will, for the first time, contribute to a 
circular economy for plastics at the most sensitive quality level. This will achieve a transformation from a linear take-
make-dispose model to the holistic inclusion of different recycling technologies. 
 
(c) Reduced use of virgin raw materials ( SO3, SO4, SO5) 
MLC plastic waste from food packaging is currently considered unrecyclable, but CIRCULAR FoodPack will render 
these MLC plastics recyclable, thus removing them from the 
materials destined for incineration (or even landfill) and 
injecting them into the volume of materials available for the 
production of new packaging. By using the recovered 
materials in this manner, the use of virgin raw materials will 
be reduced drastically. If only a conservat ive 5% of LDPE is 
exchanged in this way, it would avoid the use of  450,000 
tonnes of virgin LDPE  per year, 63 in turn preventing the 
emission of 714,500 tonnes CO2 and thus contributing not only 
to circularity but also to the EC’s climate goals.64 CIRCULAR 
FoodPack aims to replace at least 70% of one single bulk PE 
layer in the final flexible laminate with PCR, avoiding the use 
of 6,300,000 tonnes of virgin PE per year. Plastic packaging 
has a better  weight/functionality ratio than glass and paper, 
and fulfils the main function of packaging : the protection of 
goods according to  different requirements. The project’s 
results will help to reduce the amount of oil needed for packaging applications, thus making a valuable contribution 
to the sustainable use of resources. This means the project will replace the linear approach (production – consumption 
– waste) to achieve the first real circular economy for these materials (Fig. 15). 
 
(d) Increased knowledge on the design for reuse and recycling (“circular design”) of products currently made 
of composite or multi-layer materials ( SO3, SO4, SO5) 
The packaging industry must  urgently improve the sustainability of its products. In Europe, three quarters of all 
products are packaged in plastics, and ~40% of all plastic applications are found in the short -life packaging sector, 
which produces two thirds of all plastic waste. The chang ing legislation pertaining to  packaging materials and 
increasing pressure from other market participants (see ALDI Packaging Mission)65 have increased industry and end-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
63 Based on annual virgin LDPE tonnage of 9 Mtonnes, Plastics-The Facts 2019, Plastics Europe 
64 Based on EcoInvent data: 0.69 kgCO2 eq for rPE versus 2.28 kgCO2 eq for 1 kg virgin LDPE. 
65 ALDI_National Packaging Policy_EN_ALDI Belgium and Luxemburg_July 2019 
Fig. 14. Effective polymer purity as the cumulative result of 
multiple synergetic treatement steps.  
Fig. 15. Circularity of food packaging. 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 29 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
user demand for packaging R&D. In parallel, §21 of the new Packaging Act in Germany66 creates incentives for the 
use of recyclable plastic materials. The legislator defines a minimum standard for this purpose, which dual systems 
use as a guideline for the license fees for marketers. Furthermore , the strategy for plastics in Europe is that all 
packaging should be reusable or recyclable by 2030.  
CIRCULAR FoodPack will use ‘design for and from’ recycling approaches to build mono-material based multi-layer 
laminate structures that are completely recyclable and produce PCR plastics that can be reused in the same packaging 
design in compliance with food-contact regulations. EU Regulation No 282/2008 strictly governs the application of 
PCR in FCMs , so CIRCULAR FoodPack will perform migration tests and modelling to  develop appropriate 
functional barrier concepts that ensure food-contact applications are safe. Significant knowledge will be gained  to 
understand and define design concepts and to develop and validate suitable tests for the assessment of food safety in 
compliance with existing European legislation. In addition to functional barrier concepts for food compliance, the 
structures must also fulfil the same barrier properties against gases and water vapour to protect the packaged goods 
and thus ensure quality and shelf life. The m echanical and sealing properties of the new structures must also be 
confirmed. Tracers used for the sorting of novel mono-material based multi-layer laminates waste will be easily 
washable, because the ink formulations will be tailored to make them debondable during pre -treatment. These 
debondable and lighter-coloured printing inks will ensure efficient washing, enhancing the recyclability of the tracers. 
The tracers will not represent a significant change in printing requirements  and will easily be taken up. Given the 
very short usage time of our target products we can implement the CFP technologies on a short term, generating an 
early impact on the circularity of food packaging. 
The recovered PE PCRs will be used to produce  at least three demonstrators for the flexible packaging of coffee, 
creamer and cocoa powder. These will be ground-breaking European demonstrators of recycled flexible plastics 
being returned to food-contact applications other than PET bottles. The demonstrators will be validated against  
virgin counterparts. The novel laminate 
design concepts will also be shown with three 
other demonstrators in non- food pack aging 
for detergents, cleaning agents, and personal 
care (home and personal care ( HPC) 
packaging), covering almost all of the non-
food product sectors (Fig. 16)67. 
By comparing the performance (technically 
and in terms of circularity) of our 
demonstrators with current products handled 
in current EoL options and  improved EoL 
processes, we will gain an in -depth 
understanding of the contribution of our 
advances compared to the state of the art. Our 
results will serve as flagships for the eco-
friendly design of recyclable flexible mono -
material-based multi-layer products and will 
be disseminated in targeted outreach and communication actions and events. The project website will show a 
simplified and public version of the decision support tool (DSS) to transfer relevant circular design knowledge to  
stakeholders. We will publish g uidelines for the circular design of at least six  demonstrators representing the 
packaging formats used in flexible food and HPC packaging. Based on a very rough calculation, these CIRCULAR 
FoodPack demonstrators represent up to 45% of the product categories that use plastic/plastic MLC  materials in 
Europe, which makes them highly relevant as guiding examples for the whole industry.  
The CIRCULAR FoodPack consortium includes highly competent partners spanning the value chain, starting from 
the sorters and recyclers through to packaging producers and food product suppliers. Interest groups from the B2C 
market (manufacturers of branded goods , and retail companies) are important drivers for the market launch of 
products, but the economic return is also seen in the B2B markets in cooperation with packaging manufacturers, 
which will be undertaken within the project by NESTLE.  
 
(e) Increased knowledge on the process environmental footprint, including the net effects on greenhouse gas 
emissions, of improved sorting, separation and recycling of composite and multi-layer materials. ( SO6) 
In addition to compiling results from the LCSA and simulating different pathways along the value chain, the best 
process cascades and applications will be recommended based on multi -parametric optimisation models. Iterative 
feedback will be delivered to process and pack aging developers based on the LCSA results, ensuring that the new 
process is at least 30% better in terms of greenhouse gas emissions, 32.5% better in terms of energy efficiency 68 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
66 German packaging law, https://deutsche-recycling.de/en/packaging-regulation/ 
67 GVM Flexible Plastic Packaging Market in Germany and in Europe, 2016. 
68 https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2030_The%202030%20climate%20and%20energy,32%25%20share%20for%20renewable%20energy 
Fig. 16. Share of product categories for packaging in Europe.64 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 30 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
than suitable baseline models (open loop recycling or incineration). Table 6 shows how we expect the CIRCULAR 
FoodPack technologies to lower the environmental footprint (including net effects on greenhouse gas emissions) of 
the sorting, separation and recycling of MLCs. 
The assessment of the overall environmental performance of the novel CIRCULAR FoodPack technologies is one of 
the objectives of WP7. Holistic LCA will be applied to every step of the new processes and the resulting 
demonstrators according to ISO 14040/14044. We will aim to identify hot spots and select processes and products 
for upscaling based on the lowest projected greenhouse gas emissions. This will be coupled with recommendations 
for government and policymakers on the implementation of certification and bonus/malus schemes for more 
environmentally sustainable multi-layer products at an acceptable cost for society over their full lifecycles. Novel 
certificates (e.g. specifying the content of recycled materials)  and labels for use by producers and retailers will be 
designed. Furthermore, recommendations in terms of product information, tracking and optimal use throughout the 
lifecycle will be developed. We will deliver at least two fact-based, scientific white papers on CIRCULAR FoodPack 
processes and products compared to current benchmarks and waste management approaches, which will be targeted 
at EU policymakers.  
 
Table 6. Benchmarking of CIRCULAR FoodPack planned innovations compared to other solutions. 
Aspect Standard solution Other emerging 
solutions 
CIRCULAR FoodPack 
Flexible packaging 
EoL approach 
for PE 
• Downcycling to low-quality 
products 
• Landfill or incineration for energy 
valorisation 
• Chemical recycling is 
complex, expensive and 
uses hazardous chemicals  
• Recycling processes can apply 
to standard mono-material, MLC, 
and novel mono-material 
laminates, also solving sorting 
issues of food packaging waste 
Reuse 
opportunity 
• Limited to post-industrial waste, 
some downgrading 
• Recycled post-industrial waste in 
MLC is much less than 10%  and no 
PE PCR used in flexible food 
packaging 
• Chemical recycling can 
produce food-grade 
plastic for packaging at 
higher costs and higher 
CO2 emission 
• Reuse in similar high-quality 
applications, food packaging 
• > 50% PE PCR targeted in 
flexible food packaging laminates 
CO2 emission 1.9-2.2 kg CO2 / kg PE69,70 
(virgin production, cradle-to-gate70)