1.4 Ambition 
(i) Sensor Based Specification (SBS) and Tracer Based Sorting (TBS) – mainly related to WP2 work 
State-of-the-Art (SoA) and drawbacks:  SoA sorting of packaging uses SBS and relies mainly on the detection of 
different near -infrared (NIR) absorption bands of the  main polymers such as PE, PP, PS, PET and subsequent 
separation by air nozzles bars. However, NIR sorting cannot reliably differentiate between different polymer grades 
of the same type, e.g. food grade PE and non- food PE. In both cases the absorption of PE would give the same 
response. Furthermore, state of the art sorters do not identify (and sort) different materials present in multi-layer films 
or packaging containing metalised or carbon black pigments. In the MultiCycle project18 IRIS proposes Hyperspectral 
Imaging (HSI) in different spectral ranges for detection of  MLC and solutions like Laser Induced Breakdown 
Spectroscopy (LIBS) for black polymers or the identification of aluminum, AlOx or SiOx. 
SoA research options to provide sorting by pre-defined fractions include TBS (Fig 4) and Watermark based optical 
sorting. Watermark recognition relies on picture recognition, precise colour and geometric pattern measurement of 
the artwork of a packaging article. However, industrial waste sorting means that the packaging articles to be sorted 
are dirty, dusty, deformed, folded and small, so that the recognition of a specific watermark is uncertain 19. TBS in 
contrast, uses robust fluorescent sorting tracers that are printed on packaging items and emit an unidirectional signal 
as soon as the packaging article is moving through laser light. Past R&D of POLY and KIT has proven the feasibility 
to synthesize suitable inorganic fluorescent materials with different emission spectra which can be comb ined to 
provide a sorting code system. In addition, the detection and sorting technology development of POLY has shown 
that both, article and flake sorting by tracers are efficient sorting concepts. As the TBS sorting principle is positive, 
i.e. tracer mar king indicates pushing into the sorted fraction, resulting purities of ejected items is high (>95%). 
Furthermore, POLY and KIT have started to develop new fluorescent tracer materials that allow the use of existing 
NIR sorting machines 20,21. 
Step beyond SoA: CIRCULAR FoodPack (CFP) will adjust the high potential of the above mentioned innovative 
sorting concepts to the needs of circular food pack approach, including (i) the increase of target polymers in sorted 
fractions, (ii) separation of specific components of the flexible packaging waste hampering recycling processes and 
- with a strong focus – (iii) separation of non-food from food packaging items which is considered as a “door opener” 
to enable a reuse of PCR in food packaging. As a bridge technology for current non- tracer-marked waste, SBS will 
enable to detect and monitor different types of packaging films including MLP (multi-layer packaging) and will gain 
in-line information on the polymer composition of a waste stream. Data analytics based on chemometrics and 
machine learning will be applied to allow the identification of materials under real-time industrial conditions that are 
currently not identified by the use  of standard chemometrics (Fig 5). This makes use of the current findings that 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
16 V. V. Iakshmi, D. Aparanjini Niharika, G. Lahari, IOSR J.Business and Management (IOSR-JBM), Volume 19, Issue 8. Ver. V. (August 2017), PP 33-36  
17 Vivien Procher, University of Wuppertal and RWI; Colin Vance, RWI and Jacob University Bremen, Ruhr Economic Papers #393 
18 H2020 MULTICYCLE Advanced and sustainable recycling processes and value chains for plastic-based multi-materials (SPIRE 820695) 
19 https://us.pg.com/blogs/HolyGrail/ called on 31.01.2020. 
20 A.Turshatov, er al. (2018), Opt. of up-conversion photonic markers based on a La2O3 host for plastics recycling and anti-counterfeiting applications 2018. 
21 B.S. Richards (2020) Applications of up-conversion: from PV to plastic recycling and anti-counterfeiting, Invited seminar at Univ. Aarhus, Denmark, 2020. 
Fig 4. Scheme of marking and sorting process with the TBS “complete” concept 
 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 19 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
appropriate sensors can distinguish between PE films, PE based MLP and other flexible packaging items, e.g. PP 
monofilms or PP MLP. This in-line monitoring helps identifying those sorting streams that are highly qualified for 
downstream PE recovery due to high shares of PE and PE multi -layers. In such a way SBS selects suitable film 
fractions for the CIRCULAR FoodPack recycling technologies and will enable production of pure P E fractions for 
new flexible personal care packaging.   
In CIRCULAR FoodPack, TBS will step beyond state-of-the-art by (i) increasing the number of sorting codes by 
further R&D in both tracer materials and detection technology; (ii)  development and validation of efficient tracers 
for TBS sorting in NIR sorting machines and within the NIR spectrum; (iii) transfer tracer integration via print onto 
food packaging enabling removal of tracers by deinking; (iv) optimization of an existing sorting machine platform  
for handling of flexible food packaging articles. The tracer development will include synthesis i.e. of chemically -
stable oxide -based fluorescent tracers co -doped with lanthanide ions. As material specifications for food -grade 
packaging plastic are more strict than for other plastics, it is considered a crucial first step to already eliminate non-
food compliant materials . Within CIRCULAR FoodPack, the tracers will be dispersed in a light -colored or w hite 
printing ink and applied onto the outer packaging layer. Thus, strongly fluorescent, printable, chemically-stable and 
non-toxic markers detectable via existing NIR sorting machines are required. The inks used will be tailor -designed 
to deinking and delamination, to guarantee the high efficient removal of the tracer during the recycling step, and to 
guarantee that there is no remaining 
marker residue in PCRs from the 
previous tracers, PCRs will be 
subjected to migration analysis.  
In more detail, the amount of light 
absorbed by existing tracers will be 
enhanced by increasing the range of 
wavelengths absorbed such that the 
brightness of the downshifting 
phosphor emission in the NIR goes up. 
Ideally this is performed in a way that 
the light source in the NIR machine or 
a bank of LEDs can be used ( i.e. no 
lasers required) (Fig 6). It is 
furthermore foreseen to enhance the 
number of unique NIR emission wavelengths, finally providing a “NIR palette” of emission wavelengths. That 
will increase the number of targets (whether polymer types, specific ML structures, food vs non- food use) that can 
be marked. The number of individual emission wavelengths targeted is 5 (Fig 6c), which assuming combination of 
markers (25-1) would allow 31 combinations of these emission signatures. The novel markers will be based on the 
following emitters: Yb 3+, Ho3+, Pr3+, Tm3+ and Er3+. In addition the host material of markers will be optimised in 
order to increase the quantum yield of th e NIR emission. A range of host materials will be investigated to fulfil 
the criteria as phonon energy, solubility and size control (to ensure compatibility with printing processes). The latter 
relates strongly to a tailoring of synthesis pathways including solid-state reaction method, sol-gel synthesis, and co-
precipitation methods.  
 
Fig 6. (a) Absorption spectra of Nd 3+, Yb 3+ 
and Cr3+ ions. When three ions are mixed in 
one host , the energy transfer Cr 3+ 
→Nd3+→Yb3+ is expected; (b)  Emission 
spectra of excitation sources used in the 
project. Yb3+ can be excited with 980 nm laser, 
Nd3+ with 810 nm laser, Cr 3+ and Nd3+ with 
white light emitted diode (LED); (c) excitation 
of Cr 3+ or Nd 3+ results in NIR emission of 
Yb3+, Nd 3+, Ho 3+, Pr 3+, Er 3+, Tm 3+ due to 
energy transfer. As luminescence peaks are 
well resolved, delivery up to 6 different 
markers is feasible, Nd3+ however will not be 
considered due to a slight overlap. 
 
Innovation potential: While the marking system is being developed Sensor -Based-Specification (SBS) will be 
considered as charactersiation tool for packaging items not yet marked to recycle materials for non-food applications, 
with a high potential for implementation in industrial sorting lines . TBS will contribute to the  circularity of food 
packaging and provide cost -efficient sorting solutions for packaging items according to pre- defined criteria. This 
enables positive sorting of food-grade plastics and/or the separation of MLC films with of specific MLC structures.  
 
Fig 5. Data elaboration of multi-layers materials identified with IRIS technologies 
 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 20 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
(ii) Recycling of Flexible Packaging including Multi-layer Materials – mainly related to WP3 work 
SoA and drawbacks: State-of-the-art treatment of waste packaging separates bulk waste stream into defined fractions 
using a multi -stage concept that combines mechanical units (sieve drums, hoppers,..) with magnetic, eddy -current 
and optical sorters for separation of glass, metals, aluminum and different plastics. Rigid plastics are separated by 
NIR targeting at PE, PP, PS and PET streams departed from flexible packaging, which are in turn divided in a fraction 
of large pieces (>200 mmx300 mm) and a fraction of smaller items. The flexible streams are usually not sorted very 
efficiently by polymer type and contain PE and PP mono films and – with a majority in the fraction of smaller items 
– MLC films. Subsequent treatment of flexible plastics comprise shredding, post -sorting, washing, drying and re -
compounding steps with or without melt filtration22. As a result, recycled polymers with a purity of around 90% (in 
terms of polymers) and significant amounts of NIAS and IAS are produced, including odourous volatiles, which can 
be used in best case in applications such as garbage bags. 23 A particular problem of post -consumer plastic films is 
the presence of odourous constituents. Such odourous constituents typically have a broad diversity in terms of origin 
and chemical properties. Furthermore, they are typically not only found on the outer surface, but are also adsorbed 
deep into the polymer, which make them hard to remove24. Despite the broad chemical variety of odour components, 
currently implemented washing processes in recycling plants are mainly based on cold or hot water, with or without 
addition of caustic soda and detergents. These washing media are effecti ve to remove visible dirt and organic 
contamination present on the plastics, but they are not able to efficiently remove all odour  components, especially 
since these components typically have a broad range of chemical properties. Both Fraunhofer, as well as UGENT 
have elaborated analytical procedures to identify odourous constituents and quantify odour removal25, 26, 27.  
Furthermore, the mix of colors present in flexible packaging waste results typically in production of grey or brown 
recyclates for dark applications, often by adding carbon black to the recyclate. These properties hinder the reuse in 
high value applications and lead to downcycling to low quality products. More sophisticated process cascades use 
sink/float or optical sorting processes to further refine and/or color-sort initial fractions or apply stripping processes 
at elevated temperatures, e.g. in compounding processes.28 These measures improve qualities partly, and especially 
also are still difficult for film fractions. Even if sorted, (odourous) NIAS are still present and a loss of mechanical 
properties is observed. Interest in deinking and delamination procedures is growing rapidly, although the industrial 
application of effective deinking procedures is limited, or even does not exist, for post-consumer waste. In general a 
distinction can be made between water/detergent based deinking, as proposed for example by Cadel Deinking 29. 
Other approaches such as the NOREC process propose solvents such as ethyl acetate30. Recently UGENT developed 
and patented a deinking procedure as well. Similarly, delamination of multi -layer films can be achieved by 
withdrawing the adhesive that is used to attach two layers by using a specific solvent31. The use of acids (e.g., acetic 
acid, propionic acid, formic acid,  butanoic acid) to delaminate is already relatively widely described in scientific 
literature32. Other endeavours have attempted delamination based on water, with e.g. acetone, or acids 33. However, 
again implementation at larger scale is limited.  At the moment, there is very little generic insight in which type of 
delamination and deinking procedures work on which kind of laminate and ink structure, and especially in the reasons 
why and how these procedures work or don’t work on a plastic film mixture. Simila rly, liquid (solvent) based 
technologies have been developed in the past years. They enable a separation of multi -layer films either by 
dissolution/weakening of low volume intermediate layers (e.g. adhesives) or by physically dissolving major layers 
(e.g. LDPE), with the latter being more effective in cleaning the target polymer. This is due to the effect that 
delamination separates laminate structures by weakening the adhesive power, but cannot clean adhesives from the 
substrate completely as most adhesives are duroplasts and do not dissolve. In contrast, dissolution of the target 
polymer (e.g. LDPE) allows separation of non- target materials (pigments, adhesives, metals) from the dissolved 
polymer based on solid/liquid and liquid/liquid separation processes . Such a solvent -based polymer recycling 
technology (CreaSolv®) has been implemented at semi -industrial scale in Indonesia for the recovery of polyolefins 
from multi-layers, however at a quality level not sufficient for food grade packaging 34. In other rese arch projects 
CreaSolv® proofed its ability to effectively elimiante NIAS (e.g. brominated dibenzofurans) and IAS like brominated 
flame retardants from plastics in electronic waste.35 
Step beyond SoA:  CIRCULAR FoodPack intends to implement purification unit operations in mechanical and 
solvent based recycling process cascades that enable in total a sufficient reduction of contaminants present in EoL 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
22 K. Ragaert et al., Waste Management 69 (2017) 24-58  
23 Strangl M. et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 181 (2018) 599-607 
24 A. Cabanes, et al., A review on VOCs from recycled plastics, Sustain. Mater. Technol. (2020). 
25 M. Strangl, et al., Charac. of odourous contaminants in pc plastic packaging waste, J. Sep. Sci. (2017).  
26 M. Strangl, E. Ortner, T. Fell, T. Ginzinger, A. Buettner, Odour characterization along the recycling process of pc plastic film fractions, J. Clean. Prod. (2020. 
27 R. Demets, et al, Dev. and app. of an analy. method to quantify odour removal in plastic waste recyc. proces., Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 161 (2020) 104907. 
28 Strangl M. et al,  Resources, Conservation and Recycling 146 (2019) 89-97 
29 http://cadeldeinking.com/en/, patent EP2832459B1 
30 https://www.norec-info.com/en/ patent DE4122277A1 
31 Horodytska, O., Valdés, F. J. & Fullana, A. Plastic flexible films waste management – A state of art review. Waste Management 77, 413–425 (2018). 
32 Kaiser et al., Recycling 3 (2018) 1-26. 
33 Example patent nrs: DE 4122705, WO 9304116, EP 599905 , US20040054018A1 
34 https://www.unilever.com/news/news-and-features/Feature-article/2018/our-solution-for-recycling-plastic-sachets-takes-another-step-forward.html 
35 Schlummer et al. (2006). Waste Management & Research 24:573-583.  
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 21 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
packaging plastic, such as NIAS and IAS including printing inks and tracer compounds of TBS concepts (see above) 
technologies, with innovative purification methods.  
Related to deodourization , a 
method of KREYEN  is proposed, 
which relies on a  highly effective 
energy transfer system earlier 
applied in food processing. The 
process is split up in two phases: 
First the material is moved through 
Infrared Dryer (IRD). After this 
process, the material is moved into 
a silo, where it is continuously 
flushed by hot gas (Fig 7 left). The IRD heats up the product in very short times to the necessary temperatures. In 
this case, temperatures near to the melting point are reached. The infrared technology heats up the material from the 
inner to the outer surface (Fig 7 middle). Because of this, a partial pressure difference occurs that 
brings the odours very quick from the inside to the outside. This ensures a quick diffusion of the 
Volatile Organic Componds (VOC)’s from the Material to the surrounding atmosphere. Due to the 
continuous movement of the material, the surface area is exchanged frequently in the rotating drum 
(Fig 7 right). This accelerates the odour removing, because each particle of the material is brought 
very close to its melting point, accelerating the odour removal.  
Related to deinking, an innovative deinking technology of UGent (Fig 8) is proposed36. This is the 
first deinking method able to remove all types of inks, including UV crosslinked inks. Within the 
project, the UGENT method and existing deinking methods based on detergents and solvents are 
applied on a set known and unknown samples, which will deliver insight for the first time towards 
design for deinking guidelines. This allows to adjust printing inks of SIEGWERK to be applied on 
the PCR products. Also, the delamination and deinking is explored as pretreatment towards 
CreaSolv®. Potentially robust and cost-effective deinking and delamination can already clean up to 
a large extent a w hole set of NIAS, even without having the ambition to achieve at that point a 
100% deinking efficiency. Furthermore, the existing CreaSolv® Technology will be upgraded by a 
shortly patented cleaning device that improves the elimination of gel droplets (cross- linked PE) 
and smallest particles from the polymer solution and reduces critical NIAS and IAS from the polymer.  
Innovation potential:  Two post -sorting pr ocesses, namely deinking and deodour ization will be implemented in 
existing mechanical treatment cascades and produce pre-cleaned flakes that are for the first time subjected to solvent-
based recycling (CreaSolv ®) due to its share of MLC. The integrated new purification unit will further reduce 
deteriorating materials, including gel droplets or volatile and non-volatile NIAS and IAS. These new brick stones in 
the process concept will boost the current quality level of recycled polymers to a high -purity grade that is intended 
to comply with food grade specifications. 
 
(iii) Assessment of f ood packaging safety based on effective functional barriers for PCRs’ contaminants – 
mainly related to WP4 work 
SoA and drawbacks: For all recyclates in direct food contact, compliance of the recycled materials has to be shown 
according to the Recycling Regulation (EC) No 282/2008. This compliance evaluation is based on three main parts: 
(i) the input contamination levels of the recyclates, (ii) the cleaning efficiency of the applied recycling process and 
(iii) the exposure of potential hazardous substances to the consumer. The latter is based on the application of the food 
contact material (mainly depending on types of contacting food, filling and storage conditions), resulting in a specific 
exposure scenario. Part (i)  and (ii) however, are not fixed and can be approached by the applied recycling 
technologies. Reduced input contamination and increased cleaning efficiency of the recycling process will 
significantly improve the quality of the recyclates and will highly contribute t o the safety of the recycled polymers 
and their re -usability. In contrast to PET (where closed loop recycling from bottle to bottle is well established in 
Europe), recycled polyolefins from post -consumer (pc) origin cannot be used in direct food applications as these 
recyclates currently do not meet the safety levels and regulatory demands applying to food contact materials. Up to 
now, none of the recycling processes for pc polyolefins that were evaluated by the European Food Safety Authority 
(EFSA) were compliant to the set safety criteria37, required to re-use the material in its original direct food contact 
application (‘closed loop’)38. To date, such recycled plastic materials may only be used behind a functional barrier 
layer, which must ensure that migration of any contaminants will remain below the levels of toxicological concern 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
36 EP 20167745 Method for deinking plastic material 
37 EFSA Panel on food contact materials, enzymes, flavourings and processing aids (CEF); Scientific Opinion on the criteria to be used for safety evaluation of 
a mechanical recycling process to produce recycled PET intended to be used for manufacture of materials and articles in contact with food. EFSA Journal 2011 
38 EFSA CEF Panel (Food Contact Materials, Flavourings and Processing Aids), 2015. Scientific Opinion on the safety  assessment of the processes ‘Biffa 
Polymers’ and ‘CLRrHDPE’ used to recycle high-density PE bottles for use as food contact material. EFSA Journal 2015;13(2):4016, 25 pp.  
Fig 8. Deinking 
(UGENT) 
 
Fig 7. Deodourization (KREYEN): Silo, the material heated up by IRD, rotating drum 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 22 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
during the lifetime of the packaged good. Such levels, e.g. 0.15 µg/kg food required for (potent ially present) 
genotoxic substances, as described by EFSA39,40 can hardly be established using analytical-instrumental techniques. 
For the migration evaluation, the tool of mathematical migration modelling is established to predict transfer of 
molecules from  packaging items into packed food 41. Implementing Fick’s Law together with molecules and 
packaging material properties, modelled transfer rates reflect experimental migration data with reliable precision. 
Therefore, migration modelling has been accepted as a powerful tool in assessing risks of human packaging related 
dietary exposure towards contaminants42. The modelling approach is also considered to be a suitable and powerful 
tool for assessing the performance of functional barriers, but has not yet been widely applied for this purpose. 
Step beyond the SoA:  CIRCULAR FoodPack will address the food safety issues of new packaging designs by (i) 
applying well -defined (TBS and SBS sorted) input streams. (ii) Furthermore, improved sorting and cleaning 
procedures need to support this goal. However, due to the physic o-chemical properties of polyolefins as high - 
diffusive polymers, migration of substance from the polyolefins into contacting 
food is by nature rather high; Regulation (EU) No 10/2011 defines stringent 
migration threshold limits for NIAS of 10 µg/kg food for chemicals that are not 
classified as mutagenic, carcinogenic or toxic to reproduction and of 0.15 µg/kg 
food for genotoxic compounds. Therefore, (iii) highly effective barrier solutions 
need to be applied in order to reduce contamination down to levels below of 
any toxicological concern. Performance of such highly effective functional 
barrier concepts will be evaluated within the project using experimental set-ups 
such as migration, permeation and lag time experiments. For the assessment of 
migration bar rier properties and effectivness, modell laminates with an 
intentionally contaminated PE layer and different barrier options will be used. 
One model structure is presented in Fig 9, showing a PE film spiked with 
representative model contaminants, laminated to the functional barrier coated film. These analytical methods will be 
combined with advanced mathematical migration modelling approaches. As a result, maximal acceptable 
contaminant levels can be calculated for PCR plastics for given barrier materials, barrier thicknesses and storage 
conditions (temperature and time). Thus, migration modelling will substantially support and guide the development 
of the food contact materials with PCR content. As a decision and design tool , it well recommend s maximum 
contaminant levels in PCR (as a benchmark in recycling) and  a suitable barrier concept. Based on Fraunhofer’s 
experience on migration and compliance assessments, including petitioning to US -FDA and EFSA for regulatory 
approval processes on food contact materia ls, food safe design concepts will be integrated. R ecommendations and 
guidelines will be established for the assessment of the performance of functional barrier layers related to the intended 
food application, which shall support both food packaging indust ry to fulfil the safety demands as well as the risk 
assessor (EFSA) and risk manager (EU Commission) to establish safe procedures for the use of pc polyolefins. 
Innovation potential: CIRCULAR FoodPack addresses the main challenges related to the use of PE PCRs in food 
grade packaging that currently prevent their re -use in such applications. Accepted methodologies will quantify the 
food safety benefits of TBS sorting (sort food grade packaging only), of the improved purifying concept in the 
recycling cascade and of the functional barrier concepts developed in the new packaging designs. Migration 
modelling will define maximum acceptable levels of NIAS and thus deduct high percentages of purified PCR 
materials in such new food packaging items. Based on specific migration data for demonstrators built in this project, 
test methods will demonstrate that food safety concerns are not to be expected.  
 
(iv) Implementation of Circularity into Food Packaging Value Chain – mainly related to WP5 and WP6 work 
SoA and drawbacks: A typical plastic-plastic multi-layer composite (MLC) structure consists of LDPE applied as a 
sealing layer, PA or PET for mechanical strength and printing, and (Ethylene vinyl alcohol) EVOH layer (~ 5 µm) 
as oxygen barrier. Depending on the application and compatibility of the different materials seven or more layers are 
implemented in a single composite film. Such highly complex and non- recyclable MLC films are subject to 
progressively increasing EPR fees and general taxes as legislation is becoming more stringent. Some (new) structures 
are however entering the market that strictly speaking are recyclable, but in fact are not recycled back into food grade 
packaging materials as these are not sorted in mechanical recycling processes. It is necess ary to design flexible 
packaging films suitable for collection, sorting and recycling after use to create a circular economy for flexible 
packaging. Polyolefin based consumer flexible packaging makes up the largest proportion of pc flexible packaging 
waste-stream (70-80%) and the ability to sort and mechanically recycle polyethylene (PE) is already proven in 
industrial scale in Europe. Current developments by DOW and Borealis at K-Fair 2019 showed that mono-PE films 
for stand-up pouches can be produced through the combination of monodirectionally oriented PE films combined 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
39 EFSA CEF Panel (Food Contact Materials, Enzymes, Flavourings and Processing Aids) , 2016. Scientific opinion on recent developments in the risk 
assessment of chemicals in food and their potential impact on the safety assessment of substances used in food contact materials. EFSA Journal 2016;14(1):4357. 
40 EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and WHO (World Health Organization), 2016. Review of the Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC) approach 
and development of new TTC decision tree. EFSA supporting publication 2016: EN-1006. 50 pp. 
41 E.J. Hoekstra, et al. Practical guidelines on the application of migration modelling for the estimation of specific migration; EUR 27529 EN; doi:10.2788/04517 
42 Welle, F. A new method for the prediction of diffusion coefficients in poly(ethylene terephthalate). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2012, 129, 1845–1851. 
Fig 9. Model structure of test samples 
with well-defined contamination levels 
in PE film for migration tests 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 23 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
with low melt PE sealing films 43. They have no PCR content. One of the biggest issues is their processability on 
packaging lines (wrinkling, curling, slow line speeds…) at economically viable processing speeds. Furthermore, the 
current generation adhesives used for PO lamination causes yellowing of recyclates, while the printing inks are very 
hard to remove  once applied on the package , causing strong discoloration. No proper technologica l solutions for 
these issues are available to date. The use of PE recyclates from food packaging for reimplementation into packages 
and the creation of a closed loop for packaging material to packaging material is therefore not yet possible at scale. 
In terms of barrier, EVOH, aluminum and metallization are the 3 most common applied barriers, all non-compatible 
with the PE recycling stream. Inorganic barrier layers are slowly entering the market at high performance alternatives 
to Aluminum (AlOx, SiOx) and have found commercial applications when biaxially oriented BOPET and/or BOPP 
are used as the deposition substrates. For PE, not a lot is available and those materials that are, are suffering from 
poor barrier functionality due to the mismatch in stiffness and topography between the oriented PE film and the 
inorganic barrier layer. E lectron beam treatment is one possibility to enhance the processability of extruded films 
from PE PCRs 44, further enhancing the mechanical stability  brought by machine direction o rientation or biaxial 
oriented stretching of the outer  PE films, while at the same time providing the proper surface topography required  
for inorganic barrier layer deposition 45, a critical building block needed for  strong permeation barrier without 
disturbing the recycling streams, thus avoiding the need for thick EVOH layers that are considered incompatible with 
SOA mechanical recycling. In order to be able to reuse the PE PCRs in food packaging, or even in personal care 
packagings, the migration of unwanted pc compounds into the packed stuffs must be prevented. SiO x is in addition 
to its oxygen and water barrier performance has also functional barrier 46,47 potential as it is known from its use in 
PET bottles againist potential contaminants from pc-recycled PET, but has not been applied on PE PCR films yet as 
functional barrier.  
Step beyond SoA: At large scale, processing of polyolefin (e.g. PE) on single-layer extrusion lines, will be possible, 
by mono-axial stretching process, and thereby their vacuum deposition with a very thin inorganic barrier layer of 
SiOx (~ 60 nm). The SiO x coated mono-axially oriented 
PE PCR film (MDO PE PCR) will be laminated onto the 
extruded PE , resulting in a fi nal structure:  (outside) 
deinkables (with markers) / MDO PE PCR  / SiO x 
barrier /  Adhesive / PE (virgin) sealing (facing the 
food). In case the barrier performance is not sufficient for 
the selected packaging application, an additional organic 
gas barrier layer <  1 µm will be considered either before 
as a primer or after the SiOx coating as a top-coat, or both 
(Fig 10 (a), top- coat not shown, optional) . This has the 
advantage that only very thin layers are used, and 
recycling is not negatively affected . Appropriate 
conformity and safety assessments are required for all 
materials (Fraunhofer). As off -set migration during 
storage (as a reel) is a known  issue, an additional 
functional barrier layer facing the outside of the package will be considered, effectively sandwiching the PCR. 
AMCOR-K has much experience in the e -beam assisted deposition of SiO x layers and will use its knowledge to 
improve the gas and functional barrier performance when 
deposited on a PE base. A lacquer applied as a primer onto 
the PE substrate before and/or after SiO x deposition is 
reasonably ex pected, to further enhance the migration 
barrier performance by sealing off potential 
defects/pinholes in the SiOx layer, while, when applied as 
a primer, it will planarize the PE surface for SiO x 
deposition, minimizing the presence of any surface 
defects or contaminants. In case there would be issues to 
process the PCR on the machine direction orientation 
(MDO) equipment, an alternative structure is proposed in 
Fig 11 (b), where the PCR layer remains unstretched and 
stifness will be provided by a virgin (M DO) PE base 
layer. To overcome the possible machinability problems 
by packaging, during sealing, co-extrusion of virgin PE is 
foreseen, further sandwiching the PCR, improving the overall film quality (but reducing the %PCR in the film). 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
43 EP2585298A1, “Single polymer film structures for use in stand-up-pouches”, DOW and EP1961558A1, „Laminated multi-layer films”, Borealis 
44 Woods R. J., Pikaev A. K., Applied Radiation Chemistry: Radiation Processing, John Wiley Sons, INC., 1994, 288-307, 349-392 
45 Biaxial stretching of film, Principles and applications, Edited by Mark T. DeMeuse, Woodheald Publishing Limited, 2011.  
46 Functional barrier limits the migration of a component into food or food simulant in amounts below an accepted threshold or a migration limit of no concern 
47 Welle, F. SiOx layer a functional barrier in (PET) bottles againist potential contaminants from pc recycled PET. Food Additives and Contaminants. 25, (2008) 
Fig 11. Design for Circular Food Packaging 
Fig 10. Generalised type of a laminate for flexible packagings 
based on D4 Recyclability 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 24 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
Further alternatives such as thin AlO x, and also EVOH will be tested as (additional) migration barriers to cover 
potential off-set issues. 
SIEGWERK has developed a series of delamination primers for different applications, which are for the time being 
not yet commercialised, but already tested on a pilot scale (TRL 4) with very good results in terms of matching all 
requirements. By using deinking conditions as discussed above, the delamination and deinking is taking place in one 
step during the recycling. It can be applied using a gravure or flexo printing process. SIEGWERK will further develop 
this primer formulation, as a primer layer for SiOx deposition, in addition, if required also as a top coating. The primer 
formulation will match (i) to the requirements like adhesion on the used films, and (ii) the requirements of the 
recycling processes (by deinking). 
One other innovation will be the application of tracers from KIT and POLY in printing inks of SIEGWERK, that are 
deinkable. Some possible locations for the printing inks with tracers are presented in Fig 11. The project will chase 
all the possibilities for finding an all PE laminate, which is completely recyclable, functional, sortable and consists 
of at least 50% PE PCR in it, by providing design guidelines for circular f ood packaging (Fig 11).T he packaging 
types are diverse since various food and non-food types are to be packed. This will lead to differences in the laminate, 
such as the layer thicknesses, barriers used, PE types, inks included, still all to be sortable an d recyclable. A 
matchmaking is to be performed between the new materials and the final package demonstrators for each targeted 
packaging product type. The effects of laminate layer sequence on their recyclability will be rated and provided here 
as guidelines.  
Innovation potential: We will provide 3 use cases with mono-material multi-layered packaging films that can be 
completely recycled and are  suitable for food packaging, guaranteeing a sustainable use of resources. The proj ect 
will demonstrate the full recyclability of this structure, including deinking and its possible reproduction using PCR 
coming from its own recycling process. The very thin functional barrier, e.g. SiOx, will prevent migration and thereby 
will allow direct food contact, due to the PCRs being from food grade origin flexible packaging. 
 
(v) Comprehensive sustainability assessment of circular value chains- mainly related to WP7 work 
SoA and drawbacks: Circularity on its own does not equal sustainability.  Developing sustainable value chains in a 
Circular Economy requires a holistic sustainability assessment or Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment (LCSA) 48, 
taking into account environmental, economic and social impacts. Although life cycle-based standards and guidelines 
exist to assess the environmental (LCA) (e.g., ISO 14044 49, PEF method 50), economic (LCC) ( e.g., SETAC 
guidance51) and social (s-LCA) (e.g., Handbook for Product Social Impact Assessment; upcoming revised Guidelines 
by the Social Life Cycle Allia nce) dimensions, their practical implementation is often still challenging (e.g., data 
availability, lack of reliable methods for certain impact categories, assessment of emerging technologies). Although 
a holistic standard integrating the three dimensions  is not yet available, a tailor-made sustainability framework 
covering the three sustainability dimensions focused on waste management in European cities was developed in the 
H2020 REPAIR project52. Moreover, taking into account Circular Economy priorities is an additional challenge for 
holistic sustainability assessment. LCA -based indicators were developed to evaluate the circular economy 
performance of recycling value chains53. Recent reviews54 pointed out that despite the growing number of circularity 
indicators, important aspects such as value retention over different cycles and product lifetime are not yet fully 
captured and need further research. LCA of plastic waste management has been widely performed, but most studies 
focus on mixed plastic waste, mainly rigid plastics, instead of plastic film waste. Generally, these studies identified 
recycling as the preferred treatment over non -recycling options when the quality of the recycled material is good 
enough to ensure high virgin material substitution rate 55. However, in order to reveal the environmental benefits of 
recycling with high-end purposes compared to downcycling, the potential market size of the recyclates, as well as 
the recyclate quality, should be considered56. Finally, the relationship between packaging design and food waste (and 
consumer behavior) is an important aspect when developing new packaging concepts57. 
Step beyond the SoA: CIRCULAR FoodPack will evaluate the sustainability of the newly developed circular value 
chains in a holistic way, by applying a comprehensive sustainability assessment framework tailor-made by UGENT, 
taking into account environmental, economic and social impacts, as well as Circular Economy priorities, food waste 
and compliance to health and safety legislation. To support sustainable decisions by waste managers and processors 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
48 UNEP-SETAC (2011) Towards a LCSA: Making informed choices on products. United Nations En-vironmental Program. DOI: DTI/1412/PA.   
49 ISO, 2006. ISO 14044: Environmental management - LCA - Requirements and guidelines. International Organization for Standardization, Geneva.  
50 Zampori L and Pant R (2019) Suggestions for updating the Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) method. Luxembourg: JRC Ispra. DOI: 
10.2760/424613.   
51 Hunkeler, D., Lichtenvort, K., & Rebitzer, G. (2008). Environmental life cycle costing. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420054736. 
52 Taelman, S.E., Sanjuan-Delmás,D., Tonini, D. & Dewulf, J. (2019). An operational framework for sustainability assessment including local to global impacts: 
Focus on waste management systems. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcrx.2019.100005 
53 Huysveld, S., Hubo, S., Ragaert, K., Dewulf, J, 2019. Advancing circular economy benefit indicators and application on open -loop recycling of mixed and 
contaminated plastic waste fractions. Journal of Cleaner Production 211, 1-13. 
54 Moraga, G., Huysveld, S., Mathieux, F., Blengini, G. A., Alaerts, L., Van Acker, K., ... & Dewulf, J. (2019). Circular economy indicators: What do they 
measure?. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 146, 452-461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rescon-rec.2019.03.045   
55 Horodytska, O., Valdes, F.J., Fullana, A., 2018. Plastic flexible films waste management - A state of art review. Waste Management 77, 413-425. 
56 Nessi S., et al., Comparative Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of Alternative Feedstock for Plastics Production – Part 1, European Commission, Ispra, 2020a 
57 Yokokawa, N., et al. (2018). Framework for analyzing effects of packaging on food loss reduction by considering consumer behavior. J. of Cleaner Production, 
174, 26-34. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 25 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
running recovery processes, a digital Decision Support System (DSS) tool for  sustainability optimisation and 
evaluation of the most feasible process cascade and sector of application  for a certain  secondary material will be 
developed. A combination of AI-based techniques with special focus on white label approaches, capable of providing 
understandable feedback to the users will be developed. IRIS previous experience on these systems for other sectors 
will be applied, combining Rule Induction algorithms for Expert Systems applications. 
Innovation potential:  The comprehensive sustainability assessment framework developed specifically for 
CIRCULAR FoodPack will evaluate the sustainability of the newly developed technology and packaging in a way 
that is: (i)  systematically taking into account the entire life cycle, (ii) performed in a holistic way by considering 
environmental, economic and social impacts, (iii) addressing also circularity aspects, food waste and compliance to 
health and safety legislation.  The DSS tool will provide crucial insights in relation to the potential value of the 
currently unsorted material and will support the uptake of AI -based digital tools as backing for waste managers 
decision making.  
 
(vi) Market analysis, business and organisational models to ensure commercial uptake - related to WP8 work 
SoA and drawbacks: More and more large multinational food and packaging companies commit themselves either 
individually or collectively  in public or private initiatives (EU Circular Plastics Alliance or Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation’s Global Commitment) to pledges to making their packaging more recyclable or to a percentage of 
recycled plastics content in packaging products by already 2025. However, market actors emphasize that these 
pledges are ambitious and only feasible if material is available in sufficient quality and quantity and at competitive 
prices58. Studies provide additional evidence that business models for a better plastic recycl ing are still facing 
multifaceted market barriers, e.g. uncertainties regarding supply, higher production costs, initial investment costs, 
material quality differences compared to virgin plastic and lack of waste segregation by waste generators. 59 The 
bottleneck for su ccessful business models most of ten lies in the transfer from pilot feasibility to roll- out market 
feasibility. To overcome these market barriers for an improved sorting, separation and recycling of post consumer 
food packaging wastes, close co operation and joint activities of current economic actors in the value chains are 
necessary that also consider market needs and therefore require specific business models.  
Step beyond the SoA:  CFP will develop business models for implementation of the CIRCULAR FoodPack value 
chain, suggesting actors and most suitable technological interfaces for sorting, recycling and production of food grade 
packaging films from post -consumer recycled plastics. These models will be jointly discussed and improved by 
process providing R&D and industry partners as well as current global/European players. The CIRCULAR FoodPack 
technologies will be developed based on a stakeholder-driven approach by integrating stakeholders’ preferences and 
expectations. Economic actors of the whole value chain as well as consumers will be surveyed by qualitative and 
quantitative market research methods to include stakeholders’ feedback in the development of the CIRCULAR 
FoodPack technologies and to ensure a quick commercial uptake of the technologies. For the development of business 
models, it is particularly important to focus not only on the purely economic  feasibility of processes, but rather to 
include future scenarios e.g. effects of future EPR taxes and innovative business models that coin cide with lower 
circular value chains costs. In CIRCULAR FoodPack, these scenarios will be included in the SWOT analysis to 
identify strengths, weaknesses, opportunities  that also will identify actions to be taken to improve the market 
acceptance. Further on , exploitation plans for 2- 3 most promising scenarios will be developed through a cost and 
process optimization approach provided by the Business Model Canvas (BMC). 
Innovation potential: CIRCULAR FoodPack will identify suitable markets and material flows where the critical size 
for a market roll out can be easily reached. The project will define products that best fit to the CIRCULAR FoodPack 
technologies and where an improvement of the recycling processes is most necessary from an environmental point 
of view. Markets and sectors will be identified where the CIRCULAR FoodPack technologies create a value added 
for business customers and consumers and a possible price premium for the packaging can be generated. The 
activities in CIRCULAR FoodPack will ensure the coherence of pilot feasibility with market roll -out feasibility by 
connecting (1) technical and scientific excellence at pilot scale with (2) the access to large markets via the consortium 
partners to ensure a market roll out and (3) the definition of business models to exploit the potential of technologies 
generally applicable to other cases and companies in the market. 
 
 
 
 
Freedom to operate within CIRCULAR FoodPack 
The consortium conducted a patent survey to identify possible opportunities for knowledge and technological 
advancements (Table 4) . There are no patents that hinder the development and innovation ideas based on the 
knowledge of the partners. Several project partners own their key patents related to the developments (Table 5). 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
58 European Commission 2019: Assessment report of the voluntary pledges under Annex III of the EU Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy. 
59 Dijkstraa, H., et al., 2020. Business models and sustainable plastic management: A systematic review of the literature. J. of Cleaner Production.  
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 26 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
Table 4. Results of the patent search focused on main innovation areas of CIRCULAR FoodPack (CFP) 
 
The project  consortium is convinced that the  sorting, deinking, delamination, de odourization, and recycling 
processes used in flexible packaging is still largely unknown . Especially, in the area of mono -material based 
laminates with PCRs including functional barriers , the opportunities for patented IP are multiple, including 
options for expanding and perfecting partners’ existing patents. 
Table 5. Overview of the most important patents of the CIRCULAR FoodPack Project partners 
Technology (Patent No) – Title & Short Description Innovation potential 
Method for sorting and recycling PP articles (EP1966295A1) - Use in PP 
compositions suitable for production of injection-stretch-blow-moulded bottles. 
UV tracer to improve the ease and accuracy of sorting PP and PET bottles.  
CIRCULAR FoodPack aims to sort food and 
non-food flexible packagings, base on 
different marker concepts.  
Deodourizing method of regenerated plastics (JP2007210199A) - Calcium 
hydroxide (~ 5 wt.%) is added to waste plastics, crushed, melted, extrusion 
molded into a strand, cut to small lumps, pellet manufactured  
The technology needs additives, which is not 
preferable in circular use, and has several 
processing steps. CFP focuses on the removal 
of VOC by means of Infrared Dryer 
Method and apparatus for processing of plastic material (US20110251368A1) 
- Extrusion system for thermoplastics incuding a suction device for removing 
volatile components from plastics 
The technology requires a long residence time 
depending on the dimensions of the degassing 
unit. Plastics need to be melted prior to 
decontamination. 
Method For Purifying Reclaimed Polypropylene (US20180171095A1): The 
plastic is brought in contact with a first extracting solvent and then dissolved in 
a second solvent. The second solution is purified by adding a solid media to 
produce a third solution comprising purer polymer 
Different solvents are applied in series, which 
makes it a technical and energy-intensive 
technology. 
Method and apparatus for recycling printed plastic films (EP1419829A1):  
Consecutive and/or simultaneous soaking phases with non-ionic surfactant, 
organic solvent, an aqueous mineral base are used as a deinking medium. 
The recovery of deinking medium is difficult 
due to use of various solvent and surfactant 
mixtures. The technology is limited to deink 
surface printed plastic films.  
Mult-ilayer Packaging films with recycled PA content. (WO2019231442) - No 
offensive odour, useful for packaging organoleptically sensitive food.  
CFP will develop (i) recyclable all PE based 
mono-material multi-layered laminates for 
flexible packaging, (ii) including PE PCRs 
(50% of laminate) with functional barriers, 
(iii) tracers in “deinkable” inks for sortability. 
(iv) The laminate will fulfil all the functional 
requirements, e.g. oxygen, water vapor 
transmission, sealability, machinability, (v) 
The functional barrier will profide migration 
and gas and water vapor barrier performance. 
All Polyethylene laminate film with barrier adhesive layer (WO2020074688 
(A1)) - Recyclable, suitable for use in a flexible packaging. 
Gas barrier transparent film (JP2002321301A) - flexible, gas-barrier with a 
thin film layer of an inorganic oxide, better in recyclable properties  
Single polymer film for use in stand-up-pouches (EP2585298A1) - A mono- 
or a multi-layer film, has acceptable water vapor transmission rate and good 
tear resistance. 
Scope CIRCULAR FoodPack – Relevant patents of the partners 
Tracer based Sorting 
(TBS) 
POLY: “Material having a marker and a method for sorting a mixture of materials:”, 
EP2828053(B1); “Method for recycling materials from used objects”, EP2019731 (B1); “Method for 
identifying materials”, WO2017220079 (A1)  
KIT: “New Composition With Enhanced Luminescence”, EP3431570(B1) 
Sensor Based 
Specification (SBS) 
IRIS: “ Device for detecting foreign matter in an edible substance or in a container containing the 
edible substance and method employing the device” - EP19382101; “An integrated optical system for 
the examination of sample materials”, EP18198458. 
Deodourization KREYEN: “Method for decontaminating bulk food and/or feed material”, 10440978. 
“A new patent for deodourization of recyclates is under application.” 
Deinking  
UGENT: “Method for deinking plastic material”, EP 20167745; The present invention relates to a 
method to deink plastic material, for example plastic waste. The present invention also relates to a 
method to delaminate and deink plastic material. 
CreaSolv® 
Fraunhofer: “Method for treating waste containing plastic”, WO2011082802 A1; “Verfahren zur 
Anreicherung von mindestens einem Polymer aus einem Polymer-haltigen Abfall und Polymer-
Recyclat“, DE102013212813A1; „Method for separating and recovering target polymers and their 
additives from a material containing polymers and use therefore”, EP1311599b1; “Method for 
recycling polyolefin containing waste”,  EP3305839A1. 
Recyclable laminates 
AMCOR has an extensive know how on the production of poly propylene based mono-material 
based laminates. “Recyclable Films for Product Packaging”, WO19132954; “Recyclable Films and 
Packaging”, WO20050860; “High-Barrier Recyclable Film”, WO20112148; “Packaging Films with 
Recycled Polyamide Content”, WO19231442 
Recyclable, Sortable 
packs with PCRs NESTLE: No patents on this topic filed currently, but there are patent applications in preparation. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 27 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
2. Impact