3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  
3.2.1. Organisational structure 
In order to ensure a smooth decision -making process and 
collaboration between the 14 partners, the organizational 
structures are kept as straightforward as possible. It is of high 
importance not to neglect the necessary management 
elements to avoid conflicts or uncertainty about 
responsibilities and obligations. Figure 23 shows the structure 
of the project organization. The Coordinator (CO) will report 
directly to the EC Project Officer , supported by the project 
manager (PM). The Project Steering Committee (PSC) will 
interact with the  Coordinator who maintains an overview of 
the project. The WP leaders (WPLs) will oversee the work 
packages and report progress to Coordinator and PSC. The 
main goals of the project coordination are: (i) organize the 
information flow in timely manner and a ccurately inside the 
consortium to meet project objectives; (ii) take the appropriate 
decisions to reach the project objectives; (iii) provide the EU 
with reports and organize reviews for the suitable tracking of 
the project progress.  
Coordination Team (CT) with the Coordinator (CO) and the Project Manager (PM)  
The project will be coordinated by Fraunhofer that has participated in various European projects in FP6, FP7 and 
Horizon2020. On behalf of Fraunhofer, Dr. Esra Kucukpinar will act as the CIRCULAR FoodPack coordinator 
responsible for the overall coordination of activities. Dr. Kucukpinar has gained experience in the management of 
collaborative research projects through more than 20 national and European collaborative research activities and 
projects, whereas she acted and still acts as the technical manager in six projects. With respect to the recyclable 
packaging material developments, Dr. Kucukpinar and her team successfully designed and developed recyclable 
mono-material based multi-layered laminates for flexible drink pouches. She has the experience and the competence 
on how to design and develop flexible packaging materials for various types of packaging applications including 
sensitive food products, vacuum insulation panels, flexible photovolta ics and displays. Dr. Kucukpinar will be 
supported through Fraunhofer colleagues, by Dr. Martin Schlummer for the topic of the purification and recycling of 
flexible packaging by the CreaSolv® technology and by Dr. Diana Kemmer for the area compliance for food 
packaging. Dr. Kucukpinar has access to a strong backbone of administration personnel dedicated to managing 
European funded projects within the Fraunhofer headquarters. As Europe’s leading organization for applied research 
and as project partner in ma ny EU-projects, Fraunhofer fulfils these principles. There is thus extensive expertise in 
the management of EU projects and the PSC members are also experienced with project management of European 
as well as national projects. 
The CO will rely on the WPLs for monitoring the technical implementation of the project. He can take urgent low -
level decisions, if necessary and after discussion with the WPLs. He can propose solutions and contingency plans to 
the partners in case of delay, discrepancies or when a technical choice has to be made. Furthermore, the CO will be 
assisted in all administrative and financial management tasks by the PM  located at partner BayFOR, by WPLs and 
by the General Assembly, which will be empowered to make high -level decisions on every  aspect of the project. 
Melanie Schulte, a well -experienced EU project manager with a scientific degree in forest science and resource 
management is going to fulfil the role of the PM. Both the CO and the PM together build a highly skilled Coordination 
Team. The organizational structure and the rights and duties of the operati onal bodies responsible for the decision-
making in the project will be explained and described in detail in the Consortium Agreement. 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
A Project Steering Committee, led by the CO, will be installed as a supervisory body supporting the project’s normal 
operation. The PSC will supervise crucial decisions related to all relevant administrative management and scientific 
matters and will be responsible of  the operation of the technical work programmes. More specifically, PSC has a 
double role: 
• It is the governing body that prepares the decisions  for the General Assembly. It is responsible for proposing  
redistributions of funds if needed and for the management of the joint funds. Other tasks include settling potential 
conflicts among partners. 
• It will assess the work within the WPs and ensure alignment of the individual WPs with the general objectives  
of CIRCULAR FoodPack. The PSC is further responsible for monitoring the budget and the overall management 
of the project.  
 
Fig 23. CIRCULAR FoodPack Management structure 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 50 of 100] 
CE-SC5-24-2020 
The PSC shall meet every six months alongside the General Assembly meeting, unless interests of the project require 
intermediate meetings or ad hoc upon written request by any PSC member. Its members can vary as the project needs, 
but will consist at least of CO and PM, Quality Manager (QM), Research and Technology Manager (RTM),  
Exploitation and Innovation Manager (EIM), and Dissemination and Communication Manager (DCM): 
 
Quality Manager (QM): The QM (Prof. Steven Demeester, UGENT) will be in charge of disseminating the quality 
procedures, encouraging their use and monitoring with adequate metrics. This will include setting up a qualitative 
review process to ensure proper quality of all deliverables and contribute to reporting. Steven Demeeste r wide 
experience in the field of Quality Management will guarantee high -level project deliverables through establishing 
quality assurance. All deliverables generated by the persons in charge (see list of deliverables) will be checked and 
controlled in thi s sequence: WP Lead er → PM → CO and QM → submission to EC . The QM will conduct the 
internal quality assessment of milestones and deliverables that are based on the quantified objectives detailed in 
section 1.1 and within the WP descriptions and give status updates within the PSC. 
Research and Technology Manager (RTM): The RTM (Pieter Cools, AMCOR-G) will have an advisory role on 
the R&D decisions within CircularFoodPack and will ensure that project milestones and goals are achieved. The 
responsibilities of the RTM include: determining, implementing and monitoring research and development strategies, 
policies and plans. This role is appointed to Pieter Cools who has extensive R&D experience both as a coordinator 
of EU projects ad partner in European and national initiatives, dealing with high impact technological advancements.  
Exploitation and Innovation Manager (EIM): The EIM (Prof. Aggelos Tsakanikas, NTUA) will be in charge of 
the continuous assessment of the market potential of the developed know -how. The determination of actual market 
trends is imperative to realize the full commercial potential of project results.  The EIM will lead the preparations of 
exploitation strategies in cooperation with WP8 members. The EIM will further identify potential users outside the 
consortium and act as the main contact point for business related issues while reporting these activities to the PSC 
and General Assembly. The EIM will capture and manage research results generated by the project in order to exploit 
them in the most effective manner.  
Dissemination and Communication Manager (DCM):  During the project’s duration, several dissemination and 
communication activities will be undertaken (cf. chapter 2.2. and WP8) to successfully spread important information 
and project results. Melanie Schulte (BayFOR) will act as the DCM  and has the responsibility to keep track of all 
communication and dissemination activities within CIRCULAR FoodPack. The DCM, in close contact with the CO 
will ensure the dissemination of project results to relevant stakeholders, governmental bodies, research communities 
and others. The DCM will regularly present all related activities in PSC and GA meetings. Detailed communication 
and approval procedures will be set out in the Consortium Agreement.  
 
The General Assembly (GA): 
The GA is composed of one representative from  each partner and chaired by the CO. The GA will represent the 
highest level of decision-making within the project and will decide the overall project strategy, including contractual 
matters and exploitation and will also supervise the achievement of the milestones. The GA will convene biannually 
(at least once per year in a face- to-face meeting). Additional meetings via digital conference tools will be held on 
any extraordinary occasions requiring a decision by the GA. The main mission and tasks of the GA are: Assessment 
of work carried out; decisions about project strategy and technical issues; analysing technical conflicts between 
partners and proposing agreements; defaulting party management; studying the evaluation reports on all activities of 
all partners; deciding by confidential vote about allocation of finances, adding new members to the consortium, 
reviewing or amending the EU contract, change or exchange of WPs. 
 
Work Package Leaders (WPLs): To facilitate the organization and management, the project is structured in 8 WPs. 
Each WP is carried out by a varying number of involved parties and will be headed and coordinated by an experienced 
principal investigator as WPL to manage and ensure success of the WP. The WPL supervises and adjusts the process 
flow and works closely with the CO. The WPL has an integrating function and is responsible for engaging and 
communicating with all participants in the WP. (Virtual) WP meetings will be arranged on a regular basis. The WPL 
will report on the progress in relation to the deliverables and milestones achieved and delays. To ensure and document 
that this is being achieved, the WPL will biannually send an internal Interim Report to the PSC and report to the GA. 
In the unlikely event of disagreements within a working group that cannot be resolved simply by the WPL, the issue 
should be reported to the CO, who will ascertain the facts and present them to the GA, which will take a decision for 
the benefit of CIRCULAR FoodPack as a whole. WPLs will also be the main contact point for the EAB. 
 
External Advisory Board (EAB):  To ensure quality and societal relevance beyond the consortium, CIRCULAR 
FoodPack will establish an EAB until the project starts. It consists of international experts of industrial players (Table 
14), who will participate as non-funded partners to complement and enhance the expertise of the consortium. These 
large well-known enterprises not only function as advisors but also as stakeholders, which can commercialize the  
CIRCULAR FoodPack ideas globally. With such an involvement, it will be possible to eliminate contaminants from 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 51 of 100] 
CE-SC5-24-2020 
“dirty” flexible food packaging waste and lead post -consumer polyolefin recyclates successfully into a flexible 
packaging laminate also for food  packing, leading to circular economy. T he suggested experts have been 
preliminarily contacted and informed about the project concept and objectives. All stated members of the EAB agreed 
to be part of this and  showed their large interest by an expression of interest letter (attached as an Annex).  During 
project, the consortium will appoint additional members, whenever the results or missing expertise of the consortium 
makes it necessary. The EAB ensures a high standard of the project and will interact regul arly with the consortium 
and, where and when relevant, the EAB or selected members will be invited to GA meetings or technical meetings. 
The EAB has hereby no voting rights.  
 
Table 14: CircularFoodPack confirmed External Advisory Board Members 
3.2.2. Decision making and conflict management 
The General Assembly (GA) is the highest decision-making body within CIRCULAR FoodPack. It takes high-level 
decisions to achieve the goals of the project, wherefore it is crucial to achieve consensus among the project partners. 
All major decision making procedures will be refined and detailed in the Consortium Agreement such as the 
interaction between partners, distribution of EC funds and voting rights. Before each GA meeting, partners will have 
to prepare a short report to be uploaded on the collaboration platform. These reports w ill include the main results 
within each WP, difficulties encountered, dissemination and communication activities, exploitation routes, use of 
resources and deviations from Annex 1 and 2 of the Grant Agreement. Such issues will be discussed by the GA and 
decisions taken accordingly.  
The PSC can take medium-level decisions with the agreement of GA. The GA itself is responsible for all important 
management issues and thus takes the high -level decisions. This overall decision -making structure is supported by 
well-defined deliverables and clear milestones, which will be closely tracked during the proposal and serve as the 
basis for decision points (see Table 3.2a ). Besides the GA meetings, there will also be (online) technical meetings 
attended by a limited number of partners and the respective WPLs to address particular WPs. Additionally, contact 
among partners will be maintained by e -mail and telephone, with regular written progress reports circulated to all 
partners. Such technical meetings will be strongly encouraged to promote technical exchange and multidisciplinary 
cross training among partners. This will allow decision- making on a practical day -to-day level, with low -level 
decisions of minor scope taken by the WPLs respectively.  
The CO assisted by the PSC will propose corrective actions if necessary, following consultation with GA members  
to allow for proper conflict management. If for any reason, the CO and PSC cannot resolve the conflict, the GA will 
conclude on the c onflict by majority vote (in case of draw, the CO has the decisive vote). For serious and urgent 
matters, an extraordinary GA meeting can be called. Clear strategies will be laid out in the Consortium Agreement 
(CA). The CA will be signed prior to the Grant Agreement and will define the roles and obligations of each partner, 
rules for partners joining or leaving the consortium, internal organization of the consortium, its governance structure 
and voting mechanisms, criteria for evaluation of the activities (referring to the quality assurance procedures), 
provisions for the settlement of disputes and exploitation. 
Name Value for CIRCULAR FoodPack 
Steinert A Leading developer and manufacturer of NIR and other sorting machinery equipment with international sales 
& service, located in Germany 
UBESOL 
SL 
UBESOL in Spain, will consult non-food packaging. They will assess the processability of the laminates for 
wet-wipes in flow-wraps, cosmetics in sachets and detergents’ packaging. 
CEFLEX 
CEFLEX represents the entire value chain of flexible packaging, will act as multiplier to get access to different 
companies of the value chain, to receive feedback on defined questions.  AMCOR, NESTLE, SUEZ, SIEG-
WERK are members.  
ISWA 
A non -profit association in Netherlands, consists of international waste management experts and relevant 
stakeholders. It organizes international networking events , conducts educational workshops on waste man-
agement, engages in developing economies to establish sustainable waste management practices .  
FPE Flexible Packaging Europe Assocication in EU supports in identifying the EU-wide needs in terms of flexible 
packaging recycling and disseminate the project results among their members as potential users of recyclates  
IVLV 
IVLV is an Association for Food Technology and Packaging, in Germany. It initiates, supports application-
oriented projects. It can give access to food packers to access their aspirations and concerns in terms of recy-
clability of packaging materials and use of recycled materials, respectively 
ZLV 
ZLV is an association focusing to added value along the entire value chain for packed food stuff. Give access 
to food packer to access their aspirations and concerns in terms of recyclability of packaging materials and 
use of recycled materials, respectively. 
PRE Plastics Recyclers Europe represents the voice of EU plastics recyclers, so will promotes the use of quality 
plastic recyclates and give concrete advice on developing innovative, recyclable products and packaging.  
JRC Joint Research Centre , EU science and knowledge service provid ing independet scientific research -based 
advice and support to EFSA and EU policy, committed to be in EAB, but is formally not able to sign the LOI. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 52 of 100] 
CE-SC5-24-2020 
3.2.3. Innovation management 
The implementation of CIRCULAR FoodPack follows a targeted innovation management. It is pulled by end-user 
needs with clearly defined targets and corresponding methodology to enable a circular economy of flexible food 
packaging. The identification of the market opportunity has already started that exists for reprocessing and upgrading 
of PE PCRs before they enter a new production cycle of packaging.  
Innovation management includes the translation of the existing knowledge into CIRCULAR FoodPack concept with 
the support of a preliminary market analysis in WP8 performed for the related market sectors. These sectors will also 
be represented by the relevant EAB (Table 14). Within WP2 -6, the most promising results and technologies will be 
defined according to their transferability in industrial scenarios, their final cost for industrial take-up and exploitation 
(investment costs, operational costs) and their LC SA. The project management approach proposed provides 
mechanisms to identify and resolve potential risks. Risk mitigation measures (cf section 3.2.4) have been and will be 
selected according to their impact on the exploitation of the project results.  
Several innovation management tools and processes are planned, e.g. fast innovation cycles during specification, 
end-user involvement during validation phase through the end- user NESTLE, customers of AMCOR, and partners 
of EAB, periodic IPR assessment, result -focused project management(incl. phasing of project – laboratory & 
industrial, focus on manufacturing). CIRCULAR FoodPack will actively reach out to recyclers and standardization 
bodies (e.g. the reuse of PE PCRs in flexible food packaging), to adopt and share best practices for higher -TRL 
technology development and dissemination. Two specific aspects of the innovation management we want to highlight 
are (i) introducing a system innovation and (ii) following a market pull and technology push. 
By appointing a dedicated Research and Technology Manager (RTM), Exploitation and Innovation Manager (EIM), 
it is ensured that the innovations are detected and handled in time and in accordance with the Consortium Agreement.  
3.2.4 Overview of risks, their potential impact and proposed contingency 
None of the foreseen risks are within the highest critical region for the project. As will be further defined in the CA, 
in case of a significant unexpected ri sk requiring a quick decision, an emergency/ extraordinary meeting of the 
relevant WP will be called by its responsible WPL with the CO. Following the decision procedures of chapter 3.2.2, 
low-level decisions can be taken by WPL in accordance with CO. D ecisions of strategic importance will be the 
mandate of the GA together with the PSC.