3.3 Consortium as a whole  
Due to the global network in trading of products, it is not possible to implement a circular economy by only a single 
country (region). For that reason CIRCULAR FoodPack sets up a European consortium of different organizations to 
link end users (NESTLE), material converters for flexible packaging (AMCOR & customers through the EAB), waste 
managers (SUEZ), sorting company (POLY), separation technologies (SIEGWERK), de odourization (KREYEN), 
technology provider (IRIS) with researchers for marker development  (KIT), pre-treatment and recycling processes 
(Fraunhofer, UGENT, UM). Thus, the complete value chain of flexible packaging flow can be covered. All partners 
in this consortium have been selected in view of their individual expertise and complementarities. For CIRCULAR 
FoodPack waste manager (SUEZ) is providing the consortium with market data of waste generation and flexible 
packaging waste. The research institutes (Fraunhofer, UGENT, KIT, UM) develop the novel markers for sorting of 
food packaging waste from non -food and corresponding printing technologies (KIT), purification and recycling 
processes for MLC (UGENT, UM, Fraunhofer) and deinking and de odourization processes together with the 
industrial partners SIEGWERK and KREYEN, respectively. The PE based recyclates will undermine an analytical 
process for contamination and migration challenge tests, which will be performed at the accredited laborat ories of 
the research institute (Fraunhofer) for the novel functional migration barrier developments at AMCOR -K and 
AMCOR-G. Material converter (AMCOR) have the facility to analyse the usability of PE PCR for food and HPC 
flexible packaging and give advices for the novel mono-material based laminate design and production with PE PCRs 
including functional barriers and the novel tracers in deinkables. Environmental aspects, e.g. risks for environment 
originated from PE PCR, LCA for PE PCR, social impacts, gender aspects and economic aspects (market analysis. 
business plans, marketing strategies) are screened through experts (UGENT, IRIS, NTUA and ECOZEPT), which 
have many years of experience in these fields. ECOZEPT as a private market research and marketing consulting 
agency will conduct extensive market analysis to iteratively integrate consumers’ and experts’ perceptions into the 
development of the CIRCULAR FoodPack products.Finally, promising results are disseminated and communicated 
to public and relevant organizations by non- profit-partner BayFOR. CIRCULAR FoodPack will be managed by a 
research institute (Fraunhofer), supported by BayFOR, which both plenty of practice in handling of EU funded 
projects. Our multinational cooperation is essential in order to reach the intended objectives. 
The key personnel of Fraunhofer, IRIS, UGENT, SUEZ, BayFOR, ECOZEPT, UGENT , UM will be female (ca. 
40%). Key decision-making positions within the project will be equally filled by men (RTM, EIM, QM) and women 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 53 of 100] 
CE-SC5-24-2020 
(CO, PM, DCM). Gender balance in recruitment for the project will be overseen by CO to ensure a reasonable level 
of balance. 
Industrial/commercial involvement in the project. 
Industrial or commercial occurs through industrial participation: 5 out of 14 partners are SMEs and 5 are large 
industry partners. The industrial partners consist of flexible packaging material converters, a brand owner and end 
user, waste manager, one technology provider and consultants and they are essential for the success of the project. 
The waste manager (SUEZ) is collecting the contaminated flexible packaging from different available sorting sites 
in France or Belgium and ensure the safe handling of that. The waste will go to the sorting line advanced with the 
Tracer-Based-Sorting technology of POLY, and potentially in addition with Sensor-Based Specification technology 
of IRIS. These will guarantee the separation of flexible MLC food packaging waste from the non-food flexibles with 
the rich in PE content. Thus, the input flow is guaranteed, this input then goes into purification and recycling plants 
(CreaSolv
®). Thermally assisted deodourization by KREYEN, deinking technology with the novel ink formulations 
of SIEGWERK will ensure the higher purification levels before the recycling processes. Flexible packaging 
producers (AMCOR-K and AMCOR -G) and the end user brand owner (NESTLE), which bring products on the 
European market, must adhere on EU  guidelines, recommendations and Regulations by EFSA. The PE PCRs 
recovered from food packaging waste, and free from hazard contaminants, implemented in mono- material based 
laminates will be commercialized by these experts. They are establishing relationships to the customers/public. With 
product stewardships, in where the producer guarantees an environment friendly product, they win the customer’s 
confidence. In this way, the image of PCRs in flexible packaging applications in public can be improved. Product 
stewardships are based on analytical determinations, in where the environmental risks and benefits from product and 
process are evaluated. Therefore, experts (ECOZEPT, IRIS ,) compile a risk assessment and LCA as well as 
conducting market research to identify business plans and marketing strategies for the product.