2.2 Measures to maximise impact 
The impact of the CIRCULAR FoodPack  project will be maximised by developing a tailored dissemination and 
communications package in WP8, targeting stakeholders in the European materials and recycling communities. 
2.2.1 Dissemination and exploitation of results  
Dissemination and communication plans  
Fraunhofer, BayFOR and NTUA will lead the dissemination of knowledge generated by the CIRCULAR FoodPack 
project. The consortium will support these activities to increase international visibility and awareness. We will target 
each partner’s network ( Fig. 18),  encompassing the scientific 
community, regulatory bodies, packaging producers, end- users, 
food/HPC brand owners, the pharmaceutical packaging industry, 
waste managers, recyclers, and process developers. Besi des 
these, further main target groups of policy makers, regulatory 
bodies, the scientific community and relevant project clusters, the 
media and general public have been identified and will be further 
assessed in the Plan for Dissemination and Exploitation  of 
Results and Communication activities (D8. 2). The consortium 
will publicise the activities of CIRCULAR FoodPack and the key 
role of the EC . The preparation of targeted promotional 
material for different stakeholders, such as scientific 
organisations, regulatory bodies, financial investors, recyclers, 
producers and  manufacturers, will lie at the core of our 
dissemination and communication activities ( Table 9). This material will include press releases, ro llups, posters, 
leaflets, regular newsletters , and a website and social media presence to showcase the project and its results. 
Moreover, the project outcome s will be presented at conferences , workshops, fairs and events that are open to  the 
public to demonstrate the benefit s of EU-funded research and its contribution to the challenges facing European 
society. The EC will be informed in advance about such activities. With these measures, we will emphasise the 
significance of the CIRCULAR FoodPack consortium in the circular use of flexible food packaging materials, and 
in the long term achieve a market uptake that is driven not only by producers but also by consumers. In order to 
achieve impact with all stakeholders, we will produce a detailed description of all dissemination and communication 
activities as part of the overall Plan for Dissemination and Exploitation of Results and Communication Activities  
(PDEC, D8.1/D8.2) at the beginning of the project (month 4). It will be updated throughout the project wit h a final 
version in month 42 that also includes outreach metrics. The main objectives of the communication and 
dissemination activities are summarised below: 
• Develop a strategy to raise public and economic awareness (main message, indicative timeline) 
• Ensure bidirectional communication flow to and from stakeholders by providing appropriate infrastructure and 
management and establishing communication responsibilities throughout the consortium 
• Stimulate external feedback and integrate it within the consortium in addition to the External Advisory Board 
• Manage and include stakeholder expectations to build a qualitative reputation 
• Fine-tuning identified target groups and agree on the most suitable communication channels  (including mass 
media channels for communication activities) 
• Identify and involve collaboration partners (business es and research networks) by disseminating results to the 
target groups summarised in Table 9. 
We will organise three dedicated workshops at the demonstrator sites (SUEZ, Fraunhofer , UGENT/AMCOR-G, 
and NESTL E) during the project, open to  students, researchers, the packaging industry, recyclers, and users of 
recycled materials, including extra sessions for training, helping to convince industry partners of the market relevance 
of the CIRCULAR FoodPack technologies. Virtual alternatives may be necessary due to COVID-19. The consortium 
partners have strong (joint) publication records and have often served as editors/reviewers of leading scientific 
journals or as advisors to national or international agencies. The project results will be made available to the larger 
scientific community via peer-reviewed joint publications in scientific journals, favouring the open access model 
to reach the widest possible audience. CIRCULAR FoodPack represents a significant step forward in the translation 
of state-of-the-art recycling research  into efficient modern methods , including sorting, pre -treatment, material 
recycling, packaging production and compliance testing, which could be adopted by the industry. Therefore, we will 
publish a policy brief setting out the project results and new opportunities arising from them. 
Communication activities and tools 
CIRCULAR FoodPack will initiate communication activities from th e very beginning of the project  and the 
strategies will be reviewed and revised  on a regular basis, if necessary. We will make target stakeholders aware of 
Fig 18. Overview of target groups 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 38 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
our goals, research methods, achievements and innovations. Fraunhofer, BayFOR and other partners’ press officers 
will be responsible for public relations and will support the Dissemination and Communication Manager (DCM) to 
identify ‘newsworthy’ items and appropriate media for the dissemination of this information. A logo and corporate 
identity will be developed to ‘brand’ the project and will be used on all public outputs. CIRCULAR FoodPack  
partners are committed to raise public awareness while simultaneously ensuring that information is disseminated in 
a responsible and ethical manner. Ultimate responsibility for public disclosure of confidential knowledge generated 
by the project will lie with the Coordinator and the DCM, both experts in the communication of science to the public. 
The project website will be launched in month 4. Electronic versions of  the newsletters will be accessible on the 
website. Various promotional materials will be produced during the launch phase of the project, and distributed by 
the project partners at relevant events. Social media will allow European research projects to reach a wider audience, 
but it is difficult to gain significant user numbers for social media channels specifically set up for research projects, 
so the consortium will adopt a dual approach by communicating through CIRCULAR FoodPack accounts while also 
making use of the project partners’ existing popular channels. We will  create project-specific brands (e.g. hashtags 
like #CircularFoodPackaging) that will be used to highlight the project on social media. Communication activities 
will be reviewed, evaluated and refined throughout the project under the leadership  of Fraunhofer and BayFOR. A 
brief draft dissemination and communication plan is presented in Table 9, and this will be developed into a formal 
document at the beginning of the project for submission as D8.2. 
Table 9: Draft dissemination and communication plan of CIRCULAR FoodPack. 
Timing Activity Objective Target groups Accomplishments and expected impact 
Start 
M4, 
contd. 
Interactive 
project website 
Regular updates, 
news section, 
partner login 
Waste collectors, 
sorters, recyclers, 
material suppliers, 
converters, research 
Structure the 
homepage; formulate 
the content  
Communication 
platform, continuous 
engagement. 
Plan: 
M12, 
M24 
M36 
Workshop, 
webinars to 
selected 
stakeholder 
groups, training 
on site, videos 
Minimum three 
workshops to three 
types of audiences 
at the partners in 
Belgium, France 
and Germany, at 
demonstrator sites 
Industry, inverters, 
stakeholders, 
research, policy-
makers, members 
of CEFLEX, IVLV, 
ZLV, Plastics 
Recyclers Europe 
Reaching a broad 
audience, selection of 
speakers; 
dissemination 
through web; training 
the future staff of 
commercial plants 
Public awareness, 
feedback (interest in 
buying packaging with 
recyclates), recycling 
instead of waste 
disposal, life cycle 
management, market 
research results 
Operati
onal by 
M4, 
cont. 
Digital 
newsletter, 
leaflet, press 
releases, 
interviews, 
partner websites 
Public 
dissemination, 
2000 prints to be 
distributed 
Stakeholders, 
policymakers, 
scientific 
community, 
industry  
High-quality 
documents prepared 
by the experts 
Central source of project 
information, 
communication 
materials, raising 
awareness, attract 
audience to engage  
Plan: 
M18 
M30 
M42 
Feedback on 
roadmaps, 
exchange 
webinars 
(online), and 
joint events 
(e.g. project 
day). 
Guidelines on: 
- Recycling 
- Effective sorting  
- Management of 
packaging after 
use 
- Industrial take-up 
to support circular 
use of PE PCRs  
Research groups, 
all stakeholders, 
regulatory bodies, 
alignment with 
other H2020 
projects, industrial 
partners, policy 
makers 
Policy brief 
recommendations for 
future policy 
implementations; 
project updates; 
industry testimonials 
and interviews; 
contribution to 
industry clusters, 
roadmap objectives 
Engage with research 
community and policy-
makers, provide 
evidence of potential, 
publicity for mechanical 
recycling with 
CreaSolv® process with 
advanced pre-treatment 
and purification for food 
packaging 
Cont. Social media 
(YouTube, 
Twitter, 
LinkedIn, 
ResearchGate) 
Regular posts 
(monthly) 
targeting followers 
Industry, science, 
technologists, 
investors in waste 
collection and 
sorting, recycling 
Engagement and 
interaction with 
followers and readers 
Rising of awareness, 
spreading news quickly 
Cont.  
M18 
M30 
M42 
Publications in 
journals, 
technical 
articles, some 
examples 
already 
identified by 
project partners  
J. Mater. Chem., 
Adv. Optical 
Mater., Resources, 
Conserv. Recyc., 
J. Cleaner Prod., 
Appl. Sci., IEEE 
Photon. J., 
Recycling, Food 
Additives and 
All scientific 
community 
At least five papers:  
- Packaging products 
containing recyclates  
- SBS of different 
packaging waste 
fractions for better 
recyclate quality 
Communicate scientific 
contributions, guidelines 
for EU policymakers, 
contribution to science, 
migration behaviour of 
polyolefin recyclates in 
packaging, migration 
challenge test results, 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 39 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
 Contaminants, 
Thin Solid Films 
- Synthesis and 
optical properties of 
fluorescence markers  
food compliance with 
recyclates in packaging 
Cont.  
M18 
M30 
M42 
Presentation at 
industry events, 
trade shows, 
scientific 
conferences, 
(online and 
face-to-face), 
Innoform, 
SOLPACK, 
multi-layer 
packaging 
conference, 
IAPRI, ILSI 
At least one trade 
fair, and three 
conferences per 
year: ISWA World 
Congress, Odour 
and Emission, 
Plastics Recycling 
Conference, K-
shows, SAMPE 
conference, JEC 
conference, 
Anuga, Extrusion 
Policymakers, 
industry, scientific 
community: 
 
European Circular 
Economy 
Stakeholder 
Platform 
(https://circulareco
nomy.europa.eu/pla
tform/) 
 
- Project results at 
targeted trade fairs 
(e.g. joint booth with 
BayFOR at IFAT, 
Munich, leading trade 
fair for environmental 
technologies; 
packaging fairs, e.g. 
Fachpack, Interpack 
and K fair, Biofach, 
the leading fair for 
sustainable concepts 
in food) 
Present CIRCULAR 
FoodPack as innovative 
process in the section 
‘good practice’ (regular 
updates); knowledge 
exchange to increase 
impact of project results; 
understand resource 
efficiency of the 
increased use of recycled 
packaging systems; 
market-uptake increase; 
engage, promote, inform 
about the potential cost 
reduction for waste 
owners 
Plan for exploitation 
The exploitation plan and the identification of business opportunities will be built on a dialogue with packaging 
stakeholders by investigating industry and consumer expectations. The results of expert and consumer interviews 
will be iteratively included in the project’s innovations, ensuring the market acceptance of our technologies. 
Commercial exploitation and IPR  management will to some extent align with practices already used by  the 
consortium partners, and their well -established exploitation strategies will be used to commercialise our research. 
The industrial partners will be  involved in the project from the beginning , covering the value chain from 
materials to application, thereby encouraging  the exploitation of our  results. Most partners already have excellent 
legal support teams and technology transfer offices (TTOs) that specialise in the identification, protection and 
marketing of technologies through licensing and spin- off companies. The TTOs of each partner will help  the 
Exploitation and Innovation Manager (EIM) to develop protection and exploitation strategies.  
The exploitation plan closely correlates with our communication and dissemination activities. A well- defined plan 
for the simultaneous protection and promotion of knowledge will be concei ved and regularly updated in the PDEC 
(D8.2, D8.8). The fast and smooth transfer of project know-how and technology is essential for the economic success 
of the partners. All non-confidential products directly resulting from the project, such as guidelines for the sorting of 
food packaging items, or the recycling of FCM flexible packaging materials, will be made accessible to the public.  
2.2.2 Initial business plans 
Potential Markets 
Circularity in the flexible packaging value chain will create new markets for the waste management and recycling 
industry, the European plastics industry, the (flexible) packaging industry, the food and drink industry, the HPC 
packaging industry, and manufacturers of sustainable packaging.  
Waste management: The separate collection of municipal waste96, stimulated by ambitious EU legislation, is steadily 
increasing over time. T he municipal waste recycling rate in 2018 was  43%.90 Market growth can be attributed to 
increasing awareness of  sustainable plastic wast e management practices, the rise in infrastructural development 
(including recycling plants ) and urbanisation. In Europe, 9.4 million tonne s of plastic post -consumer waste was 
collected for recycling in 2018.90  
Recycling industry: In 2018, the recycling rate for PE films in Europe was 23%, with only 13% being used again in 
films (60% of all flexible films are made from PE). The utilisation of recycling plant capacities for flexible films was 
estimated at 90% in 2018.97 Furthermore, 29.1 million tonnes of post-consumer waste was collected in 2018, of which 
32.5% was sent for recycling, 42.6% was used for  energy recovery (incineration) and 24.9% ended up in landfill. 
Exports to non-EU states declined by 39% from 2016 to 2018. 93 In 2018, the total amount of wo rldwide recycled 
plastics was 29.4 million tonnes, with the market valued at €35.19 billion. The plastics recycling industry is predicted 
to grow by 6.6% from 2020 to 2027.98  
Plastics recycling industry: The value of the global recycled plastics market was an estimated €31.14 billion in 2017, 
projected to reach €42.47 billion by 2022. Packaging is the fastest growing segment, PET being the fastest growing 
type, and North America being the fastest growing region. The largest market is the Asian-Pacific market.99   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
96 Source: European Environment Agency; Jul. 2020. Plastics Europe, 2019. Plastics – the facts 2019.  
97 Plastics Recyclers Europe, 2020. Flexible Films Market in Europe – State of Play.  
98 Research and Markets, 2020. Global Plastic Recycling Market Trends Report 2020. (Global-Plastic-Recycling-Market-Trends-Report-2020.html) 
99 MarketsandMarkets, 2018. Recycled Plastics Market. https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/recycled-plastic-market-115486722.html 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 40 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
European plastics industry: The turnover was €360 billion in 2016, with more than 1.6 million people employed by 
60,000 companies, mostly SMEs. Packaging is the largest end-use plastics market in Europe, accounting for 39.9% 
of the 51.2 million tonnes of European plastics demanded by converters in 2018. The European countries with the 
largest demand in 2018 were Germany (24.6%), Italy (13.9%), France (9.4%), and Spain (7.6%).100 
European flexible packaging market or packaging industry: This is e xpected to reach €16 billion by 2023, 101 
compared to €14 billion in 2017 (annual growth rate = 2%).102  
Sustainable packaging: The global market was valued at  €200.78 billion in 2019, with a growth rate of 5.7%  
predicted until 2025.103 
European food and drinks industry: This manufacturing sector had a turnover of €1,192 billion in 2017, with 2.1% 
of EU gross value added in 2016, and is a leading employer (4.72 million employees in 2016). There were 294,000 
companies active in 2016 (99% SMEs), creating 47.5% of the turnover and employing 60.8% of all employers in the 
EU food and drinks industry.104 
European HPC packaging market: The total demand in Europe for HPC products is projected reach  €252 million 
by 2026, while the global market is projected to reach €38 billion in 2025, representing a growth rate of 4.7%.105 
CIRCULAR FoodPack solutions can improve the competitiveness and innovation capacity of all these markets, with 
the largest impact on the PE flexible food packaging plastics and recycling industry. In 2018, demand for PE flexible 
films was an estimated 8.5–9 million tonnes, of which 1.2–1.3 million tonnes was met by recyclates produced within 
the EU. PE flexible films have a wide variety of uses, the majority (81%) of which are packaging applications (23% 
food packaging, 41% non- food packaging films, and sacks and bags used for packaging). The amount of film 
packaging consumed is expected to equal the amount of packaging requiring collection, sorting and recycling within 
the same year, because of the short lifetime of film packaging. In 2018, ~1.8 million tonnes of the 2.7 million tonnes 
of PE flexible films sent for recycling were sent to recycler s within the EU (with an addition of 0.5 million tonnes 
production scrap). The total input of PE flexible films to EU recyclers was therefore 2.2 –2.3 million tonnes. The 
average yield of recyclate from post -consumer PE flexible films within the EU is ~ 70% of input, suggesting ~ 1.8 
million tonnes of recyclate output was produced in the EU (1.3 million tonnes from post-consumer flexible films and 
0.5 million tonnes from production scrap).106  
The PE film product sector could incorporate 36% recycled content overall. In the EU, demand for PE could require 
3.6–5 million tonnes of PE recyclate by 2030 compared to only 1.8 million tonnes in 2018. Due to high levels of non-
PE films (PP films, multi-layers) in household waste, output yields are similarly low at ~50%.107  
The largest end -use market for flexible recyclate is  non-food film. The  applications of recycled flexible films are 
limited by quality (primarily the colour, additives and odour ). An economically viable business model for higher 
quality, light -coloured output from household films is needed, in order to develop  a product that meets the 
requirements of the largest non -food flexible film sectors, aiming  to displace virgin raw material . In contrast, PE 
recyclates are not used in flexible food packaging even though food packaging is one of the largest markets for PE. 
This reflects both policy and R&D gaps, which need to be tackled simultaneously by policymakers and industry, to 
ensure that larger quantities of collected films can be processed into higher -quality recycl ate for the large -scale 
manufacture of films. CIRCULAR FoodPack will help to fill in these gaps by increasing the recycling output yield 
for PE rich flexible films to >90% referring to current SBS technologies and providing food-grade PE PCR with 99% 
purity referring to new TBS approach (SO1), creating a new market segment worth more than €5 billion within the 
next 10 years (assuming an average PE PCR cost of €1/kg). To achieve this goal, we need the market pull of the large 
companies in CIRCULAR FoodPack (NESTLE , AMCOR) and the EAB members (CEFLEX, FPE, IVLV, ZLV, 
STEINERT, ISWA, PRE), especially the leveraging effect of the associations and networks. These will help to 
motivate companies outside CIRCULAR FoodPack to adopt our technologies, which include novel technologies for 
the sorting, recycling, material and converting industries. CIRCULAR FoodPack will provide continual 
improvements in innovative packaging design, solv ing recyclability challenges, and opening the potential for step 
changes in how collection, sorting and recycling is optimised for a circular economy. 
 
Identification of key results and preliminary business plan 
The highly challenging overall target of CFP, i.e. circularity of multi -layered food packaging, will only succeed if 
the major sorting and recycling technologies as well as packaging designs are implemented in the market jointly. 
However, each single building block of our innovative value chain has a great potential to support current market 
demands for higher qualities and yields of PCR polymers and better recyclable food and HPC packaging. Thus, the  
expected key exploitable results of each partners prepared during the proposal phase are described in Table 10. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
100 Statista, 2018. Distribution of plastics demand in Europe in 2018, by country.  
101 https://www.woodmac.com/press-releases/Europes-flexible-packaging-market-will-be-worth-over-16-billion-by-2023/ 
102 Flexible Packaging Europe, 2018: Strong demand for flexible packaging industry in Europe (/files/FPE/pressreleases/FPE-MarketOutlook2018-GB.pdf) 
103 Mordor trends, 2019. Green Packaging Market - Growth, Trends, and Forecast (2025). mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/green-packaging-market 
104 FoodDrinkEurope 2019: Data & Trends of the European Food and Drink Industry 2019.  
105 Research and Markets, 2020. Global Personal Care Packaging Industry. (/0/en/Global-Personal-Care-Packaging-Industry.html) 
106 PRE market expert. 
107 Based on market expert information and the ratio of PE to other materials in food packaging, Axion Consulting (2016) Reflex Project Summary Report. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 41 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
Table 10: CircularFoodPack key exploitable results. 
All industrial partners expect to achieve significant increases in knowledge, capacity building and also in financial 
benefits from the exploitation of project results by increasing their direct sales or market share, or by savings in 
WP KER Owner(s) Envisaged IPR Type of exploitation Target end-users Timetable 
2 
Tracers for sorting 
food, and non-food 
packaging waste (TBS) 
KIT, POLY 11 existing pat-
ents and trade 
secrets, potent. 
new patent appl.   
Commercialisation Tracers: packaging 
manufacturers; TBS 
equipment: utilities, 
sorting factories 
3 years 
after the 
project 
2 
Sensor based 
specification (SBS) 
IRIS Trade secret; two 
patents under 
assessment 
Commercialisation, 
consultancy services, 
licensing 
Waste managers: 
Sorters, photonics 
solution providers  
3–4 years 
after the 
project 
3 
Conditions for 
recovering different 
fractions using the 
CreaSolv® process  
Fraunhofer 5 existing pat-
ents and trade 
secrets, potent. 
new patent appl. 
Know-how transfer and 
licensing to new 
companies; services for 
adjusted process for 
new materials.  
Recyclers, converter, 
virgin polymer 
producers, end users, 
waste managers 
At end of 
the project  
3 
Insight in application 
range of de-inking 
procedures. Design for 
delamination and de-
inking. De-inking as 
pre-treatment. 
UGENT (Existing) patents 
and confidential 
know-how 
Know-how transfer and 
licensing to new 
companies; services for 
adjusted process for 
new materials. 
Recyclers, converters 
to recycle production 
scrap, end users, waste 
managers, polymer 
and ink producers 
3 years 
after the 
project 
3 
New recycling 
technology to remove 
odour from plastic 
using infrared 
technology. 
KREYEN Patent under 
assessment, and a 
novel patent 
Commercialisation of 
odour removal process 
Recyclers, original 
equipment 
manufacturer (OEM), 
extruder 
manufacturers 
3 years 
after the 
project 
3 
Inks with tracers for 
deinking, delamination 
primers&coatings for 
barrier layers 
SIEGWERK Trade secrets, 
patents 
Commercialisation Converters, recyclers 3 years 
after the 
project 
4 
Migration models, test 
methodologies for 
design of functional 
barriers  
Fraunhofer Methodology 
(models and 
analytics) 
developments 
owner 
Analytical services of 
novel migration tests  
Customers from the 
industry, packaging 
companies, material 
suppliers, converters 
At the end 
of project  
5 
Design rules for 
recyclable packaging 
structures 
Fraunhofer Existing barrier 
patent, additional 
patents, 
confidential 
know-how. 
New research projects, 
know-how transfer and 
licencing to companies 
aiming at researching 
for these new materials  
Co-packers, packaging 
material producers 
from Germany, 
Europe, USA and 
Asia. 
At the end 
of the 
project  
5 
Multi-layer films and 
packaging with 
recycled PE (PE PCR) 
AMCOR-K 
AMCOR-G 
Design patents 
on Polyolefine-
PCR/SiOx 
packaging 
Production of said 
packaging at industrial 
scale, protecting these 
new developments 
from direct 
competition/licensing 
the IP when 
strategically opportune.  
Fast-moving 
consumer goods 
(FMCGs), co-packers 
and convertors 
At the end 
of the 
project.  
6 Sortable packages with 
PCRs 
NESTLE Patents/use of IP Commercialisation Consumer 1 year after 
project 
7 
Results of LCA and 
LCC 
UGENT Methodology 
belongs to 
UGENT 
Scientific 
communication in open 
access journals, 
services to companies 
Companies spanning 
the value chain, 
government 
Directly at 
the end of 
the project 
8 
Report on market data 
and marketing 
prospects 
ECOZEPT  Author rights Converters, food 
industry, retailers, 
policy makers 
At the end 
of the 
project. 
8 
Business and 
exploitation plan 
NTUA Confidential 
know-how 
Services for companies 
that implement 
envisaged technologies 
in commercial scale 
Recyclers, converters 
to recycle production 
scrap, end users, waste 
managers 
At the end 
of the 
project. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 42 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
materials and energy reflecting the future use of PCRs. The TRL will reach 5–6 by the end of the project . The 
industrial companies will see an increase in turnover after ~5 years. Revenues mainly depend on the final quality of 
PE PCR and the willingness of customers to cover the cost and eventually pay a premium for PE PCR (see Section 
2.1.3). During the proposal stage, each partner has communicated their exploitation expectations in line with their 
business activity and positioning along the value chain (Table 11).  
Table 11: Summary of exploitation intentions of the CircularFoodPack partners. 
No. Partner Core business Intention for use of project results 
1 Fraunhofer Research and 
development 
At least two technical papers and three industrial press articles. New knowledge about 
recyclable multi-layer structures with PCRs for food packaging, recycling technologies, 
migration models and analytics will be shared with companies and trans lated into 
industrial applications. Knowledge will be also leveraged to generate additional  
complementary research projects. 
2 BayFOR Consulting, 
projects 
New partnerships, new customer segment s, greater visibility in Europe to promote EU 
projects and encourage RTOs, SMEs, and industry to participate in EU activities. 
3&4 AMCOR-K 
AMCOR-G 
Flexible 
packaging 
New food-grade packaging solutions that meet new regulations and requirements, further 
differentiating ourselves in the food packaging market. 
5 UGENT Research and 
teaching 
Spin-offs, licensing, research projects, services to industry. Exploitation of the LCSA 
results via further research projects and services offered to  the consortium partners and 
other companies. The recycling technologies fit with our IP portfolio (patents, databases, 
software), which is commercialised via industrial collaborations using an open innovation 
approach. The patents are commercialised via a licensing strategy.  
6 IRIS Photonics and 
digitisation 
HSI-NIR products are already commercialised. We will use established B2B channels, 
distributors, and OEM channels. The digital tool will be offered as part  of our digital 
solutions portfolio and licensed or commercialised with ad hoc  adaptations (6–12 
monitoring devices in 4 post-project years; projected sales of €500,000–€1.12 million). 
7 POLY 
Tracers, TBS 
detection 
equipment and 
sorting 
machinery 
Increase in sales volume and global expansion of products. Further c ooperation with 
larger industry players and/or strategic investors. We will continue to manufacture the 
markers but will use new knowledge to continue R&D on optical detection an d sorting 
machines. TBS could achieve efficient, reliable sorting into ~40 well-specified packaging 
waste fractions at a total sorting cost (including tracer) of ~ €200/tonne of input waste , 
valorising ~ 150 million tonne s of plastic packaging that requires better sorting . The 
budget for a good sorting service is at least € 200/tonne, bringing the global market 
potential to at least €30 billion/year as part of a circular plastic economy. We  could also 
liaise with a large utility and offer sorting as a service,  especially in countries without 
sorting and recycling infrastructure. We predict three digit sales levels and the need for a 
substantial number of high-quality jobs. 
8 KREYEN 
Equipment 
manufacturer  
(deodourization) 
Entering a new market segment (odour removal from plastic). An infrared dryer costs 
€250,000–300,000 for a 1000 kg/h plant. We develop, design and manufacture products 
on location. If there is a market for odour removal from plastic, and the process is 
successful, we will publicise and market this through our network, contacts in the 
recycling market, OEM extruder manufacturers, trade fairs and congresses.  
9 KIT Research and 
development 
Novel patents, spin-offs, licensing, research projects and services to industry. Novel NIR-
emitting tracers that are ideally compatible with existing NIR plastic machines will be 
patented and then licensed. Target end-users include tracer-based sorting companies. We 
estimate that a  patent application can be lodged in year 3 of the project  followed by 
scientific publications to strengthen future grant applications. The development and 
licensing of new patent-protected luminescent markers for plastic sorting will provide an 
additional budget to strengthen the quality of education and research infrastructure . We 
will recruit PhD students and postdoctoral researchers who will contribute to the 
economic prosperity of the European and global communities. 
10 NESTLE 
Food company, 
end user for 
food packaging, 
brand owner 
Results from the safety evaluation published and made available to the EC and EFSA for 
future guidance in the recycling of polyolefins. We envision p ress releases related to the 
introduction of these laminates with recycled content. NESTL E expects to reduce its use 
of virgin plastics  by de veloping innovative packaging solutions containing recycled 
content. Introducing these laminates earlier than competitors may give a competitive 
advantage. 
11 SIEGWERK 
Ink 
manufacturer, 
printing 
Knowledge concerning the formulation of primers and coatings  yet to reach the market  
and the commercialisation of these products to generate licensing revenue from the IP. A 
new series of inks and coatings containing TBS markers will be developed , as well as 
primers and coatings to protect the barrier layers , and to facilitate de -inking and 
delamination. These new product range s have a strong market potential given the 
addressable market of corresponding packaging materials in Europe. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 43 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
A preliminary business model canvas (Table 12) has already been developed to highlight market potential. It will 
be developed and regularly updated within the PDEC  to keep the focus on most relevant exploitable results for all 
project partners. 
 
Table 12: Preliminary business model canvas foreseen to be applied to each key exploitable result. 
Preliminary business model canvas 
Key partners Material producers, film producers, packaging converters, waste management bodies, plastics 
recyclers, sorting technology providers, plastics machinery manufacturers, composites 
manufacturers, R&D partners, strategic alliance between partners, dealers and distributors, joint 
ventures.  
Key activities Novel material design, recycling processes, sorting technology integration, networking with 
customers, value chain management, sales and distribution, IPR and exploitation management of 
technologies. 
Key resources 
 
Experience in waste collection, sorting, processing (pre-treatment, mechanical and solvent-based 
recycling), package production, end-users, software and hardware, IPR, human and financial 
resources.  
Value 
propositions 
 
 
Consumers perceive environmentally-friendly packaging positively and are willing to pay more. 
Innovations will be perceived as an added-value product assuming that consumers are clearly 
informed that the packaging consists of recycled materials and can therefore replace virgin plastics. 
We will empirically determine how consumers and industrial operators evaluate the innovations and 
whether an added value is actually perceived. This will indicate the most effective messages for 
communication to consumer groups also including the results of LCA. 
Customers 
Large multinational food companies are becoming more committed to setting up their own plastic 
strategies (e.g. to use only recyclable or reusable plastics). Consequently, a high market potential 
can be assumed. The identification of target customers will be verified empirically through 
interviews with experts and consumers, and the results will be incorporated into the development of 
the innovations. 
Customer 
relationships 
During planned interviews with packaging experts, the most effective measures will be identified to 
establish long-term relationships between suppliers of project innovations and their customers. We 
will determine how users can be best supported in adopting the new technologies. 
Channels 
 
The exploitation plan will give insights into the most suitable logistics and organisation of the value 
chain to ensure the successful introduction of project innovations onto the market. These results will 
be based on feedback from experts representing the entire packaging value chain, from brand 
owners and retailers, to sorting and recycling companies. 
Cost structure 
 
Purchasing all needed raw materials and components, IPR protection, patents, sales management 
and distribution costs, upgrading and modification of existing facilities. 
Revenue streams 
 
 
The outcome of the exploitation plan based on the incorporation of packaging experts’ and 
consumers’ feedback will determine suitable pricing strategies for the CIRCULAR FoodPack 
innovations. 
12 ECOZEPT 
Consulting, 
knowledge 
transfer 
Providing services based on the results of market research and SWOT analysis. Target 
groups: packaging makers and converters, food industry, retailers, policymakers. 
Development of new international partnerships and networks. 
13 SUEZ 
Waste 
management: 
collection, 
sorting and 
recycling of 
plastic 
IP covering sorting and recycling of post-consumer plastic packaging waste, and 
exploitation via  licensing. Analysis of the composition of post-consumer flexible 
packaging waste in different EU countries will help to improve current sorting steps and 
to develop new sorting strategies leading to an increase in  sorting and recycling rates. 
High-quality recyclates with virgin -like properties. Our  operation of  more than 150 
sorting plants in Europe and worldwide implementation will allow us to harness TBS and 
SBS technologies to sort more plastic waste from packaging and to select food packaging 
answering the first requirement for food-grade PCRs. Increasing the production of high-
quality PCRs in Europe requires new and improved de-inking and washing technologies 
for packaging. The technologies developed in this project will be of interest to recyclers  
and will be welcomed at recycling plants. A tangible action would be the design and 
implementation of a prototype of mechanical recycling for PE flexible packaging at a 
current recycling plant.  
14 NTUA Research and 
teaching 
Cooperation with engineering partners and stakeholders following commercialisation, 
new partnerships, further EU research projects, networking, creation of new sectors of 
economic and technological activities reflecting  the combination of know -how from 
various industrial sectors and their innovation systems.  
15 UM Research and 
teaching 
Transfer of project results to the BSc Circular Engineering. 
Research projects, services to industry. 

 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 44 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
SWOT analysis for CIRCULAR FoodPack 
In order to enhance the strengths of the project, mitigate weaknesses, seize opportunities  and neutralise threats, we 
will conduct a thorough SWOT plus A (action) analysis in Task 8.1 supported by input from multi-stage interviews 
with experts and consumers. A preliminary version is presented in Table 13, will be periodically revised and finalised 
as D8.7. 
Table 13: SWOT analysis for CircularFoodPack 
 
2.2.3 Strategy for knowledge management and protection (IPR) 
Background IP brought into the project by the partners is summarised in Table 14. The Project Steering Committee 
(PSC) will oversee the dissemination and IPR policy by taking on the following responsibilities: 
• Supervise access to background IP and determine which background IP is essential for the project. 
• Adjudicate on ownership of foreground IP. Each partner will make an application for ownership and this claim 
will be distributed to all confidentiality -bound partners in case of any counterclaim. Resolutions  include joint 
ownership agreed between partners with exploitation rights regulated by the PSC, or sole ownership granted to 
the partners most likely to exploit results and free research licenses distributed to other relevant partners. 
• Decide which information may be published a nd which should be withheld pending protection or exploitation. 
This will ensure that results are managed in a way that ensures the most suitable exploitation pathway. 
• Approve further grant applications where background IP or results (foreground IP) are to be used. This will ensure 
no use without the owner ’s permission. All partners will sign a Consortium Agreement (CA) before the Grant 
Signature, which will include detailed procedures for IP ownership and conditions of access for both academic 
and industry partners, thus ensuring optimal cooperation. The CA will be based on the DESCA model.  
Table 14: Background IP and expertise brought in by project partners (AMCOR-K and AMCOR-G are considered, under AMCOR). 
 Helpful to achieving the objective Harmful to achieving the objective 
Internal origin 
(attributes of the system) Strengths 
• Ability to separate food and non-food plastic waste during 
sorting by TBS  
• CreaSolv® and mechanical recycling process cascades enabling 
sufficient reduction of contaminants in EoL packaging waste 
• Novel design of packaging laminates with PCRs to ensure a 
closed loop circular economy 
• Creating new value chains based on recycled polymers, 
targeting the food packaging market  
Weaknesses 
• Input waste stream is rather mixed and 
contains multiple foreign materials 
making cleaning highly challenging 
• Close co-operation is required between 
parties in the value chain. 
External origin 
(attributes of the environment) Opportunities 
• Synergistic collaboration among partners with complementary 
skills, ultimately achieving integrated processes along the whole 
value chain 
• Legislation is becoming more demanding in terms of recycling 
quotas  
• No direct competition as we tap into currently non-recyclable 
materials and utilisation in food packaging  
• Required technologies and know-how available in the 
consortium  
• Extremely high market potential  
Threats 
• Regulatory approval processes; strict 
regulation/legislation framework for 
FCMs 
• Resistance to change in well-established 
procedures of waste management 
• Difficulty to position vs virgin 
polymers, if value chain does not value 
environmental aspects, leading to mere 
price competition making market entry 
difficult 
No. Partner Background 
1 Fraunhofer 1) Recycling of ABS, PS, PA, PBT, PET, LDPE, HDPE, PP, PVC, EPS and other polymers from plastic 
waste using CreaSolv® solvents. Recovery of these polymers, removal of soluble and insoluble 
contaminants from polymer solutions. Scalable hydrogenation processes. 
2) Compliance and migration testing, migration modelling, analytical chemistry 
3) Development and characterisation of high-barrier materials for food and non-food applications. 
2 BayFOR Offers a broad array of professional services in the fields of management, consulting, networking, PR and 
administration to entities applying for and managing EU grants  (Horizon 2020) and provides profound 
knowledge in the areas of circular economy and stakeholder engagement. 
3&4 AMCOR-K 
& 
AMCOR-G 
Flexible film convertor. AMCOR -G: industrial production of plastic flexible packaging, extrusion and 
conversion, PE, PP, film (co)extrusion (blown and cast) with EVOH and PA and laminating with PS, PET, 
aluminium, printing and slitting. AMCOR-K: electron beam evaporation process. 
5 UGENT 1) Delamination and de-inking technology for multi-layer packaging materials. 
2) Extensive experience in the context of LCSA  
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 45 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
2.2.4 Management of research data 
The CIRCULAR FoodPack project will participate in the Open Research Data (ORD) Pilot, which  is an extremely 
effective method for  disseminating scientific results and making them available to the public. Participation in the 
ORD Pilot will be based on the underlying principle ‘as open as possible, as closed as necessary’. A Data 
Management Plan (DMP) will be developed by month 6 (D1.3) and updated at the end of the pro ject. CIRCULAR 
FoodPack partners will implement the  DMP according to FAIR ( Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and 
Reusability) principles, taking into account exploitation activities dr iven by the industry partners. The DMP will 
contain all necessary information regarding the handling of research data , including the definition of data that will 
be shared openly or restricted, types of collected and processed data, methods and standards applied to data generation 
and processing, and information on how data will be stored, accessed and analysed during and after the project. In 
line with the DMP, the Coordinator will ensure that project data are deposited in a trustworthy digital repository, 
such as Zenodo. Information concerning the tools and instruments used to validate the results will also be provided 
and all open-access publications will be deposited on the project website.  
2.2.5 Communication activities 
Some dissemination activities can include communication and vice versa ( e.g., trade fairs) . Our communication 
strategy and its objectives are therefore included in the Plan for Dissemination and Exploitation of Results and 
Communication Activities (PDEC; D8.2). The PDEC is a comprehensive plan that comprises the dissemination, 
exploitation and communication activities of CIRCULAR FoodPack and the communication strategy is described in 
detail in Section 2.2.1.  
6 IRIS NIR devices for in -line monitoring, also based on hyperspectral imaging (HSI) in SWIR region; 
chemometric machine learning modelling , data mining for process optimisation. Two  patents are under 
assessment covering data-driven machine learning techniques for quality and process optimisation. 
7 POLY 
Develop, optimise, synthesise and process fluorescent particles (11 patents ; Section 1.4). A new patent 
under assessment covering a one-step sorting procedure of packaging waste using TBS. Optical physics, 
measurement techniques, electronics, automatio n, machine building to develop and manufacture new 
detection systems, sorting machines and sorting lines, and to adopt existing NIR sorting machines together 
with the manufacturers of these machines.  
8 KREYEN Background on deodourization process (based on infrared dryer), patent in registration stage. 
9 KIT 
Synthesis and optical characterisation of luminescent lanthanide-based materials; synthesis of luminescent 
materials with exceptionally high luminescence efficiency (PLQY –  photoluminescence quantum yield)  
using a pproaches such as solid -state and hydrothermal chemical processes; synthetic expertise; 
measurement of absolute PLQY in single crystals; microcrystalline powders and nanocrystalline materials; 
knowledge for the correct evaluation of the performance and applicability of luminescent markers.  
10 NESTLE 
Analytical chemistry (LC -HRMS/GC-HRMS); toxicological assessments (including biological assays); 
risk assessment of (recycled) packaging materials; v arious packaging materials for all food types; 
development of laminates for most food types; new knowledge gained from  the performance of recycled 
polyolefins and to a limited extend the manufacturing of pouches with recycled content. As the biggest 
food company, NESTLE packages foods in pouches and has  all facilities to perform shelf life studies and 
investigations of the barrier properties of packaging materials. 
11 SIEGWERK 
Formulation know-how for all kind of inks (solvent-based and aqueous, UV) for packaging structures and 
substrates reflecting the demand from the packaging market, delivered by more than 60, globally distributed 
production and blending sites. Experience in de -inking and delamination technology and the formulation 
of primers, inks and coatings to ensure proper deinking and delamination during recycling. 
12 ECOZEPT 
Sustainable agro -food markets ; m arket intelligence systems and marketing approaches for niche and 
innovative markets in the agro -food industry and circular economy (organic products, regional, typical 
products, sustainable packaging). Practical insights in value -creating supply chains, contribution by 
combining practitioners’ views with analytical approaches for understanding sustainable agro -food value 
chains and the behaviour of economic actors, from farmers to consumers. 
13 SUEZ 
Waste management activities in Europe, including collection, sorting (with more than 150 sorting plants) 
and recycling of plastic waste ( nine recycling plants in EU). Sampling and characterisation methods 
dedicated to waste streams and methods to assess the operational performance of process lines.  
14 NTUA 
Exploration of socioeconomic and development effects of technology and innovation, focusing on the 
analysis of business strategies and related public policies at national and EU levels; promotion of innovative 
and environmental ly friendly technologies and e nergy saving measures; qualitative (e.g. case studies, 
panels of industry experts/academics/policymakers to study specific value chains and innovative processes 
and business activities) and quantitative techniques (e.g. multivariate statistical analysis, social network 
analysis) and empirical methods (e.g. large-scale surveys). 
15 UM 
RQ, a ‘quality factor’ tool that predicts the quality of mixed recycled polymers in terms of the composition 
and miscibility (based in interfacial tension) of the components. Polymer science for mechanical recycling 
of plastics. 
 
[101003806] [CIRCULAR FoodPack] - Part B  [Page 46 of 100] 
Circular packaging for direct food contact applications 
Research & Innovation Action addressing CE-SC5-24-2020 
3. Implementation