2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact 
2.1.1 FREEME Key Impact Pathways 
The FreeMe project is dealing with a real industrial need in the field of surface finishing and more specifically in 
the Plating on Plastics process: The elimination of use of chromic acid and palladium. The project objectives are in 
full accordance with expected outcome of the project that is the development of new metal coating systems produced 
without the use of toxic substances (i.e. Cr 6+) and PGMs (i.e. Pd). It is important to state that heavy metals or other 
toxicants release in the environment is mainly happened from the plating installations where these compounds are 
in a dissolved state (i.e. ions) through wastewater and sludges, rather than from the coatings, which are in a solid 
stable state, of the plated objects. [ 43] More specifically, the FreeMe project’s results will contribute towards the 
main expected outcome and impact set by the EC as follow: 
 
Safe & Sustainable by Design approach 
FreeMe will develop two alternative coating solutions for PoP applications. As mentioned, the current practice is 
based on the use of chromic acid (Cr 6+) and Pd. The new technologies will provide the surface finishing industry 
with non-toxic processes, free of the use of critical raw materials (i.e. Palladium) enhancing thus the safety in the 
occupational environment and the environment as well as the overall resilience and sustainability of the process. Both 
technologies are based on REACH compliant chemicals and no listed compounds (i.e. in the list of SVCH)  will be 
utilized. For example, formulation of  new UV -curable resins utilizing bio-based chemical platforms  (i.e. 
isosorbide and itaconic acid) will take place instead of the use the Bisphenol -A compound that is recognized as a 
toxic for reproduction an d endocrine-disrupting substance that may cause adverse effects to people's health and to 
the environment and is listed in SVCH. Additional, mixtures of common industrial used acids or alkali will be used 
in the second path instead of the chromic acid. Elimination of Cr 6+ from the PoP will be a significant innovation 
towards safer and more sustainable surface finishing industry.  
Scale: The global market of chromic acid was estimated at ~600 million € during 2020, with ~8% to be used in 
plastic etching processes. [44] Based on the CrO3 price (i.e. 22€/kg) this is translated to ~2.100 tones per year. Europe 
has a share of ~25%, thus, 525 tones of Chromic acid are consumed in Europe annually for PoP purposes.  
Significance: Reduction of chromic acid etching process usage will have a tremendous impact on the PoP industry 
in terms of environmental and occupational health issues. Cr6+ has been proven to be a toxic and carcinogenic 
compound affecting not only the plating workers but also the citizens around the plating plants (i.e. the famous real 
case of Erin Brockovich against the Pacific Gas & Electric Company that operated chromic acid processes). Exposure 
to Cr6+ results in excess risk of lung or other type of cancers [45] Wide adoption of SSBD technologies of FreeMe 
will significantly reduce such incidents in the European PoP in the long term, targeting in zero deaths after 30 years. 
 
New Materials Development with equal or enhance properties compared to SoA 
The POP is the main technology that can provide decorative and functional finish ing in plastic surfaces. Practically 
most POP applications concern decorative finishes, while a small part is for engineering purposes in which properties 
such as hardness, wear and corrosion resistance or EMI shielding. In all the cases, of primary importance is the  
excellent adhesion of the electroless coating in the surface of the plastic . Low adhesion will lead to pre -mature 
failure of the component in all cases. Thus, all studies towards the direction of novel PoP technologies focuses mainly 
on this property. The FreeMe will provide technologies that will have superior adhesion as well as other benefits.  
In the case of s prayable resins, containing Ni salts free reactive -COOH groups that acts as anchoring groups to 
plastic surfaces enhancing thus the adhesion of the resin to the substrate  will be inserted. In the following steps the 
activation of Ni sites and the electroless plating (formation of Ni-P layer) will take place. The adhesion of the latter 
layer is of crucial importance for the coa ting’s performance. Its excellent adhesion is ensured based on the 
distribution of the Ni nuclei that are mechanically entrapped in the resin matrix. Another benefit of the proposed 
technology is that PoP becomes a substrate-independent process in terms that after the deposition of the resin thin 
film in the substrate surface, the following steps involve the sprayed resin  and not the subst rate. This could be of 
extremely high industrial importance as it can be the basis for metallization of various types of surfaces . On the 
other hand, the adhesion of the coatings prepared through the green etching process is expected to as effective as the  
current chromic acid etching route , based on double mechanism. At micro level mechanical interlocking of the 
metal film on the etched polymer surface takes place, while at molecular level chemical forces (i.e. Van der Waals 
attraction of valence bonds of metal with polar groups of plastic resulted from the etched solution) are developed.  
Scale: The global market for Plating on Plastics was estimated to be ~580 million € (2020) while the Europe 
share was ~190 million €. There is a strong increasing demand for the technology as it combines lightweight, low 
cost and high aesthetic, especially in applications in automotive and aerospace industry, where the reduction of weight 
 
43 V. Vhahangwele, “Environmental Contamination of Heavy Metals”, 2017, DOI:10.5772/intechopen.76082 
44 «Global Chromic Acid sales market report 2020”, 360 Research Reports, 2020   
45 “Final Report for Hexevalent Chromium”, ECHA/2011/01-SR-11, November 2013 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [19 of 44] 
has multiple beneficial impacts (i.e. reduction of fuel consumption, increased autonomy of electric cars etc). 
Significance: The participation of three major large enterprises in the FreeMe proj ect provide a high innovation 
potential for the adoption of technology in the market. Stellantis (CRF) is the the sixth -largest automaker in the 
world having in its portfolio brands such as Fiat, Jeep, Alfa Romeo, Opel, Citroen, Maserati etc, being first in Europe 
with 854.000 cars registered during the first quarter of 2021. Arcelik is active in more than 100 countries worldwide 
operating 15 production plants in Europe, Asia and Africa offering products under its own brand names (i.e. Beko, 
Grundig, Artic etc) or acting as a Tier 1 for other brands for hundreds of millions of spare parts. Finally, Israel 
Aerospace Industry operates in a high niche market, developing technologies for the aerospace industry.  
 
Materials Modelling 
FreeMe activities in the modelling area are innovative especially regarding the usage of multi -scale modelling and 
simulation to the overall spray application of resins for supporting the metallic plating of the plastic materials. The 
usage of a multi-scale approach in such multi-step processes is challenging and aligned with the goals of the European 
Material Modelling Council (EMMC). The need for improved linking and coupling of models to describe all relevant 
phenomena is already raised by the EMMC and is addressed in FreeMe by the proper specification of the modelling 
and simulation needs and the interfaces between the different scale activities. This will be reinforced by adopting the 
MODA (MOdelling DAta generalisation) to reach a standardised descript ion of the required materials models and 
linked activities, and by also adopting the European Materials Modelling Ontology (EMMO) for the project activities 
definition. This will, in parallel, maximise the impact of the modelling activities beyond the proj ect scope, by 
allowing future usage and linking of the developed models, potentially within the EMMC targeted European 
Marketplace. The usage of AI -based surrogate models to facilitate the interlinkage of models with the application 
allows it, is also a relevant innovation that can find applications in many other material-modelling related activities. 
Scale: The field of materials modelling spans across a wide range of disciplines, i.e. computational chemistry, 
continuum mechanics, thermodynamics etc. A rec ent study, contacted by the EMMC -CSA and MarketPlace EC 
funded projects, resulted that the estimated materials modelling market size is 340 million €. [46]  
Significance: Modelling is widely used to enhance research efficiency, contributing to reduction of  costs and time 
by identifying alternative, more cost -effective materials, and processes. Based on statistic data [ 47] it is estimated 
that the cost saving utilizing targeted materials modelling in the framework of FreeMe project (i.e. concerning the 
development of sprayable resins and the etching process for increasing adhesion) is ~ 60% of the budget allocated in 
WP3 and WP4, meaning ~1.000.000€ for the duration of the project.  
 
Market replication of new technologies 
The EC defines the meaning of market replication Innovation Actions as those aiming to support innovative advancements 
to reach the market after successful demonstration but not application/deployment. This is due to several obstacles that can 
be encountered (see next subsection). Therefore, it is often highly beneficial to make use of tools and practices that facilitate 
the market replication, or, in other words, that help innovation make it in the market. FreeMe is designed to utilize them, 
aiming to maximize its impact and boost the market uptake of its results. The consortium’s work in SSBD will produce not 
only sets of criteria, guides and safe methodologies for the processes of focus, but also standardization results, via integration 
of SSBD findings into protocols and guidelines, useful for derivative and relevant works. Those results will essentially be 
combined within a bigger set of guidelines and good practices that will result from the project and will constitute one of its 
main outcomes. They will be widely communicated but also disseminated, targeting policymakers and stakeholders of the 
field, aiming for the integration of these protocols and good practices into cluster efforts, widely used by field-related 
stakeholders. In addition, FreeMe will develop a DST, with the aim of demonstrating the technologies of the project, with the 
systematic integration of SSBD considerations. This means the DST will give interested users -that will not have to be by any 
means programming experts- the opportunity to simulate virtually their plating production lines, examining their optimal 
selection and/or re-engineering according to FreeMe’s results, while, automatically, the tool will be taking into consideration 
in its mathematical computations all SSBD aspects  (sustainability, recyclability, safety, cost) and including those 
considerations in the results. The tool will be highly customizable, aiming to offer high potential for future works to build 
upon it adding derivative or relevant technologies. Moreover, FreeMe is also employing additional, more traditional 
demonstration and facilitation of technology adoption measures like training activities and modules. Workshops and training 
activities will be organized within the project, with all this material remaining public after the project’s completion, aiming 
to simplify workforce upskilling for interested technology users (particularly targeting SMEs). All the above target to support 
market replication of FreeMe, in strong connection with the project’s exploitation and business planning.  
Scale: According to recent studies, [ 48] around the European surface finishing industry employs about 900,000 
 
46 G. Goldbeck et.al., “Materials Modelling Software Market”, 2019 
47 G. Goldbeck, C.Court, “The economic impact of materials modelling”, EMMC 2016  
48 P. Leisner, C. Larson, L.P. Nielsen, S. Müller, W. Hansal, J.-C. Puippe & A. Zielonka (2020) Global competitiveness of 
European surface technology. Part 1: competitiveness and the relationship between European manufacturing and surface  
finishing sectors, Transactions of the IMF, 98:6, 279-287 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [20 of 44] 
people recording an 3.6% average growth rate. Almost one third of it is done in the form of subcontracting. And with 
the majority of enterprises being under 10 employees small. At the same time, data indicates a clear correlation 
between company size and automation, resulting to smaller companies having very law automation rating. 
Significance: FreeMe is aiming to surpass  socio-economic barriers inhibiting innovation uptake by SMEs, by 
promoting its market replicability tools in the market. Easy to use guidelines and standardization protocols, combined 
with free training modules will support the adoption of FreeMe’s good p ractices by small enterprises looking for a 
competitive edge. The DST will act as an enabling platform to build on and further develop, for automation and 
digitalization even by non -experts and without requiring large investments. FreeMe’s business plannin g will 
specifically target SMEs in the field and aim to offer SSBD adoption and upskilling, while supporting the 
achievement of sustainable economic and technological advancements.  
 
FreeMe contribution to the wider, long-term impacts as set by the destination 
FreeMe project’s result will have a contribution in the wider impact set by the EC in a different lever as follow: 
✓ Resilient, sustainable and secure (critical) raw materials value chains for EU industrial ecosystems, in support 
of the twin green and digital transformations. 
FreeMe project will have a significant contribution towards this impact. FreeMe targets to eliminate the use of Cr 6+ 
substance from PoP processes, moving to greener technologies in the surface finishing industry. Of similar 
importance is the target for replacement of Pd used as activator (catalyst) during the activation process, prior to the 
metallization step. Pd is a critical raw material and EC is depended on imports, mainly from Russia. Successful 
replacement of Pd will ensure the value chain and supply of materials for the EC sector.  
✓ New sustainable -by-design materials with enhanced functionalities and applications in a wide range of 
industrial processes and consumer products. 
PoP is an important sector for many industries, mostly for automotive, bus also for other sectors including consumers 
goods (i.e. home appliances, fashion etc). FreeMe will invest in materials modelling approach to enhance the most 
important property of coatings on plastic, that is the adhesion. 
✓ Leadership in producing materials that provide solutions for clean, toxic/pollutant free environment, 
decarbonising industry, and safeguarding civil infrastructures. 
Concerning this impact, FreeMe is also expected to have a major contribution. Surface finishing industry is an 
important sector for the EC and the manufacturing industry. Specifically, PoP shows a significant growth for reasons 
already analysed in the previous paragraphs (i.e. lightweight of plastic products). By developing a green, toxic -free 
solution, EC plating sector will be favourably positions against competition from Asia (i.e. China, India). 
Additionally, elimination of Cr6+ usage will give a relief on society (i.e, plating workers, and neighbouring areas to 
plating facilities) leading to significant decrease of environmental pollution and cancer incidents.  
✓ Leadership in circular economy that strengthens cross-sectorial cooperation along the value chain and enable 
SMEs to transform their activities and business models. 
FreeMe will be developed as a technology harmonized with the circular economy concept, ensuring the recyclability 
of plated components with SoA technologies.  
✓ Increased adoption of key digital and enabling technologies in industrial value chains and strategi c sectors, 
paying particular attention to SMEs and start-ups. 
The advancements in materials modelling as well as the development of a Decision Support Tool for SSbD 
application of FreeMe technologies in the industry, including SME, will have a significant impact towards 
digitalization and faster adoption of technologies.  
 
2.1.2 Requirements & barriers and mitigation approach 
The adoption of a new technology is inextricably linked  with the environment in which it will be deployed. Thus, 
besides technological issues, political, economic, social, legal, and environmental factors are very important and 
should be thoroughly considered so as to achieve the maximum potential of exploitat ion of the results. In the 
following PESTLE analysis, the most important requirements and barriers related to these factors are mentioned. 
These are categorized either as positive (opportunities of the adoption of the FreeMe technologies) or negative 
(barriers that should be surpassed for the adoption of the technologies. 
 
Table 2.1: FREEME PESTEL analysis 
POSITIVE for achieving impact NEGATIVE for achieving impact 
Political 
European policies towards greener and sustainable 
industries (Green Deal) : The EC policy favors the 
development and adoption of new Green Technologies 
providing multiple opportunities for further upscaling 
and commercialization of the technology such as easier 
Strong advocacy from industrial lobbies to postpone the 
ban of Cr 6+ use: Large industrial consortia are putting 
pressure for extension of ECHA authorization for using 
hexavalent chromium. However, the main reason for 
this is that curren tly there is no vial economic and 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [21 of 44] 
access to funding, favorable regulatory framework.  
 
efficient technical solution. If FreeMe achieve its 
objectives, industry will adopt it as it will be attractive 
(REACH compliant, low cost and of high quality).    
Economic 
Increase demand for PoP, especially from automo tive 
and aerospace industry : PoP technology can provide 
properties of metals in the surface of lightweight 
plastics, making it extremely attractive ton sectors 
where reduction of weight is of crucial importance. The 
presence of two major companies in these sectors (CRF, 
IAI) in the consortium is indicative of this fact. 
Need for investements : FreeMe project will bring the 
technology to TRL 5. To further upscale it and enhance 
its robustness for industrial applications further 
investments will be needed. A s explained under the 
political factors, the favorable policies applied by the 
EC will allow easier access to funding both from public 
sources and private investements. 
Social 
Strong requirement for safe operational environment in 
the plating in dustry: Workers in the surface finishing 
industry have been suffered from exposure to highly 
toxic and carcinogenic Cr 6+. FreeMe technologies will 
relieve the industry from such substances as it is based 
on safer, REACH compliant chemicals. Thus, it is 
expected that it will have the social acceptance 
Public perception about environmental and health 
hazards risen from the surface finishing industry : This 
perception has been created due to several incidents 
related to polluted areas next to plating shops and severe 
negative impact in health of workers and inhabitants. 
Extensive communication activities will be taken in 
order to raise the awareness of public about FreeMe 
Technological 
Advances in Materials Modelling: It is remarkable that 
the introduction of AI modelling and advance 
simulation models have given an impetus to materials 
development leading to significant savings in resources 
(costs, effort and time). It is expected that the actions 
undertaken in the framework of FreeMe towards this 
direction will further facilitate the upscaling process. 
Competitive technologies to FreeMe: There are several 
competitive or emerging technologies for PoP as 
already mentioned in paragraph 1.1. However, most of 
them have a completely different approach compare to 
what is currently applied in the industry. FreeMe may 
have a higher lever of adopt ions as it will be based on 
present experience of surface finishing sector.  
Environmental 
FreeMe technologies is in accordance with trends for 
greener technologies : Thus, in general terms it is 
expected to have an overall beneficial impact. In order 
to enhance this, special focus will be given in the 
extension of baths lifetime as well as in the assessment 
of recyclability of coated objects so as FreeMe to be 
consider a real circular technology. 
Generation of wastes: Even though FreeMe is based on 
green technologies, as a wet -based technology, 
generates wastewater from the spent baths and rinsing 
processes. Since the main pre -treatment solutions used 
in the FreeMe process are non -toxic their treatment as 
wastes is relative easy a nd in accordance with SoA 
technologies for industrial treatment of acids and Alkali. 
Legal 
FreeMe is harmonized with the general regulatory 
framework (i.e. REACH, Directive 94/62/EC and 
Directive 2019/904 for plastic waste recycling 
compliance.  
There is no identified legal based negative aspect of the 
FreeMe technology