4. Personal Data Page
Does this activity involve processing of personal data? Yes No
Does this activity involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including 
use of preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)?
Yes No
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non-EU countries? Specify the type of 
personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU or from a non-EU 
country to another non-EU country? Specify the type of personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Does this activity involve the processing of personal data related to criminal convictions or 
offences?
Yes No
5. Animals Page
Does this activity involve animals? Yes No
6. Non-EU Countries Page
Will some of the activities be carried out in non-EU countries? Yes No
In case non-UE countries are involved, do the activities undertaken in these countries raise 
potential ethics issues? Yes No
It is planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Is it planned to import any material (other than data) from non-EU countries into the EU or 
from a non-EU country to another non-EU country? For data imports, see section 4. Yes No
Is it planned to export any material (other than data) from the EU to non-EU countries? For 
data exports, see section 4. Yes No
Does this activity involve low and/or lower middle income countries, (if yes, detail the benefit-
sharing actions planned in the self-assessment) Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the activity at risk? Yes No
7. Environment, Health and Safety Page
Administrative forms
Page 98 of 100
Proposal ID 101058699
Acronym FreeMe
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 23/09/2021 19:33
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants.(during the implementation of the activity or further to the 
use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
Does this activity deal with endangered fauna and/or flora / protected areas? Yes No
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to humans, 
including  those performing the activity.(during the implementation of the activity or further 
to the use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
8. Artificial Intelligence Page
Does this activity involve the development, deployment and/or use of Artificial Intelligence? (if 
yes, detail in the self-assessment whether that could raise ethical concerns related to human 
rights and values and detail how this will be addressed).
Yes No
9. Other Ethics Issues Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I will complete the 
ethics self-assessment as described in the guidelines How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Administrative forms
Page 99 of 100
Proposal ID 101058699
Acronym FreeMe
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 23/09/2021 19:33
Ethics Self-Assessment
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact
Explain in detail the identified issues in relation to: 
  - objectives of the activities (e.g. study of vulnerable populations, etc.) 
  - methodology (e.g. clinical trials, involvement of children, protection of personal data, etc.) 
  - the potential impact of the activities (e.g. environmental damage, stigmatisation of particular social groups, 
political or financial adverse consequences, misuse, etc.)
Remaining characters 4594
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations
Describe how the issue(s) identified in the ethics issues table above will be addressed in order to adhere to the ethical principles and 
what will be done to ensure that the activities are compliant with the EU/national legal and ethical requirements of the country or 
countries where the tasks are to be carried out. It is reminded that for activities performed in a non-EU countries, they should also be 
allowed in at least one EU Member State.
Remaining characters 5000
Administrative forms
Page 100 of 100
Proposal ID 101058699
Acronym FreeMe
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 23/09/2021 19:33
Security issues table
1. EU Classified Information (EUCI)2 Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials requiring protection against 
unauthorised disclosure (EUCI)? Yes No
Does this activity involve non-EU countries? Yes No
2. Misuse Page
Does this activity have the potential for misuse of results? Yes No
3. Other Security Issues Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials subject to national security restrictions? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
Are there any other security issues that should be taken into consideration? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
2According to the Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, “European Union 
classified information (EUCI) means any information or material designated by an EU security classification, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause varying 
degrees of prejudice to the interests of the European Union or of one or more of the Member States”. 
3Classified background information is information that is already classified by a country and/or international organisation and/or the EU and is going to be used by the 
project. In this case, the project must have in advance the authorisation from the originator of the classified information, which is the entity (EU institution, EU Member 
State, third state or international organisation) under whose authority the classified information has been generated. 
4EU classified foreground information is information (documents/deliverables/materials) planned to be generated by the project and that needs to be protected from 
unauthorised disclosure. The originator of the EUCI generated by the project is the European Commission.
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [1 of 44] 
Topic HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12: Safe- and sustainable-by-
design metallic coatings and engineered surface (RIA) 
 
Title Toxic Free metallization process for plastic surfaces  
Acronym FreeMe 
 
List of participants 
Participant No.  Participant organisation name Country Type 
1. (Coordinator) Gaser Ossido Duro srl – Gaser  IT SME 
2 Politecnico di Milano – PoliMi  IT Univ 
3 Creative Nano PC – Cnano  GR SME 
4 Aristotelio Panepistimio Thessalonikis – AUTH GR Univ 
5 Idener research and development agrupacion de inters 
economico – IDE  
ES SME 
6 Iris Technology Solutions, Sociedad Limitada – IRIS  ES SME 
7 University of Burgos – ICCRAM  ES Univ 
8 Exelisis PC – EXE  GR SME 
9 Innovacion Y Consulting Technologico de Levante S.L. – INC  ES SME 
10 Centro Ricerche FIAT SCPA – CRF IT LE 
11 Arcelic A.S. – ARC  TR LE 
12 Israel Aerospace Industty – IAI  IS LE 
  
1. Excellence