1.2 Methodology  
1.2.1 Concept idea 
There are hundreds of plating on plastics lines producing millions of chromium or other metals plated parts every 
day. The vast majority of these lines are using chemical processes based on chromic acid etching and subsequent Pd 
based catalysed deposition of electroless nickel or copper, technologies that have been developed and designed 
decades ago for a specific group of plastic substrates (e.g. ABS).  However, the plating on plastics  market has evolved 
and now includes a broader range of substrates  while huge increases in selective plating demand  is also observed. 
[11] As an example, biobased composite PLA reinforced with hemp or carob, is a promising alternative to ABS when 
it comes to 3D printing processes. [12] FreeMe aims to provide a holistic approach for PoP covering a range of 
plastic substrates (i.e. ABS, PET, PLA, nylon or UV printable Resins) 
The general concept of the FreeMe project  is presented in Figure 1.2. In the upper part a simplified SoA plating 
on plastic process is depicted. The main part of concern is the grey area, where the chromic acid etching and Pd 
based activation take place. The FreeMe aspires to replace this process sequence with safer and more sustainable 
technologies utilizing REACH compliant chemicals and at the same time, meeting the needs for excellent adhesion 
of coatings.  
 
10  
11 D. Wyaness, “Is it time to revisit your Plastic Metallizatio Process?”, Products and Finishing, August 2018 
12 M. Gali et.al, “A new generation of bio-composite thermoplastic filaments for a more sustainable design of parts manufactured by FDM”, 
Applied Sciences, August 2020 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [6 of 44] 
 
 
Figure 1.2: FreeMe concept 
 
1.2.2 FreeMe methodology and implementation phases 
Following the R&I concept presented in the previous paragraph, in the following the overall methodology is 
described with references in previous results of the partners, updated literature review and basic models and 
experimental design and assumptions considered in the project. In each part the main research challenges are analyzed 
and the projected activities to overcome these are presented. 
 
1.2.2.1  Safe & Sustainable by Design Strategy 
FREEME will  embrace the Safe Innovation Approach (SIA),  which encompasses the concepts of Safe and 
Sustainable by Design (SSbD) and Regulatory Preparedness (RP), to ensure that the whole R&D process of the new 
proposed PoP technologies follows a systemic approach. It will employ different tools (e.g., Life Cycle Sustainability 
Assessment, Safe by Design and Sustainability by Design strategies, toxicology assessment, legal analysis, etc.) to 
guarantee that the developed products are safe, sustainable, cost -effective, regulatory -compliant, accepted by 
consumers and, most notably, meet the required technical functionality. FreeMe will apply a safe and sustainable by 
design approach in the applications . A  pre-market design phase to improve product safety, reduce human and 
environmental risk as well integrating circularity and sustainability principles in line with Europe´s transition to a 
circular and low-carbon economy will be implemented. Product design will be affected by technical performance, 
product service, chemical function, circular-by-design and will run in parallel to step-wise safety and sustainability 
assessment. Thus, by applying SIA tools in the development of FreeMe innovative plating on plastic processes, the 
consortium is ensuring a faster market uptake after the end of the project, with interested parties having developed a 
process that is safe, environmentally friendly, competitive and that answers a clear market demand. Moreover, the 
development of sectoral guidelines and replicability studies will facilitate the knowledge transfer into new products 
and markets, maximizing the project’s expected outcomes and impacts.  
 
1.2.2.2 Metallization through sprayable composite resins 
The main concept of this technology is depicted in the following Figure 1.3. 
 
 
Figure 1.3: Composite sprayable resins approach for plastic metalization 

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [7 of 44] 
Anhydrous Ni salt  (i.e. NiCl2) is pulverized in size smaller tha n 1,5μm through milling. The powder is mixed in 
resins mixtures and the resulted composite resin is applied in thin layers (~2 μm) in the polymer surface. Various type 
of polymeric surfaces will be used (i.e. ABS, PC, PPA, nylon and UV-curable resins) aiming to develop a technology 
not dependable on the type of the substrate. A key part for this is to achieve excellent adhesion of the sprayable resin 
in the substrates.  Reduction of the nickel salts in the surface of the resin layer is followed with the use of a reducing 
agent and thus, Ni nuclei that will serve as catalyst for the following electroless step are created.  
 
Main research/technological 
challenges 
FreeMe activities to overcome challenges 
Excellent adhesion of Resin 
in plastic substrate.  
Design of resins with good wetting properties based on the presence of -COOH 
groups, regardless of the substrate surface energy – chemical bonding 
Reinforcing particles will be 
inactive due to the resin layer 
on their surface 
Το achieve the reduction of Ni salts to Ni nuclei as catalysts for the electroless 
step, the hardened resin in their surface should be removed. Mild, chromic acid 
free etching process will be used. 
Not to affect the recyclability 
of the plastic part 
The application of a resin layer in a plastic object might make the recycling more 
complicated. To avoid this, a very thin (~2μm) layers should be applied. 
 
A. Preparation of composite resins  
The Ultraviolet (UV) curing technology has been increasingly used in the last decades as a sustainable way of cross-
linking polymerization of monomers/oligomers towards the continuous production of epoxy-based coatings. The 
aim of FreeMe is to optimize the UV curing process of epoxy or epoxy -acrylate resins towards rigid thin (< 2μm)  
applied on the above-described substrates (i.e. ABS, PLA, etc.). Importantly, the conventional bisphenol A (BPA) 
based epoxy resins will be replaced by biomass -based epoxy resins, since BPA is considered as highly toxic 
and is listed among the Substances of Very High Concern (SVHC) and its use is subjected to authorization. 
The proposed green epoxy alternatives will be based on biomass-derived isosorbide and itaconic acid, which are 
considered among the most important emerging bio-based platform chemicals within the concepts of Biorefining 
[13]. Amongst their diverse application in the polymer, fine chemicals and fuel indust ry, isosorbide and itaconic 
acid may be utilized to produce epoxy monomers/oligomers via glycidylation reaction, as shown in Figure 1.4a, for 
the case of isosorbide [ 14,15]. The epoxidized bio -based monomers can further react with (meth)acrylic acid to 
produce the respective isosorbide-based epoxy-acrylates (Figure 1.4b), in analogy to the production of BPA-based 
epoxy acrylates [16]. Alternatively, isosorbide-based (meth)acrylates may be synthesized by direct esterification of 
isosorbide by reacting with m ethacryloyl chloride or methacrylic anhydride and a base catalyst [ 17], as shown in 
Figure 1.4c. Similar reaction paths towards the synthesis of itaconic acid -based epoxy or the respective acrylates 
will be also investigated, in accordance with recently efforts in the literature [18,19]. 
a)  
b)  
 
13 F. Aricò, Isosorbide as biobased platform chemical: Recent advances, Current Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry 2020,  21:82–
88 
14 C. Musa et. al, “Ultrasound -Assisted Heterogeneous Synthesis of Bio -Based Oligo-Isosorbide Glycidyl Ethers: Towards Greener Epoxy 
Precursors”, Molecules, 24 (2019) 1643. 
15 S. K. Bobade et al., Bio -based Thermosetting Resins for Future Generation: A Review, Polymer -plastics Technology and Engineering, 
2016, Vol. 55 (17), 1863–1896. 
16 T.C. Canak et al., “Boron containing UV-curable epoxy acrylate coatings", Progress in Organic Coatings, 77 (2014) 1911–1918. 
17 D.N. Lastovickova et al., Resin, cure, and polymer properties of photopolymerizable resins containing bio-derived isosorbide, J Appl Polym 
Sci. 2021;138:app50574 
18 T. Robert et al.,“Itaconic acid – a versatile building block for renewable polyesters with enhanced functionality”, Green Chem., 18 (2016) 
2922-2934 
19 J. Huang et al., “Self-healing, high-performance, and high-biobased-content UV-curable coatings derived from rubber seed oil and itaconic 
acid”, Progress in Organic Coatings, 159 (2021) 106391 

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [8 of 44] 
c)  
Figure 1.4. (a) Glycidylation of biomass-derived isosorbide, (b) reaction of epoxidized isosorbide with acrylic acid 
to epoxy-acrylates, (c) direct esterification of isosorbide towards isosorbide (meth)acrylates   
 
UV curing of the bio -based epoxy and acrylate resins can be conducted via the two classical routes, i.e. the free 
radical curing for the acrylate resins and the cationic (acidic) cur ing for the epoxy resins [20]. UV curing 
mechanism of the epoxy-acrylate resins is based on free radicals which are provided by appropriate photo initiators 
that break apart into radicals when exposed to UV light, such as the alpha-hydroxy ketone types (i.e. Darocur 1173, 
Irgacure 184). In order to overcome high viscosity issues that will limit the spray process to be applied in the project, 
the prepolymer resin can be mixed with mono or multifunctional acrylate monomers that are acting also as reactive 
diluents, such as tripropyleneglycol diacrylate, trimethylolpropane triacrylate, hexanediol diacrylate, mono-acrylated 
isosorbide, etc. [21]. In the case of cationic curing of neat (not acrylated) bio -based epoxy resins, different type of 
photoinitiators will be used, which can be activated by light or heat, forming a cationic “super acid” bearing a proton 
(H+) that induces ring opening polymerization reaction (ROP) of the epoxy. Typical initiators can be diaryliodonium 
or triarylsulfonium salts like Irgacure 250 and Curacure UV6976, respectively [ 22]. The distinct differences in the 
mechanism of radical vs. cationic UV curing leads to variations in the required curing time and sensitivity to the 
presence of oxygen (in radical curing), as well as they affect th e properties of the cured resins, such adhesion, 
shrinkage, resistance to solvents, storage, post-curing, etc. These effects will be investigated towards the optimization 
and development of fast, reproducible and high quality UV curable bio-based resins. 
As the ultimate goal, is to prepare epoxy (acrylate) polymer nanocomposite films with embedded Ni precursors, a 
thorough study of the incorporation of NiCl2 salts as well as on their effect on the viscosity of the resin mixture and 
the fast UV curing proce ss will be conducted. A series of characterization techniques will be applied to determine 
the final dispersion of the Ni sources (also after reduction of NiCl2 by NaBH4) and physicochemical properties of the 
nanocomposites, such as SEM, TEM, tensile and impact strength, pull off testing (to measure the adhesion strength 
of the epoxy-acrylate film on the polymeric substrates), TGA/DSC, conductivity, resistance to solvents, etc.  
B. Application of composite resins on plastic surfaces 
Prior to the application of the resin the plastic substrates should be pre -treated to achieve good wetting conditions 
and excellent adhesion. Τo do so, the surface tension of the resin coating should be less that the surface energy for 
the substrate. It is  found that the surface energy of the substrates should be ~10 dynes/cm higher than the resin to 
obtain optimal adhesion. [24] Plastics are comprised of long chain non -polar materials with inherently low surface 
 
20 S. Brännström et al., Biobased UV-curable coatings based on itaconic acid, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 14 (4) 851–861, 2017 
21 D. Yu et al., “Mono-acrylated isosorbide as a bio-based monomer for the improvement of thermal and mechanical properties of poly(methyl 
methacrylate)”, RSC Adv., 9 (2019) 35532 
22 P. Bednarczyk et al., “Photocurable Epoxy Acrylate Coatings Preparation by Dual Cationic and Radical Photocrosslin king”, Materials, 14 
(2021) 4150 
23 T. Robert et.al, . Itaconic acid – a versatile building block for renewable polyesters with enhanced functionality. Green Chem., 2016, 18, 
2922–2934. 
24 Dr. Stefan Meets, How to Coat Plastics with UV Curable Resin, Cytec Surface Specialties, Radtech Europe 2005 4 
To increase the adhesion with plastic 
surfaces, both types of proposed resins should 
have reactive -COOH groups. For this reason, 
acrylic acid will be used in the case of acrylate 
epoxy resins at different concentrations for 
radical polymerization and itaconic acid will be 
used in the case of glycidylised isosorbide 
(Figure 1.5). UV-light induced crosslinking 
epoxy-itaconante resign will be easily 
produced in the presence of  
diethoxyacetophenone (DEAP), which is a 
photoinitiator commonly used in biomaterials. 
[23] The final resin will be consisted of epoxy 
and itaconate crosslinked bonds, having also 
lots of free -OH and -COOH groups (Figure 
1.5) that both can increase the adhesion of 
formed thin layer film with plastic surfaces. 
 
 
 Figure 1.5 Proposed UV curable epoxy-itaconic acid resign.  

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [9 of 44] 
energies. [25] However, the presence of -COOH in the resins described previously will ensure the excellent adhesion.  
The application of the resin in the surface can be achieved through spaying. It is important to apply a thin layer 
(~2μm) so as not to affect the recyclability of the polymer. For example, application of such a 2μm layer of resin 
in an ABS component of a total volume of 1 lt and total surface of 1000cm 2 will result in a resin concentration of 
less ~2ppm in the whole component. Figure 1.6 depicts SEM images of the surface of an ABS sample in which resin 
containing NiCl 2 have been applied. In higher magnifications NiCl 2 particles of ~2 μm size are detected. During 
FreeMe project milling processes will be utilized in order to further decrease  the size of the Ni salts particles and 
achieve a homogenous distribution in the resin. In -silico models will provide guidance on the proper concentration 
and size of the nickel salts particles for optimum distribution across the surface after the spraying step.  
 
  
Figure 1.6: SEM image and EDS analysis of spayed resin in the surface of ABS. NiCl2 particulates are detected 
across the surface 
 
C. Reduction and metallization steps 
By utilizing reducing agents (i.e. NaBH 4) a dual positive effect can be achieved, On one hand the resin is etched 
and cavities are formed in the surface while at the same the NiCl2 is reduced to Ni nuclei (Figure 1.7) 
 
 
 
Figure 1.7: SEM image and EDS analysis of activated surface of ABS. Ni nulei are detected across the surface 
 
 
 
Figure 1.8: SEM image and EDS analysis of metallize surface of ABS 
 
 
25 Surface Energies of Polymers. The Sabreen Group. Retrieved January 23, 2006,  
http://www.sabreen.com/energies_polymers.htm 

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [10 of 44] 
The final steps for the metallization process is to apply a thin Ni-P layer through an electroless Ni bath (Figure 1.8). 
 
In the FreeMe project optimization of the process will take place in all the steps of the process. It is important the 
spayed resin to act as an intermediate layer that will provide both adhesion and the Ni nuclei for the development of 
the Ni-P layer via the electroless process. The thickness of the layer is of high importance. It should be thick enough 
to form a continuous layer across the substrate enhancing the adhesion of the system. On the other hand, during the 
etching/reduction step (Figure 1.7) the NiCl2 salts should be reduced at the maximum possible percentage. This will 
allow to have a uniform Ni-P layer across the surface.  
 
1.2.2.3 Development of novel toxic free metallization processes 
The second alternative method is based on the use of REACH compliant chemicals for etching of polymeric surfaces 
(chromic acid free process) and for the activation step (Pd free process). The research activities will cover the 
treatment of the main industrial used substrates i.e. ABS , PPA, PC as well as 3D printable resins and the emerging 
bio-based polymer PLA.  
 
Main 
research/technological 
challenges 
FreeMe activities to overcome challenges 
Avoid the use chromic 
acid in the etching process 
Being the core of the research activities for this metallization path, mixtures of acids 
or alkali will be utilized. Based on promising results, the etching process will be 
optimized and customized based on the exact type of polymer substrate 
Achieve excellent 
adhesion 
A double approach for achieving high adhesion level will be deployed: 
- Mechanical interlocking due to cavities in the etched surface 
- Chemical forces due to polar groups created in post-etched plastic surface 
Extend the lifetime of 
baths 
Degradation of bath’s performance happens due to contaminants from drag out 
(transfer of chemicals from previous steps of the process) or other sources. In FreeMe 
project, activities related to process control and contamination reduction techniques 
will be implemented.  
 
A. Development of novel, Cr6+ free surface etching 
Chromic acid has been used in a broad range of industrial sectors for more than 50 years. The outstanding technical 
advantages of Cr 6+ make it substitution difficult. Various approaches have been made utilizing acidic or alkaline 
permanganate, phosphoric acid with persulfate, trichloroacetic acid, nitrosyl sulfuric, etc. [26,27]. Out of these a very 
promising solution turns to be the mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide in various ratios. [28,29] 
Indeed, in thermoplastic polymers such as ABS [poly(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene)], etching of the surface may 
be carried out using a “ piranha solution”, a strongly oxidizing, aqueou s solution of 1:4 H 2O2 / H 2SO4. Piranha 
solutions are widely used for removing organic residues from surfaces via oxidative degradation. Immersing of the 
ABS substrate into a piranha solution also leads to the hydroxylation of polybutadiene and polyacrylonitrile parts of 
the surface. [30] This chemical modification is vital because it increases the wettability of the surface  due to the 
presence of highly hydrophilic groups (-COOH) and it creates holes for subsequent incorporation of nucleation 
sites (activation).   Based on the type of plastic substrate he following surface modifications can take place utilizing 
various mixtures of alkali or acids. 
 
ABS based substrates 
Poly-butadiene: –(CH2CH=CHCH2)–  
𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑛ℎ𝑎
→       –(CH2CH=O) + (O=CHCH2)–  
𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑛ℎ𝑎
→       2 –(CH2COOH) 
 
Poly-acrylonitrile: –[CH(C≡N)]–  
𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑛ℎ𝑎
→       –[CH(CONH2)]– 
 
PET substrate 
P-ethylene terepthalate:  -(O(C=O)-Ph-(CO)OCH2CH2)-n  
𝑝𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑛ℎ𝑎
→       HCOO-Ph-(CO)OH + -CH2-CH2-OH 
 
 
 
26 J. McCaskie et.al, “New hexavalent Cr free etch for ABS and ABS/PC electroplated plastics”, Plating and Surface Finishing, April, 2008 
27 D. Akhouri, “A review on the plating process of FDM built parts”, Materials Today: Proceedings, 26, 2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.02.461 
28 S. Whitmore “Consumable Spacecraft Structures with Integrated, 3 -D Printed ABS Thrusters” AIAA 2017 -4707, Session: Additive 
Manufacturing for Propulsion Systems II, 2017, https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2017-4707 
29 E. Correa et. al., “Activation, Initiation, and growth of electroless nickel coatings”, Taylor & Francis Group, 1 st Edition, 2019. eBook 
ISBN9780429466274 
30 X. Tang, C. Bi, C. Han, and B. Zhang, A new palladium-free surface activation process for Ni electroless plating on ABS plastic, Materials 
Letters 63, 840-842 (2009) 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [11 of 44] 
The treated substrate should be rinsed with water and immersed into a sodium bisulfite aqueous solution (NaHSO3), 
a common industrial reducing agent and antioxidant food additive to remove any piranha residues.  [31] The whole 
etching and cleaning process is a relative fast process that can be easily upscaled.  
Concerning UV-Curable resins (i.e. polyutethane acrylate resins)  & bio-based substrates (PLA): The surface 
etching of these materials is carried out using an aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH). [32] The time and 
cost of the etching process has been optimized via a compara tive study. Alkaline KOH  or other alkali solutions 
partially hydrolyze the ester and carbamate bonds of the resin to form a hydrophilic, rough surface which promotes 
metal adhesion. The resin substrates are subsequently rinsed with water. The whole etching process  lasts 
approximately 30 min. 
 
UV-curable resins 
P-acrylate: –(R1-COO-R2)–  
𝑂𝐻−/𝐻2𝑂
→        –(R1-COOH) + (HO-R2)–  
P-urethane: –(R3-NHCOO-R4)–  
𝑂𝐻−/𝐻2𝑂
→        –(R3-NHCOOH) + (HO-R4)–  
 
PLA substrate 
 
P-lactic acid: -(CH3)CCOOR)-n  
𝑂𝐻−/𝐻2𝑂
→       -(CH3)CCOOH  + ROH 
 
B. Development of novel, Pd free activation processes 
The surface activation step is a crucial part of the PoP process. This can be achieved by using a nickel acetate/sodium 
borohydride solution. [Ni(CH3COO)2] is significantly cheaper than PdCl 2 and less toxic than Sn salts.  [33] Finely 
dispersed nucleation sites are generated by the reduction of Ni2+ by NaBH4, as follows (Figure 1.9):  
 
4 Ni2+ + BH4– + 8 OH– → B(OH)4– + 4Ni0 + 4 H2O 
 
Metallization of the ABS substrate is completed by immersing the pre-treated substrate into a Ni electroless plating 
bath containing nickel sulfate as the Ni2+ source and sodium hypophosphite (NaPO2H2) as the reducing agent.33 The 
release rate of free Ni(II) cations in the solution is controlled by co -addition of sodium citrate (Na 3C6H5O7) as a 
complexing agent. [34] A fine Ni-P metal homogeneous coating is produced, shown in Figure 1.10.  
 
Ni2+ + 3 H2PO2– + 3 H2O → Ni0 + 3 H2PO3– + 2 H+ + 2 H2      
 
 
 
Figure 1.9: EDS mapping activated surface Green dots represents Ni 
Nuclei 
Figure 1.10: Cross section after EN 
 
C. Baths Qualification and maintenance  
Spent baths, i.e. baths that can no more be used in the plating process due to low efficiency, are a main source of 
waste streams of the surface finishing industry. Spent baths are either treated in-house or transferred to off-site waste 
treatment installations, increasing  thus chemical use for treatment, and generating sludges and leading to higher 
operation costs and environmental/safety risks. Thus, extension of the lifetime of baths is of crucial importance for 
the SSBD strategy of FreeMe technologies. There are a number of factors that leads to the degradation of a bath 
 
31 A. Equbal, N. K. Dixit, and A. K. Sood, Electroless metallization of ABS plastic: a com parative study, International Journal of Rapid 
Manufacturing 5, 3-4, 255-274 (2016) 
32 R. Bernasconi, C. Credi, M. Tironi, M. Levi, and L. Magagnin, Electroless Metallization of Stereolithographic Photocurable Resins for 3D 
Printing of Functional Microdevices, Journal of The Electrochemical Society 164, 5, B3059-B3066 (2017) 
33 R. Suman, D. Nandan, A. Haleem, S. Bahl, and M. Javaid, Experimental study of electroless plating on acrylonitrile butadiene styrene 
polymer for obtaining new eco-friendly chromium-free processes, Materials Today: Proceedings 28, 3, 1575-1579 (2020) 
34 V. K. Bulasara, H. Thakuria, R. Uppaluri, and M. K. Purkait, Nickel -ceramic composite membranes: Optimization of hydrazine based 
electroless plating process parameters, Desalination 275, 1-3, 243-251 (2011) 

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [12 of 44] 
performance: (a) depletion of chemical species (b) not balanced bath chemistries (c) contamination from other 
chemical species (i.e. drag out: transfer of droplets from previous steps to the tank of concern). [35] In the framework 
of the FreeMe project, qualification protocols for the various types of baths used will be delivered. This will be based 
on SoA technologies for such protocols as well as measurements for decreasing the baths contamination.  
 
1.2.2.4 Application of final finishing 
After the metallization process (i.e. the application of electroless thin coating on the surface of the activated polymer) 
the final finishing is applied via electroplating  method. This final layer is deposited according to the specifications 
provided by the end users. The most common finishes are decorative chromium (applied through trivalent chromium 
baths), nickel and nickel alloy s, and copper. For specific applications o ther type of metals can also be plated (i.e. 
gold, silver). In the FreeMe project the final finishing will be arranged by the three end users.  
 
1.2.2.5 In silico approaches for optimization of FreeMe processes 
 
Main research/technological 
challenges 
FreeMe activities to overcome challenges 
Complete modelling of material 
and  processes related to interfaces 
Modeling and simulation activities will be selected to answer the key product 
development questions rather than pure research-oriented modelisation. 
 
The overall goal of the in -silico approach proposed in the FreeMe project is two -fold: First, the in silico activities 
will target the support of the proposed components design, covering the sprayable composite resins and the etching 
process. This will be done by developing multi-scale simulations ranging from Ab Initio, Atomistic, Mesoscale and 
Continuum modelling of the involved materials and processes to provide a proper Design Of Experiments (DOE). 
Second, such developed models will be used to support the further analysis of the suitability of the proposed processes 
to specific applications. These modelling activities will be done in parallel and in strong collaboration with the 
proposed experiments to provide a continuous improvement process of both the developed models and the efficiency 
of the experimental campaigns. 
In the case of the sprayable composite resins, the scope of the simulation activities is to understand the capability 
of the produced resin to adhere to the target materials, analyse the distribution of the Ni nuclei into the target surface 
and the later efficiency of the final plating process. To do this, ab initio quantum mechanics (QM) tools and classical 
molecular dynamics (MD) will be used to determine the interfacial interactions and th e corresponding adhesion 
properties of the different analysed resin compounds. These analyses will allow gathering further conclusions on the 
material experiments and the results of the SEM image and EDS analyses, specially related to adsorption sites and 
geometry of the resin molecules and the adhesion extent. The different methods proposed for increasing the surface 
energy of the plastic parts (e.g. surface oxidation of the polymer chains) will also be taken into account through 
Monte Carlo simulations. Such models will be then combined with coarse-grained and continuous models to analyse 
the influence of the concentration and size of nickel salts particles within the proposed resin to ensure a suitable 
distribution of the nuclei across the surface. 
Regarding the plastic surface etching process, the overall objective of the in silico activities is to support the design 
and selection of the different researched piranha solutions. To do so, a combination of Chemical, Molecular 
Dynamics, Monte Carlo and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) models will be used.  
 
1.2.2.6 Development of Inspection technologies 
A number of monitoring techniques exist when it comes to characterizing structures during the inspection and quality 
control in R2R environment for organic solar cells & OLED displays; in the nano - and micro-meter ranges, which 
have been utilised in the de velopment of the LIPSS fabrication technique, including SEM (scanning electron 
microscopy) and AFM (atomic force microscopy) 36,37. Fourier transform analysis of the SEM images have been used 
to quantify the periodicity of the structures. This approach enables a global value of spatial period to be quickly 
calculated, rather than estimating line thickness and spacings line by line, and  generating a mean value, which is a 
more laborious process.  
However, most commonly used techniques at this dimensional scale are in fact implemented off line and require 
sample preparation, Optical techniques offer the best opportunity for inline process  monitoring, as they are non -
contact, non-destructive and can be applied to samples as they are without pre-treatment. According to a review paper 
 
35 W. Wallace, “An introduction to electroplating in engineering and manufacturing” SAT Plating, October 2020.  
36 A. Rodriguez, M.C. Morant.Minana, A. Dias-Ponte, A. Martinez-Calderon, M. Gomez-Aranzadi, S.M. Olaizola, Femtosecond laser-induced 
periodic surface nanostructuring of sputtered platinum thin films, Applied Surface Science 351 (2015) 135-139   
37 A. Martinez -Calderon, A. Rodriguez, A. Dias -Ponte, M.C. Morant.Minana, M. Gomez -Aranzadi, S.M. Olaizola, Femtosecond laser 
fabrication of highly hydrophobic tainless steel surface with hierarchical structures fabricated by combining ordred microstructures and LIPSS, 
Applied Surface Science 374 (2016) 81-89 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [13 of 44] 
by IRIS 38, selected combined optical technologies, such as diffractometry, but also ellipsometry and spectral  
reflectance provide the opportunity for inline measurement of the thicknesses of micro structured layers. 
 
Main research/technological 
challenges 
FreeMe activities to overcome challenges 
Difficulties on measuring coating 
thickness due to light scattering of 
particles 
The combination of various techniques and optimal calibration off-line of 
the system will allow to overcome this challenge. The speed and time of the 
process would already bring a certain idea of this data. 
Relation between quality of the 
layer and process parameters 
Correlation between Real-time data gathered and parameters for further 
processing. 
 
1.2.2.7 Development of Decision Support Tool 
The Decision Support Tool will be a solution for industrial end-users to optimally select and/or re-engineer existing 
plating production lines  by considering te chnical, economic, safety, environmental and sustainability 
constraints and criteria to maximize efficiencies in terms SSBD. The tool will also propose tuning solutions of the 
everyday production with respect to the variable input specifications of plastic matrices. The user will be capable of 
inserting unit operations, materials and products specifications as well as experimental data providing a complete 
profile of the existing production line. The DS T processes the data structuring a dynamic process representation to 
be optimized considering alternative SSBD technologies ( Cr6+etching and spraying), tuning conditions and 
downstream processing that should be appropriately designed and adapted to the existing lines. For this purpose, the 
DST exploits in-silico models, experimental data and products/production specifications ensuring SSBD, as prepared 
in contexts of FreeMe, building a technological database to simulate the overall plating operations of the alternative 
etching and spraying technologies and test their performance in front of user requirements. Data driven models will 
correlate experimental data with performance of the plating processes and contribute to fitting and optimizing 
operating conditions (i.e. method of plating, type of coatings ) with respect to user -defined input specifications for 
plastic matrices ( type of polymer, adhesion values, hardness, wear resistance etc. ) and the desired end -product 
specifications. The DST also holds three m odules for safety, LCA and LCC analyses that will translate process 
simulation outcomes into mid - and end -point environmental indicators (e.g. human toxicity, climate change, 
resources depletion), techno -economic results (CAPEX, OPEX, ROI, etc) and safety issues – based on Common 
Safety Methods (Article 6 of Directive (EU) 2016/798) – like metals concentrations in the factory, baths’ lifetime, 
Number of Reported Accidents. The overall analysis is based on a dynamic superstructure that holds options for the 
user-defined operations (e.g. the existing industry) and the candidate SSBD p lating options of FreeMe. The 
optimization framework examines the alternative designs and tuning options (e.g. nozzles diameters, spraying 
concentrations and flows, type of acids or alkali and concentration, qualification of baths) and offers optimal solutions 
and guidelines to revamp and adapt an existing technological environment with new technologies ensuring SSBD 
PoP and following safety, life cycle and sustainability criteria (objectives in optimization). 
 
1.2.2.8 Validation and demonstration activities 
A. Automotive: Decorative applications for car components (CRF) 
PoP is a technology of high importance for the 
automotive industry since the ‘60s. CRF has introduced 
various plastic components in its automobile production 
lines which are lighter but equally robust with their 
metallic counterparts. A variety of these interior (i.e. 
instrument frames, steering wheel decoration, door 
handle) and exterior  parts (e.g. door handle, bumpers) 
are made from ABS, PC -ABS and PA  polymeric 
materials. CRF applies various “Cr 6+ based processes” 
for both protective and decorative functions depending 
on each plastic component’s position and utility. The 
chromium coatings typically consist of more than one 
Cu- and/or Ni-based interlayers, deposited underneath  
 
Figure 1.11:. Interior decorative high contactable 
components by CRF.  
the final Cr layer.  However, the process requires a starting etching of the surface using Cr 6+ solutions and Pd/Sn 
colloidal solutions for surface activation. CRF is seriously interested in developing Cr 6+-free processes for 
metallization of bio-based, virgin or recycled grade plastic materials. 
 
 
 
38 E. Bugnicourt, T. Kehoe , M. Latorre, C. Serrano, S. Philippe and M. Schmid, Recent Prospects in the Inline Monitoring of Nanocomposites 
and Nanocoatings   

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [14 of 44] 
B. Aerospace: Electromagnetic shielding of 3D printed component (IAI) 
The use of electric components and electromagnetic 
interference (EMI) shielding in the aerospace industry is 
growing rapidly. This includes antenna components, higher 
power requirements that need to be electrically isolated by 
shielding. In addition, particular antenna components require 
a complicated albeit highly ordered structural arrangement 
which in turn requires the assembly of multiple individual 
parts. On top of that, these parts must meet the most common 
and strict necessity of the aerospace industry, low weight, as 
low as possible. As a result, aerospace engineers need to shave 
every possible gram from every component as excess weight 
 
Figure 1.12: Drawings of 3D printed antenna parts  
accumulates rapidly. To this end, the replacement of even a single metal component with a plastic one could be key 
to reduce weight and final cost. Moreover, employment of additive manufacturing techniques (by far less expensive 
and efficient for polymers compared to metals) can significantly reduce the number of the individual parts needed 
for the final assembly and decrease the manufacturing time of complicated arrays. Therefore, metal plating on plastics 
is key for the application of a protective and con ductive metallic layer to enhance both lifetime and EMI shielding. 
FreeMe will develop a plating process for 3D-printed antenna depicted in Figure 1.12.   
 
C. Home Appliances: Washing machine frames (ARC) 
Home electrical appliances and consumer electronics go vern almost every aspect of our lives. The 
incorporation of inexpensive plastic components can reduce cost and lower weight, therefore enabling 
manufacturers to offer their goods at more competitive prices.  In addition, plastic parts may serve as electrici ty 
and heat insulators for certain home appliances such as a washing machine which in turn mitigates health and 
safety risks. Innovative plating on plastics aims to provide a decorative and protective metal finish on such 
components. Metal coatings enhance  corrosion resistance and improve external appearance, therefore 
generating added value. For instance, ARC applies nickel, nickel -chromium and multi -layer (nickel -copper -
chromium) coatings on the door, the handle and the buttons of washing machines. However, in all cases the 
metallization process involves etching process with chromic/sulfuric acid and activation with Pd. Shifting to 
more environmental processes, the company wants to replace this process.  
 
  
Figure 1.13:. Arcelik’s washing machine (left) and SEM image of a multi -layer chrome plating application 
on ABS.  
 
1.2.2.9 Recyclability of plated plastic components – EoL scenarios 
Removal of the metal coatings from plastic substrates is well established technology, especially for coatings applied 
in the automotive industry, that is part of the dismantling process. [ 39] In general three methods are applied.  1) 
abrasive blasting, 2) cryogenic embrittlement and 3) mechanical crushing. Abrasive blasting. is the operation of 
forcibly propelling a stream of abrasive material against a surface under high pressure. Dry ice-blasting is a special 
type of abrasive blasting where dry ice (solidified carbon dioxide) will be accelerated in a pressurized air stream and 
directed at a surface to clean it. Cryogenic embrittlement may also be used to remove metallic coatings from plastic 
substrates. The recovery system involves feeding metal -plated plastics into a grinder.  The grinder contains a pre -
crusher which breaks up the parts into smaller pieces and feeds them into the grinder which subsequently reduces the 
scrap from half-inch pieces to coarse powder. A magnetic drum separator removes the pieces of metal that have been 
 
39 E.van Westing et.al, “Recycling of metals from coatings”, Materials innovation institute M2i, November 2013  

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [15 of 44] 
split off during grinding. The final step contains going through a cryogenic feeder, where liquid nitrogen cools the 
scrap to almost freezing, creating stresses which cause additional metal to splinter off. Finally, metal-plated plastics, 
could also be separated using mechanical crushing. Coatings could be easily stripped when the items are subjected 
to shear force and impulsive force. Concerning the repair of partially damaged (scratched) metal -plated plastics, 
brush plating, a portable method of electroplating without the use of an immersion tank, will be tested and employed. 
In the framework of FreeMe project, the recyclability of the plated plastic parts will be validated utilizing the SoA 
recycling methods. 
 
1.2.3 Relevant research and potential synergies 
The FreeMe project will either be based on results of previous project or will create synergies with such projects. 
The following table presents these projects and analyse the links with the FreeMe project.  
 
Table 1.2: National and International projects correlating with FreeME  
Project Link to FreeMe 
PureNano 
(821431, H2020) 
Gaser, PoliMi, Cnano , Gaser The project focuses on the development of an in -house 
system for plating baths purification of plating lines. Cnano, ISQ, Gaser and PoliMi, 
partners of the project, will transfer this technology to TreeMe, targeting to a more 
sustainable and environmentally friendly lines. 
3DPlate  
(National) 
Cnano is already providing a range of 3D printing services using environmentally benign 
and sustainable solutions to artists and designers. Importantly, collaboration with the 
famous Greek artist Costas Gaϊtis has already been established and Cnano is currently  
producing Ni metal coatings for some of the artist’s resin-based medium-size sculptures. 
PROCETS 
(686135, H2020) 
PoliMi Cnano  has a major role in the project targeting the delivery of a sustainable 
electroplating method for applying hard protective coatings. 
LightMe  
(814552, H2020) 
PoliMi are collaborating in the OITB LightMe that is dealing with the upscale of 
production processes of lightweight alloy composites. LightMe is a test bed that will 
interact with FreeMe targeting the optimization of lightweight metal surfaces. 
INFUCOMP  
(FP7, 233926) 
IAI The project focused on the development of simulation -based solutions for the 
industrial manufacture of large infusion composite parts, covering all popular Liquid Resin 
Infusion (LRI)  methods used in the Aerospace industry. IAI was one of two aircraft 
manufacturers that were participating in the project. 
DIAGONAL  
(953152, H2020) 
ICCRAM, Cnano DIAGONAL addresses nanotechnology safety issues by developing 
SbD tools and guidelines. ICCR AM is the coordinator of the project and contributes to 
activities related to modelling, risk assessment and sustainability. ISQ will perform 
exposure assessments to the various industrial demonstrators. IRIS is involved as a pilot 
line. Cnano is an industrial case for data generation and output validation. 
SafeMarble  
(co-funded, EU & 
National) 
AUTH is involved in the project related to the improvement of the properties of 
commercial protective agents/ epoxy polymers using (nano)additive materials 
OLEDSOLAR 
(820789, H2020) 
IRIS brings its knowledge for the development of in -line monitoring techniques for the 
OLED and thin film and organic photovoltaic industries. 
NANOGENTOOLS 
(691095, H2020) 
ICCRAM has a major role in the project targeti ng the development and implementation 
of a new generation of nanosafety assessment tools.  
  
1.2.4 Inter-disciplinary approach 
It is obvious that an interdisciplinary approach is necessary to deliver the project’s objectives, covering aspects of 
chemistry, physics, modelling, engineering, data driven algorithms and sustainability. The FreeMe consortium 
comprises R&I experts in the above disciplines, as well as industrial partners in the PoP field. The first 
interdisciplinary dimension (IDD1) stems  from the collaboration between AUTH (organic chemistry – polymers) 
with PolyMi (materials chemistry – plating on plastics) to deliver the biobased sprayable resin. IDD2 connects the 
above world -leading research institutions with two chemical engineering o riented SMEs (Gaser, Cnano) whose 
expertise lies in PoP and nanotechnology to produce high -quality PoP coatings. This will be guaranteed by IDD3, 
running in parallel with IDD2, which brings together the disciplines required for the in-line monitoring (physics and 
spectroscopy, IRIS) and the in-silico optimization (computational modelling, IDENER) of the PoP processes. IDD4 
will establish a two-way communication between sustainably experts (ICCRAM) with all partners of the consortium 
to adopt SSbD principles, perform necessary LCAs and ensure compliance with REACH directives. IDD5 encloses 
three different and highly competitive industrial sectors (i.e. automotive, aerospace and home electric appliances) 
that will validate FreeMe’s disruptive techonology. Fina lly, IDD6 concerns the Dissemination, Commercialization 
and Exploitation of the project results (Exelisis). 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [16 of 44] 
 
1.2.5 Gender considerations  
Within the FreeMe project, special consideration will be paid regarding the gender dimension in the research and 
innovation process. Identification of gender differences in the working environment is crucial for the implementation 
of the necessary measures to ensure the health and safety of the researchers and workers. Utilization of Plating on 
Plastics process in Fr eeMe requires the careful handling of chemical substances. Sex and gender analysis will be 
performed during the implementation of the project and key factors are already identified from the proposal stage. 
Under this scope, the magnitude and duration of an  employee’s exposure to chemical substances can be gender -
depended, as social and occupational roles of women and men might differ. Women were mistakenly considered to 
undertake less hazardous tasks and might not be properly included in the risk assessment  of specific procedures, or 
not received the proper size of personal protective equipment (PPE). [40] FreeMe will ensure that all researches will 
be equally approached in terms of personal safety, with appropriate PPE that will ensure the protection and re duce 
the risk of exposure to Nickel and corrosive substances, such as H 2SO4/H2O2 and KOH. Another aspect that will be 
examined is the impact of exposure to the above-mentioned chemicals on both sexes. Biological characteristics differ 
between women and men, leading to different health effects of toxic chemicals. In particular, Nickel can induce skin 
allergies, contact dermatitis and hand eczema, which are statistically more common in women. [41] Additionally, it 
is more likely to be stored in female tissues and bioaccumulate. What is more, special attention is required to female 
workers during childbearing years and pregnancy. Women are affected dramatically during this period by even lower 
doses of chemicals. Finally, data on occupational carcinogens have p resented an increase in cancer rates of female 
workers in chemicals, raising concerns about the different cellular response to oxidative stress among sexes. [ 42] 
Partners of FreeMe will adopt a responsible approach regarding the gender dimension on health and safety matters.  
 
1.2.6 Open science Practices 
Adopting Open Science Practices in EU-funded research and innovation has been a fundamental and unnegotiable part of 
research ethics in these programs, ensuring transparency and accessibility to public funding outcomes. There is a number of 
benefits to be taken into account, from providing information to the society about the research and innovation process and its 
particular results to assuring the general public and in particular European citizens and taxpayers of a evidently transparent, 
well-guided and efficient R&D policy on a European level. From the perspective of academics and researchers, those open 
science practices can have significant impacts on the ability of our society to innovate, surpassing barriers and rendering 
research outcomes and technological developments findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR). In the last 
decades, adoption of open science practices has benefited in terms of quality, efficiency, transparency and social acceptance 
of research in Europe, in addition to making scientific progress faster and with more integrity. FreeMe is adopting and strongly 
supporting Open Science practices to the maximum extent. In particular, scientific publications (papers) produced within the 
project will be published as open access (gold or green access), in full compliance with the Horizon Europe guidelines. In 
addition to that, an Open Access Data Repository like Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/) will be used in order to store and maintain 
publicly available all open access material (as it will be also mentioned in the next section). Zenodo, upon acknowledgement 
of the HE grant, is automatically connected with OpenAire (https://www.openaire.eu/) and with the Open Research Europe 
platform (https://open-research-europe.ec.europa.eu/browse), adding more visibility to the project public results. The goal is 
to guarantee the validity, the integrity and the reproducibility of the results, while also facilitating any derivative or relevant 
works that will be free to use, integrate and/or build on FreeMe’s public results. FreeMe is also aiming to invest quite a lot in 
citizen engagement as part of its open science practices. The public will be engaged through various communication and 
dissemination channels (see section 2.2) where an integral part of this approach is to also receive feedback and integrate the 
general public into the research and development decision making. Actions like visits to local educational institutions, creating 
public polls, and engagement with consumers of end-products will be taken into consideration on a central level. Furthermore, 
a key aspect of open science adoption in FreeMe is its Safe and Sustainable by Design approach (SSbD). The SSbD 
assessments involve open science concepts by default and as part of FreeMe’s exploitation planning, as they aim to the 
applicability of their designs and guiding principles to other applications by extension or adoption of this work. Work 
containing SSbD criteria, best practices and relevant results will be released as open as possible to ensure boosting to the 
project’s  commercial exploitation but also to support open science principles and facilitate the above mentioned benefits. As 
a matter of fact, this is a key aspect of the project and a critical factor for its successful implementation and impact 
maximization. Moreover, the academic partners (RTDs) of FreeMe have a long history of performing research activities using 
open science practices and integrating state-of-the-art methodologies and advancements in educational modules for students 
and/or researchers. This approach will be further boosted in FreeMe. Within the project’s dissemination, communication and 
exploitation measures, partners will integrate ideas and novel methodologies to educational activities, hire and train young 
 
[40] http://gender-chemicals.org/chemical-safety-at-work#_ftn1  
[41] https://www.undp.org/content/dam/aplaws/publication/en/publications/environment-energy/www-ee-library/chemicals-
management/chemicals-and-gender/2011%20Chemical&Gender.pdf  
[42] Ali I, Hö gberg J, Hsieh JH, Auerbach S, Korhonen A, Stenius U, Silins I. Gender differences in cancer susceptibility: role of oxidativ e 
stress. Carcinogenesis. 2016 Oct;37(10):985-992. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgw076. Epub 2016 Jul 31. PMID: 27481070; PMCID: PMC6276900.  
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [17 of 44] 
researchers, creating a highly skilled specialized workforce and motivating young researcher to further explore these 
advancements. At the same time, (in detail in section 2.2) 3 workshops will be held to promote the advancements of FreeMe 
and contribute to its open science activities , openly engaging with the community and relevant stakeholders.  
 
1.2.7 Research data management 
To manage the research data generated, collected, and processed during FreeMe multi-disciplinary project requires 
careful consideration. Different types of data will req uire unique data governance procedures, including technical 
and open-science policy requirements for data collection, management, preservation and sharing. A data management 
plan (DMP) defining the governance of each types of data, including standards, for mats, requirements and 
responsibilities will be delivered at M6 in the corresponding deliverable and will be updated with the progress of the 
project. In the following the main aspects of this DMP as presented as a draft version . FreeMe in general will use 
common and non -proprietary data formats to enable interoperability within the project across other data sets. The 
project will need to consider the governance of each of the different datasets in relation to legal and policy issues. 
IPR issues will be raised in relation to the ownership of data supplied as well as the ownership of data in the FreeMe 
project. The pa rtners will use the CA as an initial plan to manage the ownership of the data generated within the 
project. Issues related to research ethics, privacy and legislation will also be considered. The DMP will include which 
data should be collected, obtaining i nformed consent and governing how the data should be processed, stored and 
shared. The DMP will evaluate the extent to which the data can be made openly accessible to other researchers and 
stakeholders via an open access repository. FreeMe will make use of the Open Research Europe platform to freely 
share publicly available research data as described in the previous section. To aid the preservation and re-use of the 
FreeMe data, the Zenodo repository connected to the OpenAIRE platform will be used ensuring the integrity and 
replicability of publicly available project data and results at the early stage of the project. The consortium will follow 
standardized guidelines in relation to authoring appropriate and useful metadata incorporating them into the DMP. 
Standardized formats for data sharing, and non -proprietary formats where possible – for example, .txt in respect of 
interview transcripts originally produced in Microsoft Word. As such, will avoid access barriers related to proprietary 
software will be avoi ded. DMP will include metadata information regarding all relevant datasets, addressing the 
aforementioned descriptive information (e.g. ownership, type, origin, purpose, availability, reusability, relation with 
project objectives and WPs etc.) and all FAIR  aspects of the enlisted datasets, while the DMP will also take into 
consideration all GDPR guidelines. Finally, the DMP will align with FreeMe’s exploitation plan aiming to best 
accommodate the (post-project) data exploitation. The DMP will use these as a starting point to outline which partners 
can exploit the data, how the data can be exploited and also find possible additional ways in which data of FreeMe 
could be exploited beyond the initial confines of the project – e.g., using data for new and unforeseen purposes.  
 
Table 1.3: Draft DMP 
Core information to be provided in 
detail within the DMP Draft research data management plan provision of metadata 
Types of data/research outputs Data on: Naming, definition, description, type, purpose and 
connection with WP. All this metadata to be publicly available 
Findability of data/research outputs: All data are to be FAIR, with the exceptions imposed only by 
particular commercialization interests, when properly justified and in 
compliance with the guidelines of the Horizon Europe.  All this 
metadata to be publicly available. 
Accessibility of data/research outputs 
Interoperability of data/research 
outputs 
Reusability of data/research outputs 
Curation and storage/ preservation 
costs 
Data on: Storage, preservation, curation, associated costs, quality 
protocols. All this metadata to be publicly available. 
 
Table 1.4: Draft data generating processes assessment 
WP Processes Type of data Purpose 
1 Specs and Requirements Texts, tables numeric ranges,  SSbD, material and process development 
2 Sustainability, recyclability, 
tech. design Designs, data basis SSbD, material and process development 
and optimization, tech. development 
3 Resin development Numeric tables, images, raw 
data from instruments, texts 
Assessment of experimental protocols, 
feeding process simulation 4 Metallization development 
5 Process modelling Data basis, numeric, models Process optimization, SSbD 
6 Product validation Images, videos, Numeric, 
Comparative report 
End-user exploitation, certification, 
specs and requirements 
7 Standardization, DST Models, Process reports SSbD, policymaking, Market uptake 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [18 of 44] 
2. Impact