2.3 Summary 
SPECIFIC NEEDS  EXPECTED RESULTS DEC MEASURES 
1. Elimination of toxic and carcinogenic Cr6+ 
due to environmental & workers’ health 
issues from PoP sector 
2. Replacement of Pd (CRM) from the plating 
industry 
3. Increase of adhesion of PoP regardless the 
substrate material 
4. Increase use of metal plated lightweight 
plastic components in automotive and 
aerospace industry 
1. Development a sprayable bio-based resin-based  
process for PoP regardless the plastic substrate 
2. Development of a Cr6+, Pd-free wet chemistry 
PoP process customized on plastic substrate 
3. A monitoring system based on spectroscopy 
principles, for inspection of surfaces at various 
steps of FreeMe production process 
4. Development of multiscale models for materials 
modelling related to plastic surface treatment 
and adhesion enhancement 
5. A Decision support tool facilitating the adoption 
of the SSbD FreeMe technologies by the PoP 
industry. 
 
Exploitation activities: 
1. Dedicated business planning for PoP to prepare industrial 
partners for reaching the market:  
2. Patent application for the two approaches 
3. IPR agreements inside and outside the consortium 
Dissemination activities: 
1. Scientific community: 12 Scientific publications, 25 oral 
presentations in conferences, 2 workshops and 2 trainings  
2. Industrial community: 6 participations in Fairs and 
partnering events, 6 Publications, 2 trainings 
3. Standardization, Regulatory bodies: PoliMi, CRF, IAI, 
Gaser and Cnano, active in liaison with these groups will 
interact for promotion of new technologies 
Communication Activities: Various events such as a shopping 
mall show, open labs (i.e. PoliMi, Gaser, Cnano), events 
organized in the premises of end users  
 
TARGET GROUPS OUTCOMES IMPACTS 
Industry: 
1. Plating shops (contractors) active in the PoP 
currently utilizing Cr6+ processes 
2. In-house installation for PoP  
3. Materials suppliers for plating industry 
4. Manufacturers of plastic components 
5. OEMs in the field of automotive, aerospace, 
home appliances. In future applications 
fashion industry 
Scientific community: In the field of green 
chemistry and plating on plastic. 
Society: Workers in the PoP industry, citizens in 
the areas that PoP facilities are located 
 
1. Gaser and Cnano apply the technologies 
(sprayable resin route and Cr6+,Pf-free wet 
route, respectively) to their premises 
2. CRF, IAI  & ARC become the first adopters of 
FreeMe technologies in their plated components 
3. Wide utilization of the DST web-platform from 
potential adopters of the technology, mainly 
plating on plastics shops and in-house facilities 
4. Enhance SSbD approaches based on the first 
industrial adoption of the technology 
Scientific: New breakthrough results on plating on polymeric 
substrates. Advancements in materials modelling.  
Economic: Secure supply chains by elimination of Pd use from 
PoP.  
Technological: New improved processes and products in the 
growing markets of PoP, automotive, aerospace and consumer 
goods. Widening the technology application to new markets 
such as fashion, electronics. Increase of coatings quality due to 
better inspection  
Societal: Significant reduction of Cr6+ environmental pollution, 
reduction of occupation cancer incidents and elimination in the 
future 2) Maintenance and/or creation of high tech jobs within 
EU 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-11 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design polymeric materials 
 
[FreeMe]   [27 of 44] 
3.  Quality and efficiency of the implementation