2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication 
 
2.2.1 Draft Dissemination and communication plan 
The Dissemination and Communication Plan of the FreeMe project will include all relevant activities within the project and 
will provide the guidelines for the dissemination and communication to be followed by all partners. It contains the 
methodology and the tools to be used for the project’s needs, as well as a detailed timeline to adhere to. It is a working 
document and thus the draft present plan presented here will be updated at M6 in details, while further updates will take place 
as opportunities arise during the project. As the main target of the dissemination and communication plan is to raise awareness 
of the project and its results and thus, enhance the exploitation capacity of these results, it is important to define the target 
groups and the tools that these groups will be reached. In the following tables the description of the target groups and the main 
dissemination and communication activities are presented.  
 
Table 2.2: FreeMe Dissemination and Communication target groups 
Category Description of Target group 
SMEs SMEs across the supply chain of PoP. This included SME active in chemicals supply, 
plastic surface treatment, manufacturing of plastic components , end users  and 
recycling companies 
Large Enterprises Large enterprises are important as their active involvement in the exploitation of results 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [22 of 44] 
(LE) may have a major impact (economy of scales). End user (i.e. automotive, aerospace, 
home appliance) as well as companies having vertical productions and in-house PoP. 
Industrial associations 
(IA)  
A main role of the industrial association is to inform their members about new 
sustainable technologies that can be applied by them. Active involvement of such 
Association (i.e. the European Committee for Surface Treatment – CETS and its 
members) will be a main target during the implementation of the dissemination plan.  
Regional innovation 
networks/accelerators 
(RIN) 
Existing innovation hubs interested in expanding existing local support to European 
cross-border collaborations. Ecosystems that a re related to polymers and surface 
finishing such as Open Innovation Test Beds. 
Partners of Clusters 
(CL) 
Participants in other projects of this call or of relevant EC projects , and of CSA topic 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-08 
Broader innovation 
community (BIC) 
Community interested in best practices for advancing the EU polymer sector. High 
tech SMEs interested in upscaling new materials and applying this technology in other 
fields.  
R&D communities Universities and research centres, participants in related fields, research societies, 
interested in the PoP sector, researchers working on end-use application sectors. 
Regulatory & Public 
Authorities (RPA) 
Ministries, organisations, regulatory authorities, public initiatives, standardization and 
certification bodies 
 Communication Target group 
General public (GP) General Public and citizens affected directly (e.g. residents of neighbouring to PoP 
facilities) or in-directly by the use of chromic acid in industry.  
Young people and 
students (YPS) 
Students of primary, secondary schools and university who will become the new 
generation of users and may acts as ambassadors to promote the concept of sustainable 
consumption into their families. Young researchers looking to work on inspiring 
topics. 
NGOs Non-profit organization, Worker unions and other stakeholders  sensitized in issues 
related to environmental pollution, occupational safety and sustainable growh. 
 
Table 2.3: FreeME Dissemination and Communication tools 
Dissem.activity Target audience* Expected Impact Measure/Target (KPIs) 
Consortium activities 
Project 
Website 
All Awareness of the FreeMe 
project and its scope 
- 50 visits per day after year 3 
- Receive 5 emails via website / week 
Printed 
material 
EU, BIC, GP, RC Attract interest of industry, 
including SME and scientific 
community 
- Development of 10 printed concepts  
- Distribution of 5.000 leaflets in events 
-Express of interest, 250 stakeholders 
Presence in 
social media 
(SM) 
GP, EU, BIC , CL, 
UPS,NGO  
Attract interest of industry and 
connect with stakeholder 
pages and accounts in SM 
- 1000 connections in LinkedIn account 
by the end of the project 
- weekly posts in SM accounts 
Videos posted 
in website, 
YouTube 
GP, IN, AN, HT, 
EU, RC 
Attract industry and general 
public by showing the capacity 
of FreeMe 
- 1 infographic video at M6 
- 2 videos presenting the FreeMe  
- 3 videos of demonstrators 
Press Releases GP, RC, IN, AN, 
RC, PM 
Awareness of the FreeMe 
project results and capacities  
- 2 issues per year in 3 different 
languages (German, Italian, Greek,) 
Conferences, 
exhibition & 
matchmaking 
events 
EU, BIC, GP, RC Oral presentations in 
conferences to policy makers. 
Participation in pitching/B2B 
events.  
- Participation to at least 20 relevant 
international events/year 
- Participation to at least 4 relevant 
national events/year/country 
Participation 
in events 
RC, BI C, INAN, 
HT, EU, RNA, PM 
Liaison with stakeholders and 
present the FreeMe Ecosystem 
- Participation if 30 events (fairs, 
conferences, etc) during the project, 
having booths is at least 5 of them 
FreeMe 
conference 
RNA, BIC, IN, 
AN, HT, EU, RC, 
PM 
Establishment of a biannual 
conference in the field of  PoP 
post project 
- 1 international conference at year 4 
- 3 invited speakers, 20 presentations 
- 300 attendees  
Workshops/ 
training 
HT, RC, BIC Awareness of FreeMe and 
success stories 
- 3 workshops in international events 
- 50 attendees/workshop 
Online 
Journal 
HT, EU, RNA, IN, 
AN, PM RC 
Presentation success stories to 
stakeholders 
- 6 issues per year after Year 4 of the 
project 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [23 of 44] 
Citizen’s 
engagement 
GP, YPS Raise awareness of new PoP 
technologies and impacts 
- 3 Open labs events, 1 Public event in 
mall, - 2 events organized by end users  
Conferences and other related events to FreeME 
Conferences 
on technology 
development 
European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, EuCAP,  SAT Plating Exhibits at Satellite 
2020 Conference and Exhibition, Conferences and Meetings on Plastics, Paints and Synthetic 
Materials, Plastics Conference 2021, EUROMAT , European Advanced Materials Congress 
(EAMC), Conference on Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (ICMAE), NANOSMAT, Plast 
Eurasia, Automotive Plastics Conference, European plastics converters 
Conferences 
on innovation 
management 
Innovation Roundtable® Summit, Academy for Design Innovation Management Conference, 
Innovation, Management and Technology Conference, Innovation Events and Open Innovation 
Conferences, R&D Global Innovation Forum, Angel Investment Day – HunBAN. 
Trade fairs Global Automotive Materials Congress, Intelligent Traffic and Transportation (ICITT), Industrial 
Technologies, HANNOVER MESSE, International Plastic Fair, Plastic Trade Shows. 
Journals related with TreatMe 
Journal Impact factor Journal Impact factor 
Journals on Materials and structures 
Engineering Sciences 8.843 Engineering Sciences 8.843 
Journal of Chemical 
Education 
1.758 Journal of Chemical Education 1.758 
Surface and Coatings 
Technology 
4.158 Surface and Coatings Technology 4.158 
Business Management related Journals 
Creativity & Innovation 
Management 
2.015 Creativity & Innovation Management 2.015 
 
2.2.2 IPR management 
The IPR management of the FreeMe project will be based on three pillars: Documentation of agreements, direct 
actions for the management of the IP, and necessary interactive activities. The two legal documents defining the main 
aspects of the IPR management  are the Grant Agreement (GA) signed between the EC and the partners and the 
Consortium Agreement (CA) signed among the partners. In the latter, all aspects related to the background 
knowledge of the partners that are necessary for the implementation of th e project as well as for the post -project 
exploitation of the results will be defined in detail. In general, it is already agreed that access to the background 
knowledge, IPRs, and research data will be royalty -free during the project implementation, while  the post-project 
exploitation it will be done under fair conditions.  
The general IP management actions will be undertaken by Incotec. The ownership of the foreground knowledge 
will be depicted in the final “Result Ownership List” (ROL) and will be decided between the partners consensually 
based on which partners have been involved in the generation of these results. The communication between the IPR 
manager and the consortium through appropriate meetings and questionnaires will define efficiently the foreground 
knowledge. In general, the owner of the IP belongs to the partner that develops it. Joint ownership will be accepted 
in the case that the results have been jointly generated, however in this case the joint owners will agree on the 
allocation and terms of exploitation of this joint ownership in communication with the Incotec and the Coordinator. 
The partners will be fully responsible for the protection of their foreground ownership in respect to their own 
legitimate interests, as well as the legitimat e interests of the other partners. Already the partners have agreed that 
results with a promising commercial or industrial exploitation capacity will be protected. All the IPR updates as well 
as the Key Results and their IP routes presented in the business  case will be included in the PEDR deliverables in 
terms of Task 8.3.  
Regarding the interactive activities with the consortium, an internal IPR seminar will be organized for the 
presentation of the different IP protection types and exploitation routes for each Key Results in the first year (M6) as 
well as a final IPR seminar on M46 for the presentation of the ROL. Other additional activities for the knowledge 
management support and the patent application process will be a patent mapping analysis on M12 for the FreeMe 
technological landscape by defining the number of patents, the Top Authorities, and the Patent Classification Codes 
(CPC) codes. All these activities will be also communicated through the ‘’Management board and IPR issues’’ annual 
meetings between the Exploitation, Dissemination, IPR and Technical manager.  
 
2.2.3 Draft Exploitation plan 
The Draft Plan for the Exploitation of results is based on (a) Expected Exploitable Results, ownership and market 
addressed (b) Market analysis & customers segmentation, (c) Expected market positioning and (d) Exploitation routes 
 
A. Expected Exploitable Results – Ownership – Markets/stakholders addressed 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [24 of 44] 
The following table briefly presents the expected exploitable results of the project, ownership and in which markets 
or stakeholders will affect. 
 
Table 2.4: Expected exploitable results  
Expected Exploitable Result Initial 
ownership split 
Market/stakeholders 
Bio-based resins containing Ni 
precursors (salts) for use in PoP 
processes 
AUTH, Gaser, 
PoliMi 
Companies in the field of plating on plastics (i.e. 
suppliers of materials, plating shops) AND 
research community 
A plating on plastic process based on 
sprayable resins 
Gaser, Polimi Companies in the field of plating on plastics ( i.e. 
suppliers, plating shops) AND end users: 
automotive, aerospace, home appliance AND 
research community 
A toxic-free process (Cr6+,& Pd free) 
for plating on plastics 
Cnano, Gaser 
A system based on spectroscopy 
principles for inspection of PoP process 
IRIS Companies applying PoP processes as contractors 
or in-house 
Multiscale models for materials 
modelling in the field of PoP 
IDE Companies in the field of plating on plastics AND 
research community 
A Decision support tool facilitating the 
adoption of SSbD FreeMe technologies 
EXE, IDE Partners of FreeMe, AND PoP industry including 
SMEs. 
 
B. Market analysis and customer segmentation 
The global electroplating Market was estimated to be ~ 13 billion € while the European share was ~5 billions for 
2019. Figure 2.1 provides an integrated view of the European electroplating market. [49]  The PoP accounts for the 
~4% of the total plating and is ~190 million€/year 
 
 
Figure 2.1:. European Electroplating Market.  
 
As shown in the general electroplating sector will show a CAGR of 3.4% howerv when it comes to Plating on 
Plastics the grow is expected to be significantly higher, ( CAGR 7.9%). [50] The need for lightweight and high -
performance products in several applications (automotive, aerospace, consumer goods, arts, design, fashion) is a key 
driver for the POP market growth.  The combination of the metallic surface properties with no changes on the 
composites structure along with the customer’s demand for the enhanced aesthetic appeal of the product will drive 
positively the POP market [51]. However, the regulatory framework (EPA, OSHA, REACH) has worked as a 
constrain basically for the hexavalent chromium plating process that causes environmental issues. The hexavalent 
chromium is under REACH authorization in the European Union.  Based on the final finishing the POP process is 
segmented into Precious metals (the higher revenues with the lower volume), Copper, Nickel, Chromium, and others. 
 
49 “Global Electroplating Maket 2020-2030” Future Market Inshight, 2020 
50 “Plating on Plastic Market Size by Finish, Plastic, Application, Industry”, Global Market Insights, 2020  
51 “Plating on plastic market size, share and trends analysis”, Grand View Research, 2017 

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [25 of 44] 
In the last years' Nickel is wi dely used in the POP processes for automotive parts such as door handles and wheels 
for decorative purposes of the interior and exterior area of the vehicles. Moreover, the addition of resins on the nickel 
coating offers properties benefits such as corrosion resistance. The automotive POP application  in 2020 was 
estimated at 383,3 million EUR  driven by global manufacturers such as Stellantis, partner of the consortium, 
willingness to achieve lower CO2 emissions and reduction on vehicle weight [52]. In profit terms of this market, 
the first place is owned by Europe, followed by North America. Germany, UK, France, Italy, Russia, and Spain hold 
the largest share of the European market.  More specifically, the European POP market  was calculated at 1 906 
million EUR in 2019 and will reach 274,8 million EUR by 2027. In France, it was estimated at 30 million EUR and 
is expected to grow at 8,47% CAGR from 2019-2027 as well as in the UK. Some European plating on plastics market 
players and possible investors for the FreeMe project are Atotech, Dow Chemicals, Chromoplastica Srl, G alva 
Decoparts Ltd, Coventya, and Bolta Werke GmbH . A more detailed market analysis will be included on the M6 
exploitation dissemination and communication plan with updates and the addition of other market details.  
 
C. Expected market positioning  
Upon successful implementation of the project the FreeMe technologies is expected to enjoy a favourable positioning 
in the PoP market as they are REACH compliant processes, ensuring occupation safety and environmental 
sustainability. The presence of three major com panies, word leader in their sector (Stellantis, Arcelic and Israel 
Aerospace Industry) with a total annual revenue reaching the 160 billion € is significant of the potential market appeal 
of the FreeMe processes. It should be highlighted that the 2 differ ent PoP routes delivered in FreeMe will have a 
production cost similar or even lower to the current PoP practice. The elimination of the use of CrO 3 (~22€/kg) and 
of Pd (~55.000/kg) and the introduction of common industrial acids or alkali or of bio -based resins that have a 
remarkable lower cost will lead to a reduction of the materials costs. Additionally, savings will result from the fact 
that companies operating chromic acid procedures, will not have to apply for REACH authorizations and the 
accompanying compliance cost in the production sites. On the other hand, the additional investments necessary for 
the application of the technologies (i.e. spraying chamber and components, inspection system) in production 
installations are expected to be reasonable , not surpassing the ~150 -200.000€ per installation. During the project 
implementation a detailed cost/benefit analysis will be conducted by the partners for adoption of technologies in their 
installations (i.e. Gaser, Cnano, CRF, Arcelic and IAI). 
 
D. Exploitation routes 
Each partner with established sales network and distribution channels will approach the respective market in the 
framework of the dissemination and exploitation plan.  Each industrial partner will identify the total number of 
potential c ustomers/collaborators based on th eir current clientele and positioning in the market . Similarly, the 
research oriented partners (i.e universities) will identify the most suitable exploitation routes for their results. The  
 
Table 2.5: Partners exploitation routes  
Partner IP protection and handling Exploitation route 
Gaser Trade secret, licensing of 
technologies 
Gaser will adopt the new technologies in its premises 
providing PoP services 
PoliMi Open access respecting partners IPRs Further research activities including new type of 
polymeric materials 
Cnano Patent and licencing of technology Adoption of technology for high-tech applications 
AUTH Open access respecting partners IPRs 
In the future spin-off company 
Research for transfering of bio-based composite resin 
technologies to new applications 
Idener Open access  Collaboration with EMMC and other partners for 
development of new modelling software 
IRIS Patent of system Integration of monitoring systems in PoP facilities 
ICCRAM Open access of SSbD protocols Further research activities and consultancy in the field 
EXE Open access of DST Provision of DST tool and collaboration with FreeMe 
partners for widening the adoption of technology 
INC N/A Provision of market services in the field of PoP 
CRF Licencing of technology Close collaboration with the technology developers of 
FreeMe in order to be the early adopters of the PoP 
technologies in their products 
ARC Licencing of technology 
IAI Licencing of technology 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]          [26 of 44]