1.1 Objectives and ambition  
1.1.1 FreeMe objectives 
The industrial use of plastics  worldwide has increased remarkably over the last 30 years by virtue of their 
exceptional properties such as low density , lightweight , low cost, versatility, flexibility, strength, and easy 
machinability. Many plastic parts require a protective metallic coating  to enhance their wear and corrosion 
resistance and to provide a shiny, polished, aesthetically pleasing final surface. The electrodeposition of metals 
on solid substrates (electroplating) is widely considered as the most efficient strategy for producing metal coatings. 
However, plating on plastics (PoP)  via the application of an external electric potential is practically not feasible 
because most plastics are non-conductive. PoP of common, non-conductive plastics (polymers) such as ABS, PET, 
PLA, Nylon blends and 3D printed resins requires the initial deposition of a thin metal film  (metallization) via a 
process called “electroless plating” [1] during which metal cations are chemically reduced to metal inside a liquid 
bath. Therefore, metal deposition on the polymer surface proceeds in the absence of an external source of electrical 
power. Importantly, the surface of the polymeric substrate must undergo a specific pre -treatment before the 
metallization step that includes two crucial steps: 
• etching to increase the hydrophilicity and roughness of the surface that will have a vital role in the 
adhesion of the metallic film on plastic 
• surface activation to “seed” the surface with a catalyst  which in turn creates nucleation sites for the 
final electroless metallization step.  
Substrate pre -treatment is key to obtain a homogeneous and dense metal coating during the metallization step . 
Surface etching enhances metal adhesion whereas surface activation provides finely dispersed nucleation sites for 
ensuing electroless metal deposition. Currently, industrial PoP processes utilize Cr6+ based solutions (e.g., chromic 
acid) for surface etching. With respect to surfa ce activation, Sn-Pd colloidal baths  are currently employed. 
Palladium is an exceedingly rare, precious metal which significantly raises costs. Concluding the current industrial 
processes for PoP  present the following significant disadvantages in respect to environmental sustainability, 
occupational safety, and quality of coatings: [2] 
 
a. A mixture of Chromic (Cr6+) and sulfuric acids bath solution is used as the SoA process for plastic etching. The 
bath should operate at a temperature between 50 -70oC making the process of high risk  in relation to the 
occupation safety and environment as Cr6+ is a recognized carcinogenic and highly toxic compound.  
b. Palladium (in solutions with tin salts) is used to catalyze the reduction of copper or nickel to form a continuous 
conductive layer. This layer is necessary for the deposition of the final electroplated coating in the surface of 
 
1 A. Equbal, and A. K. Sood, Investigation on metallization in FDM build ABS part using electroless deposition method, Journal of 
Manufacturing Processes 19, 22-31 (2015) 
2 J. Margolis, “Metallic Plating and Coating on Plastics”, Conductive Polymers and Pla stics. Springer, Boston, MA. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-0851-5_3 

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [2 of 44] 
the plastic component. Pd is a Critical Raw material (CRM) as its use is strongly depended in imports (i.e.from 
Russia). Replacement of Pd from processes with more abundant materials is highly desirable. 
c. The plating result  is highly dependent on the composition of the plastic component . Inhomogeneities in the 
final coating or bad adhesion may occur, degrading the aesthetics as well as its functionalities.  
 
   
Figure 1.1 a: Gasers PoP baths 
based on SoA technology 
Figure 1.1b: Metal coated plastic 
articles by Gaser baths 
Figure 1.1c: Coated and uncoated 
3D printed artifact (Cnano) [3] 
 
FreeMe project will investigate two revolutionaries approaches  for the metallization of polymeric (plastic or 
resins) surfaces, alternative to the SoA, without the use of hexavalent chromium and palladium.  
The first approach is based on the use of sprayable resins (e.g. epoxy-acrylate resins) with the additions of suitable 
nickel based precursors (i.e. anhydrous nickel salts). This composite resin can be deposited uniformly in the surface 
of the plastic object by spray deposition methods. The nickel precursors are afterwards reduced utilizing appropriate 
reduction agents creating the necessary nuclei for the next step of electroless deposition and the formation of the 
conductive layer. The second technology is based on a  Cr6+ & Pd free pre-treatment of the polymer s urface 
followed by incorporation of nickel active sites via reduction of nickel salts in the surface of the polymer. Similarly, 
to the first technology the electroless step follows. For both cases the final step is to apply the desired metal coating 
for the final metal finishing (i.e. nickel, copper, chromium or even precious metals) . The proposed methodologies 
are based on results of four partners (Gaser, PoliMi, AUTH and Cnano) obtained by in-house, national and EC funded 
research project. The FreeMe project main objectives are: 
 
Elimination of use of Cr6+ and Pd from the PoP process. The FreeMe technologies will be based on REACH 
compliant chemicals, avoiding toxic compounds, and thus ensuring the long-term sustainability of the process. 
 
To increase the maturity of the proposed FreeMe technology to TRL 5 and bring it closer to market applications the 
following specific objectives should be achieved. 
1. Deployment and implementation of a safe and sustainable by design  (SSBD) strategy concerning the 
development of the new FreeMe technologies for PoP that will cover the whole lifecycle (from raw materials to 
recycling of the plated component). This will be based on selection of REACH compliant chemicals, evaluation 
of processes and materials relate d to safety in operational environment, end application and end -of life 
scenarios (e.g. recycling) and assessment of the overall sustainability of the technology.  
2. Development of a metallization technology of plastic surfaces (i.e. ABS, PET, PLA, Nylon blends and 3D 
printed resins,) with a technology based on green REACH compliant sprayable UV-curable composite bio-
based resins: Sprayable bio-based epoxy or epoxy-acrylate resins containing anhydrous nickel salts, i.e. NiCl2 
particles with size lower than 1 ,5μm, in concentrations of 0.5-2%wt will be produced. The Ni salt particles in 
the resin’s surface will be chemically reduced forming Ni nuclei, acting as catalysts for the following electroless 
process. 
3. Development of Cr6+ free etching technologies for plastics (i.e. ABS, PET, PLA, Nylon blends and 3D printed 
resins) pretreatment. The technology is based on the use acids or alkali mixtures to micro-etch the surface and 
prepare it for the activation steps utilizing Ni-based salts and reduction of them  For the 3D printed resins to 
used mixtures of alkali to micro-etch the surface, followed by the activation step 
For both the objectives 2 and 3, the ultimate target is to achieve excellent adhesion of the coatings in the 
plastic surface (4,9 N/25mm) based on peel tests 
4. Development of in -silico techniques (simulation and modelling ) facilitating both the development and the 
synthesis and application of the sprayable composite resins and on the optimization of plastic surface etching 
based on multi-scale models, ranging from atomic to mesoscopic scales.  
5. Development of a fast and accurate inspection method based on spectroscop ic imaging ellipsometry and 
optical coherence tomography for micro -scale monitoring (up to 3 μm) for the QC of the process (KPI: to 
monitor up to 3μm scale resolution, with 99% probability of defect detection) 
 
3 https://www.3dplate.gr/electroless-metallization-of-a-3d-printed-resin-object/ 

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [3 of 44] 
6. Demonstration of the FreeMe technologies in automotive, aerospace and home appliances demonstrators by 
applying metallic coatings on plastic components and proceed in validation of them 
7. Assessment of the recyclability of coated polymers  based on the current SoA technologies for recycling (i.e. 
abrasive blasting, cryogenic embrittlement and mechanical crushing).  
8. Development of a data driven Decision Support Tool combining data from SSBD assessment, in -silico 
approaches, experimental/manufacturing results (i.e. operational parameters, structural and morp hological 
characterization, properties), LCA/LCC assessment and specification/requirement of test cases, for serving 
industrial end users, including SMEs, on the selection, development and application of the most suitable PoP 
technology.  
9. To facilitate the acceptance of the new technologies by the market defining the standardization landscape and 
contribution to future standards development. 
10. To prepare business plans and define exploitation routes  for the partners of the project based on the results 
and to enhance their impact by undertaking targeted dissemination and exploitation activities, including 
training course for the PoP industry 
 
1.1.2 Relation of FreeMe objectives with the topic and realistic feasibility 
The proposed technologies of FreeMe project aims on revolutionizing the PoP surface treatment industry. By 
eliminating the use of Cr6+ (a toxic and carcinogenic compound) and the use of Pd (a platinum group metal), FreeMe 
will offer a safe and sustainable solution that can dominate the market. The novel processes will deliver high quality 
coating systems that will provide protection of plastic surfaces from corrosion and wear, increase the surface 
hardness, promote multifunctionality  (i.e. electromagnetic shielding)  and high aesthetics (appearance). A basic 
requirement to achieve these properties is the excellent adhesion of the coating on the plastic surface. [4] Poor 
adhesion will lead to premature failure of the coating and consequently of the coated polymer components. A main 
part of the research activities of the project focuses on the achievement of excellent bonding of the coating systems 
with the plastic substrate. Finally, in respect to the targets of the European Green Deal, a SSbD strategy will be set 
up and implemented across the project so that:  
(a) chemicals, materials and products designed, produced and used in the FreeMe project will not harm people 
and the environment (i.e. decrease pollution, achieve toxic-free productions and promote circular economy)  
(b) give a boost to the European surface finishing industry  that struggles to survive between the stricter EC 
regulatory framework and the increased competition from Asian countries (e.g. China, India). [5] 
The involvement of industrial partners covering the supply chain of the PoP sector enhances the market orientation 
of the research activities, based on industrial standards and methodologies. Fin ally, the FreeMe technology will be 
validated in demonstrators covering industries such as automotive, aerospace and home appliances.  
 
1.1.3 Advancements in relation to the SoA 
The last decades a series of new technologies were oriented towards novel metallization routes . The following 
paragraph briefly presents the most important of them. 
1. Vacuum Metallization (Physical Vapor Deposition). In this process a metal coating is deposited on prepared 
surfaces (washed, etched). A metal (usually aluminum) is evaporated in a vacuum chamber and the vapor 
condenses onto the surface of the plastic part. The main disadvantage s of the process are the high cost of the 
technology, the thorough pre -treatment process, and the use of aluminum layer, a difficult to plate metal for 
providing the final metal finishing of the component. [6] 
2. Flame/arc spraying. A low-cost metallization process in which liquid metal is sprayed onto a plastic part. The 
produced layer is thick compared to other metallization methods. Main drawbacks of the technology are that the 
coatings prepared by these methods are quite porous, coating adhesion is lower, and the surface roughness is 
relatively high. [7] 
3. Sputtering metallization. It is a process in which metal atoms are transferred from a metal target via inert gas 
plasma to the plastic surface. The technology presents a better a dhesion compared to the previous mentioned 
due to higher kinetic energy of the metal atoms. Main disadvantages are the high cost of the method and the low 
production rate that makes it not suitable for mass applications [8] 
4. Direct electroplating in conduc tive polymers . The use of conductive polymers that will be directly 
electroplated has attracted the interest of research community. This can be achieved either by intrinsic 
 
4 Boipai B. et.al, “ Improvement in Adhesion of Electroless Coating on Plastic Substrates: A Review”, Recent Advances in Manufacturing 
Processes. Springer, 2021, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-3686-8_15 
5 “Asia-Pacific metal finishing market – growth, trends, COVID-19 impact and forecasts (2021-2026), Mordor Intelligence, 2021 
6 J.G. Drobny, “Application of Fluoropolymer Films”, Plastic Design Library, William Andrew, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-12-
816128-9.00001-5 
7 R. Gonzalez “A review of thermal spray metallization of polymer based structures”, Journal of Thermal Spray T echnology 25, 2016, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11666-016-0415-7 
8 J. Liebeskind, “Plasma spraying for selective metallization of 3D polymer surfaces” 22 nd International Symposium on Plasma Chemistry, 
July 5-10 2015, Antwerp, Belgium 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [4 of 44] 
conductors (i.e conductive polymers) or by extrinsic conductors (i.e. composite conductive polymers) in which 
the conductivity is due to the inclusion of conductive fillers in the polymer matrix. [9] While the first class of 
polymers is very expensive and cannot be used in large volume applications, the latter case is a promising 
technology for commercial applications. In the FreeMe project a variation of this technology is used in the case 
of sprayable composite resins. The advantage of FreeMe proposed solution is that instead of utilizing a bulk 
conductive polymer, only a thin layer will be sprayed in the surface of the polymer part making the process less 
expensive and not creating doubts about the feasibility of recyclability of coated part as it will be later explained.  
5. Cr6+ free etching process. The etching step in PoP has two purposes: to make the surface hydrophilic and to 
form microscopic holes in the surface of the plastic to provide the anchoring sites for activation and metal 
deposition. These sites are needed for adhesion between the plastic and the metal. The etching or dissolving of 
the butadiene phase in ABS requires strong oxidizing agents and an acidic medium. The last decade a high R&I 
effort has been devoted in developing etching process without the use chromic acid.  FreeMe project wil l 
upscale such a technology . Utilizing modelling and DoE, mixtures of REACH compliant acids will be 
investigated in combination with the main polymers used by the industry today.  
 
Relevant Patent Search and commercial products 
The consortium carried out a patent analysis in the field of toxic-free metallization of plastics. WIPO, EPO, and 
PatSnap platforms were used for the identification of the number of patents and other useful information. The targets 
of the patent search are on one hand to investigate the current technology landscape (Figure 1.2a) and freedom to 
operate (FTO) study and on the other hand to obtain useful insights facilitating the market uptake of the technologies 
and the R&D strategy to be followed within the FreeMe project. A detailed patent mapping landscape showcases the 
patent value, the Top Assignees, the Top Classification Patent Codes (CPC) and other data. An initial ‘’bottom-up’’ 
approach was followed starting from the more general concept of “Plating on Plastics” (utilizing similar keywords) 
and ending up with the “non-toxic plating on plastics”. Based on the relevant low number of patents (Table 1.1), it is 
evident that there is an innovation space for the development of the FreeMe concept. A first study of these patents 
showed that there are not direct overlaps with the FreeMe propose technologies.  The patent landscape of the 
relative “non- toxic plating on plastics” was further analyzed and the Top Assignees Countries (Figure 1.2b) are 
presented. Among the Top Assignees, China, United states, and Germany have leading positions. The patent mapping 
information will also enhance the business planning activities by defining the associated geographical market strength 
and possible IP holders for collaboration and networking. In most cases the research and development activities are 
associated with the market analysis. Patent mapping analysis will be updated during the project.                                                                                       
 
  
Figure 1.2a: Technology landscape of patent search Figure 1.2b: Top assingees countries 
 
Table 1.1: Patent mapping 
Patent Mapping No of 
Patents 
Keywords search on PatSnap 
Platting on plastics  26,271 TAC_ALL:(metallization or metallization or ''plating on plastic'' or ''plating on 
plastics'') 
Electroless plating on 
plastics 
3,793 TAC_ALL:(metallization or metallization or ''plating on plastic'' or ''plating on 
plastics'') AND TAC_ALL:(electroless or electroplating) 
Toxic-free 
Electroless plating on 
plastics 
99 (Metallization OR "plating on plastics" OR "plating on plastic") AND 
TAC:(electroplating OR electroless) AND TAC:(" hexavalent chromium " OR " 
chromic acid " OR "Cr6+ free" OR "non-toxic" OR "toxic free" OR "toxic-free") 
 
 
9 P. Augustyn, “A review on the direct electroplating of polymeric materials”, Journal of Materials Science, 56, 2021, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-021-06246-w  

 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FreeMe]   [5 of 44] 
 
1.1.4 R&I maturity  
In the following table the  R&I maturity of the main proposed technologies is presented. The starting and targeted 
TRL is also provided as an indication of the expected progress in terms of lab to market: 
1. Sprayable resin technologies.    Start TRl: 3 End TRL: 5 
The manufacture of epoxy-based (nano)composite resins with different types of nano-additives and fillers is a mature 
technology in various industrial sectors, e.g. automotive, aerospace, packaging, etc. [ 10] Sprayable resins are 
attracting increased interest  as they can facilitate continuous processes of thin coatings formation on metals, 
plastics and other surfaces. However, the viscosity of the epoxy prepolymer to be sprayed and the possible need for 
use of organic solvenst may in some cases limit the industrial application of spraying technologies. Furthermore, the 
effect on Ni-salts fillers (i.e NiCl2) on the viscosity and UV curing process, along with the desired propert y of thin 
epoxy-based polymeric films, are still under development. FreeMe aims to bring this technology from TRL 3 to 5 
and demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed approach. The utilization of biomass derived platform chemicals, 
such as isosorbide and itaconic acid, as the starting chemicals to synthesize novel UV curable bio-based epoxy (and 
epoxy-acrylate) monomers and resins, along with their mixing with Ni Salts will be systematically investigated to 
evolve from the experimental proof of concept to technology validated in relevant environment (TRL5). Furthermore, 
recent results on the labs of PoliMi have shown that the reduction of Ni salts particles in resins is feasible and thus 
the formed nuclei can act as activation sites for the next step of electroless nickel application.  
2. Cr6+ free etching and Pd free surface activation Start TRl: 3 End TRL: 5 
Cnano has studied chromic acid and Pd free technologies in the Greek national funded project 3Dplate. Both ABS, 
PET and PLA polymers as well as 3D printed resins have been treated in lab scale apparatus with different mixtures 
of chemicals (i.e. piranha solutions, caustic soda solutions etc) achieving very promising results in terms of etching 
process and adhesion of the coating in the surface. The novel etching processes were followed by successful Pd free 
activation of the surface utilizing nickel salts. In the framework of FreeMe project, the technology will be optimized 
in the laboratory with the contribution of the multi-scale modelling activities and then will be upscaled to the use of 
pilot line (150 lt volume)  
3. In-silico approaches     Technology transfer 
The proposed methods for multi-scale modelling activities within FreeMe are more than validated in the modelling 
industry and have been widely used to support research and design activities in the material modelling area. The tools 
used to perform such modelling activities as NWChem, Gaussian, SIESTA, LAMMPS, Gromacs or COMSOL are 
also widely validated for both research and commercial activities. However, the specific models to be developed 
within FreeMe are innovative in terms of the materials used and the targeted applications. 
4. Surface inspection methods    Technology transfer 
IRIS has studied and developed optical methods for inline real-time thickness monitoring of coatings and lamination, 
compounding, injection/co -injection and electrospray Nano deposition. This activity took place at the 
OPTINANOPRO project (H2020, GA Nr: 686116). The sensors are based on spectral reflectance and ellipsometry, 
designed to measure thickness in coating and na no deposition processes. Within FreeMe project, IRIS aims to 
optimize the technology measuring resins in lab scale and then to upscale it in the pilot line, introducing a real-time 
acquisition of data.