3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
3.2.1 Consortium as a whole 
FreeMe presents a highly interconnected network of partners that will act towards the sustainable development of 
three different end user applications, which have been selected due to the fact that they are representing a wide 
spectrum of sectors interested in the project results. The partners are distributed across 5 Countries (Italy, Spain, 
Greece, Israel, and Turkey ). The partners will have a unique role in the consortium and synergies will be created 
between them across the project implementation. The consortium is characterized as highly industrial driven having 
in its partnership 6 SMEs including the coordinator, 3 Large Enterprises and 3 Universities. More specifically: 
Gaser: An SME in the north of Italy member of a group of companies acting in the field of surface finishing. Gaser 
has long tradition in development of proprietary technologies via in-house research activities. It has a long-standing 
collaboration with PoliMi and has collaborated also closely with Cnano. It role will be vertical spannin g from 
synthesis of chemical baths and up to application of the FreeMe technologies and validation of coatings.  
Cnano is Greek a SME  that is well know on the optimization of industrial surface treatment processes, offering 
multiple solutions on every day troubleshoots of plating facilities and develop customized plating methods. The 
company has been working the last 5 years on 3D Printing developing PoP protocols and plating baths formulations. 
Cnano is active also in the art & design sector, collaborating  with famous artists (i.e. Costas Gaitis) for applying 
coatings in artefacts. Finally, Cnano has research agreements with Gaser and PoliMi.  
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [42 of 44] 
IDE is an IT company offering solutions to materials modelling, member of EMMC. It has collaborated with Gaser, 
PoliMi and Cnano in the framework of PureNano project providing optimization models. Through this collaboration 
IDE has developed knowledge in the demanding field of surface finishing, something that will useful for the FreeMe 
implementation.  
IRIS has long experience in monitoring technologies. It develops monitoring and inspection systems for process QC 
and IoT-Industry 4.0 concepts and its systems are integrated in various production facilities, mainly related to plastic 
processing.  
EXE is an engineering company developing customizable solutions, such as decision support tools, for industrial 
end-users. EXE has a strong background in process design, simulation and mathematical programing that are properly 
integrated towards the construction of optimization tools for decision -making and support. For this purpose, EXE 
utilizes modelling environments, like GAMS software, for the development of DSTs, which offer user -friendly 
interfaces and multiple-purpose services. 
INC is a  consultancy company with experience in capitalizing research results, developing business plans and 
commercialization roadmaps. It will have an important role in the project providing guidelines for in -time actions 
related to market adoption.  
The three large enterprises are very well positioned in their fields. A more analytical description is in paragraph 
3.2.2. Their role in the project will be of high importance providing specification and validating the technologies 
based on industrial standards.   
 
 
Figure 3.2: FreeMe partnership 
 
The three Universities participating in the project are well established in their corresponding fields: 
PoliMi has a more than 50 years tradition in the surface and finishing industry and is p oint of reference for plating 
process across Europe and more importantly in the North Italy that provide research services and consultancy to 
companies. It has collaborated in the past with most of the partners of the consortium in previous EC projects. It s 
role is crucial for the development of the technologies.  
AUTH’s team has a world recognition on developing bio-based polymers and resins with more than 250 publications 
in the relevant field the last 10 years. It has strong experience in collaboration w ith the industry providing research 
activities design of new chemical formulations. 
Finally, ICCRAM has developed a high expertise in the field of safety and environmental assessment. It coordinates 
a number of relevant projects, is member in EC initiative s about safety and sustainability. It will lead the relevant 
activities in the project.  
 
The nature of the complementary interrelations within the work structure of the proposed work, arises from the 
interdisciplinary contributions, described in sections 1.2 and 3.2 In Figure 3.3 , the key expertise for project 
implementation brought by each partner is presented. The consortium covers all aspects for the development of the 
technologies having main contributors and partners with supplementary knowledge and expertise. 
 

 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [43 of 44] 
 
Figure 3.3: Consortium complementarity table 
 
 
3.2.2 Access to critical infrastructure 
The consortium members conduct innovative research in their own sub -disciplines for which they are recognized. 
They have all the necessary expertise and equipment to carry out their tasks within FreeMe. The table below presents 
the infrastructure and important instrumentation brought in the project by the partners. The consortium has an 
autonomous capacity to implement this project.  
 
Table 3.3: Partners Infrastructures 
Partner Infrastructure 
Gaser, Cnano, 
PoliMi 
Plating baths up to 1000 L, Pilot Lines of Plating baths (1-120L) 
PoliMi, AUTH Chemistry and analytical laboratories, Polymer production and Compounding, reactors for 
most relevant polymer/composites production technologies present in the industry 
Cnano Characterization facilities (FTIR, UV-Vis spectrophotometer, hardness, contact angle, DSL  
IRIS Spectroscopic Laboratory, Optical photonics -based technologies and PAT systems, 
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories 
AUTH Polymer production and Compounding (reactors representing the most relevant 
polymer/plastics/composites production technologies present in the industry) 
PoliMi, AUTH  
SEM, XRD, XPS, profilometry, Raman, AFM, NMR, Spectrophotometers, 
gonioreflectometer, X Ray Fluorescence (XRF and micro -XRF) X Ray Diffraction (Micro 
XRD Spectroscopy) 
CRF, IAI, ARC 
Products validation: aging and reliability, Reliability chambers: UV , ° C, %RH cycling, salt 
spray, cyclic corrosion, CASS test Mechanical tests: abrasion, adhesion, stone chipping, 
dynamometer, Charpy, Izod 
ICCRAM, 
IRIS, IDE 
Toxicology testing, chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from 
Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial chemometric tools (Matlab  and Python 
toolboxes). 
IRIS, EXE 
IDE, ICCRAM 
Big data storage (software/modelling tools), Matlab and Python toolboxes, GAMS 
ICCRAM LCA software Simapro 9.2, LCA,  
 
3.2.4 Role, adequacy and resources of each partner 
FreeMe has been designed with a clear set of objectives surrounded by the Safe and Sustainable Plating on Plastics Industry, 
aligned with the Work Programme topic description and the Destination and directly transferred to the work structure as the 
primary and only objectives of each work package. The consortium has been built with distinct roles to be undertaken but 
ensuring complementarities will be exploited and that the final outcome will be the delivery of the exact project objective. 
Each partner has evaluated their role and assessed in detail the work to be carried out, the lead as well as the supporting roles 
to be undertaken, and the requirements arising by the above. The contribution requested by the EC is 4.834.592,00 € € for a 
total of 12 partners, which can be considered as profitable ratio of investment over expected impact. As an indication of the 
high potential of the proposed work should be considered the ambitious post-project exploitation planning. End-users will 
have to undergo a 5 years technology uptake plan followed by a certification acquirement procedure that comes with costs in 
the range of millions that will be own investments, the SMEs will additionally apply a request to the Horizon Results Platform 

 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [44 of 44] 
(HRP) building a bridge with private investors. 
 
 
3.2.5 Industry involvement and commercialization potential.  
FreeMe is a highly industrial driven project led by an SME (Gaser) belonging to a group of companies (Gruppo 
Gaser) with established presence and commercial networks in the field of surface fini shing, including plating on 
plastic processes. The commercialization potential of FreeMe project is consider as significantly high as it deals with 
a real industrial need that seeks an urgent solution. Three large enterprises, point of reference in their s ectors, have 
joined the consortium to assist with their industry driven innovation philosophy the fast uptake of the results. 
Stellantis (CRF) is a top automotive group of companies having in its portfolio world recognized brands. Arcelik, is 
a major manufacturer and provide of home appliance and other consumer goods while Israel Aerospace Industry is a 
world recognized innovation in the field of aerospace. All three companies are currently operating either in-house or 
via their subcontractors chromium acid etching and Pd based activation steps. Moving to safer processes (both from 
the side of occupation health and environmental  protection as well as from the side of securing supply chains via 
exclusion of Pd use) will give them a significant competitive advantage for the highly aware consumers. 
Their role in the project will be of high importance for the development of the technologies. They will provide 
industrial based specifications and high standards, while they will follow and properly guide the researc h activities 
towards achieving thes standards.  
Finally, it should be highlighted that in FreeMe consortium the whole supply chain of PoP is formed, covering 
materials suppliers (i.e Gaser), plating shops (i.e. Cnano and Gaser) and end users (i.e. CRF, ARC  and IAI). This 
will allow a holistic view of industrial spec and requirements across the value chain, providing valuable input in the 
research activities.  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Enrico GALLIANI on 23/09/2021 16:36:21 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)