3.1 Work plan and resources  
In line with the objectives that FreeME must achieve in these 48 months project, the work to be accomplished has 
been structured in nine work packages (Figure 3.1). Each WP has been sub-divided into tasks. WP leaders and task 
leaders have been assigned based on their core expertise and contribution in the specific tasks, with main purpose to 
lead and monitor the progress. The reporting and monitoring of the progress and results is  based on a set of 
Deliverables (Table 3.1c) and Milestones (Table 3.1d). The Deliverables have been scheduled to provide an 
integrated reporting of the work implemented in WPs and relevant Tasks. Some of them will serve as living 
documents (i.e. the PEDRC ). Milestones are positioned across the 48 months with the purpose to monitor the 
achievement of specific goals of the project that will allow the smooth continuation.  
 
Table 3.1a: List of work packages  
WP 
No 
  Work Package Title Lead 
Par/nt No 
Lead Par/nt 
Short Name 
PMs Start 
Month 
End 
month 
WP1 Project’s Requirements & Specifications 1 Gaser 42 1 6 
WP2 Safe & Sustainable by Design Strategy 7 ICCRAM 100 1 48 
WP3 Sprayable resin process 2 PoliMi 100 5 24 
WP4 Cr6+ & Pd free metallization process 3 Cnano 68 6 48 
WP5 Development of supporting technologies 5 IDE 82 1 48 
WP6 Validation of technologies in end user's 
test cases 
10 CRF 100 6 48 
WP7 Roadmap to market deployment  2 PoliMi 76 1 42 
WP8 Extroversion and Exploitation activities 8 EXE 104 1 48 
WP9 Project management 1 Gaser 53 1 48 
Total 725   
 
 
Figure 3.1:. FreeMe PERT diagram . 
 
 
 

 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [28 of 44] 
Figure 3.1: Gantt chart of FreeMe project. 
 
  
 

 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [29 of 44] 
Table 3.1 b: Description of each work package 
 
Work Package 
Number 
1 Lead Beneficiary Gaser 
Work Package Title Project’s Requirements & Specifications 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCRAM EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 1 End Month 6 
Objectives 
WP 1 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To harmonize the R&I towards REACH compliance chemicals 
2. To provide specification on the methods and the equipment that will be utilized in the project 
3. To define the requirements of the end users in terms of materials, properties and standards 
Description of Work 
Task 1.1: REACH & RoHS compliance (Task Leader: Gaser), M01-06 
Supported by: All partners 
As a leading industrial partner in the surface and finishing industry, with a strong position in the Plating on Plastics 
field, Gaser will lead the compliance task. In collaboration with the other partners the proposed ch emicals for the 
development of the technologies will be listed and analyzed. No chemical under the restriction lists of REACH 
(SVHCs) as well as RoHS will be selected, while data from the REACH (e.g. risks associated with exposure to the 
selected chemical throughout the lifecycle of the targeted products, including waste and disposal will be reported. 
Interaction with Task 2.1 will take place. 
 
Task 1.2 Specifications on methods and equipment (Task Leader: PoliMi), M01-06 
Supported by: All partners 
In this task the specifications for the methods and the equipment that will be utilized during the project will be 
provided. Flow charts and diagrams of raw materials, processes and wastes  will be developed, including 
quantities and potential exposure risks based on data of Task 1.1. Precaution measures for the proper handling of 
materials and equipment will be also delivered. Finally, dimensioning of l ines will be made in order to cover the 
needs of the end users’ applications based on data provided by task 1.3 will be made. 
 
Task 1.3 Requirements of end users’ test cases (Task Leader: CRF), M01-06 
Supported by: All partners 
In this task the specificati on and requirements of the end user’s applications will be collected and reported. This 
will include the type of polymeric substrates used, designs of the objects, current pre -treatment and metallization 
processes, desired properties (e.g. surface hardness , wear and corrosion resistance, aesthetics) will be provided 
together with the final surface finishing preferences (i.e. the type of the final electroplated metal after the 
metallization process). Additionally, the QC protocols and standards followed will be also provided.  Strong 
interactions with Task 2.1 will take place.  
Deliverables 
D1.1 Report on specifications. The deliverable will contain specifications and requirements as collected in tasks 
1.1 and 1.2 and designs and data provided by end users concerning the test cases as well as the standards that 
will be utilized for the validation of them (Task 1.3). Delivery: M06 by GASER 
 
 
Work Package 
Number 
2 Lead Beneficiary ICCRAM 
Work Package Title Safe & Sustainable by Design Strategy 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCRAM EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 1 End Month 48 
Objectives 
WP 2 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To reduce human and environmental risk avoiding known substances of concern through the assessment of 
potential safety impacts of prototype candidates. 
2. To determine the sustainability performance of new PoP processes through life cycle against various dimensions 
3. To assess the recyclability of the coated plastics 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [30 of 44] 
Description of Work 
Task 2.1: Identification of options for technology delivery (Task Leader: ICCRAM), M01-36 
Supported by: All partners 
During this task, the design team defined in the consortium (product designers, material engineers, chemists, 
toxicologists, and sustainability experts , designers and business developers from end uses ), will consider the 
functionalities that the FreeMe technologies will deliver in the final products. Based on the specifications provided 
in WP1 a minimum level of performance will be defined to be the baseline for the development of technologies  
targeting to prolong the products lifecycle by increasing durability and repairability. Another target of this task will 
be to reduce the complexity of product’s designs based on the progress of the technical work in WP3, 4 and 5  and 
thus, to easy the processes of recycling, repairing or reduce the raw materials used, fostering the Green Deal targets. 
  
Task 2.2: Assessment of environmental sustainability (Task Leader: ICCRAM), M12-48 
Supported by: All partners 
The task aims at supporting the sustainable synthesis and implementation of the proposed PoP processes. Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA), Life Cyc le Costing (LCC) and Social Life Cycle Assessment (S -LCA), will be performed to 
compare: 
- Sustainability by Design strategies: Based on inputs collected (e.g. materials and energy use, costs, working 
conditions), the materials and process alternatives leading to the best sustainability performances for the same 
functionality will be identified to support sustainable-by-design of the metallization technologies. 
- Market implementation scenarios: Depending on the application envisaged, potential impacts will be compared to 
benchmarking technologies, to understand the benefits and potential trade -offs of the deployment of the newly 
proposed technologies (e.g. higher safety for workers but increased carbon footprint). 
The LCA, LCC and S-LCA evaluations will follow existing standards (e.g. the Product Environmental Footprint) 
and use the same scope (e.g. compared scenarios, system boundaries, functional unit). Based on the results analysis, 
recommendations for the Sustainable by Design and the fut ure large -scale deployment of the proposed PoP 
processes will be drawn. 
 
Task 2.3: Human and environmental safety assessment (Task Leader: ICCRAM), M12-48 
Supported by: All partners 
This task will provide evaluations that demonstrate the reduced toxicity o f the new processes developed and 
materials involved. A set of protocols will be applied in order to measure their potential risk in comparison with 
SoA equivalent processes. Toxicological potential against human health will be determined employing appropriate 
cellular models adequate to expected exposure routes for in vitro cytotoxicity and cell viability assays. The 
ecotoxicity and potential danger for the environment of the new catalysts will be also assessed analysing their impact 
in the bioluminescent marine bacterium Vibrio fischeri, in the model fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as well as 
in a set of microbial exoenzymes responsible for different biological functions from eukaryotic and prokaryotic 
organisms. The proposed toxicological tests will be p erformed employing samples obtained at different process 
stages. 
 
Task 2.4: Application of the Sustainability and Safe-by-Design strategy (Task Leader: ICCRAM), M24-48 
Supported by: All partners 
This task will implement a SSbD innovation approach to ensure that the resulting FREEME’s processes are safe, 
both for humans and the environment, and sustainable along their life cycle at an early stage, aligned to the EU 
chemicals strategy for sustainability, including: 
(i) Safe-by-Design (SbD) strategies, which focus on a) Safe-by-Material Design –SbMD- strategies (that will 
allow reduce potential risk based on the physicochemical and (eco)toxicological properties of the materials; and b) 
Safe-by-Process Design -SbPD- strategies, based on the relevant factor s during the processing of the materials in 
terms of potential exposure to hazardous substances, and  
(ii) Sustainability-by-Design (SusbD) strategies that can increase the environmental, economic and social 
sustainability performances of the novel PoP processes. 
An assessment of the safety and sustainability performances throughout the processes and product’s life cycle will 
be done for both types of strategies. All the evaluated indicators will be integrated (e.g. via multi -criteria decision 
analysis) resulting into a SSbD index for each FreeMe process. This will allow the identification of the most safe 
and sustainable alternatives at the design stage, further translated into recommendations for the implementation of 
SSbD strategies 
 
Task 2.5: Recyclability and Repairability assessment (Task Leader: PoliMI), M12-48 
Supported by: Gaser, Cnano,  
Removal of the metal coatings from plastic substrates for recycling will be investigated by employing one of the 
following methods: 1) abrasive blasting, 2) cryogenic embrittlement and 3) mechanical crushing. Abrasive 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [31 of 44] 
blasting. is the operation of forcibly propelling a stream of abrasive material against a surface under high pressure. 
Dry ice-blasting is a special type of abrasive blasting where dry ice (solidified carbon dioxide) will be accelerated 
in a pressurized air stream and directed at a surface in order to clean it. Cryogenic embrittlement may also be used 
to remove metallic coatings from plastic substrates. The recovery system involves feeding metal-plated plastics into 
a grinder. The grinder contains a pre-crusher which breaks up the parts into smaller pieces and feeds them into the 
grinder which subsequently reduces the scrap from half-inch pieces to coarse powder. A magnetic drum separator 
removes the pieces of metal that have been split off during grinding. The final step contains going through a 
cryogenic feeder, where liquid nitrogen cools the scrap to almost freezing, creating stresses which cause additional 
metal to splinter off. Finally, metal-plated plastics, for instance electroplated Cu, Ni and Cr on ABS, could also be 
separated using mechanical crushing. Coatings could be easily stripped when the items are subjected to shear force 
and impulsive force. Concerning the repair of partially damaged (scratched) metal-plated plastics, brush plating, a 
portable method of electroplating without the use of an immersion tank, will be tested and employed. 
Deliverables 
D2.1 Report on the outcome of Task 2.1  with recommendations for SSbD for products and processes . 
Delivery: M18 by ICCRAM and update at M36.(D2.2) 
D2.3 Initial report containing the outcome on assessment of potential impacts and environmental sustainability 
(Task 2.2 & 2.4). Delivery by ICCRAM and updated at M48 
 
 
Work Package 
Number 
3 Lead Beneficiary PoliMi 
Work Package Title Sprayable Resins process 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCR EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 6 End Month 36 
Objectives 
WP 3 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To develop appropriate formulations for composite resins containing Ni salts  
2. To optimize the application of sprayable composite resins in polymer surfaces resulting to excellent adhesion 
3. To investigate suitable surface treatment methods of hardened resins to facilitate the following metallization step  
4. To optimize the activation and/or metallization processes for the two types of resins 
5. To achieve excellent adhesion of metallic coatings on plastics 
Description of Work 
Task 3.1: Development and optimization of composite resins (Task Leader: AUTH), M06-36 
Supported by: PoliMi, Gaser, end users 
UV curing of epoxy and epoxy-acrylate resins that will be synthesized from biomass -derived platform chemicals, 
i.e. isosorbide and itaconic acid, as well as of their (nano)composites with nickel salts will be studied and optimized 
towards the formation of rigid thin (< 2 μm) polymeric films on polymeric substrates (i.e. ABS, PC, etc.). The 
prepolymer resins will react with mono or multifunctional acrylate monomers, such as tripropyleneglycol diacrylate, 
trimethylolpropane triacrylate, hexanediol diacrylate, etc, in the presence of appropriate photo initiators, such as the 
alpha-hydroxy ketone types (e.g. Darocur 1173, Irgacure 184 etc.) in the case of epoxy -acrylates (free radical 
mechanism) or diaryliodonium and triarylsulfonium salts (e.g. Irgacure 250, Curacure UV6976) for the acidic UV 
curing mechanism of epoxy resins.  The Ni/epoxy-acrylate composite resins mixture will be characterized for their 
viscosity (targeting to low values of ca. < 200 cP, that will enable solventless spraying application and abil ity to 
perform fast UV curing, while the final cross-linked (nano)composites will be characterized a series of techniques, 
such as SEM, TEM, tensile and impact strength, pull off testing (to measure the adhesion strength of the epoxy -
acrylate film on the polymeric substrates), TGA/DSC, conductivity, resistance to solvents, etc.  
 
Task 3.2 Application of resins layers in polymer substrates (Task Leader: PoliMI), M08-36 
Supported by: Gaser, end users 
A conventional spray gun will be used for the formation of the resin layer on the polymer surface. The whole process 
will be conducted inside a customized, well ventilated and filtered cabinet to enclose and isolate hazardous fumes 
and airborne particles. The “pot life” of the composite resin (the amo unt of time the resin will remain in a liquid 
state) will be optimized by varying temperature, mixing solvent and viscosity of the resin). The spraying pressure 
will be varied between 1 and 5 bar to optimize the spraying velocity and as a result the durati on of the overall 
process. Different spraying nozzles (shape and size) and different spraying directions (angled or perpendicular) will 
also be considered to obtain a homogeneous resin layer. 
 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [32 of 44] 
Task 3.3 Metallization process of the resin layer (Task Leader: Gaser), M08-36 
Supported by: All partners 
Subtask 3.3.1: Metallization of the composite resin layer initially requires the generation of metal nucleation sites. 
To this end, samples will be immersed into an aqueous NaBH 4 solution to reduce Ni from the cat ionic Ni2+ to the 
metallic Ni0 state and to roughen the resin surface. A Design of Experiments (DoE) will be implemented to optimize 
the activation rate and the roughness of the surface, considering the following parameters: (i) NaBH4 concentration 
(5 to 50 g/L), (ii) immersion time (1 – 30 min) and (iii) temperature (20 – 50 °C). The resulting dispersion of the Ni 
metal sites and the surface roughness will be validated by SEM and EDX mapping.  
Subtask 3.3.2: Metallization will be completed by immersing the  activated samples in a Ni-P electroless aqueous 
bath containing nickel sulfate [Ni(SO 4)2] as the Ni 2+ source, sodium hypophosphite (NaPO 2H2) as the reducing 
agent, sodium citrate (Na3C6H5O7) as the complexing agent to control the release rate of free Ni2+ cations in solution 
and an ammonium chloride/hydroxide buffer to adjust the pH. The electroless plating conditions, i.e. pH, time and 
temperature will be optimized depending on the surface area of the sample and the targeted layer thickness. Based 
on the obtained results, a finer adjustment of the above parameters will follow.  The morphological and structural 
properties of the Ni -P layer will be investigated via microscopy (optical digital microscopy, SEM and EDX 
mapping) and spectroscopy (FT-IR, XRF and XPS). Metal-polymer adhesion will be evaluated via standard “peel” 
or “pull off” tests. The final metal finishing will be produced via pulse current plating, according to the 
specifications of the end users (e.g. nickel, nickel alloys, copper, precious metals). 
The development of this task will be split in two phases: in the 1 st phase, lab-scale experiments will be carried out 
(baths up to 3 L) whereas in the 2nd phase, scaling up of the process will be explored using Cnano’s pilot line (baths 
up to 150 L). 
 
Task 3.4 Baths qualification process (Task Leader: Gaser), M14-36 
Supported by: All partners 
Baths qualification protocols will be developed in this task as a main part of the SSBD approach. Several methods 
and techniques will be applied to monitor and adjust in real-time baths parameters as well as to avoid condamintation 
that have an important effect on the plating process and on the lifetime of the baths. Chemical analysis will be 
carried out to determine chemical composition of the baths (titration, elementary analysis for organic species). ICP 
(Inductively Coupled Plasma) spectroscopy will also be used for determination of metals content in the baths. 
Deliverables 
D3.1 Intermediate report containing the progress on the activities of WP3 Delivery: M18 by PoliMi  . 
D3.2 Report including the resins’ formulation and optimized methods for application on polymer surfaces 
Delivery: M36 by AUTH 
D3.3 Report on the optimized activation and metallization processes of composite sprayed resins Delivery: M36 
by Gaser  
 
Work Package 
Number 
4 Lead Beneficiary Cnano 
Work Package Title Cr6+ and Pd free metallization process 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCR EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 6 End Month 36 
Objectives 
WP 4 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To develop and optimize a Cr6+ free process, based on acids or alkali mixtures 
2. To replace Pd during the surface activation process with more abundant materials 
3. To perform metallization of polymers based on the previous process 
4. To achieve excellent adhesion of metallic coatings on plastics 
Description of Work 
Task 4.1: Development of Cr6+ free etching process (Task Leader: Cnano), M06-36 
Supported by: All partners 
ABS, PET, PLA and UV -curable resins will be used as polymeric surfaces for electroless metal plating. Surface 
preparation will begin with surface degreasing during which the samples will be immersed into a soap solution 
under sonication. Afterwards, Cr 6+-free surface etching will be carried out to create cavities and to install polar 
groups on the polymeric surface to enhance adhesion. ABS and PET s ubstrates will be immersed into a strongly 
oxidizing aqueous solution of 30% wt H2O2 / H2SO4 (“piranha solution”). PLA and UV-cured resins will be etched 
by immersing the samples in highly alkaline solutions of KOH or NaOH. The effect on surface properties of H2O2 
/ H2SO4 ratio (from 1:1 to 1:7), [OH-] concentration (1 – 5 M) and immersion time (30 s to 2 h) will be investigated, 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [33 of 44] 
i.e. roughness (measured by optical microscopy and SEM), hydrophilicity (measured by contact angle analysis), 
chemical composition (measured by EDX and FTIR). Finally, all surfaces will be neutralized to remove remnants 
of the etching solutions by rinsing with DI water and/or immersing in an antioxidant solution, such as sodium 
bisulfite (NaHSO 3). The combined comparative studies wi ll furnish an environmentally benign, time - and cost-
efficient etching method.  
 
Task 4.2 Development of Pd free activation process (Task Leader: Cnano), M06-36 
Supported by: All partners 
Pd and Sn free surface activation will be held via immersing the sam ples into a nickel acetate [Ni(CH 3COO)2] 
solution and optimizing the concentration (1 - 10 g/L ) and the immersion time (10 – 120 min). Afterwards, surface 
adsorbed cationic Ni 2+ species will be reduced to metallic Ni 0 nucleation sites by immersing the sam ples into an 
aqueous NaBH4 solution. NaBH4 is also expected to further roughen the polymeric surface. Although the NaBH 4 
reduction step resembles the one described in Subtask 3.3.1, the chemical environment around Ni2+ is now different. 
Therefore, an independent DoE will be implemented to probe the effect of NaBH 4 concentration, immersion time 
and temperature on the resulting dispersion of Ni 0 metal sites (measured by EDX mapping), surface roughness 
(measured by SEM) and hydrophilicity (measured by contact angle analysis).  
 
Task 4.3 Metallization process of polymeric activated surfaces (Task Leader: Gaser), M08-36 
Supported by: All partners 
Metallization will be completed by immersing the activated samples in a Ni -P electroless aqueous bath. 
Optimization of the electroless plating conditions (i.e. pH, time and temperature) and validation of the resulting Ni-
P layer will be caried out following the protocols of subtask 3.3.2. Development will be again split in two phases, 
i.e. lab-scale experiments using baths up to 1 L(1st phase) and upscale using baths up to 150 L (2nd phase). As above, 
the final metal finishing will be provided via electroplating based on the end user’s needs.  
Deliverables 
D4.1 Intermediate report containing the progress on the activities of WP4 Delivery: M18 by Cnano  . 
D4.2 Report on the development of a Cr6+free etching process and Pd -free activation step for plastic surfaces 
metallization including characterization of structures and properties. Delivery: M36 by Cnano 
 
 
Work Package 
Number 
5 Lead Beneficiary IDE 
Work Package Title Development of supporting technologies 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCR EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 6 End Month 48 
Objectives 
WP 5 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To support the development of sprayable resin and chromic acid free etching with in-silico techniques based on 
multiscale modelling 
2. To optimize an optical inspection system for monitoring of PoP process. 
WP leader: IDE 
Description of Work 
Task 5.1: Materials and process in-silico modelling (Task Leader: IDE), M06-36 
Supported by: All partners 
The objective of this task is to perform the multi-scale modelling activities required to boost the design process of 
the proposed sprayable composite resins. For this purpose, IDE, will work closely with the rest of the material  
developers in the project towards the proper modeling of the required materials and interfaces. The specific scale 
and type of models to be developed will be selected so as to fill the gaps in the information provided by the 
performed experiments and to o ptimise their design, minimising the required tests. The selected models will be 
implemented using a combination of ab -initio quantum (QM) and Coarse -Grained (CG) models which will be 
simulated using molecular dynamics (MD), Monte Carlo (MC) and FEM techni ques to unlock multi -scale 
modelling advantages. Moreover, the developed models will aim to support the process scale-up by providing key 
information on their applicability for different applications. The work of this task will be split in two subtasks, 
T5.1.1 and T5.1.2, which will cover the modeling required for the sprayable composite resins and the  
 
Task 5.2 Development of in-line optical inspection system for coatings (Task Leader: IRIS), M06-48 
Supported by: All partners 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [34 of 44] 
An optical system for inspection of surface, based on spectroscopy principles will be delivered for high-speed inline 
monitoring of, on the one hand, the coating application processes and, on the other hand, to assess the quality of 
organic deposits on a range of substrates. Th e selected optical system will be assembled and pre -calibrated in the 
lab scale on a relevant set of samples for obtaining respectively coatings and deposition in non-continuous modes. 
It is expected that material dispersed in the resin coatings (i.e. Ni salts or Ni NPs) may lead to scattering, therefore 
a specific calibration may be needed for the two concluded different formulations as opposed to the absolute values 
that are expected in case of unfilled coatings or dense layer. In this latter case of depo sition, the speed and time of 
the process would already bring a certain idea of this data. The overall performance of the system will be validated 
during a certain period of time at pilot scale.  
Deliverables 
D5.1 Intermediate report containing the progress on the activities of WP5 ). Delivery: M18 by IDE and updated 
at M36 (D5.2) by IRIS 
D5.3 This deliverable will consist of the implemented multi -scale models. Such models, the data required for 
replication and the  data produced through simulation will be openly published accordingly to the DMP. 
Whenever the data requires protection due to the targeted commercialisation, the models will be 
accompanied by synthetic data (Task 5.1). Delivery: M48 by IDE 
D5.4 This report will provide the conclusions drawn through the project on the suitability of different multi-scale 
models for supporting the design of PoP processes. Moreover, it will contain an analysis of the optimisation 
of the design process achieved through the DoE produced in base of such models (Task 5.1). Delivery: M48 
by IDE. 
D5.5 Development, installation and validation of in-line optical inspection system (Task 5.3). Delivery: M48 by 
IRIS 
 
Work Package 
Number 
6 Lead Beneficiary CRF 
Work Package Title Validation of technologies in end user's test cases 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCR EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 28 End Month 48 
Objectives 
WP 6 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To demonstrate the sprayable resin route for metallization of plastic surface in real applications 
2. To demonstrate the Cr6+ and Pd free metallization process on real applications 
3. To proceed in the qualification of coatings through industrial QC protocols of end users 
Description of Work 
Task 6.1: Decorative automotive parts (Task Leader: CRF), M28-48 
Supported by: All partners 
The deployment of this taks will be split in two phases. Firstly, tests on non-definitive samples (e.g. flat plaques) 
will be carried out to ensure quality of the coatings and possibly finely tune the environmentally benign novel 
technologies, developed in FreeMe. Secondly, will deliver various components for both interi or and exterior use, 
made mainly of ABS and PC-ABS. Both developed ways will be applied (sprayable -resins and Cr6+-free etching) 
for the metallization step, depending on the size and the geometry of the parts. Afterwards the layer electroplated 
layered structured of Ni and trivalent Cr coatings will be followed. CRF will  validate the quality of the produced 
metallic coatings by performing in -house tests, according to automotive standards and international norms (e.g., 
ISO, ASTM) and compared the obtained re sults to benchmark performance. These tests include mechanical and 
physicochemical properties of the coatings such as adhesion, brightness, anti-scratch, impact and UV resistance.. 
 
Task 6.2: EMI shielding on antennas (Task Leader: IAI), M28-48 
Supported by: All partners 
IAI will manufacture and deliver to Cnano 3D -printed antenna parts (Figure 1.12.). Cnano will apply a metallic 
coating following the wet metallization route. Sprayable resin rout will not be investigated due to the complexity of 
the antennas’ structure. The application of a Ni-P thin layer will be carried out, following the optimization process 
described in Subtask 3.3.2. The final metal finishing will be provided by pulse current electroplating depending on 
the needs of IAI. First row transition metals (e.g. Ni and Cu) will be initially used to achieve high conductivity and 
related EMI shielding values (e.g. 10 -1 S/cm and – 40 dB, respectively). Alternatively, a silver interlayer will be 
applied to promote conductivity. The morphological (optical microscopy, SEM) and the physicochemical properties 
of the metallized antennas will be investigated by Cnano (EDX mapping, XRF). The electrical pr operties of the 
metallized antenna will be investigated by IAI. Special tests regarding mechanical strength and wear resistance in 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [35 of 44] 
extreme conditions will be also conducted by IAI  
 
Task 6.3: Applications on washing machine parts (Task Leader: ARC), M28-48 
Supported by: All partners 
With the FreeMe project, ARC aims to eliminate chromium from the plating process and develop alternative, 
less hazardous routes while maintaining the top quality of the final metal finishes. ARC will provide specific 
plastic par ts of their washing machine production line (e.g. dials and buttons) to PoliMi, Cnano and Gaser 
for plating via the project’s innovative technologies. Both developed routes will be followed for these parts. 
ARC will serve as the end user validating the qua lity of the metal coatings. To this end, adhesion, corrosion 
and aging tests will be carried out to measure properties such as adhesion (100% based on ASTM D3359), 
thickness (varying between 0.5 and 10 µm, depending on the application), brightness (based o n ASTM 
D523), humidity resistance test (100% adhesion after 10 days based on ASTM D2247), salt spray test (based 
on ISO 9227), UV resistance (< 10% brightness loss after 10 days exposure based on ASTM D4587) and 
thermal cycle tests. Samples should not show  any signs of staining, matting, cracking, bubbling of peeling 
after the tests.  
Deliverables 
D6.1 Report on the results on the demonstration activities. The report will include the PoP process for the 
demonstration, characterization profiles of the coatings and QC tests of end users Delivery: M48 by CRF 
D6.2 Public report on the demonstration activities that will include non -confidential results targeting on the 
functionalities of new coating solution and their wider impact Delivery: M48 by PoliMI 
 
 
Work Package 
Number 
7 Lead Beneficiary PoliMi 
Work Package Title Roadmap to market deployment 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCR EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 1 End Month 48 
Objectives 
WP07 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To facilitate the acceptance and utilization by the market of the developed processes and materials 
2. To provide benchmark information for the activities of other WPs, ensuring compatibility with standards 
3. To use standardization system as a tool for dissemination of the project results and interaction with market 
4. To develop a decision support tool facilitating the SSBD PoP technology by the industry 
Description of Work 
Task 7.1: Implementation of standardization activities (Task Leader: PoliMi), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
By M6 a benchmark analysis of standard and regulations will be performed, based on the needs of the projected 
research activities and the expected results . Contribution to the ongoing and future standardization developments 
will be followed after M7, allowing the project to interact with the related standardization technical committees, 
assessing they type of communication and data share (monitoring their i nformation, attending to TC meetings, 
establishing formal liaisons, organizing joint events, etc.). FreeMe will also contribute to new standards 
developments in the field of surface treatment and PoP, promoting the inclusion of the outcomes of the project in 
new or future standards that can be easily used by the European or international industry, increasing this way the 
impact of the project. Based on the progress of the standardization sectors at the moment, this can involve providing 
information, participating in ongoing works, submitting technical manuscripts and promoting the development of 
new standard documents. 
  
Task 7.2: Development of DST (Task Leader: EXE), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
The core of DST will consist of a dynamic superstructure, whose elements enable representation of technologies 
and processing steps, their connectivities as well as materials flows, concentrations, and products specifications. In-
silico models of the indiv idual phenomena are integrated to simulate the different processing steps of the 
superstructure. Experimental data (from project or user -defined) will systematically be processed for data -driven 
analysis of flows, concentrations and specifications (on matrices and products) of the superstructure with respect to 
outputs in operations, safety demands, technologies qualification and products quality control standards. The LCA 
module holds an environmental factors database for KPIs analysis. The LCC module incl udes fixed (by project) 
and incoming (by user) economic data on technologies, chemicals, operating and capital costs that are processed to 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [36 of 44] 
calibrate cost models and systematically incorporate techno-economic analysis in the optimization procedure. The 
safety module will be structured by risk factors, methods and descriptive data for risks evaluation and assessment 
of the simulated operations (based on user-defined inputs) and will offer lists of options to mitigate hazards across 
the design process consulting industrial users. The overall tool will be constructed as an optimization problem to be 
programmed with GAMS modelling environment and will hold a user-friendly interface (GUI) to enable interaction 
with the user. The DST will be provided as a stand-alone tool to use for decision making on the selection and design 
of best practices for plating on plastics. 
Deliverables 
D7.1 Report containing the activities undertaken by the consortium towards the standardization of new processes 
and liaison with corresponding stakeholders, Delivery: 48, by PoliMi  
D7.2  Delivery of DST ready to be used by the industry Delivery: 48, by EXE 
 
Work Package 
Number 
8 Lead Beneficiary EXE 
Work Package Title Extroversion and Exploitation activities 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCR EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 1 End Month 48 
Objectives 
WP 8 has the following specific objectives:  
1. To coordinate of the communication and dissemination activities for the project´s outcomes and results 
targeting the identified stakeholders and target groups and maximizing, thus, the project´s visibility. 
2. To define and implement the exploitation strategy based on the key results identified. 
3. To conduct IPR management seminars to jointly seek ownerships and joint exploitation potentials. 
4. To carry out training activities responding to the needs and specific requests of identified stakeholders.  
Description of Work 
Task 8.1: Dissemination & Communication (Task Leader: EXE), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
The FreeMe dissemination strategy will ensure an efficient project visibility and that communication actions are 
measurable, in order to divulge the project. The strategy will also provide recommended channels for scientific 
dissemination, guideli nes, graphics, and templates to allow a coordinated dissemination of results and news. 
Dissemination tools (website, brochures, newsletters, posters, videos, press releases etc.) EXE will work closely 
with all partners to identify, develop and publish diss emination materials. The target is to reach multiple 
stakeholders, raise their awareness, and encourage the engagement of specialized and general audiences. More 
specifically, it will include (A) the development of a project identity/brand (logos, colours, font sets, banners, 
templates etc.), Q&A documents, press releases, infographics, flyers and similar resources to support partners in 
publicizing the project (B) the establishment of a project website from M3 containing information on the project 
(weekly progress updates). Social media channels including professional networks (e.g. LinkedIn) and public/ social 
network (e.g. Facebook, Twitter) will be established at M1 to facilitate the project´s promotion. The preliminary 
D&C plan has been included in Section 2.2 and a deliverable will be submitted in M6, this will be updated for each 
reporting period.  
 
Task 8.2: Exploitation and business cases (Task Leader: INC), M01-48 
Supported by: All partner  
The exploitation and commercialization strategy will comprise different phases such as product identification, 
market analysis, preparation of product launch and strategic alliances. The business cases will be analysed versus 
market landscape of each resul t, definition of values proposition, market competition and value creation (value 
change, customer relationship, etc.). A financial analysis will be performed to evaluate the profitability of the 
revenue model, understand future cash flow and highlight the need for additional funding or external investment to 
reach the first stage. Focus will be given on marketing activities to support the future exploitation of the FreeMe 
results, to assist in raising the awareness and interests of potential investors to contribute to the financing and growth 
of the project results, post -project training, dissemination campaigns to the European industry through major 
exhibitions and shows, additional demonstration work with industry, communication with policy makers and 
standardization bodies, etc. Knowledge seminars will be organized for the identification, distribution, and 
representation of knowledge generated. Finally, Freedom to Operate (FTO) assessment will be conducted for the 
technologies and the results arising of the project to avoid the infringement of third-party intellectual property rights, 
and to plan the necessary mitigation strategies.  
 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [37 of 44] 
Task 8.3: Open Science and Research Data Management (Task Leader: PoliMi), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
A concrete and sustainable IPR strategy will be designed following the exploitation strategy towards the Open 
Science framework. Crucial to this ef fort will be the development of a Data Management Plan (DMP) that will 
incorporate the technical and business knowledge produced during the course of the project. It is foreseen that in 
the first version of DMP will be delivered in M6 and will updated for each reporting period. PoliMi will take 
responsibility for the collection, management, and sharing of the research data, as well as for the day-to-day quality 
assessment. The associated data files will be captured using Office software and will be analyzed using appropriate 
analytic tools. Finally, data will be maintained in an open XML format to enable open re-use of the data. Over the 
course of the project, data will be collected and entered into databases as described in Section 1.2. Project results 
and Public Deliverables will be posted on the project website within one month. The site will be established using 
an appropriate content management system (Drupal or Joomla, etc.) so that data users can participate in adding site 
content over time, making the site self-sustaining. For preservation, the coordinator will supply periodic copies of 
the data to “repository”. Data available and cited in publications will follow Open Access principles. 
 
Task 8.4: Training Activities (Task Leader: EXE), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
The objective of this task is organizing and carrying out a number of training/dissemination workshops. For this 
purpose, a set of materials, like training manuals and guidelines will be developed. A database of videos and photos 
will be created, with the assistance of all partners, to facilitate training. The training workshops will be organized 
for two different targets, internal training (aimed at staff of the project partners) and external training. At least two 
(2) international and two (2) national training/dissemination workshops are planned. A final workshop with at least 
50 participants will be implemented in M35. EXE will introduce a training module related to the project results into 
their standard training packages for plating shops. A final event will be organized, in order to gather all the industry 
stakeholders from several sectors and present the main results and expected gains of its deployment for the targeted 
markets, providing for a faster acceptance and integration of the project results. 
Deliverables 
D8.1 A report containing the Plan for the Dissemination Exploitation of Results and Communication activities 
(PEDRC) including training activities Delivery:M6 by EXE. The deliverable will be updated at M18 (D8.3), 
M36 (D8.4) and M48 (D8.5) by EXE 
D8.2 Data Management Plan Delivery:M6 by PoliMi 
D8.6 Report containing the dissemination material and the open training material developed by the partners 
Delivery:M48 by EXE. 
 
 
Work Package 
Number 
9 Lead Beneficiary Gaser 
Work Package Title Project management 
Nr. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Name Gaser PoliMi Cnano AUTH IDE IRIS ICCR EXE INC ARC IAI CRF 
PMs             
Start Month 1 End Month 48 
Objectives 
WP09 has the following specific objectives:  
1. Establishment and follow-up of Consortium Agreement and implementation of Grant Agreement 
2. To overview the financial management. Responsibility for the communication within the consortium. 
3. Controlling of project advance and time schedules. Review of milestones and deliverables. 
4. Organization of regular reports and generation of special mid-term reports & summary reports. 
Description of Work 
A management team has been defined for the proper monitoring of the project. This consists of: 
Mr Enrico Galliani from Gaser that will be the Project Manager (PM). Together with his management team will be 
responsible for the coordination activities and the relationship with the EC and the FreeMe partners. 
Prof. Luca Magagnin from PoliMi will be the Technical Manager following the research and development activities 
of the technical WPs and communicating with WP and Task leaders. 
Mrs Laura Zacares from Incote will be the Innovation Manger responsible for monitoring of the Innovation Strategy 
of the Project 
Dr Ioanna Katsavou from Exelisis will be the Dissemination & Communication Manager.  
 
Task 9.1: Administrative and financial project management (Task Leader: Gaser), M01-48 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [38 of 44] 
Supported by: All partners 
Gaser’s Management and Coordination Tasks include: * Communicating between consortium and EC, including 
the provision of legal and financial information about the partners during the GA and CA preparation phase. * 
Administrative, financial, legal, and ethical management of the consortium and the resolution of contractual issues 
during the project. * Manage and define IPR issues in order to submit by the end of the project the Innovation Radar. 
* Preparation and post-processing of EC reviews from the consortium side, including support in the implementation 
of any recommendations from the EC and reviewers, with the support of the WP leaders. * Coordination of 
payments and the distribution of finances; keeping of records and financial accounts, collation of fin ancial 
statements. *Day-to-day communication with FreeMe project partners, organizing meetings (including the kick-off 
and six-monthly meetings) and circulating minutes. * Ensuring gender equality and Open Science, collating of the 
deliverables and milestone reports, and collaborating in strong ties with partners to effectively prepare progress and 
periodic reports and timely submit deliverables. 
 
Task 9.2 Technical project management (Task Leader: PoliMi), M01-48 
Supported by: All partners 
Prof. Luca Magagnin from PoliMi in collaboration with the project coordinator Mr. Franzosi and each WP leader 
will monitor the technical delivery of all Work Packages applying a day to day management of technical project 
activities and coordinate activities between Work Package Leaders. A risk log and milestone progress reports will 
be developed and maintained. The work package leaders will report directly Prof. Magagnin and will be responsible 
to coordinate the work package specific technical activities and review and man age the according deliverables, 
milestones and risks. The deliverables will follow an internal peer review process where a partner will be assigned 
to evaluate the quality of the deliverable versus its objective. Each deliverable will be ready as a draft v ersion one 
month before the submission and the partners will have time to comment in order to ensure the quality. May results 
be available for open access publications the papers will be circulated 40 days before its submission in order to 
receive approval by the partners. 
Deliverables 
 The reporting of this WP will be done in the contractual periodic reports. 
 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables 
Deliv. 
Nr. Deliverable name WP 
Nr. 
Lead 
Partner Type Diss. 
level 
Deliv. 
date 
D1.1 Report on specifications. 1 Gaser R SEN 6 
D2.1 Recommendations for SSbD products and processes A 2 ICCRAM R SEN 18 
D2.2 Recommendations for SSbD products and processes B 2 ICCRAM R SEN 36 
D2.3 Report on assessment of potential impacts and 
environmental sustainability 
2 ICCRAM R SEN 48 
D3.1 Intermediate report of progress of the activities of WP3  3 PoliMi R SEN 18 
D3.2 Report including the resins’ formulation and optimized 
methods for application on polymer surfaces  
3 AUTH R SEN 36 
D3.3 Report on the optimized activation and metallization 
processes of sprayed resins  
3 Gaser R SEN 36 
D4.1 Intermediate report of progress of the activities of WP4  4 Cnano R SEN 18 
D4.2 Report on toxic-free wet process for metallization of 
plastic surfaces 
4 Cnano R SEN 36 
D5.1 First report of progress of the activities of WP5  5 IDE R SEN 18 
D5.2 Second report of progress of the activities of WP5  5 IRIS R SEN 36 
D5.3 Multi-scale models for environmentally friendly PoP 5 IDE OTH SEN 48 
D5.4 Guidelines on in silico models usage for the design of 
new PoP processes 
5 IDE R SEN 48 
D5.5 Development, installation and validation of in-line 
optical inspection system   
5 IRIS DEM SEN 48 
D6.1 Report on the results on the demonstration activities.  6 CRF R SEN 48 
D6.2 Public Report on demonstration activities 6 PoliMi R PU 48 
D7.1 Report on standardization activities 7 PoliMi R PU 48 
D7.2 DST webplatform 7 EXE OTH PU 48 
D8.1 First PEDRC 8 EXE R SEN 6 
D8.2 Data management Plan 8 PoliMi R PU 6 
D8.3 Second PEDRC 8 EXE R SEN 18 
D8.4 Third PEDRC 8 EXE R SEN 36 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [39 of 44] 
D8.5 Final PEDRC 8 EXE R SEN 48 
D8.6 Dissemination and training material 8 EXE OTH PU 36 
 
Milestones of FREEME  
The Project Milestones have been targeted planned in order to be used as a valuable tool for evaluating critical 
performance and determining whether or not the project is on schedule, these additionally have been projected to 
cover all reporting periods and to be balanced split between them. Milestone reviews will be held at each meeting of 
the PSC six monthly and a critical review of the outlook for effective exploitation of results will be monitored by the 
partners. Successful achievement of the targets specified in the milestones will ensure a smooth project 
implementation and the on-time planning.  
 
Table 3.1d: List of FREEME milestones 
No Milestone name WP Date Means of verification 
MS01 Kick off meeting 1 1 Meeting minutes approved by partners 
MS02 Definition of REACH compliance 
baths chemistries 2 5 Chemical to be used in baths and Safety Data 
Sheets approved by the consortium  
MS03 Integrated safe- and sustainable-by-
design approach 3 10 Common evaluation framework applicable to 
the case studies 
MS04 First successful UV-curing of bio-
based composite resin in lab 3 14 Report on resin formulation, UV-curing 
protocol and characterization of hardened resin 
MS05 Utilization of spray apparatus for 
application of resin in substrates 3 19 Video from application of resins in the plastic 
samples 
MS06 Successful activation utilizing Pd-
Free baths 4 25 Characterization via SEM and EDS 
measurement of Ni nuclei and Ni-P laye 
MS07 Achievement of adhesion value of 4,9 
N/25mm 3-4 29 Via peel-test configuration, coatings of both 
routes will be studied 
MS08 Delivery of demonstrators in Cnano, 
Gaser and PoliMi premises 6 33 Delivery notes from Arc, CRF and IAI 
MS09 Recommendations for the 
implementation of SSbD strategies 
presented in workshop 
3 36 
Report on the materials presented and minutes 
of meeting from the round table discussion  
MS10 First successful application of resin 
based POP process on automotive part 6 40 Full characterization profile of the coating 
based on end user’s QC protocols 
MS11 First use of beta version of DST by 
external user  8 42 Report on the feedback from applicants  
MS12 Open event for public engagement & 
Training workshop for industry 9 47 Press release on media for the implementation 
of the events and interviews from attendees  
 
Risks and Migration Measures  
All necessary risks and migration measures have been dully foreseen, categorized in terms of managerial, technical 
and Business/ Exploitation and dissemination. Management related risks will be evaluated and monitored by the PC. 
In more details, the table below shows the main risks identified, their probability of occurrence, these risk table is 
intended to be reviewed and the status will be evaluated during each project meeting.  
 
Table 3.1e: Critical risks for implementation (where L: Likelihood, I: Impact) 
Description of risk WP(s) Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Management Risks 
Management issues  
L: low. I: high All 
The proposed working groups that will be chaired by the PM and 
TM, have relevant representatives of the most relevant disciplines 
to assure the required leadership. 
Technical Risks 
Lack of data from the test cases to 
model the sustainability 
performances  
L: medium I: medium 
2 
Bilateral meetings with relevant partners to fill data gaps, use of 
literature data and sensitivity analysis on key uncertain parameters 
to understand the influence on the results  
UV-cured r esin layers result to 
limited Ni nuclei and thus, low 
quality metallization 
L: medium I: high 
3 
Instead of using anhydrous salts (i.e., NiCl 2), mixing of Ni 
nanoparticles with the resin will be tested. Following, an etching 
process will be applied to expose Ni NPs to the surface which will 
act as Ni nuclei for the electroless deposition.  
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [40 of 44] 
Insufficient etching process via the 
wet route based on piranha sol. 
L: medium. I: medium 
4 
This risk has been foreseen and is specifically connected to the 
complexity of wet chemistry of the etching process. Use of stronger 
mixtures (i.e. KMnO4/H2SO4) will be utilized. 
Pd-free activation process results 
in limited Ni nuclei 
L: medium I: medium 
4 
A revising of both etching and activation step will be made as they 
are directly connected. Utilization of more dense Ni solution or of 
copper salts solution.   
Required models too complex or 
computationally intensive 
P: medium I: medium 
5 
Targeting of the modeling activities. Usage of HPC/Cloud services 
if needed. Usage of surrogate models when required 
Final finishing coatings are of low 
quality  
P: low I: medium 3-6 
The quality of the final finishing is based on the quality of the 
metallization step (application of Ni-P layer). Usually this defect is 
solved by application of Ni-P layers of higher thickness (with a low 
impact on the duration of the process)  
Results on demonstration activities 
do not correspond to lab scale 
results 
P: high I: low 
6 
During demonstration activities, larger scale components will be 
used, having as a result the need for a more robust operation and 
control of parameters. The presences of Gaser in the consortium 
that has huge experience in plating process will be valuable.  
Difficulty in matching user defined 
input data with data required by 
DST. 
P: medium I: low 
7 
Missing input data will be completed by experimental (generated 
by the project) and data-driven modelling outputs.  
 
Industrial implementation/Business/ Exploitation and dissemination risks 
Internal disputes  regarding IPR 
and exploitation routes 
P: low I: high 
WP8 
CA will define the IPR issues, while at the end of the project the 
Results Ownership List will be established based on Horizon 
Europe principles for ownership of results 
 
Summary of staff effort  
The consortium set up by FreeMe has a clear vision of its objective and therefore is committed to the right allocation 
of the financial resources. There is an appropriate budget allocated to R&D work, communication, dissemination, IP 
and knowledge management and business planning activities for impact. Considering that there are 12 partners in the 
project, and the competitive 48-month work plan, an EC Contribution of 4.834.592,00 € is requested.  
 
Table 3.1f: FREEME Summary of staff effort  
 Name WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 WP9 Total 
PMs 
1.  Gaser 7 5 18 21 2 13 4 3 28 101 
2.  PoliMi 4 11 31 0 2 9 3 10 6 76 
3.  Cnano 4 5 0 35 3 15 6 5 2 75 
4.  AUTH 2 2 39 0 3 4 3 2 2 57 
5.  IDENER 2 5 3 3 40 2 10 3 2 70 
6.  IRIS 3 2 2 2 25 7 2 2 2 47 
7.  ICCRAM 2 54 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 66 
8.  EXE 1 4 0 0 0 2 25 30 2 64 
9.  INC 3 3 0 0 0 5 13 40 2 66 
10.  CRF 6 2 2 3 3 15 3 3 2 39 
11.  Arcelic 4 4 3 2 1 15 3 2 2 36 
12.  IAI 4 3 2 2 1 11 2 2 1 28 
Total PMs 42 100 100 68 82 100 76 104 53 725 
 
In the below Figures the other directs costs are analysed for the partners that exceeds the 15% of other direct costs 
compared to the personnel costs. 
 
Table 3.1h: ‘‘Purchase costs’ items (travel and subsistence, equipment and other goods, works and services) and 
‘Other costs categories’ items (e.g. internally invoiced goods and services) 
3. Cnano  Cost (€)  Justification 
Equipment  14.000€ Peel test for adhesion measurements: 14.000€ 
Remaining 
purchase costs 
(<xx% of pers. 
48.000€ 
 
 
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2021-RESILIENCE-01-12 — Safe- and sustainable-by-design metallic coatings and engineered surfaces  
 
[FREEME]    [41 of 44] 
Total 62.000€  
 
 
4. AUTH  Cost (€)  Justification 
Equipment  25.000€ Reactor for monomer synthesis/polymerization and parts of it: 20.000€ 
Components of analytical instruments: 5.000€ 
Other goods, 
works and 
services 
14.000€ Consumables and raw material (chemical reagents/gases): 8.000€ 
Services for analytical measurements: 6.000€ 
Remaining 
purchase costs 
(<xx% of pers. 
28.000€ 
Total 67.000€  
 
6. IRIS  Cost (€)  Justification 
Other goods, 
works and 
services 
53.000€ Cost for the manufacturing and integration of sensor (optical component, 
mechanical supports etc): 53.0000€ 
Remaining 
purchase costs 
(<xx% of pers. 
18.000€ 
Total   
 
7. ICCRAM  Cost (€)  Justification 
Other goods, 
works and 
services 
15.000€ Toxicology Lab consumables: commercial cell lines, cell culture reagents and 
consumables; microbiology reagents and consumables; buffers and plastic and 
glass material for laboratory; kits and consumables for toxicity and field assays : 
15.000€  
Remaining 
purchase costs 
(<xx% of pers. 
33.250€ 
Total 48.250€  
 
Table 3.1i: ‘Other costs categories’ items (e.g. internally invoiced goods and services) 
 
Participant Number/Short Name 
7. ICCRAM Cost (€) Justification 
Internally invoiced 
goods and services 
5.000€ The R+D+i service - Technological Park - of the University of Burgos 
passed on the researchers, based on usage, all expenses associated with their 
teams, among which are: NMR, FT -IR, elemental analyzer, electron 
microscopy scanning, ICP-Masses, High-resolution masses, RAMAN, etc.