2.1 pact 
network drive of the party who owns the data and be available for 10 years, in accordance with the VSNU code of 
conduct for research integrity. 
Regulatory and Ethical aspects : GIANT LEAPS will ensure full compliance with ethic regulations and GDPR  
(General Data Protection Regulation) for personal data gathered in the project, particularly the stakeholders in WP1,  
allergenicity work in WP3, and the human trial of WP4. In the WP1 consumer surveys, only fully anonymized and 
no personal data will be collected. More details are given in the ethics self-assessments of involved WP1, 3 and 4 
partners. Ethical approvals will be requested for at the responsible committees prior to the planned research. 
 
GIANT LEAPS offers a ground-breaking integrated approach to addressing pathway 4 alternative proteins and 
dietary shift of the Food 2030 pathways for action.24 It contributes to the Green Deal priorities, Farm to Fork strategy 
towards sustainability and circularity. 
The project addresses methodology bottlenecks, delivers broadly carried, standardized datasets to compare across  
protein sources, innovates to overcome barriers, and engages to ensure that stakeholder groups apply the results to  
deliver mid-term outcomes and long-term impact. To illustrate this, results have been categorized as methodology - 
(M), dataset- (D), innovation- (I), and engagement- (E) related, and are translated to the intended outcomes and impacts 
in the tables below. The impact goal of GIANT LEAPS is to substitute the consumption of traditional animal proteins 
in the European diet by alternative proteins to reach 50% of total protein intake by 2030. Fig. 2.1 illustrates how project  
results translate via outcome pathways to this ambition and long-term impacts. 
 
Fig. 2.1: GIANT LEAPS results connected via outcomes to long-term impacts 
 Specific results related to mid-term outcomes  
The role of policymakers, risk assessors and other public governance actors to shape, facilitate and incentivise this  
complex transition is crucial.25 The research and innovation (R&I) activities in this proposal provide these key actors 
with the essential, now-missing, methodologies, datasets, and innovations to take the necessary decisions and actions. 
Table 2.1 presents the results and knowledge gained from GIANT LEAPS will be used to inform a systemic approach 
to food policy development and relevant sectoral policies, i.e. policy outcomes. 
Table 2.1. Results and outcomes related to food policy development and sectoral policies 
GIANT LEAPS results 
(M-methodology; D-dataset; 
I-innovation) 
Policy outcomes and KPIs 
Implemented data Guidance on evidence-based policymaking, supported by information and tools, 
integration and insights into synergies and trade-offs between public health and environmental 
interoperability platform impacts, and a basis to align relevant sectoral policies on. 
(SO 6-D) and optimised Updated dietary recommendations based on integrated knowledge on protein quality, 
future diets (SO 7-M) co-nutrients and management of risks. Guidance to maximise public acceptance 
 based on insights regarding consumer acceptance data and effects of policy 
 incentives (e.g. taxes, nudging). 
 KPI: 1 policy brief on integrated food policy and 2 sectoral policy briefs on public 
 health and consumer education 
 
24 Food 2030 pathways for action - Research and innovation policy as a driver for sustainable, healthy and inclusive food systems. doi:10.2777/104372I 
25 Science Advice for Policy by European Academies. A sustainable food system for the European Union. 2020 
2 IMPACT 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
19 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Improved risk assessment 
methods, case-series and 
consumer perspectives (SO 
3-M), new methods to assess 
nutritional quality (SO 4-M). 
Possibilities to improve the regulatory approval process of novel proteins (e.g. 
without use of animal studies), identification of critical parameters for food safety 
monitoring, and recommendations to improve current food labelling policies and to 
implement an EU post-market surveillance system for monitoring adverse effects. 
KPI: 3 policy briefs on food safety. 
Implemented integrated 
sustainability framework, 
filled Life Cycle Inventory 
(LCI) database and 
combined environmental, 
economic and social LCAs 
(SO5-D). 
Comprehensive understanding of the environmental footprint and sustainability of 
alternative proteins. Recommendations to (dis)incentivise production of alternative 
and/or traditional proteins (land-based and aquatic). Guidance on subsidies and other 
policy measures, including climate and environmental policies, fair redistribution of 
profits and fair access to healthy food. 
Recommendations on climate adaptation strategies for the selected alternative 
proteins and in general for the protein sector. Inform EU climate policies and 
strategies, contributing to EU emissions mitigation and climate adaptation goals. 
KPI: 1 policy brief on agriculture and aquaculture sectoral policies, 1 policy brief on 
environmental policy, 1 for circularity and 1 for EU climate policies and targets. 
The two key impact areas in this project are climate -related, including GHGs and biodiversity, and health -related, 
through more nutritious and healthier food choices. Both environmental and health impacts of alternative protein 
sources are proportional to their level of consumption, so the acceleration of adoption is key to achieving impact. The 
project delivers results and defines key actions to ensure maximal uptake of results towards a food system change and 
long-term impact. Two key strategies to reaching mid-term outcomes (described in Table 2.2) are defined: 
1. Build consensus on the optimal selection of diverse proteins and maximise the use of available alternative 
protein sources in future EU diets, considering both health and environmental impacts. 
2. Enlarge the number of future available alternative protein sources that can be applied in foods to enable 
continuing improvements to diets and their impacts into the future. 
Table 2.2. Results and outcomes contributing to optimized protein source substitution in future EU diets 
GIANT LEAPS results 
(M-methodology; D- 
dataset; I-innovation) 
Outcomes and strategies KPI Target 
groups 
I Food prototypes and 
technological innovations 
Maximised use of alternative protein 
sources in foods and diets 
Deliver 6 prototypes 
and innovations using diverse 
alternative protein sources 
Food industry, 
retail, out of 
home 
M Improved food 
allergy-related consumer 
risk communication and 
post-market surveillance 
strategies 
Maximised safe use of alternative 
protein sources in foods and diets 
Report -reactive 
allergen labelling and post- 
market monitoring of food 
allergies 
Policymakers, 
patient and 
civil society 
organisations, 
citizens 
M  
toolbox including 
improved methods for risk 
assessment 
Increased number of available 
alternative proteins in the future by 
speeding up and improving risk 
assessments 
Scientific papers describing 
toolbox and improved 
predictive in silico and in vitro 
predictive methods 
Scientists, 
Food industry, 
policymakers, 
risk assessors 
M Risk assessment 
scenario case series 
Increased number of future 
alternative proteins available by 
clarifying pathways, improved 
methods and necessary data 
Pathways and necessary data 
submitted for deliberation with 
panel experts and scientific 
networks hosted by EFSA 
Scientists, 
Food industry, 
policymakers, 
risk assessors 
M - Improved in vitro 
models for assessing 
protein digestion and 
bioavailability 
Optimised selection of alternative 
protein sources and blends to meet 
protein requirements and optimise 
product design 
Models validated with human 
study and applied to 9 
alternative protein sources 
Scientists, 
Food industry 
D - Nutritional passports 
for protein sources and 
formulated foods 
Optimised selection of alternative 
protein sources, considering co- 
nutrients, ANF and protein 
requirements. 
Passports delivered for 9 
protein sources 
Scientists, 
Food industry 
M - Integrated 
sustainability framework 
Optimal selection and use (through 
processing and optimising side 
streams) of alternative proteins to 
fight climate change, halt 
biodiversity loss, improve ecosystem 
services and promote circularity 
Integrated sustainability 
framework published in 
scientific journal. 
Sustainability profile for 9 
alternative protein value 
chains. 
Scientists, 
primary 
producers, 
food industry, 
policymakers, 
consumers 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
1
10 GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
D - Filled Life Cycle 
Inventory (LCI) database 
Identified data gaps for sustainability 
analysis of alternative protein 
sources 
LCI database with existing and 
project-generated data for 
traditional and 9 alternative 
proteins 
Scientists, 
Food industry, 
policymakers 
M - Modelling framework 
to calculate the impact of 
diets on health and 
environmental parameters 
Optimised future diets in which 
alternative protein sources substitute 
traditional animal proteins 
Scientific paper describing 
framework setup 
Scientists, 
Food industry, 
policymakers 
D - Filled data integration 
and interoperability 
platform 
Identified data gaps for integrated 
analysis of alternative proteins 
across sustainability and health 
domains 
Data platform filled with 
existing and project-generated 
data for 28 protein sources 
Scientists, 
Food industry 
 
 
2.1.2 Expected wider mid- and long-term destination impacts  
The GIANT LEAPS project results include evidence and solutions for transforming food systems for health,  
sustainability and inclusion while maximising co -benefits with respect to the four priorities of the  Food 2030  
initiative: nutrition and health, climat e and environmental sustainability, circularity and resource efficiency, and  
innovation and  empowering communities. These  results lead to mid -term outcomes and long -term scientific, 
economic/technological and societal impacts. The foreseen impacts are provided in Table 2.3. 
 
Table 2.3. GIANT LEAPS scientific, economic/technological and societal impacts 
Impact type Impact Quantification and specific target 
groups (if applicable) 
Scientific Standardise and validate methods for determination of 
protein quality; implementation of improved methodologies 
and databases accessible to the scientific community; 
knowledge transfer to researchers in food industry. 
4 new/improved methodologies, 2  
open-access databases, knowledge  
transfer to 4 large industry partners. 
Scientific Deliver new, high-quality knowledge to the scientific 
community. 
70 scientific publications, 70 
conference presentations, 
Scientific Educate a new generation of scientists in a multi-disciplinary 
setting and holistic approach to improving the food system. 
17 PhDs 
15 Postdocs 
Scientific / 
societal 
Reduce animal testing for allergenicity and toxicological risk 
assessments and analysis of digestibility of proteins 
Methods leading to up to 30% 
reduction of animal testing in 2030 
presented to and considered by 
panel experts and scientific 
networks hosted by EFSA 
Economic Increase return on investment and improved competitiveness 
through guidance to investors, the primary production sector 
and food industry in Europe on alternative protein sources to 
develop / invest in and setting benchmarks for future novel 
protein sources. The utilization of alternative protein sources 
requires development of new value chains, providing new 
job opportunities and a pathway to fairer profit distribution. 
Dissemination of results to 40 
private sector actors (SMEs, large 
industries, sector associations) 
across the value chain through the 
stakeholder board and dissemination 
activities 
Technological Increase availability of alternative protein-containing 
ingredients and foods through uptake of recommendations, 
food prototypes and technological innovations. 
Uptake of innovations by retail, out- 
of-home and food industry, 
increasing alternative proteins in 
food supply up to 30% in 2030. 
Societal Accelerate substitution of animal proteins by alternative 
proteins in the diets of consumers living in Europe. 
50% alternative protein intake (of 
total) by 2030. 
Societal - 
health 
Increase consumer trust through reliable and clear science- 
based communication about sustainability and health impacts 
of traditional and alternative protein foods; empower 
communities through regionally adapted recommendations 
for sustainable and healthy food choices. 
Optimised future diets 
communicated to 15000 citizens 
across 4 EU regions by the end of 
the project. 
Societal - 
health 
Improve overall health through a 25% reduction in the 
consumption of total animal proteins via replacement by 
alternative proteins by 2030 
Estimated3 years of life saved: 
6,215,000 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
20 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Societal - 
environmental 
Increase the climate resilience of the EU protein sector by 
delivering a climate vulnerability analysis and adaptation 
strategies for alternative protein production, making it less 
vulnerable to events or trends related to climate change. 
Increased EU food security and 
stability for farmers, producers and 
markets. 
Societal - 
environmental 
Mitigate the impacts of climate change, CO2 emissions and 
loss in biodiversity through the dietary shift in 2030. Extend 
the consumer base through a more sustainable, alternative 
protein-based product portfolio, which contributes to GHG- 
emission reductions via consumer sensibilization towards 
sustainability, circularity and carbon neutrality. 
Estimated26 reduction of EU GHG 
emissions by 2030: 326 MtCO2-eq 
Estimated reduced EU nitrogen 
application by 2030: 4901 GgN 
Increased reuse of nutrients 
alternative proteins by 15-20% 
 
 Other impacts  
GIANT LEAPS will directly contribute to the four Farm to Fork goals of reducing climate footprint, enabling a 
global transition, creating new opportunities through innovation, and increasing resilience by taking climate  
adaptation strategies into account. Indirectly, GIANT LEAPS will also contribute to three of the four Farm to Fork 
targets: reduction of pesticides (through optimized protein/crop selection), reduction of antimicrobials (through  
reducing animal protein consumption), and reduction of nutrient losses through improving circularity. By making the 
food system healthy, sustainable and more resilient , GIANT LEAPS contributes to long -term food security and 
many of the UN Sustainable Development Goals including (3) Good Health and Well-being, (9) Industry, Innovation 
and Infrastructure, (12) Responsible consumption and Production and (13) Climate Change. More resilient local food 
supply chains and healthier diets are also essential to avoid COVID-like future shocks to the food system. 
2.1.3 Potential barriers to reach impact  
The main potential barriers to GIANT LEAPS and strategies to overcome these are: 
Regulatory approval for novel (processed) proteins is a sine qua non for implementing alternative protein 
sources in foods and diets in the EU and, therefore, to reach impact. The activities in WP3 aim to develop  
improved methods and tools to gather the necessary data while maintaining optimal risk and safety assessment. 
Insufficient industry uptake of the GIANT LEAPS recommendations and innovations hampers the availability of 
sufficient variety and quantity of foods to consumers to reach impact. Co-creation with industry, utilization of 
the extensive networks available to the consortium (B2F network, EFF network, SB) for exploitation, and 
inclusion of economic aspects in the sustainability analysis are applied to minimise this risk. 
Consumer acceptance is another necessity for reaching impact through the susta inable consumption of  
alternative protein -based foods as part of daily meals. Insights from quantitative research on consumer  
acceptance will be used as starting points to define the future optimised diets across 4 regions in Europe.  
Results of the optimised diets will be used for feedback to consumers to investigate how the dietary shift can 
be maximised. 
Policymakers need to recognize the credibility and relevance of the optimised future diets as a basis to develop 
or adapt integrated food policy and relevant sectoral policies, thereby providing incentives for all actors in the 
food system to enable the transition. GIANT leaps dissemination activities using policy briefs and interactive 
sessions to explain the concepts and results will be deployed to maximise policy impact. 
Unforeseen impact on primary production of alternative protein sources may influence availability and make 
the optimised future diets unattainable. However, the applied modelling approach is flexible to be rerun in the 
future with new data, parameters and proteins to mitigate this potential risk. 
The shift away from traditional animal proteins may disrupt major parts of the food system economy. GIANT 
LEAPS addresses this risk by proposing a gradual transition, by inclu ding the economic sustainability of  
proteins in the integrated LCA analysis, and by providing new economic opportunities for actors across the 
value chain related to the utilization of alternative protein sources. 
2.1.4 Scale and significance  
Around 60-70% of total protein intake is derived from animal sources in European diets. 27,28 The ambition of the  
GIANT LEAPS consortium is to achieve 50% of total protein intake derived from alternative protein sources,  
representing a decrease in absolute animal protein intake of 20-30% under the assumption that increased alternative 
protein intake fully substitutes traditional animal protein intake. Springmann and co -authors published a modelling 
approach to estimating health and environmental impacts of sustainable diet strategies.29 Based on their work, a 25% 
decrease of animal protein intake would reduce GHG emissions in 2030 by 326 MtCO2 -eq, reduce EU nitrogen  
application by 2030 of 4901 GgN and save 6,215,000 life-years through long-term health impacts. 
 
26 Based on Springmann et al. (2018) Lancet Planetary Health 2;10, pp e451-e461. doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(18)30206-7 
27 doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2009.73 
28 doi:10.3945/jn.113.177113 
29 doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(18)30206-7 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
21 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
 
2.2.1 Dissemination, exploitation and communication  
All partners in GIANT LEAPS are committed to deliver on the objectives and create widespread impact from the  
project results. The combined experience, expertise and wide network of our consortium members will ensure that we 
reach maximum impact with all key actors identified. A fully integrated plan for communication, dissemination and 
exploitation (Task 8.1) involving all partners will be developed and implemented within 6 months after the project  
starts and updated continuo usly throughout the project. Its objective is to ensure that the impact of the project is  
immediate and continues beyond the life of the project, addressing all relevant target groups. 
GIANT LEAPS will disseminate and promote the results of the project to key stakeholders active and related to the 
food supply chain from farm to fork, e.g. primary producers, food and ingredients producers, food processors and 
distributors, wholesalers, retailers, food service, restaurants, consumers, opinion leaders/regulators, the 
  . The  
geographic coverage ensured by the Consortium members, who have networks across Europe, will enable a far - 
reaching and systemic dissemination. Each GIANT LEAPS partner will be actively involved in the   
dissemination activities, which will enhance the sustainability of the project results. They will also assist in translating 
any dissemination and communication materials into the local languages and attend local events. 
GIANT LEAPS will focus particularly on dissemination of results to policymakers via dedicated policy briefs. The 
project will contact policymakers and risk assessors at the EC including EFSA, at the WHO/FAO, and in Member  
States of the EU. Contacts will be established through in -person and online meetings to identify the views of  
policymakers on issues relevant to alternative proteins, dietary shift, environment and health, as well as via a workshop.  
Combined with the project approach and results this information will be used to generate policy briefs on 9 key topics 
of the project. Policy briefs are a unique means of tailored communication and will contain adequate information, fully  
supported by science and presented in tangible format for policymakers to digest.30 They will be drafted within WP8 
in liaison with the other work packages in the project on the following topics: 
- 1 policy brief on integrated food policy (dietary goals 2030, interrelated goals & impacts for sectoral policies) 
- 2 sectoral policy briefs on public health and consumer education 
- 3 policy briefs on food safety 
- 1 policy brief to inform both agriculture and aquaculture sectoral policies 
- 2 policy briefs on environmental policy and circularity 
Collaboration with other food-related projects and the use of national contacts: GIANT LEAPS will multiply its 
outreach through joint dissemination efforts with other projects and initiatives, including but not limited to the four 
projects funded under topic LC-SFS-17-2019: Alternative proteins for food and feed and  - 
FARM2FORK-01- . This 
will r and workshops, and other 
joint dissemination and communication actions. The outreach and contribution of the GIANT LEAPS consortium and 
regional/national networks and initiatives will be crucial in engaging all stakeholders for the proper dissemination,  
communication and further uptake of our results and best practices. 
A comprehensive communication strategy will be deployed. The project website will be the primary interface for 
communicating the GIANT LEAPS results, featuring links to the partner websites, project updates, news articles,  
events, social media widgets and contact information. An electronic newsletter will be produced every 6 months, with  
recent highlights from the project. Several project leaflets will be developed for distribution to partner networks and 
at conferences, exhibitions and other events in addition to a project media kit. The project will have a social media 
presence through Twitter, LinkedIn and ResearchGate, to ensure wider dissemination to many target audiences. A  
LinkedIn page will be created for the GIANT LEAPS community to exchange information about project 
developments and gather views on specific aspects of the project. Every effort will be made to publish the work of the 
consortium via the media, publications, conference presentations and workshops , as well as through the 
Commission and industry bodies. A final GIANT LEAPS conference will be organised to raise awareness about the 
dietary shift and the role alternative proteins can play in this, to share the results of the Giant Leaps project, but also to 
give floor to related other initiatives in society. Additionally, the Annual EFFoST Conference will dedicate a special 
session for presentations from the GIANT LEAPS partners. An e-learning platform will be set-up with courses for 
multiple target groups. The objectives will be to (i) educate school children and students, (ii) to provide new knowledge  
and upgrade practical skills of  
biases towards alternative proteins and the dietary shift. Results of the project will be disseminated via reports, 
scientific papers, policy briefs and technical articles . All public communication will be made open access, to 
facilitate scientific exchange. Open publications will also be shared through the personal profiles of the authors on  
ResearchGate. Table 2.4 summarises the main dissemination tools and channels used to reach the various audiences. 
 
30 Good examples are Policy Briefs as practised by the WHO (examples: LINK1, LINK2, LINK3)