1.2 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
7 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
5 Rozin, P. (1996). Sociocultural influences on human food selection. In E. D. Capaldi (Ed.), Why we eat what we eat: The psychology of eating (pp. 233 263). 
6 Liñán et al. (2019), DOI: 10.12691/jfnr-7-9-10 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
8 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
climate (WP5), data integration and interoperability (WP6), and optimising the dietary shift (WP7). Existing data on 
these aspects will be collected and any missing data gaps be filled, to estimate the environmental and health impacts 
of future diets based on these alternative proteins (in WP7). Other alternative protein sources are in a much earlier 
development stage (exploratory sources, Table 1.2); WP3-4 will develop methodologies and case studies/series that 
will accelerate risk assessments, including data collection, and bringing those proteins to the market, creating long- 
term impact. For plant-based and other sources with few or no knowledge gaps (the long list, including traditional 
animal proteins as comparators, Table 1.2), existing data will be collected and analysed (in WP5 -7). These sources 
will serve as a benchmark for project-generated data and will be incorporated in dietary modelling. 
Table 1.2. List of proteins7 categories, and strategies to achieve diet impact 
Protein source selection1 Knowledge gaps and 
regulatory status 
Strategy to achieve diet impact WP Impact 
timeline 
Exploratory sources, e.g. hemp 
(P), leaf proteins (P), algal 
fractions (O) 
Many knowledge gaps 
Regulatory approval 
missing 
Improved RA methodologies to 
accelerate safety data collection 
of new alternative protein sources 
3, 4 Long- 
term 
Short list: faba bean (P), lentil 
(P), oat (P), quinoa (P), rapeseed 
(P), microalgae (Chlorella sp; O), 
 ; M), 
crickets (I), cultured beef (C) 
Specific / 
technological / sensory 
knowledge gaps 
Regulatory approval in 
place or pending 
Technological innovations to 
increase availability of alternative 
protein-containing foods; assess 
environmental & health impacts 
of innovations; use data for 
comparisons and modelling 
optimised future diets 
2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7 
Mid-term 
Long list: soy (P), wheat (P), pea 
(P), chickpea (P), potato (P), 
 (P), 
Spirulina sp. (O), fish side 
streams (O), krill (O); 
beef (T), pork (T), chicken (T), 
egg (T), milk (T), other dairy (T) 
Few or no knowledge 
gaps 
Readily implementable 
in foods 
Collect existing data for 
comparisons and for modelling 
approaches to define how 
alternative proteins can be 
optimally included in future diets 
for positive health and 
environmental impacts 
5, 6, 7 Short- 
term 
1 (P) plant proteins; (M) microbe & fungal proteins; (O) ocean-based proteins; (I) insect proteins; (C) cultured meat; (T) 
traditional animal proteins. 
 Increasing the availability of foods containing alternative proteins  
To increase alternative protein consumption in European diets, these must  
become more available, accessible, affordable, and acceptable to consumers. 
Processing technologies will be investigated to increase the availability of a  
diverse group of foods made of alternative protein ingredients (plant, microalgae,  
insect, microbe) by developing sustainable, healthy, and preferred alternative  
protein-based ingredients and food prototypes (Fig. 1.5). 
Effects of ingredient, food processing, and formulation will be investigated 
strategically (WP2, led by VTT) in relation to the key functional attributes, 
i.e. nutritional, technological and sensory properties , of the alternative  
protein sources in foods with complex structural hierarchies. The focus will 
be on less refined, minimally processed ingredients rather than highly 
refined ones to make use of multi-functionalities of distinct components (i.e. 
Fig. 1.5: Innovation overview 
protein, dietary fibre, carbohydrates, minerals). Different protein sources will be blended (hybrids) to improve and 
complement the functional and nutritional properties of the end-products (IRTA, MATIS, UCC, VTT, VM, UL, 
FC). Applications in meat (MATIS, VTT, UL, VM, NFB, BD), dairy (IRTA, UCC, NFB, FC), egg alternatives  
(UCC) and culinary products (IRTA, MATIS) will be  prioritised to maximise the potential impact of the innovations  
through substitution of these major dietary sources of traditional animal proteins. Ingredient and food processing, 
food formulation and matrix effects can have major effects on safety, health and environmental and sustainability 
aspects. Therefore, sample material and data generated in WP2 will be shared with WP3, 4 and 5 to: a) seek  
optimisation of these parameters through feedback and iterative steps, and b) include the impact of ingredient  
processing and food manufacturing on health and sustainability-related impacts (estimated in WP7) of future diets. 
Ingredient-specific functionalisation strategies will be developed (IRTA, UCC, VTT, VM, NFB, UL, FC, BD, AGT) 
for improved technological functionality in food processing, as well as sensory characteristics and nutritional  
quality and safety aspects (allergenicity and microbial stability; interaction with WP3 and 4). 
 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
9 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
7 Protein selection by be changed based on input from Stakeholder Board sessions, co-creation workshops or progress in the state of the art. 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
10 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
a) Available data for each raw material will be collected/updated to identify the most critical knowledge gaps. 
b) Functional properties of each protein ingredient will be characterised. Particularly, protein composition, 
particle size distribution and application conditions (temperature, pH, ionic strength and solvents) will provide 
the essential background needed to understand protein -protein interactions and interactions with other polymers  
(i.e. dietary fibre, starch). 
c) Protein techno-functionality aspects (such as solubility, emulsification, foam ing, gelation, cohesion -adhesion, 
elasticity, viscosity, fat absorption, wettability, flavour binding and hydrophobic properties) will be 
investigated. 
d) Sensory properties (flavour, off -flavour components, texture, taste) will be tested in suitable solutions.  
Proximate composition (water, protein, fat, ash) will be analysed, including dietary fibre (soluble vs insoluble) 
and mineral composition. 
e) Various protein ingredients from diverse categories will be utilised in design of complex food model systems 
(from liquid to solid) which can be used as alternatives to animal protein-based foods. 
Functionalisation approaches by thermo-, mechanical (VTT) (i.e. homogenisation, microfluidization, extrusion) and 
bio- (i.e. enzymes, fermentation) (IRTA, UCC, VTT) process technologies will be applied to achieve the targeted 
nutritious and tasty alternative protein -based foods in situ. A comprehensive evaluation of the functional  
properties of the modified proteins and the evolution of their structure conformation will be performed, to enable 
the functionalised protein sources to be applied in different food/beverage model systems (UCC). Microstructure 
(using CLSM, SEM) and macrostructure investigation, integrating rheology (oscillation and rotational tests) and 
tribology analysis (allowing to predict and understand the oral textural sensory properties of foods), and design of 
new food structures will enable the development of a powerful prediction tool for the product optimisation of the 
further range of food prototypes. 
Healthy, sustainable and delicious prototype products for meat (wet & dry extruded, VTT), dairy (including drinks 
(UCC), yoghurt type gels (UCC), and cheese like spreads (IRTA)), culinary products (including patties, meat 
balls (MATIS, IRTA)) as well as egg replacers for fine bakery products (UCC) will be developed, based on the 
functionalisation strategies and food structure bioengineering innovations. Consumer preferences/insight 
obtained in WP 1 will guide the selection of ingredients and dedicated food applications. Food-compatible and 
label friendly technologies for improving the functional properties of protein ingredients will be addressed. Food 
prototypes will be characterised for rheological, textural properties, microstructure, flavour and mouthfeel, and  
selected samples will be sent to WP3 and 4 for further analyses. 
Table 1.3 shows the short list of alternative protein sources with the highest potential for new applications in foods, 
that will be focused on regarding ingredient processing and food manufacturing. It concerns the short list (in Table 
1.2), except for cultured meat because of (too) low volumes produced (for technology work in the project). 
Table 1.3. Alternative protein sources addressed in ingredient processing and food manufacturing 
Source, EU 
production 
volume and 
main countries 
State of the art & enablers for food applications Main barriers and knowledge gaps to 
address 
Faba bean, 1.8 
Million tons.a 
UK, FR, LT, 
DE, and IT. 
Clear LCA assessment. Successfully applied for 
bakery products, extruded snacks and pasta. Some 
research done on nutritional functionality in foods. 
Sensory issues (bitterness and astringency). 
Low performance in meat and dairy 
alternatives. FODMAPS and allergens, lack 
of knowledge on in vivo protein digestibility. 
Lentil: 105.000 
tons. ES, FR 
and EL.a 
Clear LCA assessment. Successfully applied for 
beverages and pasta. Nutritional functionality 
studied mainly for beverage applications. 
FODMAPS, lack of knowledge on in vivo 
protein digestibility and relationship between 
protein molecular structure and 
functionalities. Techno-functional and 
sensory challenges in meat and dairy 
alternatives. 
Oat :13.6 
Million tons. 
PL, FI, ES, DE, 
SE. b 
Research focus mainly on fibre, less on protein. 
Fractionation designed mainly -glucan 
extraction. Applied for bakery products, extruded 
snacks and pasta, non-dairy milk. 
Protein functionality is still inferior especially 
in meat alternatives (compared to legumes). 
Issues in dairy alternatives i.e. fermented 
products, linked to starch and/or dietary fibre. 
Quinoa: 24511 
tons in 2020.c 
UK, ES, FR, 
GE, IT 
High nutritional quality (protein quality, gluten and 
allergen free, source of Fe, and zinc). Applied for 
gluten-free (fine)bakery, extruded snacks. 
Sensory and techno-functional challenges for 
dairy and meat alternatives. Lack of 
knowledge in processing-protein 
functionality and in vivo protein digestibility. 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
11 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Rapeseed: 23.2 
Million tons 
DE, FR, PL, 
CZ, UK. b 
Good nutritional quality (rich in fibre and protein 
balanced aa, higher Cys and Met than legumes). 
Sensory and/or techno-functional challenges. Tested 
in bakery products, meat alternatives. 
Major sensory and techno-functional 
challenges in meat and dairy alternatives. 
Studies on nutritional functionality for food 
applications are limited. 
Chlorella 82 
tons/year (d.w.) 
PT, DE, NL, 
CZ, DK 
High nutritional functionality (high protein content, 
source of fibre, all essential aa present, -linolenic 
acid, -3 fatty acids and carotenoids). Used in a 
wide range of food products. Light Chlorella was 
recently established and is currently applied in a 
limited number of food products (e.g. sports bar, 
soups, crackers). 
Techno-functional and sensory challenges in 
meat and dairy alternatives partially solved 
using light Chlorella (low chlorophyll 
content). Contrarily to wild type Chlorella 
vulgaris, the new light clones were recently 
established (2019-2020). Limited knowledge 
available regarding digestibility and safety. 
Single cell 
protein (SCP) 
10.000 tons in 
UK 
New highly promising technology to produce 
bacterial SCP biomass from CO2 with renewable 
energy. Amino acid and biomass composition 
comparable to other SCP sources. Bacterial SCP 
biomass is high in Fe and B-vitamins. 
Techno-functional challenges especially for 
dairy and meat alternatives, Lack of 
knowledge in processing-protein 
functionality and in vivo protein digestibility. 
Cricket (Acheta 
domesticus) 500 
tons total EU 
insect products.d 
NL, BE, ES, 
LT, DK 
Functional properties studied mainly in feed. Food 
related research is limited and focused on bakery 
products, minced meat, pasta and protein bars. 
Positive EFSA opinion on Novel Food status 
recently released awaiting final EC approval. 
Complete protein with favourable amino acid 
profile and rich in essential micronutrients. High 
feed conversion ratio and wide substrate range. 
Optimal application of cricket sensory 
qualities as well as product format (e.g. 
minced meat, protein bars, spreads and paste, 
cereal) with best market fit is yet to be 
identified. Sensory challenges through post- 
harvest drying and processing steps. Techno- 
functional challenges in integrating fresh or 
dried crickets in meat replacements. 
Note: aSource: DG Agri, 2018; bSource: FAOstat, 2019; cSource: Mordor Intelligence 2020; dSource: IPIFF, 2019 
 Risk assessment (RA) strategies: Safety by design  
In Europe, rigorous safety assessments considering microbiological and 
chemical food risks, impact on nutrition, and allergenicity, are applied and  
essential to ensure consumer health and trust in food. Such an assessment often 
comes at the end of product development and involves animal studies. 
a. A safety by design approach is essential to ensure that safety and health  
considerations are embedded early and within the entire development of  
future alternative protein sources. It needs to encompass both management of 
known safety hazards already subject to regulation (including upcoming 
regulation) and identification of any potential new hazard ( the unknown Fig. 1.6: Safety overview 
unknown ) be it a new infectious hazard, toxin or new allergen. While the safety of the short list proteins (Table 1.2) 
has already (largely) been investigated, this is not yet the case for the exploratory protein sources (Table 1.2), and any 
other future alternative proteins. Additionally, changes in consumption and hence exposure to potential hazards 
that may increase due to the protein transition strategies also needs to be accounted for. 
b. Animal models have been widely used to identify new hazards, but these are imperfect predictors of saf ety in a 
human context and in allergenicity RA. Classical toxicological studies, including genotoxicity assays and animal  
studies have not been adapted to assessing dietary components such as proteins. This is even more challenging in 
the context of allergenicity RA. The emergence of IgE -mediated food allergy as a condition of public health importance  
affects around 17 million Europeans.8 This context, together with the societal drive to reduce animal 
experimentation, requires further development of more effective and validated in silico and in vitro alternatives  
with readouts that can be readily interpreted as to what might be considered safe and what may raise concerns. 
c. Effective post-market surveillance tools are lacking to monitor unintended consequences of introducing a new 
food into the marketplace. Registries have been developed to collect data on severe, anaphylactic reactions reported 
by clinicians 9 and in iFAAM an on -line reporting tool was dev eloped where patients could self -report their reactions. 10 
However, no tools have successfully been developed to date to monitor allergic reactions to alternative proteins. 
GIANT LEAPS will address the above-mentioned gaps (Fig. 1.6) by: 
Setting up a safe -by-design framework including integrated effective set of in silico and in vitro tools to 
support the safety assessment of future alternative protein ingredients, encompassing novel processing technologies, 
 
 
8 EFA report, 2019. Quality of Life for People with Food Allergies in Europe: A Menu for Improvement (LINK) 
9 Worm et al. (2014), doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2014.0367. 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
12 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
10 Jusufagic et al. (2015), doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-564-7-320 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
10 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
enabling the rapid and safe introduction  of alternative proteins into the marketplace. It will use data -driven 
approaches to methodology (including protocols) and reference data sets to support the assessment. 
General risk assessment for a case -series: The framework will be developed and worked out or at least 5  
different types of alternative proteins (UMan) including both 2 -3 proteins of a more developed nature  (from short 
list: e.g. rapeseed and cricket flour) and 2-3 more experimental novel proteins (exploratory sources: e.g. from leaf 
and algal protein fractions). These will be benchmarked against foods of different nutritional quality (WP4) and 
-funded 
projects, led by or with key involvement of GIANT LEAPS partners (Allergest, EuroPrevall, iFAAM, INFOGEST,  
IMPARAS, ThRALL). The selection will consider processing strategies both novel and conventional that may be 
used to mitigate or remove potential hazards such as chemical contaminants, microbes or allergens and include 
, and thus feed into food processing mitigation strategies (WP2). Also, identified issues 
will be addressed through wider stakeholder engagement through WP1. 
General safety assessment (WR): Risks that lie in immunomodulatory effects of novel protein ingredients  
(including potential adjuvant effects of chemical compounds) will be assessed using human cell lines models of the 
gut epithelium (WP4) and with model i mmune cells. Immune cell differentiation and modulation of immune related  
pathways will be evaluated using (whole genome) gene expression analysis and cytokine profiling. A co-culture of 
immune cells and intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells will emulate 
the in vivo intestinal environment and exposure conditions as accurately as possible. Immunomodulatory effects 
will again be evaluated as above and linked to assessments of potential genotoxicity in B-cells. 
Allergenicity risk assessment for cross -reactivity to protect existing food allergic consumers (INRAE): 
Existing in silico tools and databases will be aligned to facilitate phylogenetic and allergen sequence identity and 
similarity approaches together with motif searching, to incorporate HLA class II binding, using statistical and  
machine learning methods, to enable future initial screening of novel proteins. In silico predictions will be validated  
using IgE binding studies with serum panels from food allergic patients. Innovatively, this will be based on rational 
plasma selection and multiplexing or microfluidics, to reduce the volumes of precious biological samples. 
Allergenicity risk assessment for de novo sensitisation (WR): De novo sensitisation, i.e. the capacity of an  
alternative protein to cause new food allergies, is less explored. GIANT LEAPS will develop models to assess the 
potential of alternative proteins to act as sensitisers, focusing on the gut, utilising gut epithelial models developed 
in WP4. Events in the gut lumen will be studied by using in vitro digesta applied to WP4 gut models, model proteins  
and alternative protein ingredients. Digestion peptide data sets will be used for modelling of HLA binding, again 
to facilitate initial screening. Events in the gut epithelium will be addressed mimicking either a healthy or an atopic,  
proinflammatory epithelium. This will be linked to in vitro methods to assess antigen-presenting cell (APC) and B- 
cell responses, to identify which parts of (novel) proteins can initiate immunogenic reactions. The capacity of APCs 
to activate naive PBMC -derived T-cells will be assessed and studies will be undertaken to investigate B -cell 
activation from human volunteers with and without atopic disease including food allergy. To validate in vitro 
results, in vivo sensitisation potential will be assessed in volunteers included in WP4 human intervention trial. 
Consumer perspectives: risk communication and post -market surveillance in relation to food allergens  
(UMan, DAAB): An outcome of allergenicity risk assessment is so-called precautionary labelling (implementing 
regulation (EU) 2021/120). Such statements may  be mis-interpreted by allergic consumers and viewed as  
misleading and defensive. Based on patient-led approaches developed in the iFAAM project and the risks cross- 
reactive novel food ingredients pose to allergic consumers, effective ways of communicatin g those risks will be 
assessed. Post-market surveillance issues will be tackled by developing an electronic observatory based on the  
iFAAM reactions in the community project, to collect information on adverse reactions to alternative protein foods. 
 Digestion, bioavailability & health benefits  
Digestibility generally describes protein quality: the better the digestibility, the 
higher the protein quality. The gold standard for analysis is the true ileal  
digestibility of each amino acid (DIAAS method), most commonly performed 
with pigs. Digestibility can be affected by many factors, e.g. protein structure, 
food matrix, food micro and macro structure, and physiological factors and life 
stages. Plant protein in its original food matrix (legumes, grains, nuts) is  
generally less digestible (<80%) than animal protein. Food processing has  
limited impact on animal protein but a profound effect on plant protein 
digestibility. Further, anti-nutritional factors (ANF), e.g. protease inhibitors, 
and co-nutrients like fats and fibre, can be affected by smart process designs.11 Fig. 1.7: Health overview 
Digestibility, bioavailability, ANF and co-nutrients collectively affect health impacts of alternative proteins (Fig. 1.7). 
Accurate assessment methods preferably avoiding animal models are needed to assess the digestive behaviour, 
bioavailability and overall digestibility of alternative protein sources and processed ingredients, and food products 
 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
10 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
11 Prandi et al. (2021), doi:10.3389/fnut.2021.695793 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
11 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
containing these. The INFOGEST model is an international consensus me thod, widely adopted by academia and  
industry, for the simulation of food digestion, protein digestion in particular, and is being evaluated as an alternative 
in vitro DIAAS ISO method. Proteins are digested to peptides in the stomach and the small intestine by the action 
of the pepsin and pancreatic enzymes (trypsin, chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidases). Finally, the brush border  
membrane (BBM) enzymes, located in vesicles on the epithelial cells of the small intestine, are the final step of the 
digestion, reducing peptides to free amino acids, di - and tripeptides that can be absorbed across the intestinal  
epithelium. So far, no in vitro digestion method has included BBMs, and it the GIANT LEAPS ambition to  
improve the standard methods beyond the current state of the art by including these. 
Regarding in vitro models of gut epithelial barrier function, there are gaps in the knowledge of the se polarised 
monolayers (e.g. Caco2-HT29MTX) when treated with food digesta, resulting in poor reproducibility and variable 
transport and permeability rates. Together with WP3, WP4 aims to harmonise protocols and define the characteristics 
of a healthy monolayer to create a consensus protocol for gut barriers treated with food digesta. 
A human intervention study (DigestAA) will be performed, by one of the world -leading laboratories in the field, 
with two selected alternative proteins for accurate determination of the true ileal digestibility, which will also as a 
benchmark and validation of the new in vitro digestion method. Two alternative 15N isotopes labelled protein-based 
foods, to distinguish food proteins from endogenous (secreted) proteins, will be assessed for digestibility in healthy 
volunteers. They will be equipped with a naso-intestinal tube the day before the postprandial test.12 When the tube is 
located at the ileal site, samples will be collected continuously for 8h after the ingestion of the test meal, and  
breakdown products (amino acids and peptides) will be analysed,  to determine the protein quality and metabolic  
bioavailability of dietary nitrogen. Also, an alternative, novel and highly innovative method will be used to  
indirectly quantify endogenous protein by prior administration of D 2O.13 The determination of D -enrichment in 
individual amino acids allows to discriminate between endogenous (D -labelled) and dietary (unlabelled) amino acids.  
This method will be a proof of concept to improve digestion studies. The results of the human intervention study 
will feed into the validation of the new in vitro digestion method and WP3 safety assessment (characterisation of 
released peptides and potential epitopes). 
Nutritional passport: Alternative proteins ( short list) will be tested for digestive behaviour, bio availability and health  
biomarkers to develop a nutritional passport, including the presence of co-nutrient information, allowing comparison 
with reference proteins (soy, egg or whey). Mass spectrometry mapping of the digestion products - especially on the 
basolateral side of the epithelial cell layer- will be applied to identify peptide sequences with beneficial health effects 
and confirmed with cell-based assays. In silico prediction of bioactivity will also be addressed. WP4 will collate and 
bridge the knowledge gap for WP2-selected proteins, and -in interaction- will investigate specific processing steps to 
improve digestibility and digestive behaviour. 
 Holistic sustainability assessment environment, society and economy  
The EU food system cannot currently be considered sustainable with respect to 
environmental, social and economic aspects.14 The way in which we produce 
and consume animal proteins is causing significant negative environmental  
impacts. Plant sources which currently dominate the global protein supply also 
cause issues: land clearings, intensive use of croplands, habitat fragmentation, 
threats to biodiversity, GHG emissions and fertiliser use. As a large proportion 
of these are currently converted into animal protein for human consumption, the 
environmental pressure derived from traditional animal protein production is 
further intensified. From the broadest perspective possible, environmental 
impacts of alternative proteins do not give a correct estimation of their Fig. 1.8: Sustainability overview 
sustainability. Human well-being is one of the key aspects of the long-term sustainable development of the planet, with 
s dealing with social impacts 15. Biodiversity loss has been identified as one of the  
three most critical environmental impacts caused by human activities, and biodiversity protection and restoration is 
one of the 6 environmental objectives of the European Union (EC/2020/85).16 Nevertheless, many mainstream LCA 
methodologies have largely ignored biodiversity loss.17 Active development has been in  progress to include  
biodiversity as an impact category in LCA but significant methodological challenges still remain. To fill the evidence 
base, pros and cons of producing alternative proteins on sustainability, biodiversity and climate (neutrality/adaptation) 
need to be assessed, in comparison to traditional animal proteins. GIANT LEAPS will address this (Fig. 1.8) as follows: 
- An integrated GIANT LEAPS sustainability assessment framework will be developed (by ETHZ) to conduct 
a sustainability assessment of the alternative proteins, considering all three pillars of sustainability: environmental, 
 
12 Oberli et al. (2015), doi:10.3945/jn.115.216838; Calvez et al. (2020), doi:10.1093/ajcn/nqaa274 
13 Tessier et al. (2020), doi: 10.1093/jn/nxz279 
14 European Commission (2020). Towards a sustainable food system. 
15 Source: CAP Context indicator C.26 on Agricultural entrepreneurial income (https://agridata.ec.europa.eu/Qlik_Downloads/Jobs-Growth-sources.htm) 
16 Rockström et al. (2009), https://doi.org/10.1038/461472a 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
12 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
17 FAO (2020) Biodiversity and the livestock sector - Guidelines for quantitative assessment: Version 1. FAO, Rome, Italy 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
13 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
social and economic impacts. The framework will be based on LCA and Social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA), 
and Environmental Life Cycle Costing (E-LCC). The sustainability assessment framework will go beyond state 
of the art by implementing results from novel biodiversity impact analysis and analysis of circularity  
potentials of the alternative proteins (by DIL), offering a broader sustainability profile and by setting the  
ground for new PEF based categories for alt ernative proteins. Costs and benefits (WU) of the selected  
alternative proteins for climate and biodiversity will be incorporated into the framework, using LCA and non -LCA 
methods. Methods for each sustainability dimension will be defined in the framework based on scientific methods 
following recognized European and international standards and frameworks. The framework will then be used to 
build the comprehensive sustainability models of the alternative protein systems. 
- Environmental sustainability: Impacts of selected alternative proteins on all five main drivers of 
biodiversity loss will be assessed. LUKE will apply existing LCA methods to cover three of the main drivers  
(habitat change, climate change and pollution) while separate (non-LCA) indicators will be used to assess impacts 
on the remaining two drivers (invasive species and overexploitation), for which no operational LCA-methods yet 
exist. This innovative approach will be integrated into the sustainability assessment to fill knowledge gaps on the 
environmental footprint of alternative proteins. 
- Social sustainability: GIANT LEAPS will assess social impacts (LUKE) through Social Life Cycle Assessment 
(SLCA), an approach that was formalised by the SLCA Guidelines by UNEP/SETAC, updated in 2020. The  
method considers the entire value chain of products and the multitude of stakeholders found along it, including the 
workers in the fields and in the factories, the consumers, the local communities impacted, other value chain actors 
and society as a whole. The results are often site -sensitive; thus, primary data will be collected through  
questionnaires and focus groups to reflect the reality of production of alternative proteins in several areas in 
Europe and the potential switch from one protein type to another. The aim is to better understand the positive 
and negative social impacts and to ensure that all project implementation activities have, as much as possible, a 
positive effect. The lessons learnt will be of great importance for future agricultural projects and for companies 
looking to produce sustainable alternative proteins. 
- Economic sustainability : A  Life Cycle Costing approach  (WU) will be applied  to assess the  economic 
sustainability of the production chains of alternative protein sources. This assessment focuses on the internal costs 
of the production chain to evaluate its economic viability. Scenario analyses will be performed to account for  
impacts due to potential changes in the global protein market situation. 
- Climate adaptation/mitigation: Results from the LCA analysis will be further used (by MATIS), and an  
additional protein vulnerability analysis be done to provide detailed climate profiles of the alternative proteins . 
This will indicate the alternative proteins potentials to serve as climate mitigation and/or adaptation methods, and 
also give stakeholders an insight into key climate vulnerabilities of the production of the proteins, which, if  
addressed, can largely enhance their resilience towards main expected climate risks. 
- Data collection: The extensive amount of data from various sources collected and generated in WP5 throughout 
 (by DIL) in a Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) data repository, which will be 
freely available for research purposes, and linked to the cloud platform in WP6. This LCI repository will be used 
in WP5 sustainability impact assessment and thus serve as an important tool in filling existing knowledge gaps on 
the environmental, social and economic impacts of traditional and alternative proteins sources. 
This comprehensive and comparative analysis will provide stakeholders and policymakers with new, detailed  
knowledge on the potential impacts of environmental, societal and/or economic changes on the production of the  
alternative proteins and assess how their  production and consumption may affect  our society, economy and  
environment, including biodiversity and climate, and make a clear comparison with traditional proteins. 
The sustainability analysis of WP5 is directly linked with WP6 regarding collecting  and delivering data on  
sustainability aspects according to the defined methodology of data collection and management. WP5 will use data  
from WP2, WP3 and WP4 in their environmental, social and economic analyses. The results of all analyses performed 
in WP5 will feed directly into WP7, where the sustainability of the future dietary shifts will be analysed. 
 Integration of data and impact of future diets  
To provide policymakers and other decision-makers in the food system with all 
relevant information to plan and achieve the protein transition successfully, it is 
paramount that all the types of data streams related to the use and processing of 
protein sources in diets, health risks and benefits, and sustainability are combined  
and integrated into one open assessment framework (Fig. 1.9). 
An open access data integration and interoperability platform  will be  
developed in WP6 in order to bring all data streams together (including project- 
generated and external data), to provide an overview of available and missing 
data per protein source and to create a future-proof data infrastructure that 
can be used by scientists and policymakers. The open cloud data platform Fig. 1.9. Data platform and 
future diets overview 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
14 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
addresses the gap of data availability on protein sources (including alternative) holistically combining multiple aspects 
of nutrition, safety, health and sustainability along the complete life cycle chains. It will serve as the one-point of 
entry for integrative modelling by relevant stakeholders, policymakers and scientists, e.g. performed in WP7 for  
modelling and optimization dietary impact. 
Data integration protocols will be defined in interaction with WP2, WP3, WP4 and WP5 and public data on protein 
sources will be captured. The platform will support data discovery and reuse, methodology and open frameworks to 
facilitate curation and annotation with community standards (e.g. ISA) and established metadata that can be explored 
and annotated according to FAIR principles and relevant disciplines through interpretational module of developed  
ontology (WP6). Data semantics will be structured hierarchically and stored in an ontology, together with their  
relationships for formulating data search strategies and interoperability. Furthermore, a new explainable Artificial 
Intelligence approach (AZTI) will be applied to predict the characteristics and impacts of alternative proteins. 
data platform will be built to integrate aggregated data into open access cloud databases for scientific 
purposes, in cooperation and alignment with external EC -funded projects, initiatives and infrastructures, including  
FNS-Cloud, SmartCLIDE projects and the European Open Science Cloud. Active involvement from JRC will be  
sought to ensure maximal interoperability. Overall, it aims to activate data for interdisciplinary work (e.g. for the  
application in WP7-8) and cooperation between project partners and beyond, extending it to external users. 
 The overall impact of the dietary shift towards alternative protein foods  
The European food system has the potential to operate in a more coherent and efficient manner to work towards  
common health and planetary goals. Dietary patterns representative of all European regions need to be estimated,  
especially pertaining to protein.  The innovative inclusion of health metrics (allergenicity, quality, safety) and 
environment metrics (nitrogen, greenhouse gas emission, land use, water use) will mean significantly broader  
applicability and exploitation of these models. GIANT LEAPS will use the available building blocks and extend the 
current models with health and environmental metrics. 
a. Indicators for health and environment will be established, that are quantifiable and can be normalised in order 
to combine them in an overall output. 
b. Relevant data on the indicators will be collected from the other WPs, available databases and published studies 
(WR, WU), as aggregated in the data integration and interoperability platform (WP6), and incorporated in the 
GIANT LEAPS dietary shift modelling approach. 
c. The impacts of typical current (traditional protein) diets across Europe on the health and environmental metrics  
will be estimated using this framework, for updated dietary intake data from 16 countries, averaged across 4 
European regions (N/S/E/W). 
d. Based on the typical diets, also future alternative protein-based diets will be composed for each of the four EU 
regions, taking into account regional dietary guidelines, culture and eating habits, and impacts of these future diets 
on health and the environment will be assessed as well. This extends the current SHARP and SUSFANS 
modelling approaches to include food safety, allergenicity, bioavailability, nitrogen and phosphorus, and water 
and land use impacts, as well as to include alternative protein-based foods. 
e. Preferences of different stakeholder groups will be included, using a Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA), 
an approach that has successfully been applied to compare potential mutually exclusive factors.18,19 Each of the 
indicators can be weighed equally or weights can be attributed to the various indicators depending on their  
perceived importance. The outcome of such an MCDA allows fast ex ante comparison of various future diet 
scenarios on health, sustainability and other relevant factors. 
f. Alternative protein diets will be optimized , using (multi -objective) optimization modelling to minimize  
negative environmental impact while not reducing (or increasing) consumer health 
The GIANT LEAPS modelling framework will be used in interaction with input from stakeholders, with results  
providing input to other WPs (see Interaction with other WPs), in this way providing a feedback loop. 
1.2.3 National or international research and innovation activities                                                                            
GIANT LEAPS will build upon many past and ongoing national and international projects, presented in Table 1.4, and will 
focus on integrating the knowledge, experiences, tools and innovations gained within the separate domains of 
research. The specific partner involvement per project is described in part A of the proposal. 
Table 1.4. National and international projects and activities categorised by topic area. 
Topic and relevance to GIANT LEAPS Projects with GIANT LEAPS partner involvement 
Many partners are or have been involved in 
projects around specific classes of alternative 
and sustainable protein sources, including 
dedicated HORIZON 2020 and national calls 
EU-SUSINCHAIN and InUrban (Insects); EU-ProFuture (Algae) 
EU-NextGenProteins (diverse selection); EU-SMART PROTEIN 
(terrestrial); EU-Plenitude (Fungi); EU-BBI-PROMINENT (cereal 
side streams); Sustainable Future Proteins (diverse selection); EIT 
 
18 Rosa et al. (2016), doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2014.02.027 
19 Burkhard et al. (2014), doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2014.02.022 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
15 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
focusing on sustainable proteins. A limited 
selection is shown here. 
FOOD Taste2Meat (sunflower); SUSFOOD-OATPRO (oat); EU- 
AQUABIOPRO_FIT (fish-side stream); EU-FASTTRACK (oil 
plants/ rapeseed); EU-GREENPROTEIN (leaf protein) 
The GIANT LEAPS consortium can build on 
the allergenicity expertise developed within 
Europe, notably due to several large EU 
projects that partners led or contributed to. 
EU-iFAAM (prevent and manage); EU-EuroPrevall (information 
tools for authorities and industry); PREFER (toolbox for 
sensitisation); ThRAll (detection); COST-ImpARAS (allergy risk 
assessment strategies) 
Partners have been involved in research and  
activities related to risk assessment of food  
and were/are engaged in novel food 
procedures and food legislation. 
EU-NOFORISK; EU-MyToolbox (mycotoxins); EU-GRACE 
(maize); ALGAESOLUTIONS (algal products); Support to 
several EFSA dossier submissions (Insects, Duckweed, Beet Leaf, 
and several ongoing); Activities as panel member of EFSA 
Digestibility & health, important quality 
characteristics of proteins and foods, were the 
topic of several projects the partners were or 
are involved in. 
COST-INFOGEST (in vitro digestion methods); VistaMilk 
(dairy); TOMI and InfantDigest (infant formula); EAT4AGE 
(food for elderly); SOLARBIOME; PRODIGE (oilseed proteins); 
SustainableFutureProtein (alternative proteins) 
Innovations in product development have 
been developed and ongoing projects, mainly 
on a national level. The GIANT LEAPS will 
connect expertise and accelerate product 
development by combining this knowledge. 
PlantMeatMatters, PlantPromise and EXPRO (meat replacers); 
FUNGITIME (fungi biomass-based food products); EU-BBI- 
PROMINENT (cereal sides streams); 
EU_ALSEOS (rapeseed waste to food); EU-FIDOs (products 
from oilseed co-stream); Fifteen crickets (products from crickets) 
Innovations in production processes to 
increase quality, functionalities, cost 
efficiency and sustainability were topics 
addressed in several large projects and many 
smaller bilateral projects not listed here. 
EU-Enthalpy; EU-NewTechAqua; EU-MASTER (fermentation); 
EU-PROTEIN2FOOD; EU-APROPOS (biomechanical 
processing for rapeseed press-cake and fish side-streams); EU- 
GREENPROTEIN (protein extraction); PARP (protein 
extraction); BRIdgeALfa (technologies for rapeseed and soy) 
Life cycle analysis, sustainability of 
proteins and agri-products were specifically 
addressed in these projects. 
EU-ClimeFish; EU-CLIMAQUA; SEFARI (pathways to 
sustainable protein commodities); BIOEASTsUP (circular 
economies); LIFEinFORESTS and EU-BIOVALUE (biodiversity) 
Consumer aspects, like trust, human diet and 
relation to health and sustainability were 
included in several projects listed above but 
addressed explicitly in the projects listed here. 
Many national-level projects are omitted. 
EU-SUSFANS (metrics, models and foresights for sustainable 
food and nutrition security Europe); EU-EFCOVAL (Food 
consumption validation); EU-EURRECA (micronutrient 
recommendations); EFSA RPC (models for consumption data); 
SUP-DIE (consumption habits); EU-SMART PROTEIN (Trust) 
GIANT LEAPS will continue and integrate  
multi-actor engagement as initiated in 
several projects, including those listed here. 
EU-RADIANT; TRADEIT (regional competitiveness SMEs); 
INNO4AGRIFOOD (SME Agri-Food ecosystems); MY- 
GATEWAY (boosting start-ups) 
GIANT LEAPS will use the data sets and  
platforms and infrastructure developed in 
past and current projects. Projects also include  
IT solutions and AI approaches to support data 
integration, data analysis and exploitation. 
FNS-Cloud (data-knowledge and tools); CoEICT (AI for allergy 
prediction); ICTSES (immunotoxicology); ProteinCompass 
(database on protein functionality and nutrition); P-PRO (protein 
processing ontologies); TECNOMIFOOD (AI for precision 
nutrition); ASSIST and DIY4U (Digital platforms) 
 
1.2.4 Integration of disciplines  
The GIANT LEAPS scientific approach and assessment methodology to optimise sustainability- and health related 
outcomes of future alternative protein-containing diets integrates, by design and necessity, a wide range of scientific 
disciplines. Diverse fields are brought together, including food science and technology, social sciences and  
humanities, life sciences, environmental sciences, and data sciences including modelling and artificial 
intelligence. Considering all aspects of the value chain , a systems -oriented approach is necessary to realise the  
ambition to reshape the food production, processing and consumption and bring this to the next level. As is illustrated 
in Fig. 1.1 (section 1.1) and in the WP structure diagram (Fig. 3.1, section 3.1), the integration of disciplines is at the 
heart of GIANT LEAPS. In addition, it is the explicit purpose of WP6 (open data integration platform) to enable the 
integration of data stemming from the wide variety of scientific disciplines and associated methodologies. 
Many of the GIANT LEAPS partners have extensive experience with integrating scientific disciplines during research 
activities. For example, LCA, socioeconomics and studies on climate impact and dietary shifts integrate various  
disciplines that require a broad knowledge and understanding of the agro -domain, land use, crops and production,  
processing, food consumption et c. During project meetings, the interaction and information exchange between  
partners, WPs and disciplines will be encouraged through plenary sessions and joint co-creation workshops with a 
wide range of stakeholders, including policymakers, primary producers, food producers and consumers. 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
16 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
1.2.5 Integration of social sciences and humanities  
GIANT LEAPS strategically addresses alternative protein -related knowledge gaps with the end goal to achieve a  
dietary shift and sustainable food system. The success of the dietary shift and the environmental and health impacts of 
this transition critically depends on the willingness of consumers to consume alternative protein-containing foods as 
integral part of daily meals and on the economic feasibility of the change in the food system for all actors across the 
value chain. Therefore, these two critical aspects related to human behaviour are an integral part of GIANT LEAPS. 
Within WP1, quantitative consumer research is performed, tailored to 4 regions across Europe, to address regional and 
cultural differences, to ensure that the innovations that are developed in WP2 and the future diets that are defined in 
WP7 align with consumer perspectives to maximise the chance of success and long-term impact of the dietary shift. 
WP1 also defines poli cies to increase alternative protein food production and consumption that is acceptable to  
consumers. Within WP5, economic and social aspects are assessed as part of a holistic sustainability, climate and  
biodiversity assessment. The essence of the GIANT LEAPS proposal is the integration of these social sciences and 
humanities disciplines with technology, life science and health-oriented disciplines, combining the related insights 
and information flows to define optimised future diets that can guide policymakers, businesses and consumers towards a 
dietary shift, sustainable food system and positive environmental and health outcomes. 
1.2.6 The gender dimension (i.e. sex and/or gender analysis)                                                                                    
GIANT LEAPS will actively address the gender dimension in its activities throughout the WPs by facilitating inclusion 
of sex and gender as critical analytical and explanatory variables in its research and involvement of the multi -actor 
stakeholder interactions. In all proposed studies, measures will be taken to ensure the different genders will equally  
participate. Gender analysis and gender dimensions are included in all relevant project activities to enable a shift  
towards healthy and sustainable diets, supporting climate change and transforming the food system in a fair and  
equitable way. 
Statistics show that females have a major influence on the daily meals of European households,20 and are also more 
concerned about sustainability of food production and climate issues than male.21 Regarding alternative proteins, 
the influence of gender seems to vary, as insects are more accepted by males and plant-based proteins by females.22 
Therefore, gender is an important variable in the consumer surveys (WP1). Information about gender will be collected 
and used in the analyses. A non -binary answer option will always be included but, based on past studies, it is not  
expected that a sufficiently large number of people will use the option for it to be included as a category in the analyses.  
Therefore, the main comparison will be between males and females. The sample will consist of equal numbers of  
females and males for each consumer study, ensured by using quota samples. Within WP2, no prototypes or  
innovations are developed that favour either female or male end users, but input from consumer research in WP1 will 
ensure that gender dimensions are addressed in identifying the best opportunities to develop new food prototypes. In 
WP3 and WP4, sex-specific dietary and nutrient responses in relation to food safety and health are considered, with 
special consideration for vulnerable groups including pregnant and/or breastfeeding women. The human study in WP4 
is performed on healthy vo lunteers and the inclusion criteria are defined broadly to represent the healthy adult  
population: men and women, aged 18 to 65 years, BMI 18 -30. The aim is to include males and females equally. Within  
WP5, gender dimensions will be part of the social LCA assessment, and in WP7 future diets for the four regions in the 
EU will be defined, ensuring that these are well-balanced from a gender perspective. The GIANT LEAPS consortium 
will support the inclusion of gender perspectives in all its policy recommendations (WP8), in line with the Gender  
Equality Strategy 2020- -equal 
23 Moreover, recognising the importance of 
battling gender stereotypes, communication and dissemination activities of WP8 will avoid the use of stereotypical 
and values towards gender equality. 
Through new knowledge and innovations, WP8 will identify pathways to support the creation of new jobs and  
preparing the workforce for jobs of the future in the food and bioeconomy sector with an emphasis on training/capacity - 
building activities to improve professional skills and competencies. Strategy and work on this will aim to support 
equal participation and payments of men and women across the relevant sectors of the economy. 
1.2.7 Open science practices  
GIANT LEAPS will produce tremendous amounts of data, publications and other scientific outputs. To ensure the  
highest possible quality, efficiency and responsiveness of the research, Open Science is the standard way of working 
within GIANT LEAPS, and integral to the exploitation and dissemination plan. The following principles apply: 
 
 
20 Eurostat (2019) Participation rate in cleaning and food management, by gender, % (2008 to 2015) 
21 OECD (2014) https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264214651-en 
22 Onwezen et al. (2021) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2020.105058 
23 European Commission, Gender Equality Strategy 2020-2025, p.2; European Commission, DG for Research and Innovation (2013), Gendered Innovations: 
How Gender Analysis Contributes to Research, pp.26, 28. 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
17 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
- All publications will be made openly available and shared as early as possible within the publication process.  
Popular articles will be shared, in addition to the print versions, on the GIANT LEAPS website and websites of 
the involved partners. Peer -reviewed scientific publications will be submitted to Open Access journals , with pre - 
prints published (e.g. at ResearchSquareF100). Protection of knowledge will be ensured by adopting licenses that 
- Open data sharing principles: All data collected within the project will be shared with the community, wherever 
possible, applying FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Re-usable data) principles. Data will be shared 
with the public repositories, or as separate datasets, e.g., on data repositories like European Open Science Cloud 
(EOSC), Zenodo or FAIRSharing. 
- GIANT LEAPS researchers adheres to the commonly agreed standards of research integrity, i.e. the proposed 
research is conducted so that others have confidence and trust in the methods and results. All research activities, 
such as experiments, modelling etc, are defined and executed in such a way they are reproducible and re-usable. 
Research hypotheses will be stored on beforehand on OSF (https://osf.io/prereg/) or AsPredicted 
(https://aspredicted.org/). 
- Involved scientists are supported by the WP9 Open Science and Data Manager, as well as Data Stewards of 
own organizations) to apply proper Data Management and Open Science research routines and practices. Mutual 
learning exercises and training are implemented for exchange of experiences and learning from each other.  
Open science practices will be linked to innovation and business models, by involvement of the WP9 Innovation 
and IPR (IIPR) manager, requiring careful consideration of issues like IPR, licensing agreements, 
interoperability, and data reuse. 
- European consumers and citizens are recognized by GIANT LEAPS as valid contributors to achieving the  
scientific aims of the proj ect. Citizens, consumers and civil society organisations and end -users will be  
involved in the co-design and co-creation processes, particularly in the three multi-actor WP1 workshops, and 
consumers are involved in the WP1 surveys to guide the selection of ingredients for dedicated food applications 
in WP 2 and to obtain realistic and accepted future diets in WP7. 
1.2.8 Research data management and management of other research outputs  
Data Management is an integral part of the GIANT LEAPS research process. At the start of the project, a detailed 
Data Management Plan (DMP) will be developed, using the Horizon Europe template, by the Open Science 
and Data Manager (OSDM) in agreement with all partners. This DMP will be delivered (in WP9) at Month 6, 
and will be updated every 6 months by adding more detailed information, such as applying relevant ontologies 
and data format standards (for e.g. protein composition and sustainability and health indicators), and providing 
updates as the project progresses. GIANT LEAPS  applies FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, 
Reusable) principles, implying that data are as open as possible and as closed as necessary. The DMP will outline  
how these principles are applied in practice in our project. Since already existing data will be gathered and (re-) 
used in the project, particularly in WP5, 6, and 7, the DMP will also cover these re-used datasets. 
FAIR principles: Newly generated data will initially be stored locally in the institutional repositories of the respective 
partner. Metadata of all original datafiles, compliant with the Horizon Europe guidelines, will be made publicly 
available. Then, newly generated data will be made openly accessible in trusted public repositories, such as EOSC, 
whenever possible, while keeping robust IPR management (data linked to IP will be available after only IP 
protection mechanisms have been put in place), and with the metadata standard of that repository added to the 
dataset. Source code, and AI and statical models will be made available in open source version control systems, 
like GIT, to make the analysis reproducible (e.g. R or Python Notebooks), let others review it and share it publicly. 
Other research outputs: The DMP, next to data, will also include a plan on how other research results that will be 
generated by or re-used in the project will be handled. These include, amongst others, processing technologies in 
WP2, gut models and bio-assays in WP3, nutritional passports for alternative proteins and in vitro digestion models 
as alternatives to animal models in WP4, Life Cycle Inventories and system models in WP5, AI algorithms in WP6, 
and the SHARP model in WP7. 
Resources: Each partner in the project has allocated costs (mainly personnel) for making data FAIR and for a data  
steward.  Data Stewards monitor the data collection process of the respective partner, make sure  
FAIR principles are abided throughout the duration of the project, and provide assistance whenever needed. The 
 responsibility for data management is with the project Open Science and Data Manager, but ultimately 
with the PC, and the aspect of proper data management will be covered as standard agenda point of the annual  
consortium meetings and the ExC meetings. 
Data security: Data storage and security will be managed by the respective institutions, such as their local drives and 
security measures. A part of the collected data is sensitive and will be processed in accordance with regulatory  
(GDPR) and institutional guidelines. This includes a data privacy assessment, data minimization, providing an  
informed consent form and anonymization/pseudonymization. Further, sensitive data will be stored in password 
protected folders and where possible encrypted. Data ownership and sharing of the data will be covered in the  
consortium agreement of this project. Datasets, where restrictions (e.g. privacy) apply, will be archived on the 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
18 
GIANT LEAPS