1.1 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
3 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
other limitations that to date  prevent (future) alternative protein sources from being used in foods and diets at scale, and 
clearly aligns product development strategies with consumer preferences 
2. Methodologies: Improve and innovate current methods 
Despite many existing methodologies and tools, critical methodological knowledge gaps exist within specific domains 
that limit relevant data collection, e.g. to successfully assess biodiversity impact in Life Cycle Assessments (LCA), 
predict allergenicity of novel proteins, assess protein digestibility and bioavailability without animal experiments, and 
model full impacts of diets on health and environment. 
3. Datasets: Gather data to create open access, comprehensive datasets 
A wide array of alternative protein sources is already available and even more will become available in the future.  
However, data related to health and environmental impacts, and critical applicability parameters (technological,  
nutritional and sensory fun ctionalities) of these protein sources are scattered and incomplete. Therefore, GIANT  
LEAPS will develop a future-proof, open cloud platform with protein screening AI algorithms to collect and 
update comprehensive datasets from project-generated and existing data, covering a broad set of alternative proteins. 
Fig. 1.1: GIANT LEAPS: stakeholders, knowledge gaps and results 
1.1.1 Objectives  
The GIANT LEAPS objective is to deliver the methodologies, datasets and innovations needed to accelerate the 
adoption of healthy and sustainable alternative proteins and actualise a dietary shift across Europe . The  
methodologies and datasets will be open (access) and comprehensive, providing stakeholders with a scientific basis to 
make future-proof and maximum-impact choices, from consumer-accepted policies to new technologies. To reach the 
overall objective, specific objectives (SO) have been defined, presented in Table 1.1, categorised as being primarily 
related to methodologies (M), datasets (D), innovations (I), and engagement (E). 
Table 1.1. GIANT LEAPS Specific objectives 
SO 1-E: Engage and co-create with policymakers, regulators, producers, businesses and networks, NGOs, 
consumers and consumer organisations to adapt or validate the approaches and specific choices (e.g. selection of 
protein sources) and perform consumer research providing insights to define societally acceptable future diets for 
four typical European areas taking into account regional food cultures, consumer habits and gender considerations. 
SO 2-I: Deliver at least 6 food prototypes and technological innovations that optimally utilise proteins across at 
least 4 categories (plant, microalgae, insect, single-cell protein) with analytical results for health, safety and 
sustainability-related parameters. 
SO 3-M: Deliver a safety by design toolbox, including novel cell-based tools for toxicological, allergic cross- 
reactivity and de novo sensitisation analysis, deliver 5 risk assessment scenarios for different classes of future  
alternative proteins, and develop consumer risk communication strategies and an online observatory for adverse 
response monitoring. 
SO 4-M: Deliver an optimised and improved in vitro digestion method and standardised gut epithelial model 
that are validated by a human intervention study, assessment of a minimum of 9 alternative protein sources and 
formulated foods including bioavailability of amino acids, presence of co-nutrients and anti-nutritional factors, and 
in vitro methods to assess down-stream health effects. 
SO 5-D: Develop an integrated sustainability framework including product environmental (PEF) category rules, 
construct and fill the Life Cycle Inventory database with sustainability data, and complete an assessment of 9 
selected alternative protein value chains, compared to traditional protein chains. 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
4 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
SO 6-D: Deliver an operational cloud data platform , based on well -defined ontology with standardisation,  
interoperability and data requirements for maximal integration with existing EC -funded databases, available for data  
integration, analysis and exchange within the project and remaining available after the project ends (with Joint 
Research Centre (JRC) alignment and involvement). 
SO 7-M: Optimized future diet: modelling framework fully defined, and the impact of the dietary shift 
comparing the exchange of traditional animal protein with alternative protein foods calculated and optimised for 
human health and planetary outcomes, for four regional diets in the EU. 
SO 8 -E: Development and dissemination of science -based policy briefs on alternative proteins as part of  
optimised future diets to support policymakers to successfully develop integrated and sectoral food-related policies, 
execution of an appropriate IPR strategy and exploitation plan for project innovations, and dissemination of main 
findings to all relevant audiences including the scientific community, farmers, producers and the general public. 
 
1.1.2 Progress beyond the state of the art and ambition  
This project is unique in that it is comprehensive, transdisciplinary, and deeply interlinked . The outputs of the  
project will advance science with new methodologies and innovative solutions, improve decision-making and policy 
through comprehensive shared datasets, and accelerate the transition through cross-cutting engagement. Earlier efforts 
have been focused on single protein categories, scientific approaches, or impact  domains. GIANT LEAPS will go 
beyond the state of art by applying a holistic approach, and maturing the development across protein sources 
and categories, encompassing safety, health and environmental assessment domains. 
To achieve impact, dietary alternatives must be adopted in practice by consumers, i.e. alternative proteins foods should 
be produced and consumed at large across Europe. GIANT LEAPS will determine protein source/product combinations  
with high potential for consumer acceptance. Consumer research and impact estimation will be performed in four  
European regions (North, East, So uth, West), ensuring that the targeted future diets reflect regional habits and  
preferences, satisfy dietary guidelines, and offer culturally appropriate alternatives for consumers across the EU. 
In developing the project content, partners and Stakeholder Board members have extensively discussed and evaluated 
protein sources, leading to a preselection of protein sources for which knowledge developments are required on 
the short-, mid-, and long-term (see section 1.2, Table 1.2 for more detail). 3 Animal and plant sources that are already  
extensively studied will be included only for purposes of creating comprehensive comparative datasets and for  
estimating future diets impacts. Nine high-potential proteins with high potential to substitute traditional proteins on 
the medium term: faba bean, lentil, oat, quinoa, rapeseed, microalgae, single cell bacteria, crickets and cultured  
beef, will be characterized comprehensively and act as the focal point of processing and product innovation. Food  
prototypes and technological innovations for these proteins will be developed from TRL 3-4 to TRL 5-6, while safety 
assessment focuses mainly on new, exploratory alternative proteins (e.g. hemp, leaf proteins). 
The ambition of the GIANT LEAPS project is to deliver a number of food prototypes and technologies that can be 
leveraged widely and have large potential for scale-up and industrial uptake to increase the availability of alternative 
protein-containing foods in the mid-term, contributing to the continued acceleration of the dietary shift. 
New methodologies will be developed to advance scientific understanding of environmental and health impacts 
(including safety risk assessment) of alternative proteins and foods and diets containing those, including: 
a. Environmental assessment 
- Set up comprehensive GIANT LEAPS sustainability framework, integrating existing and new methods. 
- Develop innovative methods to assess biodiversity, circularity and climate potentials. 
- Create new product environmental footprint (PEF) category rules for alternative proteins. 
- Co-assess impacts on environment, natural resources, biodiversity and climate, acknowledging trade-offs. 
- Combine existing environmental, social and economic data with new data to perform a holistic sustainability 
assessment, using predominantly Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)-based methods. 
b. Health and safety assessment 
- Set up a safety by design approach for current and future alternative protein sources, considering nutritional 
quality and bioavailability, and possible negative impacts (allergies, toxicological or other adverse effects). 
- Develop and validate novel in silico and cell-based models to fill data gaps without the need for animal  
studies (e.g. replacing 90-day rodent studies), applied to selected protein sources, and assess the impact of  
ingredient and food processing. 
- Demonstrate the safety by design approach with case studies for 5 different types of current and future  
alternative proteins with varying risk profiles. 
 
3 Selection of protein sources may be adapted based on stakeholder input (multi-actor approach) or state of the art progress before project start. 
1. Innovations: Overcome bottlenecks with targeted innovations 
2. Methodologies: Advance scientific data collection with new and improved methodologies 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
5 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
c. Assessment of dietary impacts on environment and health 
- Define indicators for environment and health (nutrition, allergenicity, toxicity) and collect relevant data, and 
extend the SHARP (Sustainable, Healthy, Affordable, Reliable and Preferred) diet -model with these indicators  
(including at least land and water use, nitrogen and phosphorus) 
- Assess impacts of alternative protein -based (future) diets on health and environment  using the extended  
SHARP model taking into account cultural and regional dietary habits within four main regions in Europe,  
as compared to traditional animal protein-based diets, allowing realistic health and environmental synergies 
and trade-offs. 
- Apply a multi -criteria decision analyses (MCDA) -like approach to allow rapid a priori analyses of the  
preferences and weights of various groups of stakeholders on the different types of health and environmental 
impacts of the diet, for use in the policymaking setting. 
- Use optimisation techniques for environmental impacts of alternative protein -based diets while observing  
safety and other constraints. 
The ambition of GIANT LEAPS project is to develop improved, fast and animal-friendly methodologies for the 
health, safety and environmental assessment of alternative proteins to arrive at future diets that are accepted by  
consumers and optimized for health and environmental impacts within the scope of the project, and to disseminate 
these methodologies to the scientific community so they can be applied widely to alternative protein sources now and 
in the future to keep accelerating the protein transition and the dietary shift. 
No single holistic database on protein sources (traditional and alternatives) for food currently exists. Such a database 
would ideally combine multiple aspects of nutrition, health, safety and sustainability along the complete life cycle  
chains. The project aims to develop such a holistic open-access data platform. Existing ontologies will be integrated 
to combine available key databases on protein properties. This project links closely with other EC-funded 
infrastructures and initiatives, including the European Open Science Cloud, EFSA FoodEx database, Sma rtCLIDE and 
FNS-Cloud projects, for the purpose of developing a single framework. It will be aligned with the JRC Data Catalogue 
for long-term implementation. The data platform will be populated with existing and project-generated data, and can 
be further extended in the future. The integrated data platform will help identify existing data gaps, enable cooperation 
between project partners and direct future interdisciplinary work beyond the project. 
The ambition of the GIANT LEAPS project is to collect comprehensive data on 28 alternative proteins (including 
traditional animal reference proteins, Table 1.2) to allow stakeholders to compare and benchmark proteins of interest 
and identify data gaps and targets per protein source. The open cloud data platform will remain an accessible and  
expandable resource after the project      . This will allow scientists, industry and other end-users to define health and 
sustainability targets for new proteins and technologies to improve the state of the art, advancing the dietary shift. 
The four projects funded under the topic LC-SFS-17-2019: Alternative proteins for food and feed collectively represent 
state-of-the-art, each in their specific alternative protein domain. All coordinators of these projects are part of the  
GIANT LEAPS consortium and have been assigned roles as protein category Theme Leader. They coordinate the  
exchange of information and materials between the GIANT LEAPS activities and these projects. GIANT LEAPS will 
also connect to other relevant projects including 
-FARM2FORK-01-02: 
  
protein crop systems and value chains to ensure that 
GIANT LEAPS does not duplicate efforts but builds 
on and synergizes with emerging results. 
The ambition of the GIANT LEAPS project is to 
engage with a wide range of stakeholders to ensure the  
GIANT LEAPS solutions will be taken up and 
exploited by relevant end-users, empowering them to 
progress the dietary shift. The overall ambition of the 
GIANT LEAPS consortium is to provide coherent 
methodologies, datasets and innovations to achieve 
that 50% of total European protein dietary intake 
is derived from alternative protein sources by 2030 , 
as a steppingstone to reach levels of 60-70% by 2050. 
The ambition of  will be made possible  
by advancing science, and informing and providing  
solutions to policymakers, businesses and the public  
to achieve positive health and environmental impacts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.2: GIANT LEAPS setup in relation to ambition and 
main impacts 
3. Datasets: Accelerate decision-making with comprehensive datasets