2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
22 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
Table 2.4. GIANT LEAPS Dissemination and communication tools 
Dissemination tool Target audience KPI Means of verification 
 
Scientific 
community 
Industry & 
SMEs 
Public at 
large 
  
Project website Y Y Y 10000 visitors + 25000 page 
views. 30% spending more than 
1 minute on the website. 
Web traffic statistics collected and 
documented in the activity reports 
Project materials 
(leaflets, brochures, 
A/V publications) 
Y Y Y 3 videos with over 750 online 
views per video; 1000 project 
leaflets distributed 
Tracking spreadsheet: input from 
partners and YouTube views 
Newsletters Y Y Y 7-8 newsletters share with our 
existing mailing lists 
Newsletters distributed and 
published via the project website 
 
mailing lists 
Scientific 
publications 
Y Y  6-10 conference papers and 
journal articles 
Activity reports 
Participation at 
scientific 
conferences, fairs 
and events 
Y Y Y 40+ attended 
20+ talks 
Activity report and tracking 
spreadsheet: input from partners 
Civil society and 
consumer 
engagement 
Y Y Y 1 event/country, 2 European 
food events (fairs, festivals), 
500+ citizens engaged 
Activity report and tracking 
spreadsheet: input from partners 
General audience 
articles/media 
 Y Y 10+ non-scientific journal news Activity report, press releases 
Social media 
(Twitter, LinkedIn, 
ResearchGate) 
Y Y Y 150+ project-specific tweets via 
consortium partners 
500+ members on GIANT 
LEAPS LinkedIn group page 
Twitter/LinkedIn analytics and 
statistical reports 
Radio/television 
broadcasting 
Y Y Y At least 1 national 
presence/country 
Recorded sessions 
e-learning courses Y Y Y At least 3 modules with 2-3 
chapters each; with 10-15 min 
per chapter 
Number of completed chapters 
followed in the LMS 
Policy briefs/fact 
sheets 
Y Y  9 Policy briefs and/or fact sheets 
distributed to >100 policymakers 
Tracking spreadsheet: input from 
partners 
Press kits Y Y Y 25 media kits downloaded Activity report 
Press conferences 
and press releases 
Y Y Y 4+ press releases Activity report 
GIANT LEAPS final 
conference 
Y Y Y > 120 participants 
> 7 speakers 
Online social media and website 
communications. Registration list. 
 
 Stakeholder and international network engagement  
The GIANT LEAPS Stakeholder Board (SB) is an open group that will be further extended before, during and after 
the project. It is composed of representatives from all kinds of organisations related the supply chain from farm to fork,  
e.g., primary producers, food and ingredients producers, food processors and distributors, wholesalers, retailers, food 
associations, media, consumer organisations and the public. In addition, important public sector stakeholders such as 
WHO and EFSA will be contacted to join after the project is granted. The SB will be part of the activities in WP1 and 
WP8 and has both a consultative role on the project content and approach, and a role to maximise the dissemination 
and exploitation of the project results. The current participants are listed in Table 2.5. 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
23 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
Table 2.5. Participants of the GIANT LEAPS Stakeholder Board 
Protein & flavour suppliers Fuji Oil; Firmenich; Cosun; Cargill; Avebe; Quinoa Marche 
Food & dairy manufacturers Valio; CJ; Fazer; Hochland / Simply V; Westland; Lantmännen; Savencia / 
Soredab; Oatly; Nestlé; Kellogg* 
Technology suppliers SPX Flow; CER Groupe 
Economic / investment World Economic Forum*; CounterFactual Ventures 
Boards & platforms European Alliance for Plant-based Foods; Good Food Institute; 
European Federation of the Associations of Dietitians; International Platform 
of Insects for Food and Feed 
Public sector / food authorities FAO Office of Climate Change, Biodiversity and Environment*; 
former EFSA panel members: prof I. Tetens, prof A. Flynn 
Research institutes ILVO Vlaanderen*; Institute of Food Research and Product Development, 
Kasetsart University, Thailand 
Note: *formal confirmation pending; Letter of Support received from all other participants 
Large international networks will be leveraged for communication and dissemination. EFF is the European affiliate of 
the International Union of Food Science and Technology and connected with more than 130 societies, institutes and 
universities across Europe. EFF also collaborates with organisations such as the European Food Information Council 
(EUFIC), the International Life Sciences Institute Europe (ILSI Europe), the Global Harmonisation Initiative (GHI) 
and the National Food Technology Platforms (NFTPs). Moreover, B2F has a worldwide network of 500+ small and 
large businesses and other organi sations. Combined with all individual partners, including 5 large industries, the  
GIANT LEAPS consortium has a tremendous network and potential for successful dissemination and impact. 
At the end of the Giant Leaps project, a final report will highlight the dissemination achievements according to the 
activities outlined in the communication/dissemination plan. The report will also include a 2-year plan for 
disseminating the results beyond the end of the project, including various activities such as scientif ic publications, 
conferences, networking, and follow-up projects. The success of the dissemination plan will be measured by collecting 
the feedback and comments, press coverage, queries posed by stakeholders, comments articulated by participants at 
workshops and seminars, and detailed website access statistics on a regular basis. 
 Exploitation  
The exploitation routes will be investigated in WP2-5 (scientific research) and WP8 (policy recommendations). The 
involved partners are experts and referents in fields of scientific communication, policy support, technology transfer 
as well as business development for the food industry (see partner profiles). EFF, in alignment with the WR Innovation and 
IPR (IIPR) Manager and with support of the members of the consortium, will act as coordinator of the exploitation 
activities and ensure that all partners as well as potential and confirmed exploitation partners will work towards a  
successful technology and knowledge transfer to ensure efficient market uptake.  EFF will be responsible for  
establishing targeted Dissemination and Exploitation strategies of Project Results. The entire project consortium 
will discuss the strategy and the corresponding document (PEDR) will be delivered at Month 6 and updated annually 
for the remaining project duration. The first phase of exploitation activities will aim to make detailed exploitation plans for 
each partner. The second phase aims to raise awareness of the project among target users and ensure engagement of 
relevant stakeholders. The third phase aims to communicate the developed products as well as provide long -term 
exploitation support. An overview of the main exploitable assets is shown in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6 GIANT LEAPS Exploitable assets 
Exploitable asset Unique value proposition 
(UVP) 
Exploitation type & 
tentative BM 
End-users Partner(s) 
involved 
GIANT LEAPS 
stakeholder 
board Platform 
A sustainable GIANT LEAPS 
platform with stakeholders who 
exchange experiences and 
knowledge on the production of 
alternative protein foods, the 
dietary shift and policy measures 
Commercial Stakeholders, including 
food industry, 
associations, NGOs, 
public authorities, 
policymakers at EU and 
national level 
B2F 
EFFoST 
FSN Product B2B 
GIANT LEAPS 
portfolio of 
demand-driven 
alternative 
protein solutions 
(WP2) 
Processing technologies for 
developing sustainable, healthy 
and delicious alternative protein- 
based foods to obtain a diverse 
group of foods made of 
alternative protein ingredients 
Commercial Food producers, 
ingredient producers, 
food processors, 
Partners in 
WP2 Product B2B/B2C 
depending on the 
interest 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
24 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
GIANT LEAPS 
dairy and meat 
alternatives food 
models 
Production of dairy and meat 
alternative food models with 
superior functionality than 
animal alternatives 
Commercial Food producers, 
ingredient producers, 
food processors, 
Partners in 
WP2 Product B2B/B2C 
depending on the 
interest 
GIANT LEAPS 
Pilot scale 
production 
Pilot scale production of 
functionalised selected animal 
alternative products 
Commercial Food producers, 
ingredient producers, 
food processors, 
Partners in 
WP2 Product B2B/B2C 
depending on the 
interest 
Education 
programme 
Stimulative, interactive and 
innovative educational program 
aimed at raising awareness about 
the role of alternative proteins in 
the dietary shift 
Commercial Scholars and students 
Food professionals 
General public 
EFFoST 
B2F 
EM Service provision, 
subscription-based or 
selling educational 
content 
 
EFF will support the development of business plans considering any exploitable results of each partner within the  
consortium. In addition to potential benefits for industrial partners, also academic partners will be positively affected 
by outcomes, due to the high innovativeness of the proposed solutions and their societal and scientific relevance.  
Coherently with the type of actions implemented in the GIANT LEAPS work plan, exploitable results will be valorised 
in the short-term impact (<3 years of project implementation) and/or in the long-term impact (4-10 years) by project 
partners and by external end-users, who will be preliminary identified through stakeholder analysis. 
All technologies, processes, services and products developed by the partners will be considered for exploitation.  
Business models to strategically manage marketability beyond the duration of the project will be developed. The plan 
will also include a roadmap of action to reach TRL9. The demand side in general and consumer concern in particular 
will be studied through consumer acceptance studies and stakeholder workshops in WP1. Outcomes of these activities 
will be used to develop recommendations on how to communicate about new alternative protein-containing products 
to consumers, to inform and alleviate concerns, reduce misinformation and minimise the likelihood of rejection. 
2.2.2 Intellectual property management  
The consortium will seek to make best use of the exploitable results of the project, with special focus on seeking IPR 
protection for innovation-type results. For new or improved methodologies, technologies and datasets, the aim is to  
pursue open access and open science practices (see also sec tion 1.2 Open Science & Data Management). When  
considering IPR, the following should be emphasized for consolidating sustainable value creation in the EU: 
considering positive economic and social impacts in addition to the environmental aspects, for widespread 
use across the food sector, along the entire food chain, and not limited to the EU alone. 
The high technical quality of the project is associated wit h innovative technologies with large potential to  
valorise at the end of the project, requiring sufficient freedom-to-operate by the exploitation partners. 
The partners acknowledge the strategic importance and sensitive nature of back- and foreground knowledge provided 
by any other partner, and that disclosure of such information will be subject to specific obligations concerning  
confidentiality and use. A Consortium Agreement will be signed before the start of the project which details relations 
and regulations regarding IPR between the partners. This will enable all partners to carry out their work on the project 
and/or exploit the results obtained in accordance with the Grant Agreement. IPR guidelines (WP9) will be developed 
by the IPR manager at the beginning of the project, distributed to and agreed upon by the consortium partners. 
A system for monitoring the results generated during the implementation of the project is created to have a common 
repository shared between the partners, serving as a collective knowledge management and exchange system. Partners 
and WP leaders periodically send preliminary results to the Executive Committee (ExC) for evaluation of possible  
exploitation or dissemination, including communication between the partners, externally with the SB, other 
dissemination and/or communication of the activities carried out, through the publication of scientific articles, etc. The 
ExC will always respect the appropriate protection of IP rights in the various dissemination-exploitation routes, and 
the information will be shared with all partners in the reserved area of the project portal/collaboration site. 

 
 
  
 
 
Specific Needs Expected Results D & E & C measures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Target groups Outcomes Impacts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
26 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary of the overall structure of the workplan 
The multi-disciplinary and interrelated research activities of GIANT LEAPS are grouped in Work-Packages (WPs) 
for the main themes of the dietary shift, representing the most logical and optimal work division. Fig. 3.1 illustrates 
the main interrelationships and flows of information between the nine individual WPs. Each WP consists of 3 to 6 
manageable Tasks to reach the objectives of the respective WP. The focus of the WPs is summarized in Table 3.1. 
 
Fig. 3.1: Work Package structure and main interrelationships and information flows (Pert chart) 
 
Table 3.1. Summary of the focus of the 9 Work Packages 
WP Main focus of the GIANT LEAPS Work Packages 
1 Engagement with relevant stakeholders, such as European and national policymakers, food companies, 
NGOs and consumers, to retrieve their views and feed their information into the project, and vice versa. 
Consumer studies on barriers and drivers for acceptance of alternative proteins in daily diets, as well as 
consumer trade-offs between different aspects of the dietary shift. 
2 Investigating processing technologies for developing sustainable, healthy and delicious foods from 
alternative proteins, as alternatives for egg, meat and milk protein-based foods 
3 Develops a toolbox that enables the safety by design approach across a range of hazards for alternative 
proteins (including nutritional imbalance), demonstrated for several case studies, and addresses critical 
issues in allergenicity assessment of alternative proteins 
4 Assesses the digestibility of alternative proteins foods, both in vitro and in vivo, and as part of that improves 
and validates existing in vitro digestion models and holds a human trial. 
5 Assessing the sustainability (from environmental, economic and social impacts), biodiversity and climate 
change mitigation/adaptation potential from the production of several alternative proteins. 
6 Set ups a data integration platform assuring the interoperability and data access between GIANT LEAPS 
partners, and beyond. The platform will be based on a database management system hosted on a cloud server 
and connected through defined ontologies and data protocols 
7 Estimates and optimizes the impacts of the foreseen and consumer accepted dietary shift on the environment 
and human health, in comparison with traditional animal protein diets, with the ultimate aim to provide the 
scientific knowledge based to all stakeholders. 
8 Maximizes the outreach and impact of the GIANT LEAPS products and innovations in terms of enhanced 
market and business opportunities, growth and jobs in Europe, as well as the foreseen dietary shift, and 
dissemination of non-proprietary results. 
9 Coordinates the GIANT LEAPS project and consortium at the 3 levels of operational, strategic and 
organisational levels, and ensures proper Ethics and IPR management. 
3 QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION `