4. Engage to ensure additionality of work 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
6 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
 
A multi-actor and co-creation approach (Fig. 1.3) is foundational to the GIANT 
LEAPS project and incorporated throughout project activities and subject domains. In 
addition to close collaboration with relevant running projects, an open Stakeholder 
Board (SB) has been convened and has already contributed to defining the main  
research questions of this proposal. 4 Engagement and co-creation will be facilitated 
in Work Package (WP) 1 (led by ETHZ), with involvement of all project partners to 
shape the research process of the project. For the interactive multi -actor an co -creation 
workshops (led by B2F), representatives from the following stakeholder groups will 
be invited: consumer associations, primary producers, food industry, retail/hospitality 
industry, public health authorities, risk assessors, and policymakers. The stakeholders 
will provide input on the project approach to ensure it delivers insights and solutions 
 
 
Fig. 1.3: Engagement 
overview 
that are most relevant to stakeholders and to maximise impact collectively. The SB will be extended before, during 
and after the project, resulting in a sustainable stakeholder platform (see also section 2.2, Table 2.5). 
Past studies focused mostly on alternative proteins from single sources (e.g., insects, plant proteins (soy, wheat, corn, 
pea)) and lack the holistic approach. The proposed research will focus on a broad set of 9 alternative proteins which 
are not yet commonly applied in foods (lentils, faba beans, oat, quinoa, rapeseed, microalgae, single cell bacteria,  
insects, cultured meat) although most of them are already on the market - to fill still-existing knowledge gaps (see 
also Table 1.2: short list), as well as on a selected set of novel alternative proteins for specific safety-related aspects 
in an exploratory way. This allows identifying the highest potential alternatives for specific cultures and target 
groups in the different regions of Europe. 
Alternative proteins must be consumed as replacement of traditional animal proteins, not on top of those. This is of 
particular importance in Europe, where most consumers overconsume proteins mainly of animal origin. Culture is 
  choices and behaviour. 5 Hence, it is important to better  
understand the preferences, and drivers and barriers for consumer acceptance of alternative proteins in different  
European countries through quantitative consumer research. For example, naturalness is an important factor  
influencing consumer perception,6 and a perceived lack of naturalness may be a challenge for acceptance of alternative 
proteins in some countries and cultures. Consumer preferences, regional differences and food habits will be elucidated 
in WP1 in four regions across Europe, supporting the selection of producing food prototypes in WP2 and the estimation 
of impacts of accepted future diets in WP7. Considering feedback and input from consumers allows for balancing  
between sensory aspects, price, healthiness, naturalness, animal welfare and environmental friendliness. 
Policies and regulations can dramatically impact the introduction of alternative proteins, and to a lesser extent on  
dietary patterns. This project examines and compares the public acceptance of  measures, 
from nudging to taxes. Using the generated data and methodologies as a science-based starting point for dialogue, the 
team engages with policymakers to develop and share best practices across countries. 
 Assessing alternative protein sources and benchmarking against traditional animal proteins  
Development stage or TRL status of the various alternative protein sources with potential for food applications (plant- 
based, microbe- -based, insect-based, and cultured meat) varies widely and, hence, existing 
knowledge gaps vary significantly between 
different sources. GIANT LEAPS brings together 
the main data generation and innovation efforts on 
protein sources (Fig. 1.4) with the highest potential  
for being newly or increasingly implemented in the  
European food chain. Table 1.2 (short list) 
presents these highest-potential protein sources. 
Most of them are already on the market but still  
only marginally used in our daily foods, whereas  
others are close to or have submitted Novel Food 
applications. These alternative protein sources will  
be addressed throughout all project activities, 
covering: ingredient processing and food 
production (WP2), safety and allergenicity (WP3), 
health and digestibility (WP4), sustainability 
(including environmental impact), biodiversity and Fig. 1.4: Protein source analysis across GIANT LEAPS WPs 
 
 
4 A webinar with feedback session was organized on 8 September 2021 with representatives from 21 non-partner organizations. 
Engagement with stakeholders and end-users: a multi-actor approach 
Methodology