3.3 Novel toxicological assay for identification of potential hazards
3.4 Allergenicity risk assessment toolbox
3.5 Post-market risk communication and surveillance of alternative proteins                  
WP4 Digestibility and health
4.1 In-vitro assessment of digestive behaviour
4.2 Bioavailability of (alternative) proteins
4.3 In-vivo assessment of digestive behaviour
4.4 Health and wellness biomarkers                  
WP5 Sustainability and climate
5.1 System mapping and sustainability framework including PEF
5.2 Inventory data collection protocol and data gathering
5.3 Sustainability assessment
5.4 Climate adaptation and mitigation
5.5 Biodiversity and Ecosystem services
5.6 Circularity potential                  
WP6 Data integration and platform
6.1 Data integration framework and interoperability ontology
6.2 Development of cloud architecture platform
6.3 Explainable AI method for predictive protein screening                  
WP7 Optimising the diet shift
7.1 Composition of future diets with alternative protein foods
7.2 Indicators and data collection for human health and the environment
7.3 Impacts of diet shifts on human health and environment
7.4 Optimization of the diet shift                  
WP8 Communication, dissimination and exploitation
8.1 Effective communication and dissemination
8.2 Set up exploitation pathway and plan for exploitation and dissemination of project results
8.3 Recommendations for policy makers
8.4 Education and training                  
WP9 Coordination
9.1 Operational project managment
9.2 Strategic project managment
9.3 Organization project managment                  
Fig. 3.2: GIANT LEAPS Gantt chart 
 
Table 3.2a: List of work packages 
Work 
package No 
Work Package Title Lead 
Participant No 
Lead Participant 
Short Name 
Person- 
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
month 
1 Sustainable stakeholder 
involvement 
33 ETHZ  1 48 
2 Processing foods from 
alternative proteins 
5 VTT  1 36 
3 Safety by design 6 UMan  1 48 
4 Digestibility and health 11 TG  1 42 
5 Sustainability and climate 3 MATIS  1 48 
6 Data integration platform 10 DIL  1 48 
7 Optimising the dietary shift 1 WR  1 45 
8 Communication, 
dissemination, exploitation 
17 EFF  1 48 
9 Coordination 1 WR  1 48 
   Total person-months:    
 
 
 
Table 3.2b: Work package descriptions for each work package 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
28 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Work package No. 1 Lead beneficiary ETHZ 
Work package title Sustainable stakeholder involvement 
Participant No 1 2 3 4 5 17 18 23 24 27 33 
Participant 
 
WR 
 
IRTA 
 
MATIS 
 
UCC 
 
VTT 
 
EFF 
B2F 
 
FSN 
Mosa 
CAP 
 
ETHZ 
Person months:            
Start month 1 End 48 
Objectives 
O1.1 Identify the relevant stakeholders and to interact with them in co-creation workshops 
O1.2 Set up a strategy for a sustainable GIANT LEAPS stakeholder platform 
O1.3 Identify consumer acceptance of alternative proteins, and potential barriers for acceptance 
O1.4 Identify policies acceptable to consumers to achieve a shift in replacing animal protein foods 
Description of work 
Task 1.1 GIANT LEAPS stakeholder and scientific network. Duration: M1-48 (B2F, WR, IRTA, MATIS, UCC, 
EFF, FSN, Mosa) 
Stakeholders, including food industry, associations, NGOs, public authorities, and policymakers at European and 
 (open) Stakeholder 
Board (SB) which already involves >25 different stakeholders (see Table 2.5). Additional stakeholders will be  
identified and approached to join the SB to extend it to a least 50 stakeholders halfway through the project. Protein 
category Theme Leaders (WR, IRTA, MATIS, UCC, Mosa) will connect with running LC-SFS-17-2019 projects 
and align all WP activities on the respective protein categories. Connection to other projects including 
2021-FARM2FORK-01-02. 
Task 1.2 Co-creation workshops with stakeholders. Duration: M1-48 (B2F, EFF, FSN) 
Co-creation workshops (three) with all stakeholder groups and consortium partners will be organized. These will 
be held (live) in conjunction with three of  (kick-off, midterm and final). 
In the first two workshops, the past and future will be scoped; the research questions and methods of the project 
will be discussed in-depth; and input, ideas and directions will be sourced from each of the various stakeholder 
groups. The gathered input will then be brought into the consortium meetings for evaluation of possible uptake in 
the project activities. Also, specific input needed in other WPs will be collected from the stakeholders, such as for 
WP2, 7 and 8. The last workshop will focus on the integration of project results into strategies. 
Task 1.3 Strategy for sustainable GIANT LEAPS platform development. Duration: M12-36 (B2F, EFF, FSN) 
A strategy will be developed for extension of the GIANT LEAPS SB both beyond Europe and after the project  
duration, aiming at achieving a sustainable GIANT LEAPS platform with stakeholders who exchange experiences 
and knowledge on the production of alternative protein foods and the foreseen dietary shift, and policy to achieve 
this (B2F, EFF, FSN) . Setting up the platform in other continents and continuation after the project (B2F) will 
benefit the worldwide production, uptake and consumption of alternative protein-based foods. 
Task 1.4 Promising alternative proteins and foods to consumers. Duration: M1-24 (ETHZ, VTT, CAP) 
Internet-surveys will be held aimed to identify what kind of alternative proteins consumers would like to see in 
certain food product categories, and to  
protein foods as part of their daily diet. The survey will cover both the GIANT LEAPS long- and short-list of 
alternative proteins. The surveys will be conducted in one country from each of the four regions in Europe  
considered in WP7 (North, West, East, South), among a total of >1,000 participants. Results of the survey will be 
used in the selection of alternative proteins in WP2, in defining future diets in WP7, and for selecting interested 
consumer groups for dissemination in WP8. 
Task 1.5 Consumer trade-offs for alternative protein foods. Duration: M12-36 (ETHZ, VTT, CAP) 
Online surveys among consumers will be held (ETHZ) to determine how important naturalness, healthiness,  
animal welfare, sustainability, price, nutritional and sensory characteristics are for the acceptance of alternative 
proteins and derived foods that are  identified as the most promising candidates in Task 1.4 ( selected set of 
alternative proteins). For product development, it will be important to understand what trade-offs consumers are 
willing to make, e.g. regarding product characteristics versus price. Data will be collected in the same countries as 
for Task 1.4 (VTT, CAP). The questionnaire will be designed in close collaboration with WP2 and WP7. Results 
will feed back into these two WPs, and in Task 1.2. 
Task 1.6 Acceptable policies to consumers. Duration: M24-46 (ETHZ, B2F, FSN) 
Internet experiments will be conducted among consumers to determine the policy measures (such as labelling,  
taxes, subsidies, nudging or education) that are most promising for increasing t he consumption of alternative  
proteins and to decrease the consumption of animal proteins. Furthermore, public acceptance of these various  
policy measures will be assessed. Data will be collected in the four European countries also considered in Task 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
29 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
1.4, differing in cultural habits and food culture. Results will feed into Task 1.2 (3rd workshop) and WP8. 
Deliverables 
D1.1 Reports (three) with results of the co-creation workshops, B2F (M3, 24, 48) 
D1.2 Scientific publication on promising alternative proteins (foods) to consumers, ETHZ (M24) 
D1.3 Scientific publication on consumer trade-offs and dietary shift policies, ETHZ (M46) 
 
Work package No. 2 Lead beneficiary VTT 
Work package title Processing foods from alternative proteins 
Participant No 2 3 4 5 19 20 21 25 26 28 31 34 
Participant 
IRTA 
MATIS 
UCC 
VTT 
 
VM 
SF 
GCL 
 
NFB 
 
UL 
FC 
 
BD 
 
AGT 
Person months:             
Start month 1 End 36 
Objectives 
proteins, and define clean label functionalisation strategies for 
improved technological, sensory and nutritional functionality in foods (co-work with WP3 and 4) 
O2.2 Develop in situ functionalisation approaches as part of food design through use of thermo-mechanical and 
bioprocess technologies 
O2.3 Design healthy, sustainable and delicious meat, dairy and egg alternatives through innovative food processing 
and formulation approaches (co-work with WP1, 3, 4, and 8) 
WP2 focus is on the alternative proteins short list (except cultured beef due to low volumes) shown in Table 1.2. 
Description of work 
Task 2.1 Ingredient characterisation. Duration: M1-12 (MATIS, IRTA, UCC, SF, GCL, NFB, BD, AGT) 
Available data for each raw material are collected to uncover knowledge gaps and ensure the best use of funds by 
preventing duplication of analysis. Functional properties of each alternative protein ingredient (i.e. composition, 
conformation) and application conditions will be studied to understand protein-protein interactions. Additionally, 
protein techno-functionality aspects such as solubility, emulsification, foaming, gelation, cohesion-adhesion, 
elasticity, viscosity, fat absorption, wettability, flavour binding and hydrophobic properties will be 
investigated. Sensory properties of ingredients (taste and flavour) will be evaluated in suspensions. The proximate 
composition, including amino acid and fat composition will be studied. 
Task 2.2. Ingredient functionalisation strategies. Duration: M1-24 (UCC, IRTA, VTT, VM, NFB, UL, FC, BD, 
AGT) 
Combinations of different protein sources in different complex food model systems (from liquid to solid) will be 
optimized by using biotechnological tools, such as enzymatic treatments and microbial fermentation. A 
comprehensive evaluation of the functional properties of the modified proteins (emulsification stability, water  
binding etc.) and the evolution of their structure conformation (size distribution, charge etc.) will be performed, as 
in Task 2.1. The   resulting functionalised protein   ingredients   will   be   applied   in   different food/beverage 
model systems in Task 2.3. Microstructure (using CLSM, SEM) and macrostructure investigation, using a 
multistage approach such as rheology (oscillation and rotational tests) and tribology analysis (allowing the 
understanding of the oral processing of food products), and experimental food development will be performed.  
This will enable developing a powerful prediction tool for the subsequent optimisation of future food prototypes. 
T2.3: Design of innovative food structures as alternatives to dairy, egg and meat. Duration: M12-36 (VTT, IRTA, 
MATIS, UCC, VM, UL, FC) 
Healthy, sustainable and desired meat (wet and dry extruded (VTT, UL), dairy (drinks, yoghurt type gels, cheese 
like spreads (UCC, IRTA, FC), culinary products (e.g.: patties, meat balls) (IRTA, MATIS) as well as egg replacers  
for fine bakery products (UCC) will be developed taking into account ingredient properties (Task 2.1) and  
functionalisation strategies (from Tasks 2.1 and 2.). Consumer insights obtained in WP1 will guide the selection 
of ingredients for dedicated food applications. Technological, nutritional and sensory quality of foods will be of 
utmost importance, where iteration loops betwe en Tasks 2.1 and 2.3, as well as WP3 and 4 will be included,  
allowing space for improvement throughout the project. Nutritional, structural, sensory attributes of the ingredients  
will be upgraded (co-work with Task 2.2) via utilising the understanding of the complex component interactions 
and routes to modulate. Food-compatible and label-friendly technologies for improving the functional properties 
of protein ingredients will be performed in co -work with Tasks 2.1 and 2.2. The work will include limited  
hydrolysis by enzymatic means (of proteins or other components such as phytate and cell wall components),  
flavour modulation by enzymatic means or with tailored solutions, enzymatic protein cross-linking or deamidation, 
shear-induced processing (e.g. high pressure homogenisation), and fermentation. The functionalisation toolbox is 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
30 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
essential to create synergy between components and take advantage of multi-functional properties of coexisting 
polymers within the protein ingredients. Most potential functionalisation approaches will be selected based on the 
knowledge on ingredient performance obtained both in lab-scale-model and complex matrix applications (link to 
Tasks 2.1 and 2.2). Developed foods will be characterised for rheological, textural properties, microstructure, 
flavour and mouthfeel. Selected samples will be sent to WP3 and WP4 for further analyses. 
Deliverables 
D2.1 Report on alternative protein ingredients characterization, MATIS (M12) 
D2.2 Report on functionalisation strategies for alternative protein ingredients, UCC (M24) 
D2.3 Report on alternative protein ingredient-based innovative food structures, VTT (M36) 
 
Work package No. 3 Lead beneficiary UMan 
Work package title Safety by design 
Participant No 1 5 6 7 11 12 14 23 24 26 29 30 31 32 
Participant 
WR 
VTT 
UMan 
UNa 
TG 
INRAE 
MUS 
FSN 
Mosa 
UL 
DAAB 
ROQ 
BD 
DNR 
Person months:               
Start month 1 End 48 
Objectives 
future proteins using in silico and in vitro methods 
O3.2 Identify compounds of toxicological concern by using in-silico and novel in-vitro methods 
O3.2 Integrate in silico and in vitro methods for assessment of allergenic risks related to cross-reactivity and de- 
novo sensitization 
O3.3 Develop effective post-market surveillance approaches to understand how the paradigm shift in dietary 
proteins may impact on adverse reactions and (particularly) food allergies 
Description of work 
Task 3.1 Working procedure for safety by design approach. Duration: M1-18 (UMan, WR, VTT, UNa, TG, FSN, 
Mosa, UL, ROQ, BD ). A safety data gap analysis for future alternative proteins will be undertaken, including  
microbiological hazards (including viruses and prions), toxicological (general and genotoxicological) and chemical 
hazards, nanoparticles, biotoxins, nutritional quality (including antinutritional factors), allergenicity (including any 
history of sensitisation) and immune modulators. This will be based on existing and upcoming regulation, literature  
review with data gap analysis, and expertise from project partners and Stakeholder Board members, using exemplar  
ingredients from at least five alternative proteins ingredient types, of which 2-3 from the short list (e.g. rapeseed, 
crickets) and 2-3 exploratory sources (e.g. hemp, leaf proteins, algae). The resulting case studies will be used to 
outline an in vitro testing toolbox and associated requirements for novel test methods that embraces a safety by  
design approach for alternative proteins that takes amount of existing and draft safety regulations. This will provide 
a focus for WP3 to fine-tune the toxicity testing approach (Tasks 3.2-3.5) and identify a list of alternative proteins 
on which Tasks 3.2-3.4 will focus. This will also include comparative traditional protein ingredients of  
milk, peanut), moderate (soybean) and low (rice/maize) allergenicity. 
Task 3.2 In-vitro digestion to support safety assessments. Duration: M12 -30 (UNa, WR, UMan, INRAE, UL) . 
Digesta based on INFOGEST protocols will be prepared (WR) for Task 3.3. The potential to use untargeted mass 
spectrometry (MS) analysis to identify bio-accessible novel compounds of digesta will be explored, and in-silico 
QSAR methods applied to identify novel compounds of concern (UMan, UNa, UL). WP4 Infogest digestion 
protocols will be mapped to those used routinely for allergenicity risk assessment and proteins and peptides in  
digests analysed using gel-based and MS-based methods (UNa, UMan). Mass distributions and sequence data will 
enable kinetic analysis to identify persistent fragments (Tasks 3.3 and 3.5) and provide consensus protocols that 
will be trialled and applied (by WR, UMan, INRAE) in Tasks 3.4 and 3.5. 
Task 3.3 Novel toxicological assay for identification of potential haz ards. Duration: M12 -40 (WR, ROQ, BD) . The 
impact of selected alternative protein samples (Task 3.1) and in vitro digests prepared using the WP4 protocols 
 
of innate immunity (e.g. THP -1, MUTZ-3, MM6) will be assessed alone and - to emulate the intestinal in vivo 
environment- also in combination with human stem cell derived intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). Effects on cell 
differentiation and on modulation of immune related pathways in IECs and immune cells will be evaluated using 
whole genome gene expression and cytokine profiling. These effects will be compared with effects observed using 
PBMCs and relevant subsets, and the gut epithelium used in Task 3.4, ensuring connectivity between models used. 
Task 3.4: Allergenicity risk assessment toolbox, Duration M4-45 (INRAE, WR, UMan, MUS, ROQ, BD, DNR). 
The phylogenetic relationships between species from which novel proteins are derived and those characterised as 
being allergenic (Task 3.1) will be described, to guide the assessment process (at whole food level). The capacity 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
31 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
of existing in silico tools to identify risks relating to cross -reactive allergies will be assessed and a novel 3D  
modelling approach to define specific HLA binding motifs will be implemented to improve predictive capacity. 
This will be complemented by a simplified serum screening microfluidic method using foods identified in Task 
3.1. A suite of in vitro cell lines and ex-vivo samples will be assessed with regards to their utility to provide data 
to assess de novo sensitization risks posed by alternative proteins. Methods and readouts (e.g. changes in  
expression of surface markers, cytokines) will be developed using the hyper- and hypo-allergens and their digests 
and compared with the alternative protein ingredients (Task 3.2) using the following models: 
(1) Gut epithelium (INRAE) models delivered by WP4 will be adapted to mimic either a healthy or an atopic, 
proinflammatory phenotypes (e.g. treatment with IL25/33, TSLP and/  
e.g. via DON, Tox-A, histamine); 
(2) Antigen Presenting Cells (WR) based on cell line-derived (e.g. THP-1) dendritic cells (DCs) will be applied to 
identify which parts of (novel) proteins (immunogenic epitopes) will be processed by DCs into their MHC-II 
 capacity to activate naive PBMC-derived 
T-cells, to create a Th2-skewing micro-environment, via analysis of surface markers and cytokine expression; 
(3) B-cells (UMan) using either established cell lines (e.g. Namalwa) or isolated from HLA -typed human  
volunteers (healthy, and atopic individuals with and without food allergy accessed through the ManARTS  
Biobank). Cell-lines and human donors will be HLA typed and these data, together with published human HLA  
data sets, used to model the binding of peptides (MUS) generated ei ther by in vitro digestion (Task 3.2) or  
intracellular (endosomal) processing using MS (UMan, UNa). This will identify digestion -resistant peptides 
that can act as immunogens. The outputs will be compared with an assessment of de novo sensitization in  
volunteers in the WP4 DigestAA trial to determine food specific plasma IgGs, IgE, IgA and IgM (INRAE). 
Task 3.5: Post-market risk communication and surveillance of alternative proteins. Duration: M12 -48 (DAAB, 
UMan, FSN). A stakeholder workshop (clinicians, food industry, analytical sciences, risk assessors and risk  
managers) will be held (DAAB) to consider options for informing consumers of risks posed by novel foods 
 
Workshop outputs will be used to adapt the iFAAM survey t DE and 
cross- 
 
Th - 
guide to allergens and alternative 
food industry. This will be complemented through the development of a pilot Allergic Reactions Reporting 
Observatory by adapting the iFAAM on-line-reactions in the community tool to run a public platform e.g. REDCap 
portal from iFAAM to collect alerts of adverse reactions from patients and the clinical community (in DE and UK). 
Deliverables 
D3.1 Risk assessment scenarios for alternative protein ingredients with safety by design approach, UMan (M18) 
D3.2 In-silico and novel in-vitro methods to identify compounds of toxicological concern, WR (M40) 
D3.3 Integrated in silico and in vitro test tools for assessing allergenic risks, INRAE (M45) 
D3.4 Report on cross-reactive allergen labelling with implications for stakeholders, and an e-Observatory of allergic 
reactions in the community, DAAB (M48). 
 
Work package No. 4 Lead beneficiary TG 
Work package title Digestibility and health 
Participant No 7 11 12 13 26 28 30 32 
Participant UNa TG INRAE APT UL FC ROQ DNR 
Person months:         
Start month 1 End 42 
Objectives 
O4.1 Establish a nutritional passport for alternative protein ingredients and derived foods, and monitor their fate 
during in vitro gastro-intestinal transit and absorption of nutrients 
O4.2 Develop novel and improved in vitro methods for determination of protein quality and bioavailability 
O4.3 Determine digestibility of proteins by an in vivo human intervention trial 
O4.4 Assess the down-stream health effects of alternative proteins, their ingredients and formulated foods 
Description of work 
Task 4.1 In vitro assessment of digestive behaviour. Duration: M1-42 (TG, UNa, UL, FC, ROQ, DNR) 
Alternative protein ingredients and derived products from WP2 will be assessed for their digestive behaviour in 
vitro methods. Information on the digestive behaviour and ANF will be used to adjust the functional properties and 
processing methods of the ingredients in WP2 (TG, UNa). The following analyses will be undertaken: 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
32 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
a) Nutritional AA balance and protein digestibility: screening of ingredients and formulated foods from WP2 using 
recognised methods, such as the ISO/INFOGEST 31 method for adults, replacing traditional animal models  
(DIAAS); Results will be compared with currently DIAAS tested proteins or other networks. 
b) Digestive behaviour: Selected foods, especially those with available digestibility data, will be digested using  
more sophisticated (semi-)dynamic methods32 for in-depth digestive analysis, e.g. slow/fast and early/late release 
of nutrients, food matrix interactions, process-induced modulation of (micro)-structure, gastric restructuring etc. 
c) Monitoring and identification of anti-nutritional factors (ANF) in alternative protein products by in vitro 
digestion before and after BBM to evaluate peptide and AA profiles. As part of this task, current animal BBMs 
will be replaced with in vitro BBMs. This will include: a) comparison of porcine and Caco2 cell BBM enzymes 
for composition, abundance and activity; b) evaluation of batch-to-batch variation of activity for standardisation 
purposes, isolation efficiency, and activity of peptidases; c) integration and validation of the new INFOGEST 
model in collaboration with international networks i.e. ring trials, and uptake by industry (UL, FC, ROQ, DNR). 
Task 4.2 Bioavailability of (alternative) proteins. Duration: M3-30 (TG, UNa, UL, FC, ROQ, DNR) 
First, parameters of a healthy Caco2-HT29MTX co-culture as a gut barrier model will be defined, including a ring 
trial of 5 laboratories from WP3 and 4. Once a consensus protocol is agreed upon, the new model will be further 
elaborated to accommodate events in the gut lumen i.e. food digesta. This accommodation will incorporate digesta 
detoxification recommendations from INFOGEST. This work will culminate in detailing the permeability, across 
our gut barrier model, of amino acids, di- and tripeptides released from test (alternative) proteins. Permeability of 
other nutritional components in test foods which can be influenced by proteins will also be tracked. 
Task 4.3 In vivo assessment of digestive behaviour. Duration: M1-42 (APT, UNa, TG, INRAE) 
In vivo digestion of two selected alternative protein-based foods (selection based on results from WP1, 2, 3, 5 
and 7), will be assessed in two groups of human healthy volunteers, thanks to intestinal sampling (n=8/ group;  
DigestAA study). Volunteers will be equipped with a naso-intestinal tube the day before the postprandial test.33 
When the tube is located at the ileal site, samples will be collected continuously for 8h after the ingestion of the 
test meal. The protein and amino acid digestibility/bioavailability  from the two foods will be determined in the ileal  
samples, using isotope labelling. Two strategies will be used: 
1. Direct quantification by labelling the food product with 15N; Undigested dietary protein and amino acids will 
be quantified in the ileum using Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometry (IRMS) coupled with Elemental Analyser 
or Gas Chromatography-combustion (GC-C). For a complete overview of protein quality, metabolic 
bioavailability of dietary nitrogen will be determined by quantifying deamination losses. 
2. Indirect quantification by labelling endogenous protein via orally administered ²H2O on the evening before 
the test. 34 The determination of ²H enrichment in individual amino acids allows discriminating between  
endogenous (²H labelled) and dietary (unlabelled) amino acids. This will enable the determination of the  
bioavailability of individual amino acids. This method is pioneering and will be used complementary to or as 
an alternative to the 15N labelling as proof of concept to improve methodology for digestion studies 
Task 4.4 Health and wellness biomarkers Duration: M28-42 (TG, UNa, UL, FC, ROQ, DNR) 
alternative proteins will be determined. The gut barrier model will be used in the 
presence of GI digested proteins. Tight junction integrity and architecture, mucus production, cytokine secretion 
and redox balance will be monitored. Alternative proteins w ill also be rated post -gastric and post -intestinal 
digestion for their ability to modulate satiety hormones in STC -1 cells. STC-1 will also be seeded on the apical 
face of the collected gut barrier and basolateral samples for downstream satiety signalling and insulin secretion 
assays. To assess the ability of test proteins to promote growth and/or maintenance of muscle, C2C12 myoblasts 
will be treated with samples collected from Caco2-HT29MTX basolateral chambers. 
Deliverables 
D4.1 Nutritional passports of alternative protein ingredients and foods, covering digestive behaviour, co-nutrients, 
safety and potential health benefits, TG (M42) 
D4.2 Report on in vivo digestibility of two alternative protein foods, INRAE (40) 
D4.3 Report on down-stream health effect of alternative protein ingredients and derived foods, TG (M42) 
 
Work package No. 5 Lead beneficiary MATIS 
Work package title Sustainability and climate 
Participant No 3 8 9 10 21 33 
Participant MATIS LUKE WU DIL GCL ETHZ 
Person months:       
Start month 1 End 48 
 
31 Brodkorb, A. et al. 2019. doi:10.1038/s41596-018-0119-1 
32 Mulet-Cabero, A.I. et al. (2020). doi: 10.1039/C9FO01293A 
33 Calvez, J. et al. (2020) doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqaa274 
34 Tessier, R. et al. (2020) doi: 10.1093/jn/nxz279 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
33 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Objectives 
O5.1 Estimate the overall sustainability of the production of selected alternative proteins through environmental, 
economic and social LCA, and compare with traditional protein sources 
O5.2 Assess the appropriateness of selected alternative proteins to serve as climate mitigation and/or adaptation 
solutions 
O5.3 Offer direction for improvements and sustainable growth within the selected alternative protein systems to 
promote improved sustainability, circularity potentials, resilience and climate neutrality 
Environmental Life Cycle Analysis (E-LCA), Environmental Life Cycle Costing (E-LCC) and Social Life Cycle 
Assessment (S-LCA) will be integrated into a GIANT LEAPS sustainability framework, also including impacts 
on the five main drivers causing global biodiversity loss through a hybrid LCA/non-LCA methods. 
Description of work 
Task 5.1 System mapping and sustainability framework including PEF. Duration: M1-24 (ETHZ, LUKE, WU, 
DIL). The sustainability of the value chains of the selected alternative proteins ( short list) will be mapped,  
including (i) identification of key actors associated with the major stages; (ii) identification of key impact  
categories (all partners) to be explored in a quantitative way; (iii) economic potentials (WU) based on qualitative 
research regarding market forecasts for product penetration; and (iv) qualitative illustration of how and what side- 
streams are important to alternative protein production. A framework (ETHZ) linking alternative proteins to the 
product environmental footprint (PEF) method will be developed. This will be accomplished via a literature review 
to determine the current state of best practices for assessing the sustainability of alternative proteins. Finally, based 
on this, an integrated GIANT LEAPS sustainability framework will be proposed. 
Task 5.2 Inventory data collection protocol and data gathering. Duration: M1-36 (DIL, LUKE, GCL, ETHZ). A 
unified system will be developed for data integration in the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) data repository (DIL). This 
repository will be used for the sustainability impact assessment Task 5.3. Data collection protocols will be designed  
for efficient and consistent data collection, fulfilling the goals and sustainability framework (Task 5.1) and  
requirements of sustainability assessment (Tasks 5.3). The data collection system will be set (DIL) in accordance 
with WP6 and include consideration of types, formats, sources, and fluxes. Next, data from literature, public  
funded projects, proprietary databases, project partners and AB members and other stakeholders will be collected 
using the developed protocol (LUKE, GCL, ETHZ). Aggregation and anonymization procedures will be applied 
to avoid potential conflicts of interests and inconsistencies. The LCI will be structured through a modular system 
(modules representing reference unit balance models) defined according to the functional units, system boundaries, 
allocation/substitution procedures. Social impacts and risks data will be collected and integrated into the joined 
LCI framework based on the recommendations from UNEP, Life Cycle Initiative and Social LC Alliance. All data 
will be integrated from available databases and from partners in other WPs. 
Task 5.3 Sustainability assessment. Duration: M12-46 (LUKE, DIL, WU, GCL). The environmental, social and 
economic aspects of alternative protein production chains will be assessed. The results of the three sustainability 
pillars will be integrated (LUKE, GCL) to provide a full sustainability analysis for the short list of alternative  
proteins and selected derived foods. E-LCA assessment will be applied to assess the environmental sustainability 
(LUKE) of the whole production chain of the alternative proteins and to identify the environmental hotspots in  
their production. New PEF based categories will be created for the selected novel proteins. S-LCA assessment: 
The Social LCA framework 35 will be used (LUKE) to assess social risk hotspots and potential benefits in all  
relevant stakeholder groups. A special focus will be paid to pathways for a just and fair transition to healthier and 
more sustainable proteins. LCC assessment: A Life Cycle Costing approach (WU, DIL) will be used to assess the 
economic sustainability of the production chains of alternative protein sources. As externalities are assessed, this 
assessment focuses on the internal costs of the production chain to evaluate its economic viability. 
Task 5.4 Climate adaptation and mitigation. Duration: M12-M46 (MATIS, LUKE). 
Alternative proteins as climate mitigation and adaptation solutions: Results from the E-LCA will be used to 
estimate (LUKE) the potential of alternative proteins as mitigation solutions, as low greenhouse gas emitters 
compared to traditional animal proteins. Alternative proteins    as adaptation strategies will be explored. 
Climate vulnerability assessment and adaptation strategies: Product vulnerability will be assessed (MATIS) for 
selected (short list) alternative protein production processes. First, exposure and sensitivity towards climate change 
impacts will be estimated throughout the production cycles, including markets and shipment. Second, the adaptive 
capacity of the production cycle will be estimated considering social, economic and environmental aspects. 
Task 5.5 Biodiversity and Ecosystem services. Duration: M12-M38 (LUKE, MATIS) 
LCA and non-LCA biodiversity assessment: The impacts related to biodiversity will be assessed considering the 
five main drivers causing global biodiversity loss (habitat change, climate change, invasive species, 
overexploitation and pollution) identified by the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment36. An LCA method will be 
 
35 Benoît, C. et al (2010). The international journal of life cycle assessment, 15(2), 156-163. 
36 Duraiappah AK et al (2005). Ecosystems and human well-being; a report of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
34 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
used to cover three of the drivers, and separate (non-LCA) indicators will be used to assess the impacts caused by 
the other two drivers (invasive species and overexploitation), for which no operational LCA-methods yet exist. 
Ecosystem services of alternative proteins: The most important ecosystem services related to the production of the 
alternative protein sources will be identified and impacts on them will be assessed qualitatively, in case no  
quantitative method is available. The impact of natural capital loss in all regions under study will be assessed as to 
inform local stakeholders. Results will feed into the overall sustainability assessment in T5.3. 
Task 5.6 Circularity potential. Duration: M24-M45 (DIL, MATIS, WU, ETHZ) 
Circularity potential through end-of-life waste treatment substitution: This task will estimate (DIL) the potential 
level of waste biomass inclusion for the cultivation/growth of alternative proteins based on the product level  
circularity index, further adapted for food systems. As the standardized approach for the economy level circularity 
is under development (ISO/WD 59020.2), the task will rely on global, regional and national nutrient flows and  
budgets (MATIS, WU, ETHZ) to estimate the circular economy potential of alternative proteins on higher levels. 
A multi-level approach will determine potential benefits and drawbacks in LCA and sustainability scenarios. 
Circularity potential through environmental impact allocation to (re-usable) by-products: Potential utilization of 
side and by-products of alternative protein sources for applications in food and non-food systems will be identified, 
from techno-environmental and economic (all task partners) perspectives following the food eco-design strategies 
(design for recycling and upcycling, design for reuse, design for sustainability). 
Deliverables 
D5.1 Manual for the Life Cycle Inventory database, DIL (M36) 
D5.2 Report on the sustainability and biodiversity of production of alternative proteins, LUKE (M46) 
D5.3 Report on the appropriateness of alternative proteins to fight against climate change, MATIS (M46) 
D5.4 Report on the circular potential of producing alternative proteins, DIL (M45) 
 
Work package No. 6 Lead beneficiary DIL 
Work package title Data integration platform 
Participant No 10 15 16 21    
Participant DIL AZTI IRIS GCL    
Person months:        
Start month 1 End 48 
Objectives 
O6.1 Set up a data integration platform ensuring interoperability and data access to stakeholders 
O6.2 Collect existing and generated data and integrate these in the open cloud platform 
O6.3 Develop explainable Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms for predicting protein properties and their 
potential for sustainable integration in diets 
Description of work 
Task 6.1 Data integration framework and interoperability ontology. Duration: M3-24 (DIL, AZTI, IRIS, GCL) 
Protocol parameters for the procedure of data integration (available in different databases and collected in WP1-5 
and 7) will be defined (DIL, IRIS, AZTI). The formatted protocols, such as GS1 GDSN and/or FoodEx2, will be 
shared with the consortium and Stakeholder Board members for further data collection and integration (Task 6.2). 
Evidence-based scientific data (available following FAIR principles) will be integrated through unified ontologies 
from all WPs (IRIS, DIL) and external sources (GCL). Ontologies built on existing developments (e.g., FoodOn) 
will be further used to define the links between the different types of semantic knowledge which help in 
formulating the data search strategies, useful for data users with different needs. A framework and ontology for 
data interchange and integration will be created and crosslinked with other digital Farm-to-Fork projects (such as 
FNS-Cloud and SmartCLIDE) with further integration in EOSC and JRC databases. 
Task 6.2 Development of cloud architecture platform. Duration: M1-48 (IRIS, DIL, AZTI) 
The back end, database, end -points APIs, user hierarchy, front -end and technical specifications for database  
selection and consensus protocols will be designed, and the external connections for modular platform exploitation  
will be defined. Conceptual diagrams and methodologies for each use case will be established, which will achieve 
a novel interoperable data platform for protein-relevant factors (explored in WP1-5, 7), since there is a need for an 
improvement in data representation to facilitate the processing by machine learning algorithms. 
Task 6.3. Explainable AI method for predictive protein screening. Duration: M14-48 (AZTI, DIL, IRIS) 
          
environmental, nutritional and safety properties of alternative proteins (traditional proteins, long list and beyond) 
will be developed (AZTI) that combines black-box models (neural networks or support vector machine) with white 
box methods (explainable AI methods: supervised learning techniques),   
(Random Forest, XGBoost). Statistical modelling techniques, e.g. PCA will also be explored to test the output 
explainability of a possible hybrid model (AI and statistical model combined). The algorithms will be trained with 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
35 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
the cloud platform database and, therefore, adapted to data size, type and structure of stored datasets. Successful 
algorithms for protein screening will be selected and integrated in the cloud platform (DIL, IRIS). The code of the 
AI algorithms will be made openly available on GitHub. 
Deliverables 
D6.1 Data integration and interoperability ontology report, DIL (M24) 
D6.2 User manual for GIANT LEAPS cloud data platform, IRIS (M36) 
D6.3 Predictive explainable AI algorithms for screening of protein sources integrated in platform, AZTI (M48) 
 
Work package No. 7 Lead beneficiary WR 
Work package title Optimising the dietary shift 
Participant No 1 3 5 8 9 15 26 27 28 33 
Participant 
WR 
MATIS 
VTT 
LUKE 
WU 
AZTI 
 
UL 
CAP 
FC 
ETHZ 
Person months:           
Start month 1 End 45 
Objectives 
O7.1 Assess the impacts of the foreseen dietary shifts using alternative protein derived foods on human health and 
the environment, and compare these with current, traditional diets based 
O7.2 Arrive at accepted optimal dietary shifts, accepted by consumers and complying to health and environmental 
requirements 
Description of work 
Task 7.1 Composition of futures diets with alternative protein foods. Duration: M1-12 (WU, WR, VTT, AZTI, 
UL, CAP, FC, ETHZ) 
Current diets (with large amounts of animal proteins) and future diets with alternative protein derived foods will 
be composed for each of four regions in Europe (North, South, West and East). Based on available data from the 
EFSA food consumption database (at FoodEx level), the typical current diets will be composed; this will be an 
  -4 countries per region, per consumer group (children, adults etc). Based on these  
current diets, future diets will be composed with alternative protein foods as part of our regular daily meals to  
replace animal proteins, considering (national) dietary guidelines, cultural differences and typical consumption 
habits in the particular regions (all). Input from WP1 will be used to assure future diets are accepted by consumers.  
Task 7.2 Identification of indicators and data collection for health and environment. Duration: M1-24 (WR, WU, 
MATIS, LUKE) 
Indicators for use in the models (Task 7.3) will be established considering the four impact groups of safety (WR), 
allergenicity (WR), nutrition (WU) and environmental impacts (LUKE, MATIS). Each impact group can have  
multiple indicators. Data on these indicators will be collected for both the alternative protein derived foods and 
the traditional foods in WP2 to 6. In this task, data collection will be completed by literature reviews, expert  
interviews, and on-going (inter)national projects, e.g. the H2020 mEATquality project. Data will be formatted for 
delivery to WP6 for storage in the GIANT LEAPS cloud infrastructure, and for use in Tasks 7.3 and 7.4. 
Task 7.3 Impacts of dietary shift on health and environment. Duration: M15-42 (WU, WR, ETHZ) 
The SHARP (Sustainable, Healthy, Accessible, Reliable and Preferred) model (https://www.tifn.nl/sharp/), which 
includes effects of dietary patterns on all macro-nutrients and several micro-nutrients, as well as on GHG and land 
use for the traditional foods, will be used as starting point. It wil l be extended (WU) with data on N and P, and  
water use, and for alternative protein derived foods. Using the extended model, the impacts of dietary patterns on 
nutritional intake, the environment, safety and allergenicity (WU) will be estimated. This will be done for the  
current and future diets (Task 7.1), for each of the four European regions, and per consumer group. Data from  
WP5 and 6, and Task 7.2 will be used, at FoodEx level. Using the extended SHARP model, synergies and trade- 
offs between health and environment will be investigated. Trade -offs will also be assessed by considering the  
opinions of the different stakeholder groups, using multi-criteria decision analyses (MCDA) (WR). Stakeholder 
preferences will be retrieved by a survey (WR) among different groups of stakeholders across Europe, during the 
3rd co-creation workshop of WP1, and by an additional consumer survey in the four regions (ETHZ). MCDA  
allows for relatively quick scenario analyses of impacts of diets on the four indicator groups. Scenario and  
sensitivity analyses will be done (WR). 
Task 7.4 Optimization of dietary shift. Duration: M24-45 (WR, VTT, WU, AZTI, UL, CAP, FC, ETHZ) 
Multi-   dietary shifts, based on the established 
indicators for health and environment, their weights and constraints. Constraints are derived from legal 
frameworks, task partners involved, and from stakeholder visions, obtained from WP1 and 8. The optimal diets 
can mitigate environmental impact while at least keeping health related indicators similar to current diets. 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
36 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Furthermore, they will take into account maximum amounts of alternative proteins and cultural differences 
between the European regions. Based on the results, together with Task 7.3 results, policy recommendations will 
be formulated (all), which feed back for discussion in the last workshop with stakeholders in Tasks 1.1 and 8.3. 
Deliverables 
D7.1 Review paper on indicators and data for dietary impacts on health and environment, WR (M24) 
D7.2 Report with impacts of dietary shifts on health and environment, compared with traditional diets, WU (M42) 
D7.3 Policy recommendations, with pros and cons of the dietary shift, WR (M45) 
 
Work package number 8 Lead beneficiary EFF 
Work package title Communication, dissemination and exploitation 
Participant No 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
Participant 
WR 
IRTA 
MATIS 
UCC 
VTT 
UMan 
UNa 
LUKE 
WU 
DIL 
TG 
INRAE 
APT 
MUS 
AZTI 
IRIS 
EFF 
Person months:                  
Participant No 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 
Participant 
B2F 
VM 
SF 
GCL 
EM 
FSN 
Mosa 
NFB 
UL 
CAP 
FC 
DAAB 
ROQ 
BD 
DNR 
ETHZ 
AGT 
Person months:                  
Start month 1 End 48 
Objectives 
O8.1 Enable effective communication and dissemination of GIANT LEAPS and results 
O8.2 Maximize the exploitation of GIANT LEAPS products and innovations 
O8.3 Develop recommendations for policymakers 
O8.4 Educate and train professionals and EU citizens 
Description of work 
Task 8.1 Effective communication and dissemination. Duration: M1-48 (EFF, all partners) 
A communication and dissemination strategy plan , visual identity and website will be developed, which  
includes (i) creation of a dissemination strategy (with key messages and target audiences) (EFF), planning of  
communication and dissemination activities (EFF), (iii) creation of a visual identity (logo, typography, graphic 
elements, branding guidelines and templates) (EM), and (iv) creation of a specific website (EM). The website will 
be set-up and maintained (EM) for the duration of the GIANT LEAPS project and kept online for 3 years after the 
completion of the project. The website will be integrated with the e-learning platform of Task 8.4 (EM), allowing 
to follow the learning curve of interested participants. E-learning for children and wider public will use games. 
Dissemination materials will be produced and distributed. Materials include(i) two project leaflets (EFF) (one 
 
and two animation videos (EFF) (one on project introduction, and one on project results), (iii) social media presence  
(EM/B2F), (iv) regular (each 6 months) newsletters (EFF), (v) popular articles (EFF) and (vi) 9 policy briefs (FSN) 
(developed in Task 8.3). Dissemination events will be organised and participated in to ensure a broad uptake of 
GIANTLEAPS results at regional, national and international level, including (i) attending dissemination events  
organised by parties from outside (e.g. BBI and EIT) and inside the consortium (e.g. the yearly B2F workshops) 
(all partners), (ii) organization of 4 online webinars (EFF), (iii) 12 presentations at scientific conferences organised 
by parties outside and partners inside the consortium (e.g. the annual EFFoST conference) (all partners), and (iv) 
organization of specific GIANT LEAPS conference at the end of the project (B2F). 
Task 8.2 Set up exploitation pathway, and plan for exploitation and dissemination of project results. Duration: M1- 48 
(EFF, B2F, EM, FSN) 
An exploitation pathway will be designed to capture all exploitable results (EFF, B2F), which includes (i)  
definition of an appropriate IPR strategy, (ii) asse ssment of the market context to be equipped to face market  
barriers and capitalise on drivers, and (iii) quantification of the addressable market to set targets for each solution. 
Exploitable project results will be identified with WP leaders on a bi-yearly basis. A detailed exploitation plan 
will be designed covering all relevant project results (EFF, B2F), including (i) identify the most appropriate  
business models for the project results and innovations, (ii) develop business plans for commercial solutions, and 
(iii) determine the steps required to bring the newly developed technologies to TRL9 after the end of the project. It 
will be combined with the communication and dissemination strategy plan of Task 8.1 to form the Plan for the  
Exploitation and Dissemination of project Results (PEDR) including communication activities. 
Task 8.3 Recommendations for policymakers. Duration: M1-45 (FSN, EFF, B2F, EM) 
Interactive face-to-face and on-line sessions with a range of policymakers at the EC level, including EFSA, at 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
37 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
individual Member States, and at the global (WHO/FAO) level will be held. The face -to-face sessions will be  
organized, in line with the three WP1 co -creation workshops, whereas the online sessions will be held with smaller  
groups of policymakers. Input from the policymakers on the protein transition and constraints will be 
communicated to the consortium for consideration in WP work, and vice versa. Ultimately, this will result in a  
series of 9 Policy Briefs on a variety of topics of relevance, containing in formation on the advantages and  
disadvantages of the alternative protein foods and dietary shifts on health and the environment, fully supported by 
science and presented in tangible format for policymakers to digest. Also, the knowledge produced through all WPs  
will be discussed with policymakers in a separately organized workshop with EU policymakers (M42). 
Task 8.4 Education and training. Duration: M24-45 (EM, EFF, B2F, FSN, all) 
Two GIANT LEAPS training programmes, aimed to support the protein transition, will be developed and offered 
(EM); one to professionals (scholars, students, researchers, interested parties from the industry, health -care 
professionals, and policymakers etc.) and one to EU citizens (lay(wo)men). Training materials will include a set of 
training modules that will also be made available online to be followed as an e-learning program. Content for the 
training program comes from all partners, EM will transform these inputs into a game-based e-learning program. 
Deliverables 
D8.1 Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of project Results (PEDR) including communication activities, EFF 
(M6, updated M18, 30, 42) 
D8.2 Exploitation pathway, EFF (M48) 
D8.3 Report with policy briefs and policy workshop outcomes, FSN (M45) 
 
Work package number 9 Lead beneficiary WR 
Work package title Coordination 
Participant No 1 3 5 6 10 11 17 33 
Participant  
WR 
 
MATIS 
 
VTT 
 
UMan 
 
DIL 
 
TG 
 
EFF 
 
ETHZ 
Person months:         
Start month 1 End 48 
Objectives 
O9.1 To manage the progress of the project to the timely completion of the milestones and deliverables, at the 
highest possible quality level and within the planned resources (operational level) 
O9.2 To manage the IPR of the project innovation and results, Data Management, and fulfilling ethical 
requirements, and manage project risks and unexpected situations (strategic level) 
  is 
delivered according to the given rules and procedures (organizational level) 
Description of work 
Task 9.1 Operational project management. Duration: M1-48 (WR, MATIS, VTT, UMan, DIL, TG, EFF, ETHZ) 
This task includes all activities to ensure that the project Deliverables and Milestones are achieved within time, 
budget, quality and scope; therefore, this covers all aspects relating to daily project management for implementing 
the project, including project monitoring and control, managing financial and administrative issues, organising of 
 
The Project Coordinator (PC), Dr AP Vos of WR, who has wide experiences in leading research in food industry 
and NGO, will take the leading role in these activities to ensure the contractual agreements with the EC are met. 
He will be assisted by an Administrative Project Manager and the Deputy Coordinator (both WR), together forming  
the WR coordination team. The Deputy Coordinator, Prof. HJ van der Fels -Klerx, has wide experience in  
leading (inter)national projects and she will assist the PC whenever needed, and replace the PC in the event of any 
unforeseen occasions. The WR coordination team will be assisted by the WR financial, ethics and legal department.  
The WR coordination team, together with the WP leaders and the IIPR manager, form the Executive Committee 
(ExC). The WR coordination team will organize the meetings, together with involved partners, including 5 face- 
to-face annual meetings with the entire consortium, and 4 face-to-face annual meetings with the ExC. 
Task 9.2 Strategic project management. Duration: M1-48 (WR, MATIS, VTT, UMan, DIL, TG, EFF, ETHZ) 
Internal and external risks, and unexpected situations occurring within the project will be systematically assessed 
and once identified, managed by the PC together with the ExC. These could be any internal or external risks 
 
ethical or legal character. A well-known example is the COVID crisis which led to temporary closure of working 
areas and laboratories in 2019 and 2020. Risks and their mitigation strategies have already been identified prior to 
the projects start (Table 3.2e) and will be updated every 6 months by the ExC. 
The PC will make sure GIANT LEAPS complies as much as possible to the principles of Open Science and Data 
Management. An experienced Open Science and Data Manager (OSDM) (WR) will be appointed for this task; 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
38 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
she/he will also train the involved partners to comply with the Open Science and Data Management plan. The  
OSDM, assisted by all partners, will elaborate a Data Management Plan (DMP), following the format provided by 
Horizon Europe (see section 1.2.8 management  
more details). The DMP, delivered at M6, will be updated every 6 months. 
Management of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR): a project Innovation and IPR (IIPR) manager (WR) will 
be appointed from the WR Legal department (which has a special group on IPR issues). The IIPR manager will 
evaluate the results and innovations from GIANT LEAPS, as early as possible, for their novelty, and possible  
patentability and protection of the resu lts under fair conditions between the involved partners. Also, project  
partners will inform the IIPR manager and PC upon identification of possible IPR. Where an IPR (e.g. patent)  
application is required, it will be filed and reported (D9.2) 
Task 9.3 Organization of project management. Duration: M1-48 (WR) 
The PC is the linking point between the consortium and the European Commission (EC) project officer. The PC 
 
according to the given rules and p 
periodic technical and financial reports (M18, 36) and the final technical and financial report (M48). As part 
of this reporting, ethical and gender aspects will be detailed (M18, 36, 48). 
Deliverables 
D9.1 Data Management Plan (DMP), WR (M6) 
D9.2 Intellectual Property Rights report, WR (M45) 
D9.3 Ethics and gender report, WR (M48) 
 
Table 3.2c: List of Deliverables 
Deliverable 
(number) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable 
name 
 
WP No. 
Short name of 
lead 
participant 
 
Type 
Dissemination 
level 
 
Delivery date 
(months) 
D1.1 Reports of 3 co-creation workshops 1 B2F R PU 3, 24, 48 
D1.2 Promising alternative proteins (foods) to consumers 1 ETHZ R PU 24 
D1.3 Consumer trade-offs and dietary shifts policies 1 ETHZ R PU 46 
D2.1 Characterisation of alternative protein ingredients 2 MATIS R PU 12 
D2.2 Functionalisation strategies for alternative ingredients 
and food models 
2 UCC R SEN 24 
D2.3 Alternative protein ingredient based innovative food 
structures 
2 VTT R SEN 36 
D3.1 Risk assessment scenarios for alternative protein 
ingredients with safety by design approach 
3 UMan R SEN 18 
D3.2 In-silico and novel in-vitro methods to identify 
compounds of toxicological concern 
3 WR DEM PU 40 
D3.3 Integrated in silico and in vitro test tools for assessing 
allergenic risks 
3 INRAE DEM PU 45 
D3.4 Cross-reactive allergen labelling, stakeholder 
implications, and allergenic reactions e-Observatory 
3 DAAB R PU 48 
D4.1 Nutritional passports of alternative protein 
ingredients/foods, incl. digestive behaviour, co- 
nutrients, safety and potential health benefits 
4 TG R PU 42 
D4.2 In vivo digestibility of 2 alternative protein foods 4 INRAE R SEN 36 
D4.3 Down-stream health effects of alternative protein 
ingredients and foods 
4 TG R SEN 42 
D5.1 Manual for the Life Cycle Inventory database 5 DIL OTHER PU 36 
D5.2 Sustainability and biodiversity of production of 
alternative proteins 
5 LUKE R PU 46 
D5.3 Appropriateness of selected alternative proteins to 
serve in the fight against climate change 
5 MATIS R PU 46 
D5.4 Circular potential of producing alternative proteins 5 DIL R PU 45 
D6.1 Data integration and interoperability ontology 6 DIL OTHER PU 24 
D6.2 GIANT LEAPS cloud data platform user manual 6 IRIS OTHER PU 36 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
39 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
D6.3 AI model algorithms integrated in gamma (final) 
version of open cloud platform 
6 AZTI OTHER PU 48 
D7.1 Health and environmental indicators with data for 
traditional and alternative protein-based diets 
7 WR R PU 24 
D7.2 Impact of the future dietary shift on health and 
environment, compared with traditional diets 
7 WU R PU 42 
D7.3 Policy recommendations with pros and cons of the 
dietary shift 
7 WR R PU 45 
D8.1 Plan Dissemination and Exploitation of results 
(PEDR) including communication activities 
8 EFF R PU 6 
D8.2 Exploitation pathway 8 EFF R PU 48 
D8.3 Policy briefs and policy workshop outcomes 8 FSN R PU 45 
D9.1 Data Management Plan (DMP) 9 WR DMP PU 6 
D9.2 Intellectual Property Rights 9 WR R SEN 45 
D9.3 Ethics and gender report 9 WR ETHICS PU 48 
 
Table 3.2d: List of milestones 
Milestone 
No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Milestone 
name 
Related 
WP(s) 
Due date 
(month) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Means of 
verification 
1 Strategy for GIANT LEAPS stakeholder 
network beyond Europe and project 
1 36 Strategy approved by the PC and WP leaders 
2 Consumer preferences for alternative 
proteins (foods) available to WPs 2 and 7 
1 18 Consumer survey data results sent to WP 2 and 
WP7 leaders 
3 Alternative protein ingredients for 
characterization, modification and testing 
2 2 Ingredient supply by industrial partners (AGT, 
CN, GCL, BD, Solar) to WP2 
4 Ingredient processing data 2 24 Data provided to WP5 and 6 
5 Protein case studies selected 3 4 Case studies approved at the first ExC meeting 
6 Ethical approvals submitted for 
eObservatory 
3 18 Ethics submission reference and associated 
documents 
7 In vitro digestion screening of eight protein 
products or ingredients 
4 18 Digested samples collected and preserved for 
further analysis 
8 In vitro gut barrier models treated with eight 
proteins products or ingredients 
4 24 Caco2-HT29MTX basolateral samples collected 
for downstream cellular assays 
9 Completion of an international ring trial to 
define a healthy in vitro gut barrier 
4 28 Identification of three potential protein products 
for human study, based on stakeholder feedback; 
feasibility of isotope production established 
10 In vitro methods to predict the digestive 
behaviour and absorption of novel proteins 
4 42 International consensus 
11 Framework for sustainability assessment 5 18 Framework approved by ExC and WP5 partners 
13 Protocols for data collection for the Life 
Cycle Inventory data repository 
5 26 Protocols approved by ExC and WP5 partners 
15 Protocol for collection and ontology for data 
integration 
6 12 Protocol and ontology approved by ExC and WP6 
partners 
16 Alpha version of GIANT LEAPS cloud data 
platform 
6 18 Alpha version available for testing by project 
partners 
17 Current and future diets composed for each 
of the four European regions 
7 12 Future diets presented at 2nd project meeting and 
approved by partners 
18 Indicators for estimating dietary   shift 
impacts on health and environment 
7 12 Indicators presented at 2nd project meeting and 
approved by partners 
19 Project logo and website 8 3 Logo approved by partners, and website available 
to the public 
20 Dissemination materials ready 8 12, 24, 
36, 48 
Dissemination materials sent to partners for 
distribution 
21 E-training module 8 32 E-training module approved by ExC 
22 Project mid-term review 9 22 Review held and report available 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
40 
GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Table 3.2e: Critical risks for implementation 
Description of risk (level of (i) likelihood, 
and (ii) severity: Low/Medium/High) 
WP(s) 
involved 
Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
Lack of engagement/interest of stakeholders 
(med/med). 
1 GIANT LEAPS partners will use their extensive network 
to reach selected stakeholders. The approach, tools and 
messages will be aligned to the needs of the stakeholders. 
Specific groups of stakeholders refuse to 
participate in joint workshops (med/med). 
1, 8 Separate workshops will be organized per stakeholder 
group, separate interaction in WP8 with policymakers 
Changes in raw material occur during supply 
or storage of the raw materials (low/med) 
2 Raw materials will be delivered and stored under 
appropriate conditions. Fresh raw material batches will be 
used in case of inappropriate storage 
Challenges in improving the critical 
functional properties (sensory, technological) 
(med/med) 
2 Protein modification will be used in WP2 to tailor 
functional properties. The project has several end-use 
applications with different target functionalities. 
Lack of consistency in application of in vitro 
digestion methods gives inconsistent results 
between partners (low/high) 
3 Prepare harmonised detailed protocols and SOPs and 
undertake pilot analysis to ensure comparability. 
Delays in obtaining ethical approval for the 
on-line (questionnaire based) allergic 
reactions observatory (low/high) 
3 Study is based on a similar study in the past (iFAAM) for 
which ethical approval was obtained. 
Draft study protocol and address sponsorship and data 
management issues as soon as the project commences. 
Insufficient volumes of serum and cells 
obtained from sufficient number of human 
study subjects (low/high) 
3 WP3 uses historic serum samples available at partners and 
samples from two different tissue banks. Recruitment of 
study subjects in centres with large patient cohorts. Begin 
in year 2 to ensure sufficient time for recruitment. 
Too many protein ingredients and foods for 
digestion screening (high/med) 
4 Regular revision of list of protein products by the ExC 
ranking and prioritising of proteins 
Insufficient number of volunteers for human 
intervention trial (med/high) 
4 Early start of planning (ethics etc.) from day 1; decision 
of two protein sources by Month 12; work with world 
leaders in the field of digestion human intervention trials 
Lack of reliable data for assessment 
(med/high) 
5 Multiple sources are used, and aggregation procedures are 
established. Data collection procedures for missing 
aspects will be provided and integrated in the analysis. 
Limited ability to collect primary data for 
social sustainability due to movement and 
meeting restrictions (low/low) 
5 Face-to-face focus meetings remain the best approach for 
data collection. Great advances have been done in remote 
connections, hence very little risk of not gathering data. 
Inconsistent data quality from various sources 6 Data aggregation procedures applied to data from multiple 
sources. Data quality will be defined and communicated. 
Lack of data with primary quality (directly 
measured data with confirmed origin) 
6 Data imputation methods will be applied to extrapolate 
values. 
EU-COVERAGE of  current protein intake 
data does   not   reflect   actual   EU- diversity 
of dietary  habits, hindering modelling 
accuracy (low/medium) 
7 Diet survey data on baseline protein intake from all four  
major EU regions will be used. 
For these data, additional EU-countries will be explored 
to maximise applicability of results, via exploiting 
existing networks within the project. 
Poor availability/accessibility of data on 
indicators (low/high) 
7 Close collaboration with WP6 and consultation with data 
experts ensures use of most relevant and up-to-date 
indicator databases 
Lack of technology acceptance by consumers 
will hinder market introduction 
(medium/medium) 
8 Consumers (associations) will be targeted in 
dissemination and communication plan and awareness 
will be created early in the process 
Competing patents have already been granted 
(low/ medium) 
8 Regularly monitor patent databases and adjust work plan 
if necessary. 
Conflicts between partners 9 The consortium agreement will describe duties and rights 
of each organisation and procedures to solve conflicts 
Overseen cost items/expenses 9 Close follow-up of budget in shorter time-periods 
 
Table 3.2f: Summary of staff effort 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
4
11 GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
 
Participant WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 WP9 Total PM 
1 / WR           
2 / IRTA           
3 / MATIS           
4 / UCC           
5 / VTT           
6 / UMan           
7 / UNa           
8 / LUKE           
9 / WU           
10 /DIL           
11 / TG           
12 / INRAE           
13 / APT           
14 / MUS           
15 / AZTI           
16 / IRIS           
17 / EFF           
18 / B2F           
19 / VM           
20 / SF           
21 / GCL           
22 / EM           
23 / FSN           
24 / Mosa           
25 / NFB           
26 / UL           
27 / CAP           
28 / FC           
29 / DAAB           
30 / ROQ           
31 / BD           
32 / DNR           
33 / ETHZ           
34 / AGT           
Total PM:           
 
 
 
GIANT LEAPS has mobilized the key scientists across Europe, together representing the entire alternative protein 
value chain, from farm to fork , and has set up co-creations among all relevant bodies in Europe , involving 
consumers, NGOs, producers and processors, and governmental agencies, in all stages of the research project to  
assure working on the right topics, and acceptance and implementation of project results. 
Consortium description, complementarity and industry involvement
3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
4
12 GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
The GIANT LEAPS consortium consists of: 
- 34 leading partners from 20 different countries, of which 31 countries across Europe and 4 associated and 
affiliated countries (UK, Canada, Switzerland, Serbia). 
- From total of 34 partners, 50% (17) are universities and research institutes (WR, IRTA, MATIS, UCC, VTT, 
UMan, UNa, LUKE, WU, DIL, TG, INRAE, APT, MUS, AZTI, GCL, ETHZ), and the other 50 % (17) are 
industries, of which 11 SMEs and start-ups (IRIS, B2F, VM, SF, EM, FSN, Mosa, NBT, CAP, DAAB, BD) 
and five leading larges food industries (AGT, UL, FC, ROQ, DNR) and one other partner (EFF). 
In preparing the proposal, the consortium partners together with the involved members of the Stakeholder Board 
(primary producers, food industry, policymakers, consumers, NGOs etc) have identified the main areas to be  
addressed for providing the science -base for producing and using more alternative protein derived foods in our daily  
diets, for all stakeholders in the value chain, from farm to fork.  Exploitation of GIANT LEAPS results and  
innovations and their future implementation in practice in industry is ensured by the large involvement (50%) of 
SME and large industries in our consortium, and the actors represented in the Stakeholder Board. 
The composition of the consortium reflects the involvement of key actors with complementary types of expertise 
and competences, both from science and practice (from SME to large food industries) on all topics necessary to 
, including multi-actor engagement and stakeholder involvement, consumer research, 
protein processing, allergenicity and health, environmental, climatic and biodiversity, and diet modelling. The co- 
creation approach and multi-actor partnership enables the inclusion of the latest technological developments , and 
existing knowledge and experience throughout the entire project, to provide science-based information to 
policymakers, consumers, and other stakeholders. Also, it enables to generate innovative solutions that are more  
likely to be applied in practice thanks to the cross-fertilisation of ideas between science and industry, to move up the 
innovations with one or two TRL levels, from 3-4 to 5-6. 
Multiple national and international projects focus(ed) on alternative protein sources, as indicated in Table 1.4. This 
proposal brings together all the separate pieces of existing information and data, and addresses all missing pieces of 
the puzzle. Consortium members are involved in many of the previous and ongoing EU projects that have a link 
to the protein transition. For instance, the consortium includes the four coordinators of the ongoing Horizon 2020 
projects funded LC-SFS-17-2019: , namely SmartProtein (ECC), 
NextGenProteins (MATIS), ProFuture (IRTA) and SUSINCHAIN (WR). Expertise in social sciences is broadly  
represented (consumer research: ETHZ; social/economic LCA: LUKE, WU, DIL; stakeholder engagement:B2F). 
 Contribution of each partner to the project with a valid role and with the necessary resources  
Partners are listed in table 3.2 for each of the core research areas around which the WPs are centred, showing that  
the expertise and involvement of each partner is relevant, duplications are avoided, and no key expertise is missing. 
Table 3.2. Core role of each partner to the key domains of GIANT LEAPS 
WP Key expertise / domain Key partners Contributing partners 
1 Multi-actor approach, stakeholder and 
scientific network, and consumer studies 
ETHZ, B2F, EFF WR, IRTA, MATIS, UCC, VTT,FSN, 
Mosa, CAP 
2 Alternative protein processing and 
characterization 
VTT, UCC, IRTA MATIS, VM, SF, GCL, NFB, UL, FC, 
BD, AGT 
3 Food safety and allergenicity UMan, WR, 
INRAE, DAAB 
VTT, Una, TG, MUS, FSN, Mosa, UL, 
DAAB, ROQ, BD, DNR 
4 Digestibility (in vitro and in vivo) of 
alternative proteins 
TG, UNa, INRAE TG, APT, Mosa, UL, FC, ROQ, DNR 
5 Sustainability, climate and biodiversity MATIS, LUKE, 
WU, DIL 
GCL, ETHZ 
6 Open data platform and data collection DIL, IRIS, AZTI GCL 
7 Dietary intake modelling (WR, WU) WR, WU MATIS, VTT, LUKE, AZTI, UL, CAP, 
FC, ETHZ 
8 Training, dissemination, communication EFF, B2F, EM All partners 
9 Coordination WR All WP leaders 
Each partner is experienced in working on national and international research projects (all partners already had a PIC 
number) and in a multi -disciplinary setting. They are used to planning research, with the necessary resources  
needed to fulfil the planned activities. The distribution of budget among the partners follows their planned activities 
in the project (see Table 3.1f: Summary of staff effort) to make sure that all planned project work will be done in  
time, with high quality and within the budget to complete the tasks in a strict timeframe. For each partner, personnel 
costs are based on average staff costs, calculated from actual costs of the different groups of personnel (e.g. engineers, 
senior scientist) involved in the activities of the respective partner. A high number (at least 17) of PhDs will be 
involved in this project, supervised by the experienced senior scientists and professors of our consortium. In this way,  
GIANT LEAPS will contribute to training young scientists, ensuring our future academic staff in Europe. 

Call: HORIZON-CL6-2021-FARM2FORK-01-12: Filling knowledge gaps on the nutritional, safety, allergenicity and environmental assessment of alternative 
proteins and dietary shift EU Grants: Application form (HE RIA/IA): V1.2   25.05.2021 
4
13 GIANT LEAPS 
 
 
Physical travels and subsistence have been minimized to five (annual) consortium meetings for all partners, of 
which Stakeholder Board members will attend three meetings (kick -off, mid-term and final), and the  three co- 
creation workshops will be held in conjunction with these three meetings. Four physical half- yearly meetings will 
be held with the Executive Committee. In this way, the number of physical travels is limited  
footprint, yet keeping the important interaction moments in the project. Working in a multidisciplinary setting, at the 
top level of research across different European cultures, needs a minimum of interactions for exchange of knowledge,  
progress and planning. Many online meetings are planned, in smaller or larger settings. WP meetings will be held 
online every 3 months, involving partners in respective WPs. Interactions with the Stakeholder Board will be done, 
whenever needed, in bilateral contacts or in smaller virtual gr oups. All partners have budgeted for diverse goods and  
services; these mainly involve a budget for publishing in Open Journals and subscription to conferences and events, 
for early and open dissemination of project results, other Open Science and Data Management activities. 
All partners have full access to the necessary personnel and infrastructure to carry out the activities, directly and 
for five partners also via subcontracting. Details on infrastructure can be found in the Part A. Highlights are: 
- WR has high-end analytical equipment and state-of-the-art facilities for safety and allergenicity research. 
- IRTA has state-of-the-art pilot scale equipment for food processing. food preparations and sensory rooms. 
- UCC has pilot scale malting, brewing and bakery including all required apparatus like milling and mixture 
equipment's and rheology equipment and kitchen with sensory labs. 
- VTT has dry and wet fractionation technology and extrusion technologies 
- UMan has facilities for all allergy related research including a biobank of patient materials, immune and flow  
cytometry equipment and hospital settings for patient tests. UMan will collaborate intensely with UNa  
because of high-end NMR and complementary MS facilities required for the allergy research. 
- WU and WR have large access to datasets, models and software tools related to health, nutrition and  
sustainability assessment, supporting evaluations of dietary shift scenarios. 
- DIL have all LCA and DSS tools and software in house for the environmental footprint analysis and more. 
- TG is fully equipped for the digestion research with spectroscopy and microscopy, and state-of-the-art pilot 
plan food processing facilities, from large scale spray dryers to small scale microfluidizers. 
- INRAE has excellent facilities for digestion research based on health volunteers and patients including a fully 
equipped human research unit. 
- MUS is specialised in high performance computing service and software for data storage and modelling. 
- AZTI is specialised in data platforms, deep learning servers, computation clusters and software related to 
nutrition. IRIS has complementary software for data management, machine learning, real time monitoring 
of processes and modules for building a SaaS platform. These companies will interact and collaborate with CAP,  
which has complementary software for diet assessments and food composition databases and tools. 
- EFF and B2F are international network organisations that connect with large and diverse sets of stakeholders 
(e.g. from research, industry and policymakers) with the capacity to organise meetings, workshops and events. 
- EM is highly complementary because of the web-based solutions, illustrators and text writers that are highly  
experienced to support efficient communication cross Europe stakeholders. 
- Many of the involved food-oriented SME have their specific equipment and pilot scale facilities for biomass 
production, processing, product development and product testing leading to many innovative ingredients, 
processes, solutions and products. These SME can and will be supported by the larger food industrial partners 
like UL, FC, ROQ, DNR that have high -end in-house technology and expertise to optimise and upscale  
processes and product development and implement the knowledge in product innovation. 
- Our consortium includes several large research organizations, such as WR, WU, VTT and INRAE, which as a 
fall-back scenario, have the personnel and infrastructure for the  research activities. 
All GIANT LEAPS partners fully acknowledge Ethic and GDPR regulations. The GIANT LEAPS consortium has 
an equal gender distribution, with more than > 58% females involved in the research activities, 33% females as 
main contact points and 30% in leading roles like WP leaders. The Deputy Coordinator (prof. HJ van der Fels-Klerx, 
and the WP2 (prof. Nesli Sözer) and WP3 (prof. Clare Mills) leaders are excellent leading female scientists. Most of 
the partners are in the process of implementing a formal Gender Equality Plan or already have one in place. 
3.2.1 Other countries and international organisations  
ETHZ from Switzerland is a leading partner and scientific authority on consumer studies. Switzerland has been  
classified as 'a non -associated third country' for all Horizon Europe calls in 2021, however, their funding is 
guaranteed by the Swiss State Secre tariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI). As such, ETHZ will  
participate in GIANT LEAPS with budget for their activities provided by SERI (if GIANT LEAPS is granted),  
implying budget to fund ETHZ is not part of the requested EC contribution. AGT, the large food industrial partner 
from Canada, will contribute to the project with in-kind contribution, unique expertise and ingredients. UMan from 
the United Kingdom and CAP from Serbia join as partners from third countries associated to Horizon Europe.