2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication  
 
2.2.1 Plan for the dissemination and exploitation including communication activities 
Dissemination strategy plan  
The project aims to reach stakeholders from several 
groups: the general public, the scientific community, 
industry, European and national policy bodies and 
potential investors. The disseminati on activities will 
be reviewed with each update of the PEDR and, if 
necessary, modified. Some foreseen dissemination 
activities are listed in Figure 16. A primary objective 
of the dissemination strategy will be stakeholder 
engagement. The consortium partners will identify 
and agree on the relevant stakeholder groups and 
individuals and the intended level of engagement: information, consultation, interaction, or collaboration. Figure 17 
details the foreseen key messages to transfer to possibly relevant stakeholders and the envisaged communication 
channels. GREEN-LOOP will encourage disseminating research results by participating in a series of events and 
Figure 16 Overview of dissemination activities planned within 
GREEN-LOOP 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 24 of 45 
 
publications as described in Table 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4 Scientific results dissemination and targets 
Name  Key performance indicators 
Scientific journals At least 12 publications in one of the following (non -exhaustive) journals: Biomaterials, 
Polymers, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, ChemSusChem, Green Chemistry, 
Macromolecules. 
Conferences  At least 17 presentations in the following (non -exhaustive) international conferences: 
International Conference on Science, Engineering & Technology (ICSTE -21), European 
Biomass Conference & Exhibition (EUBCE -2022), European Conference on Green and 
Sustainable Chemistry (6th EuGSC), 2022 Lignin Conference GRC 
Industrial Fair/exhibition  At least 3 presentations in the following (non -exhaustive) international fairs/exhibitions: 
International industrial forum 2021 , European Biomass Conference & Exhibition 
(EUBCE-2022) 
Horizon Results Platform At least 6 results presented during the project execution. 
Horizon Impact Award One application 
Patents  At least 2 per use case (See Table 5) 
Workshops At least one workshop with potential end-users. 
Innovation Radar At least 6 project results, 2 per use case. 
Exploitation strategy plan  
After M5, KERs will be re vised and if necessary updated to determine the project priorities based on three main 
parameters: i) Degree of innovation. ii) Exploitability and iii) Impact on the Industry. The sum of the three factors 
will define the primacy of each KER and de termine the proper exploitation strategy for the project and specific 
business strategies for the project partners . Table 5 shows the preliminary list of the main expected results and its 
corresponding exploitation route.  
Table 5. Overview of main expected project results, owners, type, protection and areas of application 
Partner Expected foreground Type† 
Prot
ectio
n‡ 
Potential market 
IDE 
GREEN-LOOP platform for Value chain optimization  S O Manufacturer sector 
Non-intrusive microwave enhancement for moulding injection P P Composites, plastics and bio -
materials sector Microwave curing system for extrusion process P P 
ASI Contribution to standardization (either feedback on existing 
standards for their revision or proposals for new standards) R O.T. Standardization communities, 
incl. Manufacturer sector 
IRIS 
Ultrasound enhancement for biomaterial  manufacturing 
process P P Polymer and bio-materials sector 
 
Data acquisition system S O Manufacturer sector 
FHF 
Innovative wood composite (WC) sliding bearing systems P P 
End-users: mechanical 
engineering, transportation, 
building sector 
Disruptive extrusion process for small series production of WC 
based sliding bearings (TRL 6) I.S. L Manufacturers 
Adapted non -destructive quality control method for WC 
samples and components S L Manufacturers 
Figure 17 Key messages to industrial, scientific and public stakeholders 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 25 of 45 
 
MYX 
Novel drying and milling based on non -thermal plasma  for 
treating vegetal residues from agro-industrial supply chains as 
filler for thermoplastic carriers 
I.S. L Manufacturers 
LBRT Disruptive injection moulding  process for bio-plastic bottle 
closures production (TRL 6) I.S. L Manufacturer 
UBRIS 
& NIC 
Novel compositions for bio-rubber pads with lignin additives 
for fire resistant and vibrational applications. P P Construction, transport sectors 
NCC Design Innovative Wood Composites sliding bearing systems P P End Users and SME 
Novel manufacturing for bio-rubber pads with lignin additives  P P End Users and SME 
†Type: I.S. – Integrated system; R – Result; P – Product; S – Software application; D.M. – Distinct Module  
‡Protection: O – Ownership; P – Patenting; L – Licensing; O.T. – Other protection 
Market potential of the GREEN-LOOP products 
Bottle closures:  The main industry segments for bottle closures are food and beverages packaging and 
pharmaceuticals. The main material used for bottle closures and caps is plastic, over 54% in 202064, followed 
by metal, increasing market position due to being more sustainable and durable than plastic, and other materials, such 
as wood or glass. Emerging segments that will propel the demand for plastic bottle closures and caps are estimated 
to be i) healthcare, ii) cosmetics and toiletries, iii) automotive industry65, iv) cleaning products. 
•Multifunctional rubber panels: The global natural rubber market66 demand reached a volume of 15.2 million metric 
tons in 2020. The demand is expected to grow at a CAGR of 4.8% in the forecast period of 2021-2026. The demand 
for natural rubber is expected to reach a volume of 20.1 million metric tons by 2026. The Rubber sheets industry is 
characterized for having intense competition and producers. Key money -spinning factors are driving the restraints 
for the growing market which can be overpassed with strategic planning, as stated in the report67. 
 •Wood composite bearings: The composite bearings market68 is expected to grow at a CAGR of over 6% during 
2020-2025. The growth in demand for composites  bearings from th e automotive industry is driving the market. 
Nevertheless, high raw material costs for manufacturing composite bearings and unfavorable conditions arising due 
to the COVID-19 outbreak are hindering the growth of the market. The sector that will govern the global market for 
composites bearing is automotive being Asia-Pacific the largest region and the fastest-growing market. 
Business model 
The different business 
models for GREEN -
LOOP results will target 
construction, automotive 
and food and beverage, 
the main market 
segments globally for the 
upscale of the GREEN -
LOOOP developed 
products and 
technologies, as shown in 
the different reports. 
Other promising 
segments will be further 
explored as agriculture, 
healthcare and cosmetics 
within the project´s 
implementation finding 
potential applications beyond the project´s life. Specific value propositions will be defined based on delivering the 
value of the innovative sustainable products at an appropriate and competitive cost . Figure 18 shows the canvas of 
the sustainable business model  using a 3-bottom line ( social, economy, and life cycle ) approach for measuring 
 
64 Caps and closures market Accessed on September 2021 
65 Top 10 global automotive trends 2021 Accessed on September 2021 
66 Natural rubber market Accessed on September 2021 
67 Rubber sheet market 2021-2027  Accessed on September 2021 
68 Worldwide Composite Bearings Industry to 2025 Accessed on 
September 2021 
Figure 18 GREEN-LOOP Sustainable Business Model canvas 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 26 of 45 
 
performance. This scheme consider needs of stakeholders, gives priority to shareholders, and promotes 
environmental stewardship69. 
Marketing strategy 
•Biobased polymers: The growth rate for bio -based polymers with 8 % CAGR far above overall polymer market 
growth70, expected to maintain until 2025. International companies are already increasing their service catalogue to 
include sources of renewable carbon, mainly biomass, CO 2 and recycling, boosting the bio-based and 
biodegradable polymers demand. However, there is still a lack of support from governments and policies. Only a 
few countries such as Italy, France and probably Spain will politically support this additional disposal path 70. The 
market opportunities still rising for bioplastics as the demand is continuously growing, with new applications and 
products, and biodegradable plastics production is likely to increase to 1.8 million in 2025, more than 80% compared 
to 2019. •Thermoplastic elastomer market:  The global Thermoplastic Elastomer Market size was USD 26,856.8 
million in 2019 and is projected to reach USD 39,424.6 million by 2027, exhibiting a CAGR of 5.7% during 2021-
202771. In 2020 72, the TPE market declined by 18.2% in terms of volume, compared to 2019, due to COVID -19 
pandemic that impacted the supply chain and demand reduction of end -use industries, which impacted the TPE 
manufacture. The market trend focuses on innovation in low -cost and high-performance materials from industries, 
led by the automotive industry, with a market consumption of over 43% of the global demand for TEPs in 2019 73. 
•Biocomposites: The global composites market size is projected to grow from USD 74.0 billion in 2020 to USD 112.8 
billion by 2025, at a CAGR of 8.8% 74. Being the global bio composites market size projected to reach USD 46.3 
billion by 2025, exhibiting a 12.5% CAGR75. The main market segments are automotive, building and construction, 
and electrical and electronics, and China is leading the 
manufacturing market. Market drivers are high technical 
properties and high demand in end users thus innovation 
offers opportunities for market investments. The 
transport industry, automotive and aerospace, has the 
largest volume composites shares in the global market. 
In Europe and North America, the demand for products 
that are 100% biodegradable is growing the use of 
natural polymer, opening a full range for market 
opportunities.  The successful commercialization of the project outcomes will be implemented in three phases 
(Figure 19):  
Financial projections 
These projections have been estimated and agreed 
by the projects partners to validate the economic 
sustainability of the proposed solution at a 
commercial scale. To have an accurate projection 
at this early stage is quite challenging. However, 
the combination of available data and information 
with verified and solid assumptions (partners’ 
know-how, detailed review of the SoA and direct 
insights from the industrial world). have proven 
to be enough to provide a gross quantification. 
Following the recommendati on of Ghasem J., 
201476, the paying good dividends should 
approximate the 20% of the cost price or selling price per kilogram of bio-material and per square meter of the bio-
material sheet. A rough allocation of the manufacturing cost is presented in Figure 17 for the three different materials 
of GREEN-LOOP76, 77, 78, 79. The financial projection has been created following the procedure presented by 
 
69 Nancy Bocken , Sustainable Business Models, in Decent Work and 
Economic Growth, 2021. 
70 Growth rate for bio-based polymers Accessed on September 2021 
71 Thermoplastic elastomer tpe market Accessed on September 2021 
72 Thermoplastic elastomers market 1012 Accessed on September 2021 
73 Global-market-for-thermoplastic-elastomers-to-grow Accessed on 
September 2021 
74 Composite market 2025 Accessed on September 2021 
75 Global-biocomposites-market Accessed on September 2021 
76 Ghasem, Annals of Biological Research, 4(5), 2013 
77 Rovira, Miquel, et al. Final Degree Project of Biotechnol ogy, UAM, 
2019. 
78 Sanjay K. Composites Manufacturin, CRC Press, 2002 
79 Rubber-glove-industry [Accesed on September 2021] 
Figure 20 Manufacture cost of GREEN-LOOP biomaterials 
Figure 19 Pathway for exploitation of the GREEN-LOOP results 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 27 of 45 
 
Charlermthai et al., 2020. The economic plan for GREEN-LOOP has been considered a yearly production of 
3 tons (per product), with an expected investment of 20M€ per scenario as the basis for the calculation. The 
costs have been adapted to each case, taking into account the percentages in Figure 20. For bioplastics, this 
scenario gives a result payback  time of 3.65 years and ROI of 27.3%.  For wood composites case, 3.24 
years of payback time and 30.8% of ROI, and for bio-rubber production, the values are 4.1 years and 24% 
of ROI. It should be noted that these values are subjected to changes due to the raw materials selection and 
cost variations. In WP2, a task dedicated to sourcing the raw material has been included to select the best 
options in the market and ensure circularity. A sensitive anal ysis, changing the production rate from 100% to 
25% has been performed and shown in Figure 21. The arrows indicate the point where payback time is higher 
than five years.  
 Communication activities 
•Visual identity: The communication of the project will be consolidated with a common visual identity. A logo will 
be designed at the beginning of the project. A coherent design chart (colo urs, fonts, icons) will be derived from the 
logo so that the targeted audiences will recognise a distinct brand. Responsible partner: NSB  
•Website: A website will be created at the beginning of the project and updated regularly. The website will contain 
general information of the project and current research ac tivities, access to the dissemination material and public 
deliverables, calendar of events and information about presence in conferences, industrial fairs and exhibitions. Other 
newsfeeds are contemplated on social media (e.g., Twitter or LinkedIn). Responsible partner: NSB  
•Leaflet: The main elements of GREEN -LOOP will be summarised in a leaflet to be disseminated in conferences, 
industrial fairs and day-to-day professional activities of the partners. Responsible partner: NSB  
•Press releases: The project's intermediate results and most important milestones will be communicated to key media 
actors through at least 3 press releases. Responsible partner: NSB, all  
•Video: A video of ca. 2 minutes will be produced to show the project concept and results through animations and 
filmed material. Responsible partner: NSB 
2.2.2 Strategy for knowledge management and intellectual property protection  
GREEN-LOOP will ensure the I.P. protection during and after the execution of the project. Every partner involved 
with the I.P. protection will assess the identification of any necessary IPR during the project execution. Therefore, 
no result will be publicly disseminated/communicated before being formally evaluated by each one of the partners 
under the guidance of the AXIA and Project Coordinator. During the General Assembly , results will be defined as 
more generic results and can be disseminated to the broader target groups and stakeholders. The idea is to make every 
possible effort to have the I.P. as ‘clean’ as possible. In other words, the project aims at making the ownership clearly 
defined. Since the beginning of th e project, the AXIA with the support of the rest of the partners will prepare a 
preliminary list of the results and partners involved as part of the exploitation strategies. Hereby, a minimisation of 
the later conflicts will be target since the kickoff mee ting. This list will be revised and updated along the project, 
including all the outcomes of the R&D activities. Furthermore, the exploitation of the results is available for each 
partner unless other conditions are agreed upon by all partners involved. A list of the relevant background I.P. from 
each partner will be incorporated in the C.A. Also, the access rights by the other partners in the project are stated in 
the same document. Table 3, presented previously, shows a brief list of the partners’ background (including know 
how and expertise), and Table 5 showed foreground I.P. 
 
Figure 21 Sensitivity analysis. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-11