1.2 Methodology  
1.2.1 Overall methodology concept  
GREEN-LOOP has been designed robustly to 
ensure a smooth evolution from TRL4 to TRL6 
within the project lifetime. To that end, a 3-years 
work plan has been developed. This 
comprehensive work -plan will progress 
following a 4-stage methodology (Figure 7): 
Starting of the project, team alignment, and 
definition of relevant environment. (WP 
related: WP1, WP3 to WP5): This stage's main 
objective is to identify the mechanical, physical, 
and chemical properties required by the bio -
based products. In this early stage of the project, 
the relevant environment conditions (final -user 
needs) that must be withstood by the novel bio -based products are also defined. Team alignment and proper inputs 
and outputs for each partner are clearly defined. 
Phase 1: Technology validated in lab (Ending TRL4, WP2, WP3 to WP5): The main objective of this stage of 
GREEN-LOOP is to develop evidence of the proper behaviour (mechanical, physical and chemical) of the bio-based 
materials in lab experiments. That means ensuring that all the solutions to be further developed in the project fulfil 
the necessary TRL4 conditions to jump into TRL6. The improvement of design will be supported by modelling and 
artificial intelligence as well as considering circularity, sustainability and eco-design parameters. 
Phase 2: Expanding the reach of the bio-based products (Reaching TRL5, WP3 to WP5): In this second phase, 
the lab validations will be taken to industrially relevant environments. The objective is to cover the whole TRL5 gap. 
This phase will be the most time-consuming time in the GREEN -LOOP project since it aims to achieve  the target 
properties of bio-based products for industrial-scale solutions.  
Phase 3: Generation of novel bio-based products towards its demonstration (Getting TRL6, WP3 to WP6): 
Once phase 2 is complete and the final designs of each bio-based product are validated at the industrial level, the 
preparation and manufacture of the bio-based products to be used and demonstrated at  a relevant environment is 
performed. All data generated in previous phases are utilised to describe the performance of the manufacturing routes 
and the best way to keep them in optimal conditions over time. 
Phase 4. Demonstration in relevant environment ( Consolidating TRL 6, WP 6): In this phase,  TRL6 is 
consolidated by demonstrating  the innovative manufacture and novel bio -based products  at industrial relevant 
environments. This phase will finally demonstrate that the bio-based products have the potential quality and industrial 
requirements according to key factors defined by industrial partners. Furthermore, in this phase of the project, the 
replicability and technology tr ansfer to other applications and industry sectors, where the products can improve 
sustainability, energy efficiency and circularity, are defined. 
Figure 7 GREEN-LOOP project methodology 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 12 of 45 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 13 of 45 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 14 of 45 
 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 15 of 45 
 
1.2.2 National and international research and innovation activities linked with the project  
The consortium is a well-balanced and experienced group of RTOs, universities, SMEs,  and non-profit organisations. 
Most of them have already participated in or ar e currently involved in E.U. and national projects relevant to the 
concept (Table 3). The partners will promote synergies and knowledge exchange between these initiatives within the 
I.P. governance of the project. 
Table 3. Main research and innovation activities related to GREEN-LOOP and participated by the partners 
Project [partners involved 
in parentheses; 
*coordinator] 
Description and relation to  
H2020-FNR-2020-2-
SECRETed-[IDE, AXIA] 
The project expands the chemical diversity and enhance the industrial sustainable 
exploitation of bio -based compounds.  Modelling and design of biotechnological 
processes. Experience in the coordination as well exploitation of bio-based products. 
H2020-CE-BG-06-2019-
SEALIVE [ASI] 
The project proposes advanced circular strategies that prevent and substantially limit 
pollution. It will be developed under recycling, biodegradability and composting norms 
for advanced systems.  
The project aims to develop circularity techniques and end -of-life solutions that will 
support sustainable bio-based plastics solutions. 
H2020-NMBP-BIOTEC 
PRESERVE [IRIS] 
PRESERVE is committed to develop bio -based plastic packaging and textiles by 
enhancing bio-based coatings in order to improve their recyclability and, at the same 
time, make sure these materials can be upcycled into new packaging for non -food 
applications. 
H2020-BBI-JTI-2019 
BioSPRINT, [NIC]   
To successfully research the implementation and transposition of process intensification 
method, to the purification and conversion of sugars from the hemicellulose (HMC) 
fraction of lignocellulosic and to the production of new biorenewable resins. 
BIOMASS  2009- 2015 [GIG] 
The main objective of the project was to develop a range of technologies to obtain 
polymeric fibrous and composite materials based on raw materials derived from 
the processing of different types of plant biomass by biotechnological methods, using 
specialized enzymatic preparations or cultures of microorganisms 
EU-FP7,10/2008 
PLASMANICE,  [FHF] 
The main objective was to develop equipment for in-line atmospheric plasma deposition 
of functional nanocoatings on various fibre- and polymer-based substrates. The project 
aimed at improvement of recyclability of conventional fossil fuel-based plastics and/or 
replacement by renewable bio-based (and biodegradable) materials 
H2020-RUR-2019-1 
BIOEASTsUP, [NIC] 
  
A possibility to disseminate GREEN -LOOP. The project will advance the BIOEAST 
initiative to become a catalyst for a research and innovation, rural development and 
other policies towards bioeconomy development in the CEE by creation of favourable 
inter-sectoral framework for sustainable deployment of biomass potential. 
1.2.3 Interdisciplinary approach  
GREEN-LOOP initiative is an ambitious project that 
comes from integrating different disciplines, namely: 
engineering, chemistry, biology, material science, physics, 
data science and social science. This project consists of 16 
partners with strong participation of SME, research 
centres, universities, associations, and industry. 
The combination of these disciplines is challenging 
because of the large amount of data and processes involved 
and the use of each specialised language for each one of 
the areas of expertise . Nevertheless, GREEN -LOOP 
partners’ interdisciplinary methodology will be leveraged 
to get diverse stakeholder workshops,  create replicable 
results and obtain feedback from representative  sectors 
such as food/beverage, construction, packaging, and 
Figure 8 GREEN-LOOP interdisciplinary. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 16 of 45 
 
manufacture in general . Furthermore, European coordination, partners coop eration, and activities interaction are 
principles that will ensure that researchers can focus their expertise on a European concept for a circular bio-business 
model, which is adapted to the realities and future requirements of Europe’s bio-based products industry.  
1.2.4 Social sciences and humanities dimension  
To ensure the appropriate response of society regarding the technological development of this project, GREEN -
LOOP will incorporate social innovation concepts supported by real end -users needs. This scheme allows the 
workforce and society to be part of the project in all phases, making society an essential protagonist in the European 
technology transition. GREEN-LOOP has been defined as embracing the social innovation paradigm across the 
project execution to ensure significant adoption and  maximise end-user experience.  The development of the pilot 
lines for demonstration and the use-cases will be based on five main ideas : i) involvement of designers, developers 
with workers and users, ii) mediation and coordination of different groups and stakeholders, iii) interdisciplinary, 
social, and flexible creation process, iv) highlight of historical, cultural, and organizational pre-conditions of the final 
products, v) consideration of the impact on users, environmental and workforce. Besides the training and involvement 
during design phases, t he social and socio -economic benefits of the innovative value chains developed under the 
scope of GREEN-LOOP will be addressed by applying the Social LCA methodology (T2.3), as well as assessing the 
social approval of the obtained products by key stakeholders along the value chain (T8.4). These actions will include 
health and safety, working conditions, well-being, jobs creation. (T8.6) 
1.2.5 Gender dimension  
Incorporating gender and sex in the research process, in science knowledge-making, and the science value system is 
considered a key challenge to improv ing scientific endeavours' quality and excellence 46. From its initial planning, 
GREEN-LOOP aims to impro ve well-being by solving a global problem, improving social cohesion and creating 
new business models with opportunities for all the citizens, especially in the bio-chemical, materials, manufacturing 
sectors and digital platforms. Despite the critical economic potential and the engineering sector's strong implications 
on the communities, the traditional patriarchal culture limits women's economic empowerment, access to 
opportunities, and respect for their economic, social, and cultural rights. Authors such as Demajorovic et. el. (2019)47 
conceive engineering projects as a double-edged sword, providing development to the community and, at the same 
time, re -feeding the pre -existing inequalities. Blindness in relation to gender issues generates disproportionate  
impacts on invisible men and women and therefore do not allow the design of mitigation measures. Women are more 
susceptible to the negative impact generated by engineering projects 48, hence disregarding gender issues ; this 
represents an important barrier to sustainable community development. On the other hand, considering the ex-ante 
gender approach will lead to less discriminatory and inclusive projects, generating social justice in contemporary 
society, as targeted b y the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) strategy. Following the EC policy review of 
Gendered Innovations 2: ‘How Inclusive Analysis Contributes to Research and Innovation’ 49, GREEN-LOOP will 
consider two main aspects when implementing digital and smart tools for manufacture (WP2 to WP5). i) Designing 
optimised value chains tools that integrate gender perspectives, leading to environmental and  circular economic 
solutions that can drive the bio-based transition by adopting novel manufacturing technologies .  ii) D riving the 
circular transition by taking an intersectional approach to gender, age and socioeconomic factors. Bio-based materials 
companies, policymakers , and researchers need to understand better gender and other social, economic, and 
demographic factors. Thus, GREEN-LOOP includes a transversal and constant assessment of gender risks conducted 
by AAU in Task 8.5 during the project lifetime, i.e., evaluating processes, moments, spaces, relations, etc., where, 
directly or indirectly, there is social vu lnerability. A seminar will be held during the first stage of the process, to 
provide guidelines and highlight the importance of gender and ethics dimensions. Moreover, the life -cycle 
sustainability assessment (WP2) will disaggregate results by sex, when relevant, in determining response to climate 
change. Diversity factors (age, sex, gender, ethnicity) also play a significant role in Exploitation, Dissemination and 
Communication plans (WP7, WP8), to fulfil stakeholders’ and end -users expectations. Finally, GREEN-LOOP 
consortium is committed to promoting the participation and leadership of women at all levels. The team will follow 
the Directive 2002/73/EC on the implementation of equal treatment for men and women as a guideline for, e. g., 
access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions. Equal opportunities will be 
targeted when hiring new researchers and when scheduling speakers at project-related events. Moreover, women are 
 
46 R. Palmén et al. Evaluation and Program Planning, 2020. 
47 J. Demajorovic, et al. Resources Policy, 2019. 
48 JC. Keenan et al. Journal of Business Ethics, 135 (4). 2014. 
49 European Commission (EC) - Gendered Innovations 2: Luxembourg, 
2020  
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 17 of 45 
 
presented in steering positions, with 3 WPs lead by females and an average women percentage of 27% in the project 
staff. The execution key personnel of all project partners show a good mix of men and women, even more remarkable, 
since many scientific and technical fields addressed in t he project (such as engineering and IT) used to have a low 
percentage of female students and researchers. 
1.2.6 Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI 
In recent years AI projects and applications have increased exponentially, becoming one of the top strategic priorities.  
Around 50% of the companies are increasing their usage of AI and the dedicated budget; moreover, 52% got at least 
one-use case applying AI 50. This tendency has also been reflected in European programs (FP7, H2020 and Green 
Deal). Nevertheless, besides the high potential of AI, there are also risks, such as privacy, widening socio-economic 
inequality, malicious use and jobs opportunity decrement, among others 51. Hence is crucial to assure its proper use 
having in mind its trustworthiness, as r ecently stated by the European Commission in the Ethics Guidelines for 
Trustworthy AI52. GREEN-LOOP will develop A.I algorithms in T2.6 to enhanced chemical optimisation in WP3 to 
WP5, always following the most strict rules regarding AI defined by EC. 
1.2.7 Open Science 
Since Horizon Europe aims to fund ground -
breaking research with the potential to impact 
our world substantially , GREEN-LOOP will 
continuously operate under a more global open 
science approach with  a transformation of 
culture towards more openness, accessibility, 
re-usability, multidisciplinary, participatory 
collaboration, and a methodology motivated 
by the benefit for society. GREEN-LOOP will 
follow the open science policy of Horizon 
Europe as det ailed in the Programme 
Regulation (Art. 14 and 39(3)) and further 
described in the General Model Grant 
Agreement (Art. 17 – Specific Rules). By 
doing this, GREEN-LOOP will make 
scientific processes more efficient, 
transparent, and responsive to societal ch allenges while making scientific knowledge easily accessible. In terms of 
Open Access in Scientific Publications, GREEN-LOOP is aware of its obligation of ensuring open access (free of 
charge, online access for any user) to all peer-reviewed scientific publications relating to its results via an OpenAIRE 
compliant repository (i.e. Zenodo ) that facilitates the management of the project data according to FAIR principle.  
All results generated under the scope of GREEN-LOOP will be part of the main elements of open access defined by 
the European commission: i) right to read, ii) download and print, iii) right to copy, search, crawl, distribute, mine or 
link. All data generated in the use -case ( WP3 to WP5 ), chemical optimization, manufacture innovation, 
standardization, characterization, and end-user results)  will be available (accessed, mined, exploited, reproduced 
and disseminated) free of charge for any user during and at the end of the project. Figure 9 shows the way open access 
will be covered for dissemination and exploitation based on the particular developments of GREEN -LOOP. The 
overall ambition is that these practices will increase the visibility and re -usability of the research output and  the 
reproducibility and replicability and, in general, the excellence and impact of the project outcomes. 
1.2.8 Research Data Management and Management of Other Research Output 
Since European Commission encourages Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR) research data to 
maximise the integrity and impact of their research investment , GREEN -LOOP will ensure that their research 
outcomes will be presented in the most easily accessed, understood, exchanged and reused ways. At the same time, 
the project will ensure data security, accessibility and the validation of results.  
 
50 Algorithmia, “2021 Enterprise Trends in Machine Learning” 
51 Jhon Zysman et. al. (2020); Governing AI: Understanding the Limits, 
Possibility, and Risks of AI in an Era of Intelligent Tools and Systems - 
Berkley University 
52 European Commission: High -Level e xpert group on artificial 
intelligence, “Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI” 
Figure 9 Preliminary decision to disseminate in GREEN-LOOP 
project. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 18 of 45 
 
Consequently, partners will strive to make all their non-sensitive data 
available as green or gold open -access in the form of journal 
publications, magazine articles etc. Besides, GREEN-LOOP wants 
to ensure that the funding and regulatory body requirements are met 
and that research data remain accurate, authentic, reliable and 
complete. GREEN-LOOP partners will operate with a common data 
management structure across all WPs. Data that will be particularly 
collected concern WP2, WP3 to WP6. A clear and common bio-base 
materials management structure will be applied to make clear: i) 
what is manufactured (type of products, amounts, when, what next) 
in each WP, ii) what is needed (raw materials, amounts, when), and iii) who will take responsibility for the logistics. 
These activities will reach the elaboration of an efficient Data Management  Plan (DMP) dedicated to the data 
management life cycle for the data collected, processed and/or generated within GREEN-LOOP, always under the 
criteria “as open as possible, as closed as necessary”. DMP (M6, M18, and M36) will include information presented 
in Figure 10. AAU will be responsible for managing the Data repository and overseeing that the uploaded data 
complies with the principles defined in the DMP.  This DMP will be continuously revised , describing what kind of 
research data will be generated and what policies apply to the data  e.g. EMMC dataset descript ion53. In addition, 
funding and legal policies for data management practices such as access, storage, backup will be also determined. 
Finally, raw data and all other data generated during the project will be uploaded in an open repository to contribute 
to the Open Access of scientific data within Horizon Europe (described in section 1.2. 7 Open Science). In case 
personal data is required for any research goal, the EU Commission will be fully informed to ensure full compliance 
with the Ethics regulations in the H2020 programme. During the execution of the project, the project data flow will 
be exclusively held within the limits of the European Union . Therefore, the General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) and local regulations will be the only regulations that will be exclusively considered.  
2. Impact 
Contribution to topic impacts 
•Demonstrate relevant scale production of innovative bio -based products to substitute traditional materials 
with high environmental footprint: In section 1.2.1, a full descriptio n of the three new value chain is presented. 
The scale of the demonstration activities to use bio-rubber in developing multifunctional fire-retardant and vibrational 
pads for civil engineering constructions - floors and walls; wood composites in manufactur ing sliding bearings for 
appliance and tool; and finally, bioplastic in developing bottle closures for packaging, food and beverage sectors as 
a raw material is detailed. To answer how the project will demonstrate and guarantee the demonstration, 
GREENLOOP included a structured and organized work program where three WPs (WP3 to WP5) will be focused 
on producing each of the aforementioned biomaterials during 25 months. For all of them, they will start with the 
definition of specifications and will finish wit h the validation under industrially relevant environment ( D3.1; D4.1 
and D5.1). Subsequently, WP6 will implement the activities leading the upscaling and manufacturing of  the final 
products. In addition, Task 7.1. will perform a market analysis and circular business planning of the biobased products 
will help the effective substitution. Here consumers’ needs, expectations and potential barriers will be fully analysed 
thorough dedicated surveys and well assessed methodology and measures to increase the acceptance of the targeted 
biobased products defined and considered since the product design phase.  
Focusing on the disruptive potential of the selected biomaterial and the interface between the technical feasibility 
and the expected impact, GREEN -LOOP's final products market has a consolidated international market with a 
positive compound annual growth rate. 
Fire-retardant: The global conventional fire -retardant market size was valued at USD 7.0 billion in 2019  and is 
expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 3.6% from 2020 to 2027. Aluminium hydroxide is 
the largest single flame retardant at 38% share. Second are the halogenated flame retardant systems comprising 
brominated and chlorinated products which are commonly used together with the synergist antimony trioxide, in total 
30%. Organophosphorus and other flame retardants like e.g. inorganic phosphorus compounds, nitrogen and zinc 
based flame retardants make up the rest at 32%54. Their environmental footprint is highly relevant since most flame-
 
53 Emmc info data management plan dataset -description [accesed on 
September 2021] 
54 The flame retardants market | FLAMERETARDANTS -ONLINE, 
accessed on September 2021. 
Figure 10 Data Management Plan Check 
List 
                                                
                                                   
                               
                                                  
                                                    
                                                   
                                               
                                                
                                                      

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 19 of 45 
 
retarded products eventually become waste. Municipal waste is generally disposed of via incineration or landfill. 
Incineration of flame -retarded products can produce various toxic compounds, including halogenated dioxins and 
furans. The formation  of such compounds and their subsequent release to the environment is a function of the 
operating conditions of the incineration plant and the plant's emission controls. There is a possibility of flame 
retardants leaching from products disposed of in landf ills. The significance of any release of flame retardants from 
disposal sites has yet to be determined. Even recycling is not hazardous free since they contain persistent organic 
pollutant (POPs), phosphorus-based flame retardant and phthalates which are r eported to be found in children toys 
manufactured from recycled plastics 55. Vibrational pads for civil engineering constructions : their market was 
valued at USD 2,016.4 Million in 2018 and is projected to reach USD 2,016.4 Million by 2026, growing at a CAGR 
of 4.53% from 2019 to 202656. Most of vibrational pads are fossil-based plastics (commonly thought of as traditional 
plastics) which contribute to increased greenhouse gas emissions and pollution. As of 2019, 4 to 8% of global oil 
consumption is linked t o plastics, according to the World Economic Forum. If this persists, by 2050, plastics will 
account for 20% of oil consumption. 
Bottle closures: The global beverage market size is valued at US$1550 billion for the year 2018 and the industry is 
growing at a CAGR of 4%. It’s value estimations are US$1676.48 billion in the year 2020 and the US $ 1885 billion 
in the year 2023. The beverage industry wi ll further grow and would have been valued US$ 1961.24 billion in the 
year 202457. The closures (which are made of plastics) and barrier 
materials (mainly made of aluminium) play a significant role in 
the life cycle impact. Most closures are made of flexib le material 
such as cork (biomaterial), rubber (fossil -based material), or 
plastic foam (fossil -based material). Main environmental effects 
are summarised in Figure 11. CO 2 production is not the only 
environmental issue facing closures – there’s also the issue of 
water waste to consider. When water consumption during closure 
production is considered, plastic stoppers use the most and 
screwcaps the least, while whole -piece natural corks fall 
approximately between the two. So, while aluminium products 
require a lot of energy in their production, the use of water is 
minimal for the creation of a screwcap.  
Sliding bearings: The global sliding bearing market attained a 
value of USD 928 million in 2020. The sliding bearing market is 
further expected to grow in the forecast period of 2021 -2026 at a CAGR of 5.75% to reach USD 1,381 million by 
2026. Various materials (mainly steel and polymer) are used by the bearing industry for the manufacture of different 
bearing components. These bearing materials undergo different heat treatment and processes in order to attain the 
desired properties to maximise bearing life and performance. In 2020, on average, every tonne of steel produced led 
to the emission of 1.851 tonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere58, besides the reduction of heavy metals (Pb, Cd, Sb, Cu, 
Sn) which are used in metallic bearings and the reduction on lubricants  made out of fossile resources 
GREEN-LOOP finds, by developing a preliminary environmental LCA that the use of the selected biobased materials 
save, on average, 2.5 ± 0.8 t CO2 -eq/t of GHG emissions relative to conventional materials 60. This is equivalent to 
35 ± 20% of the worldwide average per capita GHG emissions in the year 2000 59. The previous one is mainly 
achieved by: i) selection of biomaterials with gree n production strategies systems from an environmental point of 
view, ii) the reduction of distances along the supply chain, and iii) the implementation of greener end -of-life 
procedures.  
 
55 Pouya Samani, et al. Journal of Cleaner Production, 274, 2020. 
56 Anti-Vibration Polymer Market Size And Forecast . Accessed on 
September 2021. 
57 How big is the beverage industry? Acceded on September, 2021. 
58 Climate change and the production of iron and steel. World Steel asso 
ciation, 2020 
59 Martin Weiss, et al. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 16, 2012.  
Figure 11 conventional closures, environmental effects 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 20 of 45 
 
•Develop products with similar or better mechanical, physical and chemical properties, while having a 
substantially lower environmental footprint and being sustainable, non-toxic and recyclable when compared 
to non -bio-based materials : On the other hand, by developing the aforementioned preliminary LCA using 
SIMAPRO database 60 and aligned with several LCA 
studies which suggest that biobased materials59, save, on 
average, 2.5 ± 0.8 t CO2-eq/t of GHG emissions relative 
to conventional materials; exert lower human and 
terrestrial ecotoxicity as well as carcinogenic potentials 
than conventional materials and exert higher aquatic 
ecotoxicity than conventional materials (Shen and Patel 
2010). In addition, GREEN -LOOP biobased materials 
can be recyclable. Cascade products can accumulate toxic 
or critical substances, which can serve as barriers for their 
further processing or recycling. To this end, GREEN -
LOOP emphasize on products that are safe -by-design in 
terms of their chemical content, and on substitution of 
hazardous materials. Then, GREEN-LOOP include WP2 
to ensure the transition from hazardous to green 
chemicals. This mean, GREEN -LOOP products are 
developed considering low-energy consumption in their production, do not create health or environmental risks, and 
that can themselves be safely reused and recycled. This is aligned with the chemical’s strategy for sustainability61. 
•Demonstrate disruptive innovation of bio -based materials production in at least three different 
manufacturing value chains: As mentioned before in section 1.1.3 and 1.2 , GREEN-LOOP will demonstrate the 
manufacturing of i) rubber multifunctional panels fire -retardant and seismic resistance for civil construction  
application, ii)  bioplastic for bottle closures for the food, beverage and packaging applications and iii) wood 
composite bearing for appliance & tool applications. These bio-based materials will be produced at least in 85% from 
biomass, that is, from terrestrial and marine plants, parts thereof, as well as biogenic residues and waste. Each of 
these bio -materials are used in different applications to reach 3 different sectors ( manufacture packaging, food 
&beverage and construction sectors). GREEN-LOOP disrupt the manufacturing of these materials in different ways: 
Green and smart manufacture, Value Chain Platform, Skilled workforce building plan, Innovative characterisation, 
standardization, and quality controls.  
GREEN-LOOP will integrate smart and green manufacture concepts with sustainability and circularity by design 
ideas to get a holistic solution for the manufacture of bio-based products. 
•Develop sust ainable business models for materials sourcing and recycling : GREEN-LOOP will develop 
sustainable business models by expanding the traditional one layer pillar (economic pillar) by a three layer model. 
The two additional pillar are environmental and social  layer. The environmental layer is considered by including a 
view of the entire life cycle from a life cycle assessment perspective. Here, GREEN -LOOP understands the 
environmental benefits deriving from the company’s sustainability path and the major envir onmental impacts 
deriving from the product’s life cycle (T 2.3). The advantage of this layer is the possibility to understand the most 
critical environmental issues of the new biomaterials and the most important practices of circularity and sustainability 
that GREEN-LOOP is undertaking. The social layer is also included and will be represented by the social pillar of 
sustainability which investigates the relationship between stakeholders and the organization. The objective of this 
layer is to understand the major social impacts arising from relations with key stakeholders. The scale of outreach 
provides information on the breadth and depth of the relationship between the biomaterials production and its 
stakeholders. This relationship will be based on the short-term interest of both parties or could be focused on a long-
term perspective. Another factor to be considered is the outreach in terms of geographical area. The company could 
be focused on the local territory, or it could act from a global perspective. 
Social benefits will be highlighted by the increasing ability to create jobs for the local community, the transparency 
of financial information, compliance with laws in the field of production, the fair management of suppliers and the 
respect for human rights. 
 
 
60 LCI databases in SimaPro, 2021. 61 Chemicals strategy. European Commissioin, 2020. 
Figure 12 GREEN-LOOP Innovation from linear to circular schemes. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 21 of 45 
 
Contribution to Destination impacts 
•Accelerate the twin green and digital transition … GREEN-LOOP accelerates the development and deployment 
of digital technologies by achieving SO1.1, SO1.2, SO1.3, SO1.4, SO1.5, SO1.6 and SO2.7. Additionally, speed up 
the transition by manufacturing 3 final bio -based products namely, bio rubber, multifuncti onal panels, bioplastic 
bottle closures, and wood composites bearings tested with 3 end users. Modern AI models will be sued to save time 
and money during eco-design. The project is boosts and facilitates the society participation in different activities. 
• Create a new green, flexible and digital way …  GREEN-LOOP address most crucial elements on manufacture 
such as efficiency, environmental, circularity and cost are uncovered to give recommendations on the optimal 
production process by implementing the GREEN-LOOP platform to reinforce circularity and act as a foundation for 
a sustainable and digital value chain.  
•Make the jobs of the humans working in the manufacturing sector …  GREEN-LOOP will perform a skill gap 
assessment and define an optimal training 
plan. Training will be dedicated to 
practical methodologies to demonstrate 
the effectiveness of the smart 
manufacture in bio -based production 
considering different locations in Europe. 
GREEN-LOOP will promote  high-level 
jobs creation in the industrial 
biotechnology (IB) sector. The training activities (T8.4) and replicability cases (T7.4) will be conducted to guarantee 
that the know-how of the project (lessons learned, generated knowledge and technologies) is transferred to industrial 
partners and their workforce. For every job in the sector 62, there are 4 jobs created elsewhere in the IB value chain. 
This high multiplier is driven especially by upstream employment in the IB sector. A high upstream job creation is a 
general characteristic of chemicals and pharmaceuticals production, but this is augmented by the IB sectors’ sourcing 
of bio -based inputs rather than fossil resources.  Assuming this scenario, a fter 5 years of GREEN-LOOP will 
contribute to reach this objective with an 
estimated growth rate of around 30% by 
2030 and under the current policy 
scenario, GREEN-LOOP, will contribute 
to generate more than 415 jobs (including 
multiplier effects). 
•Set out a credible pathway to 
contributing to climate neutral…, •Increase productivity, innovation capacity, resilience, sustainability and 
global competitiveness … & •Contribute to a substantial reduction of waste and CO2 emissions… In a previous 
section, GREEN-LOOP already explain how is pursing the expected outcome o f having a substantially lower 
environmental footprint and being sustainable, non-toxic and recyclable when compared to non-bio-based materials. 
Considering the expected outcomes and the aforementioned outcomes of R&I investments in the long -term, 
GREENLOOP is a key enabler in positioning EU manufacturing industry as a global leader in clean and climate-
neutral industrial value chain, circular economy and climate -neutral digital systems and infrastructures  
supporting the achievement of KSO A & C. 
Outcomes and impacts of GREEN-LOOP 
•SCIENTIFIC IMPACT: GREEN-LOOP represents a forum for fruitful discussions, debates, and scientific efforts 
to transform the gaps and ambitions we have identified (Section 1.2) in high-quality new knowledge. This latter could 
become influential in those disciplines or fields already described (Section 1.2.3) and worldwide through 
publications, conferences, etc. To this end, GREEN-LOOP will ensure open access to the deposited publication via 
the repository to the bibliographic m etadata to be more efficient, transparent, and responsive to societal challenges  
aligned with EC´s goals on open science. To maximize the impact, Dissemination & Communication plan (Section 
2.2) describes how the project results will be available to EU ind ustry and academia.  KPIs in Table 4 show the 
commitment of GREEN-LOOP partners to the diffusion of knowledge to engage society in future R&I actions. 
 
62 Jobs and growth generated by industrial biotechnology in europe  
[accesed on September 2021] 
 
Figure 14 Jobs and economic impact of IB sector 
Figure 13 Framework for the economic impact assessment of IB 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 22 of 45 
 
•SOCIETAL IMPACT:  GREEN-LOOP will support several EU policy priorities. Main identified policies are 
initiatives under the Green Deal 63 such as Clean Energy, Sustainable Indus try, and Eliminatin g Pollution (fully 
integrated, interconnected and digitalised EU energy market , development strategies and business models). This 
project will also contribute to Circular economy action plan and Blue Economy . GREEN-LOOP contributes to the 
SDGs (Figure 15) through two pathways: fully described project outcomes and GREEN-LOOP market potential. In 
addition, GREEN-LOOP makes its R&I results work for society by incorporating strategies such as gender and sex 
in the research process, in science knowledge -making, and the science value system (Section 1.2.5) and engaging 
stakeholders, end-users and citizens to the co-creation of R&I content through its Communication Plan  
ECONOMIC/TECNOLOGICAL IMPACT: GREEN-LOOP will produce profitable solutions some of which are 
planned to be commercialised (see exploitation strategy plan in section 2.2.1). GREEN-LOOP has a relevant market 
potential described in Section 2.2 which is characterised by growing until 2025-2030 between 12% - 50%. On the 
other hand, GREEN-LOOP creates more and better jobs, on the one hand, by making its R&I results work for society 
as explained before and, on the other hand, providing trainings & social engagement (T8.4). Consequently, GREEN-
LOOP supports reshoring of EU industry. 
Requirements & Potential barriers 
GREEN-LOOP has identified the requirements and potential barriers during the project planning phase. As a result, 
the project finds a lack of reliable data on the feasibility and efficacy of its untested solutions due to the difficulty in 
obtaining access to novel bio-based material infrastructures by technology developers. Consequently, T1.2, T3.1, 
T4.1, T5.1 include the first step to define the requirements and needs by involving end-user in the construction sector 
(ZAG, UBRIS), packaging, food, and beverage (TDZ) and appliances and tools (LBRT) partners as the key actors to 
fully understand the requirements not only to implement the new technologies but for managing it going forward.  
As well, obsolete regulations hinder investments in new technologies. In this line, T2.1 and T2.4 include a targeted 
review of existing regulations by European Union and standardization bodies to overcome significant hurdles related 
to circularity, new value chains, re-use, re-manufacturing and recycling of products and processes at the beginning, 
during the development and validation. In addition, it helps to implement new circular markets, EU low carbon-based 
policies, and circular economy concepts, and blue economy sector on a broader scale.  
An identified barrier corresponds to the existing complexity in the adoption of innovative bio-based manufacturing. 
In particular, SMEs are the most affected by it. GREEN-LOOP creates an innovation environment by incentivizing 
various levels of integration from basic units into tooling retrofit, monitoring, characterisation, and quality controls. 
WP implementation is designed considering the integration of different disciplines (section 1.2.3), namely: 
engineering, chemistry, sustainability, monitoring, computation science, data science , business and social science, 
and 17 partners with strong participation of SME, research centres, universities, non-profit organisations, and 
industry. In addition, GREEN-LOOP identifies as a barrier the difficulty of detecting the market potential, customer 
demands and rationale behind the heterogeneous market application decisions in early phases of technology 
development. Current market  potential and requirements have been already explored (section 2.2) and will be 
continued by T2.1 and T7.1 during the project implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 The European Green Deal, EC COM (2019) 640 final, December 2019. 
Figure 15 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 23 of 45 
 
Scale and Significance 
Name  Scale Significance 
Circular 
business 
3 innovative value chains are detailed 
studied, setting the bases for an 
optimisation platform  to further 
improve new manufacture lines.  The 
optimization of value chains will be the 
first step to implement these 
technologies in the market. All publics 
will have access to it (circularity, social 
and training) 
The definition of innovative value chains  (WP2) 
combine with innovative circular business  (WP7) will 
create a new approach to introduce biomaterials in the 
market, ensuring sustainable results  and social 
acceptance. Based on market studies in Section 2.2, it is 
expected that GREEN -LOOP will increase its 
implantation on circular economy in approx. 30%: 
rubber, 6%, bioplastic, 8%, wood composites, 9% 
Social 
acceptance 
Social aspects such as the creation of 
new jobs (4-10) and further development 
of new business with the capacity ton 
increase the workforce (>300 
opportunities), beside the 
demonstration of the abilities of 
biomaterials at relevance environments  
in the GREEN-LOOP platform, allows 
the project to reach society.  
The cur rent scenarios demonstrate the viability of the 
biomaterials to be introduced in the market with 
sustainable schemes, allowing a net growth of 30%, 
ensuring the jobs creation and social benefits.  The 
optimisation of value chains  (GREEN-LOOP platform ) 
will allow a reduction of CO 2 emissions in more than 
25%, all data will be accessible to any person interested 
in results by integrating at least 3 data repositories open 
access, besides the publications (>12) 
Innovation 
on 
manufacture 
New tools will be created for three 
manufacture lines. In particular , 
extrusion, injection moulding, hot 
pressing will be benefited by novel 
retrofits and the implantation of 2 
enhancement systems: Ultrasound and 
Microwaves 
It has been demonstrated in section 1, that by the proper 
retrofit of the manufacture technologies and the 
implementation of enhancement the energy efficiency  
will be increased by 10-20%, which implies a reduction 
on CO2 emission by 20 -30%. This also impacts the 
quality of the products  (increment of 5-10%), which 
ensure similar properties than conventional materials 
Bio-based 
materials 
acceptance 
Three demonstration campaigns , for 
10 months  operating at relevant scales 
(fire/vibrational tests, bottl ing of juice 
and oil,  injection moulding)  will 
demonstrate that the biomaterials are 
ready to the next step in the market 
implantation.  
The standard activities applied to manufacture and final 
characterisation products ensures that quality of the final 
products. The bio content (>85%) of all materials should 
ensure the sustainability of biomaterials, as well as the End 
Of Life significance of them (>80% of recycling, >70% 
of reuse and >90% of refurbished capabilities)