4. Personal Data Page
Does this activity involve processing of personal data? Yes No
Does this activity involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including 
use of preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)?
Yes No
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non-EU countries? Specify the type of 
personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU or from a non-EU 
country to another non-EU country? Specify the type of personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Does this activity involve the processing of personal data related to criminal convictions or 
offences?
Yes No
5. Animals Page
Does this activity involve animals? Yes No
6. Non-EU Countries Page
Will some of the activities be carried out in non-EU countries? Yes No
In case non-UE countries are involved, do the activities undertaken in these countries raise 
potential ethics issues? Yes No
It is planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Is it planned to import any material (other than data) from non-EU countries into the EU or 
from a non-EU country to another non-EU country? For data imports, see section 4. Yes No
Is it planned to export any material (other than data) from the EU to non-EU countries? For 
data exports, see section 4. Yes No
Does this activity involve low and/or lower middle income countries, (if yes, detail the benefit-
sharing actions planned in the self-assessment) Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the activity at risk? Yes No
7. Environment, Health and Safety Page
Administrative forms
Page 134 of 136
Proposal ID 101057765
Acronym GREEN-LOOP
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 23/09/2021 21:50
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants.(during the implementation of the activity or further to the 
use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
Does this activity deal with endangered fauna and/or flora / protected areas? Yes No
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to humans, 
including  those performing the activity.(during the implementation of the activity or further 
to the use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
8. Artificial Intelligence Page
Does this activity involve the development, deployment and/or use of Artificial Intelligence? (if 
yes, detail in the self-assessment whether that could raise ethical concerns related to human 
rights and values and detail how this will be addressed).
Yes No 17
9. Other Ethics Issues Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I will complete the 
ethics self-assessment as described in the guidelines How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Administrative forms
Page 135 of 136
Proposal ID 101057765
Acronym GREEN-LOOP
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 23/09/2021 21:50
Ethics Self-Assessment
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact
To guarantee a trustworthy AI, GREEN-LOOP dedicates special attention to each pilar and apply a human-centric during the 
development of the AI.  Following the guidelines presented by the EU commission, in T2.6, where the specifications of the models are 
defined, will also be included the technical specifications to develop a robust AI: human agency and oversight, technical robustness 
and safety, privacy and data governance, transparency and accountability. On the other side, the ethical and lawful pillars will be 
addressed in T7.3 by innovation and AI experts. Concerning the ethic, it will be constantly monitored that the four main principles 
(respect for human autonomy, prevention of harm, fairness and explicability) are fulfilled. Regarding the laws, in the first place, there 
will be identified the appliable to GREEN-LOOP, following will subsequently be checked for compliance during the whole 
development.  Ensuring these three pillars will prevent and minimise the risks of the AI, consequently maximising the benefits 
offered by AI systems during all its life cycle.
Remaining characters 3917
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations
In recent years AI projects and applications have increased exponentially, becoming one of the top strategic priorities.  Around 50% 
of the companies are increasing their usage of AI and the dedicated budget; moreover, 52% got at least one-use case applying AI . 
This tendency has also been reflected in European programs (FP7, H2020 and Green Deal). Nevertheless, besides the high potential of 
AI, there are also risks, such as privacy, widening socio-economic inequality, malicious use and jobs opportunity decrement, among 
others . Hence is crucial to assure its proper use having in mind its trustworthiness, as recently stated by the European Commission in 
the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI . Following the guideline, the trustworthiness of the AI is based on three pillars. The AI must 
be lawful, ensuring compliance with all applicable laws and regulations; ethical, providing faithfulness to ethical principles and 
values; and robust, both from technical and social. 
Remaining characters 4018
Administrative forms
Page 136 of 136
Proposal ID 101057765
Acronym GREEN-LOOP
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210901 Last saved 23/09/2021 21:50
Security issues table
1. EU Classified Information (EUCI)2 Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials requiring protection against 
unauthorised disclosure (EUCI)? Yes No
Does this activity involve non-EU countries? Yes No
2. Misuse Page
Does this activity have the potential for misuse of results? Yes No
3. Other Security Issues Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials subject to national security restrictions? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
Are there any other security issues that should be taken into consideration? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
2According to the Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, “European Union 
classified information (EUCI) means any information or material designated by an EU security classification, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause varying 
degrees of prejudice to the interests of the European Union or of one or more of the Member States”. 
3Classified background information is information that is already classified by a country and/or international organisation and/or the EU and is going to be used by the 
project. In this case, the project must have in advance the authorisation from the originator of the classified information, which is the entity (EU institution, EU Member 
State, third state or international organisation) under whose authority the classified information has been generated. 
4EU classified foreground information is information (documents/deliverables/materials) planned to be generated by the project and that needs to be protected from 
unauthorised disclosure. The originator of the EUCI generated by the project is the European Commission.
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 1 of 45 
 
          Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials 
 
Participant No. Participant Organization Name Participant  
Acronym Country 
1 (Coordinator) IDENER RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT IDE ES 
2 NATIONAL COMPOSITE CENTER NCC UK 
3 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CHEMISTRY NIC SI 
4 UNIVERSITY OF BRISTOL UBRIS UK 
5 SLOVENIAN NATIONAL BUILDING AND CIVIL E. I. ZAG SI 
6 (Technical 
Coordinator) 
FRAUNHOFER GESELLSCHAFT ZUR FOERDERUNG DER 
ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V FHF DE 
7 LABRENTA SRL LBRT IT 
8 MIXCYCLING SRL MYX IT 
9 NERO SU BIANCO NSB IT 
10 GERACE MARIA CRISTINA - TERRE DI ZOE’ TDZ IT 
11 IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SOCIEDAD LIMITADA IRIS ES 
12 GLOWNY INSTYTUT GORNICTWA GIG PL 
13 AACHEN UNIVERISTY: PROCESS CONTROL ENGINEERING AAU DE AACHEN UNIVERISTY: INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY 
14 AUSTRIAN STANDARDS INTERNATIONAL ASI AT 
15 INSTITUTO DE SOLDADURA E QUALIDADE ISQ PT 
16 AXIA INNOVATION UG AXIA DE 
17 ASOCIACIÓN DE INVESTIGACIÓN METALÚRGICA DEL 
NOROESTE AIMEN ES 
Brief Summary of the proposal  
GREEN-LOOP addresses novel  bio-based materials 
solutions, tackling the problem from a circular-business 
thinking perspective, which will enable overcoming the 
barrier for new manufacture tools, energy efficiency 
improvements and sustainable value chains. The main goal 
of GREEN-LOOP is to design and optimise 3 innovative 
bio-based materials and components for industrial 
sectors: construction, packaging, food, beverage, 
appliances and tooling. 1) multifunctional panels rubber 
panels with fire resistance and vibrational applications, 2) 
bioplastic bottle closures  for oil and fruit juice, 3) wood 
composites bearings  for plastic injection machine s. The 
value chain of each product is optimised from raw material 
source to End Of Life o f products, ensuring the circular 
economy. All manufacturing lines are retrofitted to adapt 
to the new enhanced bio compoundings using Artificial 
Intelligence.. Ultrasound improvement is included in the 
lignin production and rubber manufacture , and 
Microwaves improve preheating of bioplastic on injection 
moulding and curing of wood composites. The whole process is monitored and presented in a virtual platform that 
includes KPI evaluation, business optimization in real time, training (webinars), and social engagement.  
Figure 1 Graphical abstract of the proposal 
                 
                                                                  
            
         
          
                 
              
           
                 
                 
                  
                
                     
              
            
         
          
         
           
              
                 
                                                                  
            
         
          
                 
              
           
                 
                                       
                            
                                         
           
       
           
       
           
       

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 2 of 45 
 
1. Excellence  
Background and motivation  
There is only one planet, Earth, yet by 2050, the world will be consuming as if there were three1. Global consumption 
of biomass, fossil fuels, metals and minerals is  expected to double in the next 40 years2, while annual waste 
generation is projected to increase by 70% by 2050 3. This scenario is not a pessimistic vision; this is happening 
and sadly amplified by the COVID 19 crisis. This catastrophe is not just a pandemic but a demand to change how 
the production chain works in Europe .  The need to reduce dependencies with third  countries has been exposed 
and strengthen European industry from the ground up. However, there is also a requirement to protect our citizens, 
delivering products and services of the highest quality, ensuring sustainability throughout the production chain 
(Green Manufacture). The goal is to achieve a green and 
digital transformation based on European values  by 
protecting, maintaining and enhancing the natural capital of 
the E.U. Since the current linear take-use-dispose model 
has failed , th ere is a real urgency in transforming our 
consumer behaviour to reduce waste  and keep resources 
longer in the value chain4. This industry transformation will 
contribute to the Union’s climate neutrality challenge by 
2050 and, to  some extent, to the achiev ement of the 
Circular Economy. In this context, bio-based products will 
be developed with green techniques to substitute 
traditional materials with high environmental footprint. 
As stated in the 2020 Circular Economy Action plan, a big 
effort will be made in making sustainable products the norm 
in the E.U., which can also contribute to the Blue Economy 
by reducing the harmful effects of activities on the world’s  
oceans by rethinking, reusing and recycling  materials and 
products5. Additionally, using microwaves and ultrasounds 
technologies ( electrification) in the production chain has 
huge potential in efficiency, time and cost savings. These 
technologies allow delivering the exact amount of energy to the exact physical point at a particular instant of time.  
The challenge we face is multidisciplinary, combining efforts from very different backgrounds – Physics, 
Engineering, Chemistry, Biology and Material Science. Interdisciplinary actions will contribute to the expectation 
of optimising and improving smart m anufacturing processes, unlocking the full potential of bio -based materials. 
Furthermore, GREEN -LOOP will develop and optimise sustainable business models for materials sourcing and 
recycling, so the economy will also be involved. Developing these technologies is not the only thing that matters, but 
also to ensure that personnel in the industry are qualified to apply them. Therefore, training will be developed in all 
stages of the process, ensuring that the most appropriate transfer of knowledge is achieved for each task involved. 
Consequently, a very positive social impact will be achieved to enable society to adapt to the changes  here 
proposed. In addition, s tandardisation activities of bio -based materials, adapted characterisation methods , and 
quality controls will be addressed and performed . There will be three different bio -products to demonstrate the 
concept and accomplish the following criteria:  
 
A) Sustainability and circularity by design in all stages 
of production, consumption, and use. 
B) Manufacture transformation to green and smart 
factories.  
C) Electrification of manufacture through microwaves 
and ultrasounds enhancement. 
D) 3 final users and replicability activities to ensure the 
spread of project results after its end.  
 
1 Sustainable Development Goals . Unitied Nations.  [accessed on May 
2021] 
2 OECD (2019), Global Material Resources Outlook to 2060. 
3 A Global Snapshot of Solid Waste Management to 2050. World Bank. 
2018. 
4 Lerwen Liu,et al. An Introduction to Circular Economy. Belgium: 
Springer. 2020 
5 Sustainability criteria for the blue economy. European Commission, 
2021. 
Figure 2. Actions to enhance European manufacture. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 3 of 45