3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
Consortium members 
To achieve project objectives, a multi -disciplinary consortium has been 
arranged with a well -balanced distribution integrating 6 research 
organizations, 3 universities, 1 NPO and 7 SME with R&D and industrial 
capacities. The consortium of 17 partners from 8 different countries assures a 
wide European coverage. Most partners have already participated and currently 
participate in EU project, which are related to this proposal. This will create an 
excellent basis for transfer considerabl e knowledge and technology from 
previous RTD projects by boosting the exploitation and commercialization of 
results. The consortium is multidisciplinary, covering different expertise such 
as materials, energy, chemistry, environmental, social and economic aspects, 
in close cooperation between academia and industry. GREEN-LOOP consortium is devoted to following a Responsive 
Research and Innovation methodology, including gender/sex implications on project advances. IDE and AAU will 
take care of the gender activities by performing research and analysis activities, which also includes previous European 
results on gender impact on bio-based materials-related research and innovation (T8.4, T8.5). 
Consortium interrelation 
GREEN-LOOP partners have established pre-existing collaborations between each other (research or industrial), even 
in funded EU projects. This will certainly improve the cooperation within GREEN-LOOP proposal, which is requested 
to successfully perform the project. Thanks to the comprehensive consortium, GREEN-LOOP high performance bio-
based material solutions will be a matter of fact at the end of the project. Table 12 shows the main roles of each partner 
working to tackle the ambitious challenges of GREEN-LOOP.  
Table 12. Partner competencies within the GREEN-LOOP project 
Main 
activities  Partner and role in the project  Inter-disciplinary activities 
Coordination IDE will be the project coordinator  All partners will be involved in coordination 
activities. 
Technical 
coordinator 
FHF will be in charge to monitor and review all technical 
aspects regarding the activities from TRL4 to TRL6) 
AAU (social group) will provide the social 
science and humanities activities within the 
project, including social studies for each 
value chain, and gender neutrality of results 
and during the training. NSB is in charge of 
ensuring the IPR of the results and the 
communication activities related . They also 
will support the training activities.  AXIA is 
in charge of exploitation activities and will 
ensure the circular business plan 
development for bio -based products and 
materials and value chains . ISQ will lead 
characterisation activities and coordinate the 
training activities. Training will be supported 
by the GREEN-LOOP platform. AIMEN is 
responsible of the sustainability analysis and 
circularity studies. This includes the LCA, 
LCC, and SLCA where ZAG, GIG, and 
NCC will support activities. GIG will 
Bio-rubber 
value chain 
ZAG is the end-user and will provide the first parameters 
for optimisation, NIC will provide the lignin additives 
that produce the fire retardant effect. UBRIS will perform 
the chemical compounding and optimisation. NCC will 
work on the manufacture upgrades and the final rubber 
pads. IRIS will provide sensors and retrofit support by 
integrating ultrasound technologies . ZAG will perfo rm 
the fire test in a building structure. NCC will perform 
activities for ensuring the next use of bio-rubber pads  
Bio-plastic 
value chain 
TDZ is the end-user and will provide the first parameters 
for optimisation. MYX will provide the biomass, perform 
the chemical compounding and optimisation. LBRT will 
work on the manufacture upgrades and the final products. 
IRIS will provide sensors. IDE will support retrofit 
activities by integrating microwave technologies . TDZ 
will test the bottle closures in a real bottler system. MYX 
will ensure next use of bottle closures. 
Figure 24 GREEN-LOOP Consortium 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 45 of 45 
 
Wood 
composites 
value chain 
LBRT is the end -user and will provide the first 
parameters for optimisation, NCC and UBRIS will 
provide will perform the chemical compounding and 
optimisation. FHF will work in the manufacture 
upgrades, selection of biomass and the final products and 
tribological assessment. IRIS will provide sensors. IDE 
will support retrofit activities by integrating microwave 
LBRT, as end -user, will test the wood bearing in their 
manufacturing (part of the bottle closures from the bio -
plastic value chain will be manufactured  with these 
bearings). FHF will ensure the next use studies. 
ensure the circularity of all value chains, will 
be in charge of analysis the circularity  by 
design of all bio -based products 
(recyclability, reuse and refurbish).  AAU 
(engineering group)  will provide data 
management for all value chain, giving 
feedback to control systems and the 
platform. IRIS will collaborate with IDE to 
create the platform for analysing the value 
chains and optimisation of business, 
sustainability and training activities.  
Access to critical infrastructure 
Table 3.12: Critical infrastructure of the partners involved 
Partner Infrastructure 
IDE Software infrastructure for mathematical models simulation and multidisciplinary design optimisation 
Test-bench for embedded control hardware testing 
NCC Hot press ( tool area 0.5m x 0.5m , pressing force of 1000  kN), Granulator (size reduction 6-10mm), 
Materials and Test Laboratory  (thermal analysis and rheological testing, mechanical testing, as well as 
microscopy, SEM and X-ray CT scanning) 
NIC Continuous reactor system with thermo -gravimetry, Flow-through nuclear magnetic resonance analyser , 
Continuous reactor with mass spectrometry, porosity and adsorption isotherm analyser, High-temperature 
high-pressure equilibrium analysis system. Software VASP, Quantum ESPRESSO, Zacros, OpenFOAM, 
Aspen Plus and CERRES (in-house). 
UBRIS Composite materials processing (nano and large scale) facilities , labs for rubber beads decoration, hot 
press/thermoforming. State-of-the-art large scale facilities for the vibration of structures. 
FHF Extruder and hot axial presses for continuous part productio n, Non-destructive testing methods: 3D 
computed tomography, X-ray, ultrasonic, thermography, >50 tribological test devices on a model scale 
MYX Compounder machine able to continuously extrude highly homogeneous and finely structured products , 
Mill machine for grinding and preparing fibers, Necessary to obtain different size of the fibers, Equipment 
for Impact test, Tensile strenght test. 
LBRT Injection molding machines: 2 units of J50ADS model, 2 units of J100ADS model, 2 units of J180ADS 
model. Rapid prototyping 3D printing, Quality controls: volumetric, pop-up, leaking, and stress analysis.  
ZAG Cone calorimeter with CCAC, Fire resistance furnaces, Radiant panel for flooring testing, Equipment for 
measuring heat release rate, smoke amount and time to flashover for wall and ceiling linings. 
TDZ Bottle capping machine . Equipment for bottle screw capping, also applied to seal alumi num cap, the ft 
proof cap, screw-thread cap, ROPP cap etc. 
ISQ LABMAT-Materials Laboratory, with the capability to undertake mechanical/structural characterisation of 
a wide range of materials; as well as CNE Laboratory, which undertakes several physical/mechanical and 
chemical tests in packaging and packaging materials. 
Industrial/commercial involvement in the GREEN-LOOP to ensure exploitation 
Withing GREEN-LOOP, AXIA supported by bio-based manufacturers (UBRIS, NIC, NCC, FHF, MYX, LBRT) and 
end-users (ZAG, UBRIS, LBRT, TDZ) will define a strong circular economy business to be able to reach i ndustrial 
cooperation agreement s with bio -based materials companies in sectors such as construction, packaging, 
food&beverages and tool appliances. During this process, NSB will be in charge that the Key Exploitable Results will 
be protected either during or after the end of the project, while their exploitation will be pursued after the project ends. 
In this sense, all consortium working together will obtain direct commercialisation or licensing of the newly developed 
bio-based products and materials to a multinational company or to several companies on a territorial basis. 
This proposal version was submitted by Luis Enrique Acevedo Galicia on 23/09/2021 15:25:31 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)