1.1 Objectives and ambition  
1.1.1 Objective  
The main goal of GREEN -LOOP is to develop and demonstrate a comprehensive set of novels, cost-effective and 
sustainable (green) bio -based products, able to substitute traditional materials.  Three value chains will be 
implemented: i) Bio-rubber: Multifunctional rubber panels (with lignin additives from kraft process residues) with 
fire retardant and vibrational properties for civil engineering construction . ii) Bio-plastic: bottle closures  created 
from agro-industry residues for the packaging, food and beverage sectors. iii) Wood composites: Sliding bearings 
for appliance and tools sectors. These new bio-based products aim for better mechanical, physical and chemical 
properties compared with conventional materials. At the same time, ensuring a substantially lower environmental 
footprint, being non -toxic and demonstrating its recyclability/ reusability/refurbish-ability. Furthermore, GREEN-
LOOP will master, deploy, and secure autonomy in the strategic value chains developed within the project.  
The overall goal will be reached through the achievement of the following specific objectives (SO): 
Table 1. Objectives and target key performance indicators (KPIs) of the project 
Objective#1: To enhance green and smart features of manufacture 
SO1.1. Three final bio -based products will be 
manufactured 
Scope and Target KPIs 
Strong strategy to reach TRL6. A clear pathway from lab 
validation to demonstratio n. This include Bio rubber  
multifunctional panels, bioplastic bottle closures, and wood 
composites bearings tested with 3 end users. 
SO1.2. To increase the energy efficiency of the 
target production and manufacture processes. 
Electrification of industry based on novel technologies ( 2 new 
microwaves systems (curing and preheati ng) and 2 new 
ultrasounds systems (preheating and heating). 
SO1.3. Reduction of CO 2 emissions and 
resource utilisation. 
This project is aligned to decrease energy consumption by 2030 
and reducing CO2 emission by up to 80% by 2050. 
SO1.4. To adapt, retrofit and upgrade 4 
manufacture process (2x extrusion, injection 
moulding, hot press) 
Four different manufacturing process at 3 different locations 
will be prepared to upscale production. Retrofit will be based on 
AI algorithms and new chemical compounding requirements  
SO1.5. AI models for optimising bio -based 
manufacture.  
Modern Machine learning models will be sued to save time and 
money during eco -design. 3 datasets  will be created, plus 3 
optimization algorithms for bio-based materials. 
SO1.6. Decision Support Tools for the 
assessment of circular value 
The most crucial elements on manufacture such as efficiency, 
environmental, circularity and cost are uncovered to give 
recommendations on the optimal production process  will be 
included in GREEN-LOOP platform. 
Objective#2: To manufacture bio-based materials at relevant scales 
SO2.1. To achieve a complete demonstration 
program up to TRL6 involving different sector, 
processes, and technologies. 
Scope and Target KPIs 
Construction, food-beverage, packaging, and machining industry 
will be benefited . Three end users : juice/oil producer, 
fire/seismic testing and bio-plastic injection process  
SO2.2. Circularity by design A circular business will be implemented from the beginning to the 
end of the project. This is included as part of the GREEN-LOP 
platform, free accessible to all publics. 
SO2.3. To design products with better 
mechanical, physical and chemical properties. 
The products will be constantly tested at different stages of the 
project. A final demonstration camping of 10 months will be 
launched involving industrial partners 
SO2.4. New characterization and 
standardization activities. 
Conventional and custom tests will be defined for each product. 
Support the creation of innovative tests and method involving 
national and European legislations. 
SO2.5. Quality controls in the value chain. 
 
 
 
 
A set of procedures to ensure the product quality are defined. 
These activities involve the environment, management and 
employees strive for perfection. 
Objective#3: To boost the bio-based materials in new markets 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 4 of 45 
 
SO03.1. To efficiently communicate and 
disseminate the project highlights and results 
Scope and Target KPIs 
 
Initial Dissemination and Communication Plan  (DCP) 
delivered in the first stage of GREEN-LOOP (M6). 
SO03.2. To develop and deliver a Plan for the 
Exploitation and Dissemination of Results 
(PEDR), including a business plan 
PEDR drafted by M6, with a second revied version by M18 and  
delivered in M36 
SO03.3. To ensure the appropriate management 
of the I.P. 
Effective protection of the partners’ innovations detailed in 
deliverable D7.3 in M16 and M36. 
SO03.4. Demonstrate the potential of bio-based 
products in the EU by directly reaching 3 
industrial applications during the project and 
preparing the ground for new implementations. 
Demonstration campaigns allow to implementation of novel 
products at the industrial level. Development of a business case 
to enhance transferring results to different sectors T7.1 and 
T7.4. 
SO03.5. To involve training and social 
activities with project results and development.   
Interim plan for boosting society participation in different 
activities to improve the project results at social level. 3 webinar 
with social engagement for GREEN -LOOP platform, plus 3 
presential classes.  
European manufacturing is at the centre of a twin ecological and digital transition . The integration of the most 
disruptive technological techniques in Artificial Intelligence, the use of industrial data, the transformation into a 
circular economy and the need for flexibility and adaptation to change set the path of the  main objectives of Made in 
Europe Plan. All of this, combined with the increasing threat from Asian and American economies, suggests that more 
action is needed . Since green, flexible and 
advanced manufacture is vital for 
competitiveness which will only be  obtained 
using high throughput manufactur ing 
techniques, the GREEN-LOOP b io-based 
products will contribute to the specific 
objectives of the MADE IN EUROPE 
Roadmap 2021 -20276. In this context, 
GREEN-LOOP will demonstrate three use -
cases for transitions t owards green 
manufacturing technologies, incorporating 
adapted and novel manufacturing techniques to 
produce bio-based materials. Thus, GREEN-LOOP will contribute to the reduction of the footprint across the whole 
manufacturing and products lifecycle. To sum up, it is essential to remark that GREEN-LOOP will be setting advanced 
electric technologies (Microwaves and Ultrasounds) to support manufacturing activities. Also, intelligent and logistic 
technologies as A.I. self-learning algorithms would be developed. Furthermore, models and simulations will be carried 
out to fully understand the different chemical processes, material configurations and physical behaviour . Finally, to 
boost the Blue Economy, GREEN -LOOP will pay special attention to conserving the oceans, seas,  and marine 
resources for sustainable development. Due to the circularity by design concept implemented in the project, the litter 
will be prevented from finding its way into the sea in the first place. GREEN-LOOP Activities are aligned to the EU 
action plan on zero pollution, offering an opportunity to step up action on contaminants and litter (primarily made up 
of plastics)7. Which important since the removal of litter into the seas has been accepted as a risk to the environment 
and the undertaking of human activities as established on The EU Blue Economy report of 20218. 
Relation to the work programme 
Table 2. Relation to the topic HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05 
CL4-2021-TT-01-05     How GREEN-LOOP addresses the Expected outcome 
Relevant scale 
production of innovative 
bio-based products 
This project will allow to progressively increase the level of production of the innovative 
bio-based products, including mastering the process (TRL4), deployment of technologies 
(TRL5) and manufacture of novel bio -based products to secure the value chains  and 
 
6 MADE IN EUROPE. The manufacturing partnership in Horizon Europe 
(2021-2027). European Commission, EFFRA. 
7 A new approach for a sustainable blue economy in the EU Transforming 
the EU's Blue Economy for a Sustainable Future. European Commision, 
2021. 
8 The EU Blue Economy Report, European Commission, 2021. 
Figure 3 GREEN-LOOP project contribution to MADE IN EUROPE roadmap 2021-
2027 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 5 of 45 
 
product development operation (TRL6). Addressed in objective SO1.1, SO2.1  and 
WP1, WP3 to WP6. 
Products with similar 
properties, having a 
substantially lower 
environmental footprint 
and being sustainable, 
non-toxic and recyclable 
GREEN-LOOP delivers specific sustainable circular design and material composition 
guidelines for the three products developed to contribute to MADE IN EUROPE roadmap 
2021-2027 to create products for further recyclability, refurbish -ability and reusability. 
The innovative products designed in the project will provide better performance than 
conventional products (mechanical, physical and chemical), aiming to  maximise their 
lifetime under cost-effective and sustainable conditions. Addressed in objective SO.2.3, 
SO2.5 and WP2 to WP5. 
Demonstrate disruptive 
innovation of bio -based 
materials production in 
at least three different 
manufacturing value 
chains 
GREEN-LOOP addresses all these outcomes by introducing three novel bio -based 
products. This project aims at reducing the environmental impact by introducing modern 
manufacturing techniques combined with artificial intelligence, advanced monitoring and 
robust computational data analysis. Th is project's novel and highly improved 
manufacturing processes decrease energy and resources consumption and, therefore, CO2 
emissions in the industrial value chains. Addressed in objective SO.1.2, SO1.3, SO2.5 
and WP1, WP2 to WP5. 
Develop sustainable 
business models for 
materials sourcing and 
recycling.   
Environmental assessments will be performed following the E.U. commission’s 
recommendation on Environmental Product Footprint. In this sense, the lifecycle of bio-
based materials, including alternative end -of-life applications (recycle, refurbish or 
reuse), will be studied to develop sustainable business models and innovative value chain 
strategies, including avoidance of marine litter  and the  concept of Blue Economy. 
Addressed in objective SO.1.4, SO1.6, SO2.2 and WP2, WP7 and WP8. 
Scope of topic How GREEN-LOOP covers the scope 
Optimisation and 
improvement of smart 
manufacturing processes 
 The new bio-based products developed in the project will provide a better mechanical, 
physical, and chemical performance than conventional products. They will be based on 
smart manufacturing designs (advanced monitoring and artificial intelligence -A.I.-). 
Currently, material/products developments hardly depend on empirical proces ses or 
costly experimental procedures. However, GREEN -LOOP conquers the materials’ 
informatics field to support validation and demonstration processes, with flexible and 
robust computational data analysis and Multiphysics modelling. Addressed in objective 
SO.1.2, SO1.5, SO1.6 and WP1, WP2, WP3 to WP6.  
Use of carbon positive 
bio-based materials, such 
as composite, rubber, 
plastics, in different 
products to achieve high 
technical properties  
GREEN-LOOP overcomes the challenges of using biomass raw materials. Heterogeneity 
of biomass feedstock, circularity  by design, sustainab ility, smart manufacture, and the 
compatibility of different additives and materials matrices are some of the aspects entirely 
covered by this project and its team of engineering, physicist, chemist, and biologist. 
GREEN-LOOP addresses the production of three kinds of bio-based products across the 
entire Value Chain: Bio-rubber, bioplastic and Wood composite 
Addressed in objective SO.1.1, SO1.2, SO2.1 SO2.2 and WP2, WP3 to WP5. 
Combine the use of 
different bio -based 
materials to facilitate 
refurbishing of products 
to achieve circularity  
GREEN-LOOP will promote disruptive circular  value chains based on Bio -rubber, 
bioplastic and wood composites to include sustainable End Of Life scenarios of all 
products and the chemical compounding. GREEN-LOOP will incorporate the reuse of 
scraps, recycled raw materials and mechanical methods to boost circularity of the project.  
Addressed in objective SO.1.3, SO2.1 SO2.2 and WP2, WP3 to WP6. 
Adapt existing or new 
characterisation methods 
and quality controls for 
the bio-based materials 
Characterisation and quality control activities will be carried out during the whole life of 
GREEN-LOOP. At the beginning of the project, the lab validation (TRL4) of the products 
will count with a series of tests regarding the main properties of the materials, ensuring 
the growth of the manufacturing technologies. Once the production reaches appropriate 
environment levels, tests will be focused on validating the products to use them in a 
demonstration campaign. Characterisation activities along the whole project allow 
keeping high quality and homogeneity of the developed materials/products. Addressed 
in objective SO.2.4, SO2.5 and WP3 to WP8. 
Support the creation of a GREEN-LOOP will focus on the professional sector such as workers, owners, 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 6 of 45 
 
skilled workforce, 
through 
training/qualification of 
personnel 
manufacturing companies, and potential investors. Training will be dedicated to practical 
methodologies to demonstrate the effectiveness of the smart manufacture in bio -based 
production considering different locations in Europe. It is expected that 200 professionals 
will be benefited from this program, and more than half will be able  to perform a 
manufacturing, environmental & sustainability evaluation on their facilities. The training 
program will count on both formats, online (Webinars for GREEN-LOOP platform) and 
physical, increasing the program’s impact and reaching  different locations. Addressed 
in objective SO3.1, SO3.3, SO3.5, and WP7 and WP8. 
Demonstrations and use 
cases towards green 
manufacturing 
technologies with 
reduction in the 
environmental footprint 
across the lifecycle. 
The three innovative bio-based products introduced by GREEN-LOOP aim to reduce the 
environmental impact by adapting current systems and tools and  introducing novel 
electric (Microwaves and ultrasounds) manufacturing techniques, combining intelligent 
modelling and experimental processes with robust computational data analysis. GREEN-
LOOP manufacture lines will include comprehensive LCA, LCC and SLCA, ensuring 
circularity by design and optimising product manufacture. Addressed in objective 
SO.1.2, SO1.4, SO1.5, SO1.6, SO2.2, SO3.4 and WP2 to WP6. 
Address standardisation 
activities of bio -based 
materials and adapted 
characterisation methods 
and quality controls 
Standardisation guidelines, industrial recommendations and quality controls reports will 
be prepared and disseminated to relevant stakeholders to expand the reach of bio -based 
materials in markets.  GREEN-LOOP will address the barriers of upscaling high-quality 
production and commercialisation gaps, also known as the “valley of death”, by making 
the proper connection among manufacture, market readiness, characterisation, quality 
controls (included as part of smart manufacture), and standardisation activities . 
Addressed in objective SO.2.4, SO2.5, SO3.4 and WP2 to WP6. 
1.1.2 Ambition 
Advance beyond the state of the art 
The ambition of GREEN -LOOP is to enhance and support the bioeconomy at the European level through robust 
product design adapted to new sustainable and circular schemes, reducing the cost of manufacture  and accelerating 
the market introduction of novel bio-based products.  
 
1) Enhanced and new bio-based products for different industrial sectors 
GREEN-LOOP will cover the whole value chain: biomass s ourcing, conversion and pre -treatment, disruptive and 
enhanced bio-based production at industrialization system up to TRL6, end-user testing and finally, next use activities 
(recycle, refurbish and reuse) . Bio-Rubber (Development of multifunctional fire-retardant and vibrational 
pads): Efficiency of thermoset and thermoplastics composites with natural fibres in terms of energy absorption and 
vibration damping have been confirmed TRL49, as well as the h ot-pressing techniques developed at UBRIS for PP 
and elastomeric 10. Lignin as a fire-retardant additive will enhance rubber thermal properties 11. About 50 million 
tonnes/year of industrial lignin are produced as a by-product in the pulp and paper industry. Only less than 5 % are 
further commercially used as surfactants, binders, additives,  or dispersants.11,12. Lignin obtention can be improved 
considerably (about 40%) using ultrasound pre -treatment13,14. By implement ing the proper ON-OFF timing of 
ultrasonic system, the delignification of biomass  is increased. Thus, the remaining fibrous material is potentially 
superior than conventional processes. Incorporating lignin and sandwiching techniques with eco EDPM materials is 
compatible with existing techniques and ensures that GREEN -LOOP will bring a product to TRL 6 15. To increase 
the innovation of rubber production, ultrasounds enhancement will be used during the manufacture. U BRIS has 
already tested this kind of technology for enhancing production. This technology is ideal because it has been 
demonstrated in the last year that sonification increases mechanical properties by 15%16, improve the material layers 
addition17, increase concentration, agglomeration, and additives dispersion within the matrix materials18. Besides, it 
is ideal for recycling rubber components keeping the mechanical properties of original materials19. 
 
9 Munde, Yashwant S, et. al. Sage Journals,38(17), 2019. 
10 Yousef Dobah, et. al.Composites Part B: Engineering, 184, 2020. 
11 H. Yang, et al. Green Chem, 2129 (22), 2020. 
12 S. Laurichesse, et al. Prog. Polym. Sci., 1266(39), 2014. 
13 Preeti B. Subhedar, et al. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 21(1), 2014. 
14 Kunaver M, et al. Bioresource Technology, 103(1). 2012. 
15 Nazli Gulsine Ozdemir, et al. Smart Materials and Structures,  24(12), 
2015. 
16 Hui Dong, et al. Polymers, 13(2), 2021. 
17 Dan Dobrota, et al. Materials, 11(2), 2018. 
18 Gilbert Bouquet, et al. Applied polymer, 112(3), 2009.  
19 Sayata Ghose, et al. Applied polymer, 88(4), 2003. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 7 of 45 
 
Wood composites (Sliding bearings for appliance and tool s): Slide bearings are used in a wide variety of 
applications. These bearings often consist of polymers (PA, PEEK, PES; POM etc), produced by fossil resources, or 
metals (containing Zn, Cu, Sn, Pb, Sb, As, etc .)20. Substitution of these bearings would considerably reduce these 
resources' consumption and avoid environmentally hazardous chemicals and metals21. In this sense, wood has proved 
to be a biodegradable nature, non -corrosive, with high load -bearing capacity.  Investigations at TRL 4 has 
demonstrated that wood composites can present a favourable coefficient of friction compared to th e conventional 
ones22. To increment the innovation of the manufacturing process, a microwave curing system will be adapted. 
Microwave curing can significantly reduce cure time (15%), increase energy efficiency 23 and improve temperature 
control than conventional heating24 , thanks to the better adhesion created between the fibre-matrix interface. At the 
same time, due to the reduction in residual thermal stress, the mechanical properties are increased by 20%25. 
Bio-plastic (bottle closures for packaging, food and beverage sectors): since we still dependent on fossil fuels, 
we are towards an environmental crisis, where about the 80% of plastics accumulates in landfills, natural environment 
and oceans26. For this reason, biodegradable and bio-based plastics seams to be an attractive alternative. This kind of 
plastics contributes to the bioeconomy and can be designed to be totally biodegradable in months by integrated them 
into mid and long terms infrastructures.27 On the other hand, one-third of food produced is lost or wasted in the agro-
industry sector, corresponding to 1.3 billion tons of food per year 28. One possible solution is food valorisation to 
produce biomaterials. When making bioplastic from the modification of natural organisms, pre-treatments procedures 
must be applied, including mechanical, thermal, chemical and biological conversion 29. In this sense , drying and 
milling techniques has been utilized to improve the mechanical properties of bio-based materials30, and techniques 
such as injection moulding has been used to finalize the products31. The later technique has been enhanced with the 
inclusion of microwave systems, which has demonstrated to extend the interfacial bounds  and mould filling and its 
applications in moulding for packaging and lightweight composites32.  
Ambition: New bio-based products from TRL4 to TRL6 
Bio-rubber: The fire -retardant properties will come from Kraft -lining additive s with the eventual chemical 
modification with Ultrasound improvements (grafting functionalities/compounds with excellent flame retardancy). 
The final product will be obtained through hot pressing (ultrasound enhanced) of eco-EDPM (ethylene propylene 
diene monomer rubber) pellets from recycled thermoplastics components and lignin as micro reinforcement for 
damping slip-stick effects. This product will improve thermal stability, char-forming capability, stiffness, fracture 
toughness, and vibration damping. Wood composites: Bio-based (wood) materials will be defined and optimised 
to fulfil the bearing configurations. Tribological data on friction levels and load capacity (pv -values) will ensure 
the proper TRL4-5. The manufacture will be performed by screw extrusion with microwave curing enhancement, 
ensuring the wood fibres' appropriate treatment  at homogeneous and low temperatures. The upscaling of the 
process will be made using dummy prototypes in a series of test rings. Bio-plastic: The bottle closures will be 
prepared from vegetal residues and agro -industrial supply chains . Advanced techniques based on Non -thermal 
plasma and extrusion will be used to produce the pellets. Finally, sustainable injection moulding with microwave 
enhancement will be applied to get the final products. 
2) Circularity by design 
In recent years, the European Union has implemented novel pol icies and legislations in a bast range of areas to 
facilitate circular economy development 33. These policies have been presented as Circular Econom ic Action Plan 
(adopted in March 2020). A series of actions regarding bringing resources back into the economy through the entire 
life cycle of products, repairing, reusing, and recycling  are presented. Besides, the nature of consumption and 
secondary materials and product legislation are included as social issues to be solved. In this sense, the transition to 
the circular economy model involves i) minimise the generation of unsafe, non -useful and low -value wastes, ii) 
 
20 Yongjun Dong, et al. The Open Materials Science Journal. 9(1), 2015. 
21 Navin Chand, et el. Woodhead Publishing Series in Composites Science 
and Engineering, 2021. 
22 Olga Mysiukiewicz, et al. Archives of Mechanical Technology and 
Materials 37(1), 2017. 
23 Chinedum, et al. Composites Part A: Applied Science and 
Manufacturing, 115, 2018. 
24 Yusoff, et el. Journal of Engineering Science and Technology 2(2), 2007.  
25 Kwak, etl al.18th international conference on composite materials, 2015 
26 C.A. Hall, et al. EROI of different fuels and the implications for society 
Energy Policy, 64, 2014 
27 M. Rutkowska, et al. Int. J. Environ. Stud., 1, 2002. 
28 FAO The State of Food and Agriculture 2019. Moving Forward on Food 
Loss and Waste Reduction (2019) Rome. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 
29 P. Morone, et al. J. Clean. Prod., 221, 2019. 
30 DanilaMerino, et al. Food Packaging and Shelf Life, 29, 2021. 
31 M. Félix, et al. Industrial Crops and ProductsJanuary, 79, 2016. 
32 JiangZhou. Carbohydrate Polymers, 69(3), 2007. 
33 A. Farmer. Developing the circular Econom y in the European Union. 
Springer Nature, 2020. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 8 of 45 
 
maintaining the value of resources and derived products in the economy for long as possible. These actions accelerate 
the implementation of related new strategies and processes based on bio-economy, which are essential to accomplish 
the objectives sought from the circular economy34,35. 
Ambition: Circularity by design from TRL4 to TRL9 
GREEN-LOOP will focus on a production and consumption model which involves reusing, repairing, refurbishing 
and recycling the manufactured bio-based products. In this way, the project will keep materials within the circular 
economy wherever possible; waste will itself become a resource, conseq uently minimising the actual amount of 
waste. Furthermore, GREEN-LOOP will explore and apply opportunities for a second use of the products through 
cleaner production audit to seek win-win solutions through technological route change, bio-raw material use, and 
process optimization for each value chain. These topics will be a target in the business model innovation activities, 
social engagement and training activities.  
3) Green and smart manufacture 
Nowadays, there is an ongoing search for green ways to reduce industry environmental impacts ; efforts are 
centered on efficient resources consumption, energy efficiency and waste management36,37. This new manufacturing 
scheme is paramount in making key ena bling technologies and develop ing new products more affordable, 
competitive, and accessible and fostering economic and social impacts38. Advances in this direction have shown the 
importance of identifying environmental depreciation global warming. The proper corrective actions involve 
multidisciplinary teams able to act over the entire value chain:  Product design, selection of raw  materials, 
manufacturing process, product delivery and reuse, refurbish or recycling options for products39. 
GREEN-LOOP will  act as the catalyst for sustainability and automation by coupling advanced manufacturing 
technologies. In addition, this project will boost the transition of manufacturing practices to the circular economy. 
Ambition: Green and smart manufacture from TRL5 to TRL7 
GREEN-LOOP will cover both societal and technical developments to construct a rich green and smart manufacture. 
i) The project will tackle policies and regulations at the European level, review economic incentives, and perform a 
detailed analysis of the competitive advantages of implementing bio-based products. ii) GREEN-LOOP will ensure the 
smart features of all man ufacturing systems involved. Smart connectivity will be included to perform data collection 
from machines and devices through controllers and sensors; then, those datasets will be converted into meaningful 
information. The monitoring and controls systems to be included in GREEN-LOOP, will lead to consistent products with 
low variability, higher repeatability with the highest quality standards. A  module with self -configuration based on 
previous experiences will be included to maintain manufacture as enhanced as possible.  
4) Value Chain Platform 
Manufacturing industries are a fundamental part of the European economy; however, in the last decade, the EU’s 
global share in manufactur ing value declined by 20%, attributed to shifts in global demand and loss of  
competitiveness40. To recover the lead status, it is necessary to change the value chain from linear to innovative 
circular chains. In this sense, the disruptive innovation of GREEN-LOOP will be to create new cycles of connectivity 
called circular value chains. As stated by the European Commission41, these value chains are product and technology-
driven, which can start a sustainable business to satisfy customers’ demand (goods and services).  
Therefore, the concern of Europe to support innovation of markets, industry, entrep reneurship and SMEs, 
demonstrates the current need to transform the whole value chains into a valuable and sustainable product for the 
market. When a value chain is appropriately planned, the value of the products is increased, and production cost 
decreased. 
 
34 M. Sillanpää, et. al., The circular economy. Elservier, 2019 
35 EU Commission. Closing the loop -An EU action plan for the circular 
economy. 2015. 
36 Green manufacture. A. Dornfeld, Springer, 2013. 
37 Advances in industrial Automation and smart manufacture, A. 
Arockiarajan, Springer, 2019. 
38 Smart sustainable manufacturing systems. D. Kiritsis, et. al. MDPI, 
2019. 
39 Green Manufacturing processes and systems, P. Davim, Springer, 2013. 
40 JRC, EU losing share in global manufacturing value chains. Eurropena 
Commission, 2018. 
41 European Innovation Council. Policy, strategy, how to apply and work 
programmes. 2021 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 9 of 45 
 
 
Ambition: GREEN-LOOP platform for Circular products TRL4 to TRL8 
GREEN LOOP value chains will be evaluated and optimised within a multidisciplinary platform that facilitates 
the analysis of business opportunities from raw materials sourcing to next-use (recycle, reuse, refurbish), enhances 
activities to create new bio -based products, and assesses environmental and social issues.  These results provide 
information of the social engagement that can be reached, show the business optimisation for each bio -based 
product, and the circularity aspects such as level of recyclability, refurbish or reuse of the products. The platform 
will also be part of the training activities; it will contain detailed tutorials, webinars, and examples to boost training 
activities. Finally, this platform will also serve as a facilitator to ensure sound and effective data sharing for open 
repositories. 
5) Skilled workforce building plan 
The inclusion of innovative manufacture of bio-based products (including new technologies such as microwaves and 
ultrasounds) can bring an important bottleneck regarding qualified and expert workforce in bioeconomy area. It has 
been stated in the report for industry skills prepared by the European commission42 that even though technology is at 
high TRL levels , if there is not a significant quantity of expertise in the industries, its implementation would be 
considerably postponed.  This urges an ambitious strategy on enhancing silks.  
Ambition: Training program from TRL4 to TRL9 
GREEN-LOOP will provide a strategy that ensures that society ha s access to job -career opportunities and that 
bioeconomy businesses have access to the talents they need. The training program will be focused on the following 
modules: Advanced manufacture techniques, advances on bio-based materials and products , lessons learnt and 
value chain assessment of new projects via the GREEN-LOOP platform, optimised management and monitoring 
systems (Smart manufacture), business plans and international policies and regulations. The training program will 
be the link to all project stages and task s. In this way, the training program will address the short and long term 
activities related to marketing and business needed to deploy novel bio-based products.  
 
6) Innovative characterisation, standardization, and quality controls 
Nowadays, bio -based products are more competitive than traditional products in terms of their technical 
characteristics. Nevertheless, this is not an easy task to satisfy environmental, techn ological and circularity, all at 
once. The use of multicriteria optimization and advanced decision support tools aims to design bio-based materials 
of the future43. The complete characterization of the properties of bio -based materials and products as well as strict 
quality and standards, are an essential step for their common and widespread use.  
Ambition: Topic from TRL6 to TRL9 
In GREN-LOOP, a series of characterization procedures will be utilized  in all manufactur ing routes along the 
whole project to aid the development of products and its upscaling from TRL4 to TRL6. The characterization will 
allow the validation of functional properties such as mechanical, physical, and chemical. This will promote 
engagement of end-users, developers, and new bio-based markets instauration. End-users distinguish standardized 
 
42 Skills for smart industrial specialization and Digital transformation. 
European Commission, October 2019. 
43 E. Pellicer, et al. Advances in applications of industrial biomaterials, 
Springer, 2017. 
Figure 4 GREEN-LOOP platform modules 
       
       
          
           
            
        
           
              
              
   
   
     
            
         
           
                               
                                         
         
        
              
      
      
        
             
           
   
             
      
           
        
      
             
            
    
          
              
        
              
       
         
          
              
            
     
            
         
         
           

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 10 of 45 
 
products as more trustworthy; GREEN-LOOP will apply the latest standards (such as Bio-content - ASTM D6866) 
and regulations to ensure safety, reliability, and environmental protection. The project will also promote new 
standards for the bio-based products towards the industry and market needs. 
1.1.3 Positioning of the project 
Innovation potential  
The techniques required to deliver GREEN-LOOP’s vision include the retrofit of conventional manufacture systems 
to adapt new bio-based production, electrification of manufacturing systems (microwaves and ultrasound), advanced 
control with monitoring, artificial intelligence, and sustainable designs of final products. In addition to that, GREEN-
LOOP envisions a series of key technologies whose TRL will be increased. 
Patent search 
The consortium has performed a patent survey in 
WIPO Pate nt Scope 44 further to  support the 
innovation potential of the GREEN-LOOP project. 
The search was divided in to three different word 
chains i) “Bio-based material AND (Rubber OR 
lignin) AND (Ultrasound enhancement)” , ii) 
“Bio-based material AND (bioplastics) AND 
(Microwave enhancement)”, and iii) “Bio-based 
material AND (wood composites) AND 
(Microwave enhancement)” . These searches 
gave an output of 1035 patents published between 
1985 and 2020 . To thoroughly explore the 
technology developments that underpin bio-based 
materials focusing on rubber/lining compounds, 
bio-plastics and wood composites , a Patent 
network using the International Patent 
Classification (IPC) ontological codes were 
constructed with obtained patent data. An example 
of the Pate nt network is shown in Figure 6-A. 
Thus, standard IPC technology codes shared by 
different patents can be used to connect them. Th ese IPC codes  serve mainly to study the co -occurrence of 
technologies in a set of patents and  how related a set of patents are based on their relative distance in a n extensive 
patent network45. The base of this paten t search is the organic chemistry with IPC C08 and the corresponding to 
 
44 https://patentscope.wipo.int/ 45 Leydesdorff et al. Scientometrics 112,1573–1591(2017)   
Figure 5 GREEN-LOOP Innovation Potential 
Figure 6 Patent network (A), Euler diagram for rubber and lignin (B), 
Euler diagram for Wood composites and bioplastics (C) 
  
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 11 of 45 
 
macromolecular compounds C08L. For GREEN -LOOP purposes , the C08L IPC has been decomposed in the 
following sub-categories: Lignin containing materials (C08L 97/00), compositions of natural rubber (C08L 7/00), 
Compositions of unspecified rubber, including the combination of lignin and rubber materials (C08L 21/00), natural 
macromolecular compounds , including bio-plastics (C08L 99/00 ), Lignocellulosic material , including wood 
composites (C08L-97/02). Regarding the enhancement technologies, electric heating, including microwaves (H05B), 
and mechanical enhancement, including ultrasounds (B06B), has also been considered. Figure 6-B shows that 25% 
of the bio-based related patents contain lignin. On the contrary, bio-rubber by itself has low percentage of patents as 
an organic compound. However, the combination of lignin and rubber has been explored, covering the 3% of organic 
compounds. In this sector, the inclusion of ultrasound has been used to enhance the 1% of products. On the other 
hand, Figure 6-C demonstrates that 55% of the patents are bas ed on wood composites and part of those have been 
combined with microwave technologies (1.2%). Bio-plastic compounds have also been patented and represent 6.5% 
of the total macro compounds, and the use of microwaves with these materials represents 7%.