2.3 Impact Summary 
KEY ELEMENT OF THE IMPACT SECTION 
SPECIFIC NEEDS 
•A sustainable production of bio -based 
materials that converts the classical 
lineal approach to circular one. 
•Adequate evaluation of entire value 
chain to ensure environmentally friendly 
production from materials sourcing, to 
End Of Life (recycle, reuse, refurbish). 
•Materials created with bio and 
sustainable sources that possess better 
properties than conventional ones. 
•Upgrade manufacture lines (retrofit and 
new disruptive equipment) to boost the 
bio-based materials at European level. 
•Circular business implementation to 
reduce environmental impacts, ensuring 
a sustainable economy, and including 
the reduction of waste in land and 
oceans. 
EXPECTED RESULTS 
•Demonstrate the feasibility of 
manufacture retrofit to overcome 
innovative bio-based production. 
•Demonstrate disruptive innovation of 
bio-based products : bio -rubber, 
bioplastic, wood composites. 
•Boost efficiency  and productivity of 
bio-based product by the introduction of 
ultrasound and microwaves systems. 
•Facilitate the commercialisation of the 
products in the future by carrying out a 
circular and sustainability business 
assessment of value chains.   
•To create 10 -15 new employees, from 
which 5 of them will be PhD  (during 
project).  
 
DISS. & EXPLOITATION & COMMUNICATION 
MEASURES 
Exploitation of the new product:  
•Patenting new manufacture technologies (new tools, microwaves and 
ultrasound systems) 
•Launching a new product lines 
•Proposing further research around properties enhancement for different 
applications 
•Proposing new standard s to produce bio-based materials (bio content, 
GHG emissions, energy sources) 
 
Dissemination towards the scientific community and industry: 
•Publications in open access journals and online repositories. 
•Participation in conferences to disseminate the project outcomes 
•GREEN-LOOP platform with social engagement and webinar sessions.  
•Wide dissemination of all public reports and publications, including on 
the horizon results platform, the innovation radar, and other EC 
publications.  
•Final event held jointly with another EU project to disseminate key 
outcomes to stakeholders.  
 
Communication measures: 
Awareness campaign to demonstrate the benefits o f using bio -based 
materials against conventional ones, and circular approaches that  can 
help the EU reach climate neutrality by 2050. 
TARGET GROUPS 
•Material producing industries, industry sectors  such as construction, 
transportation, food and beverage, appliances and tools, agro -industry, 
building and material logistic. 
•SMEs interested in adopting new technologies/knowledge. 
•General public, citizens, individuals interested in circular economy 
concepts and circular value chains. 
•Scientific community, universities, research centers, private sector 
•Policymakers, regulatory bodies, standardisation authorities, 
environmental consultancies 
•Stakeholders from different value chains  
 
 
OUTCOMES 
•High use of the scientific discovery published 
in Open Science  
•Better understanding by society of the role bio-
based materials manufacturing can play in 
reaching climate neutrality by 2050. 
•After 5 years from the beginning of the project 
starting the commercialisation, being able to 
achieve the market share of 2% of bio-based 
materials in the long-term. 
•Exploitation of the final products in a circular 
business approach (LBRT, MYX, FHF, NCC, 
NIC, UBRIS) 
IMPACT 
•Social: i) Reduction of the ethical concerns 
related to the use of biomaterials fabricated 
from artificial substances including metals, 
polymers, and ceramics . ii) new rules and 
regulations for manufacturing process es. iii) 
more than 415 jobs created in long term. 
•Environmental: i) Increase the usability of 
materials and products after is useful life, by 
including approaches for reuse, recycle and 
refurbish ii) Promoting circular value chains to 
enhance the sources of raw materials and 
closing loops. iii) Retrofit and enhancement 
equipment will lead to a reduction of 20-30% in 
CO2 emissions. 
•Scientific: i) Increase the development of bio-
based materials; ii) Creating new knowledge in 
manufacturing tools and equipment ; ii) 
Generating know-how through exploitation and 
dissemination plan  
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-05    Manufacturing technologies for bio-based materials 
   Sustainable manufacture systems towards novel bio-based materials  Page 29 of 45 
 
3. Quality and efficiency of the implementation