3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole The consortium reflects a balanced choice of relevant stakeholders in the EU water scene, facilitating the multiactor engagement process. The H2OforAll consortium involves 18 participants from 10 different countries (Portugal, Spain, Poland, Israel, United Kingdom, Germany, Sweden, Cyprus, Netherlands and Belgium) including 11 Universities/Research Institutes (UC, UULM, ULeicester, CYENS, UHaifa, Ugdansk, KTH, UNIVLEEDS, Utwente, IVL, WETSUS) and 7 Companies from 4 European countries (DHVMED, IRIS Technology Solutions, SPI, Adventech, Water Europe, AtlantiumTLTD, AC). The research team is composed by 43% female and 57% male investigators. Several synergies are expected to result from different interactions that will be established between the involved beneficiary and associated partners due to their different and complementary backgrounds, as shown in Figure 3.3. UC is the main proponent of this project and it will be responsible for its coordination and management, in close collaboration with all the participants (WP1). Also, UC has a strong background in water treatment technologies development as well as water characterization. SPI will work in close collaboration with Researchers from the WE and UNIVLEEDS on the dissemination and communication of the main achievements that will result from each WP and getting people (from academy, industry and the general public) involved in drinking water management issues and pollutants mitigation solutions. SPI has previously demonstrated experience in designing and developing materials appropriate and effective for communicating results and outcomes of EC projects to the widest range of relevant stakeholders (participated as a coordinator or partner in over 25 FP7/CIP and 45 H2020 projects). UNIVLEEDS, involving social sciences scientists, has large experience in participatory crowd-sensing approaches for increasing citizens’ awareness and engaging with policy-making stakeholders (e.g. development of collective decision-making platforms such as Smart-Agora, EPOS, etc.). UULM will bring knowledge in technologies for sensing persistent molecular pollutants in aquatic systems. IRIS is an advanced engineering company, certified under ISO 9001:2008 and UNE-EN-ISO 166002, specialized in process monitoring, control and optimization. UT has a strong expertise in the development of sensing infrastructures for the monitoring of water quality. Wetsus will bring the know-how on the cost-effective and high-resolution methods for detecting the selected molecules and the materials they interact with. CYENS develops algorithms and methods to model water distribution networks to detect vulnerabilities to water contamination threats for selecting the most relevant monitoring. Besides this will allow to shade light regarding DBPs formation pathways, fate along the distribution network as well as their interaction with pipes and naturally occurring materials. DHV brings the know-how regarding drinking water prevention strategies and regulation. ULeic has a strong expertise on toxicity assessment through MCDM and will help prioritizing the most dangerous DBPs as well as to evaluate the novel water treatment/disinfection technologies proposed. The company Atlantium has strong expertise in UV disinfection technologies that will complement/substitute the current approaches. UHaifa will explore the simultaneous adsorption and oxidation process for pollutants abatement from source water and DBPs removal from drinking water. KTH will apply their know-how in magnetic bio-activated carbons from biomass waste to remove contaminants from water while easily recovering the adsorbent. UGdansk has large experience in photocatalytic water treatments and photo-materials preparation will be used to degrade contaminants from water and drinking water. Since this project aims the employment of green and sustainable 
Figure 3.3. Participants involved in H2OforAll 
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 37 
technologies/solutions/materials within a circular economy concept, specialists from Adventech will help to identify synergies between all the materials/processes developed and optimized and select the most suitable ones for scale-up and to build a fully automated transportable lab-pilot scale unit that will be tested under semi-industrial conditions. IVL will assess and compare the LCA and LCC of the novel integrated water treatment and disinfection technologies compared with the conventional approaches to reach the most cost-effective and sustainable methodology. Water Europe is the recognized voice and promotor of water related RTD and innovation in Europe. With over 250 members across Europe on board, WE is recognised by the European Commission as the industry-led European Technology Platform (ETP) for Water. Leveraging from its extensive network and experience in projects, WE will play an important role into the dissemination and policy work packages aiming to maximize the impact of the project activities and results. The utility municipal company Águas de Coimbra (AC) manages the water distribution network of Coimbra city and will provide water samples, process water quality data, perform hydraulic and quality modelling through the network, support the field demonstration of the developed sensing infrastructure and promote citizens awareness and engagement on water quality. The consortium has a high international background (involving countries all around Europe and researchers with high degree of internationalisation) with a multidisciplinary (Chemical, Electro, Civil and Environmental Engineers, Chemistry, Biology, Biochemistry, Sociologists) team with the required skills and infrastructures (as described in Part A of the proposal) for fully develop the workplan proposed. It is worthy to notice that some of the participants’ have already been involved in join projects creating bonds of trust and the willingness to work together again and establish new opportunities to advance in science and contribute to an effective transition. An effective share of the critical infrastructures and samples will occur by researchers’ interchange among the partners in a cross-fertilizing environment. The participants cover the value chain from the product/technology development, through the relation with citizens, stakeholders and policy-makers all the way to the potential commercialization (bearing in mind the end-users and companies involved in the consortium). All the members of the Consortium were already involved in international and national/regional projects (see selected projects at Part A) involving open science dissemination and have demonstrated expertise and competence in those practices.  An Advisory Board (AB) is constituted for this project, we have already the support of Águas do Centro Litoral that manages the municipal wastewater treatment plants and drinking water production in the Centre Region of Portugal. This company will make part of the AB and will provide water samples for testing the water treatment and disinfection processes that will be developed in H2OforAll. The institute Waterschap Vechtstromen and the Netherlands Institute of Ecology also agreed to make part of our advisory board. Water Europe members will be contacted also to be part of the AB. This board will join the consortium in three of the meetings – M6, M18 and M30, in order to provide feedback about the project achievements and suggest improvements that can increase the impact of the project results. Milestone 1.1 defines month 3 to have the AB constituted with at least 5 institutions. However, the consortium is committed to enlarge the AB with organizations that may bring added-value to the meetings discussions. In these meetings, representatives of other projects in correlated areas can be also invited.   H2OforAll has all the required critical mass, infrastructures, and know-how to fully develop the workplan giving a strong contribution to enhance competitiveness of the EU water sector and fostering the EU’s position and role in the global water scene while promoting water protection.                   
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 38