2.2 Measures to maximise impact - Dissemination, exploitation and communication 2.2.1 Dissemination and Communication Plan   The Dissemination and Communication Plan, will be developed under WP7, a cross-cutting WP that will bridge all the project WPs and foster aligned engagement and long-term impact of the project activities and results.  Objectives of the Dissemination and Communication Plan   The D&C Plan will include the overall strategy, objectives and expected outcomes, target audiences, outputs for dissemination, dissemination materials, tools, and channels, as well as KPIs. The D&C Plan will disseminate those key messages, including the progress of the project activities and materials (such as publications, educational resources and one educational kit) while engaging the main target groups (such as civil society, academia, research organisations, utilities organisations, industry and regulators). The D&C Plan will cover the entire duration of the project and will result in online and in person activities which will attract the defined target audiences, raise awareness on DPBs in drinking water and engage stakeholders in various project activities that will be led through a co-creation lens whenever possible. The dissemination strategy will make use of the EC projects’ communication best practices and follow the 5W+1H approach to disseminate and communicate: Why: to promote and disseminate the objectives and progress of the project activities. What: key messages and information about DPBs in drinking water, guidelines and knowledge for managing drinking water quality, project’s goals, outcomes, publications, and community engagement activities. To Whom: to the main target groups of stakeholders: civil society, academia, research organisations, utility organisations, industry and regulators. Where: through the networks of project partners, the target stakeholders, as well as the project website, newsletters, social media, events, and promotional materials. When: starting from the launch of the project and adapted to the timeline of the project; How: a tailored approach to the specific needs of the target groups, mostly through online and in-print.  Target Groups   The D&C Plan indicates the activities that will be undertaken by the partners throughout the project lifetime, outlining the target groups, guidelines and communication channels to be used in order to ensure the effective implementation of the strategy. H2OforAll envisions active stakeholder engagement for wider knowledge dissemination amongst the public and those involved in ensuring water safety (Table 2.2).   Table 2.2 Stakeholders engagement for targeted knowledge dissemination Target group  Definition  Goal  Scientific and technology community   Higher education institutions, research labs and centres, science journalists, and research networks connected to water issues  To disseminate the project scientific and research outputs, conclusions amongst the R&D community, and develop scientific and research results and analysis, enabling the scientific community to leverage the activities and results developed  Water utilities organisations and industry   
Water utility companies, water treatment companies, water supplier companies, water operators, other large industry and SMEs that are part of water treatment value chain  
To broaden dissemination and exploitation opportunities and assessing the potential of the solutions and technologies from the project, contributing to the development of new R&I outputs and products to the market  Policy makers, regulators, National & European policy makers (municipalities, inter-governmental bodies, EU agencies, etc.) related to water safety policies and regulation To disseminate transformative prevention and mitigation approaches to DPBs in drinking water at the legislative level, and showcase water treatment solutions for policy intervention  
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 24 
governmental entities  
Civil society  Community groups, NGOs, professional associations, foundations and citizens   To promote horizontal knowledge dissemination, engage civil society and promote information through the wider public  Media  Mass media, online news outlets  To make information widely accessible and easy to reach by citizens  Communication channels and tools   To reach the desired target groups, the following communication activities (Table 2.3) will be included in the dissemination plan. The communication activities will be developed in WP7 with the collaboration of all partners.  Table 2.3 Communication channels and activities  Channels and tools  Description  Target Groups  Month  Project website  A website dedicated to the project will be launched and updated with news, publications and educational materials throughout the duration of the project  Research organisations; Civil society  M3  In-hand and digital dissemination tools  
Project brochures, flyers, infographics, a roll-up, and one educational hands-on kit consisting of materials related to the project research to promote the project online and in-person events. The materials will be developed in a digital format and printed if needed.  
Research organisations; Water utilities, industry; Policy makers, regulators, governmental entities; Civil Society  
M6, M32  Social media  Accounts on LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram  M2  E-Newsletter  Every 3 months, an e-newsletter providing extensive information on the progress of the project will be managed through Mailblast, and a downloadable PDF version will be available on the project website  M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36  Press releases  Press releases will be issued for specific project activities as well as at the end of the project in order to detail its main achievements and the overall impact  All  M1-M36  Publications (Scientific)  Scientific publications will be submitted to academic journals   Research organisations  M12, M24, M36  Publications (Educational)  Online educational materials will be developed in order to ensure wide dissemination of the project research amongst the general public and the relevant stakeholders.  Civil Society  M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36  Videos  Videos detailing the main conclusions of the project.  
All  
M6, M18, M36  
Events  
Opening event: the consortia will introduce the project team, objectives, and methodology.  M2  Closing event: the consortia will disseminate the main conclusions and exploitable results of the project.  M36  Third-party events: the consortia will join third party events when relevant for the dissemination of the project results(e.g. WaterJPI; WaTech; Encontro de Entidades Gestoras de Água e Saneamento; Water Innovation Europe, Water Projects Europe).  When relevant  Awareness raising webinar series: 6 webinars focusing on relevant thematic areas related to safe drinking water whose topics will be defined by the project coordinator and inspired by the WP’s progress and related research.   M6, M12, M18, M24, M30, M36  Co-Creation Workshops: 2 workshops (Civil Society; Research organisations) and (Water utilities organisations, industry; Policy makers, regulators, governmental entities) for the dissemination of knowledge and of prevention and mitigation practices related to DBPs.  
Workshop 1:  M18, M32  Workshop 2:   
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 25 
A project internal Mailing List will be developed to ensure that all project staff members are included in all interactions. Teleconference Meetings with the project partners will be organised regularly (via e.g. Skype, Zoom) to discuss the progress. Additional meetings with other relevant partnerships and networks will be organised as needed to empower the dissemination and communication actions.  In this context, the selected metrics and target Key Performance Indicators (KPI) for dissemination and communication activities are specified in Table 2.4. These will be regularly checked by the means of Google Analytics, metrics from the website’s back-end, partners’ reporting actions and listing of all social media posts, press releases, e-newsletters, and other digital content developed. Table 2.4 Communication metrics and KPIs  Channels and tools  Metric  Target  Project website  No. of visits  10,000 (total)  In-paper materials  No. of printed brochures, flyers, infographics, educational hands-on kit distributed  800 (total)  Digitally distributed materials  No. of educational materials developed  No. of downloads  6 (total)  300 (total)  Social media pages  No. of followers  No. of posts  1,000 (total, across all pages)  90 posts (total, across all pages)  E-Newsletter  No. of subscribers  No. of newsletters sent  At least 250  6 (total)  Press releases  No. of publications in the project website  36 (total)  Publications  No. of scientific publications  20 published  Events  No. of dissemination events (opening, closing, awareness raising webinar series, co-creation workshops, focus group) / No. of participants  11 events (total) / Opening event (80), Closing event (80), Webinars (15 each), Co-creation workshops (10 each), Focus group (15)  No. of third-party events attended  10 (total)   No. of conferences attended 40 (total)  It is also relevant to note that each partner will leverage its individual dissemination networks and channels to further promote the activities developed under the project. In particular, the parts will use the following channels and tools to sustain the communication impact of the project.  Communication and dissemination through the official organisation’s accounts: the consortium will utilise its social media accounts and website coverage to further promote H2OforAll. In particular, the consortium will make use of its social media channels, which include over 200,000 social media followers.  Leveraging the partners’ networks for communicating H2OforAll: the consortium will target specifically the networks of water organisations that are part of the consortium as partners, namely Water Europe and Wetsus. Besides this, other networks will also be targeted, such as: AOPs PhD School, TWI Innovation Network,  European University of the Seas - SEA-EU, ScanBalt BioRegion, Marine Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning, EU Water JPI, SPIRE, WaterCampus, WaterAlliance, ERRIN, Water4all Partnership, EIT Raw Materials and Netherlands Water Platform, Parceria Portuguesa para a Água, Associação Portuguesa de Distribuição e Drenagem de Águas, SECPHO-LIGHT Technologies CLUSTER, European Photonic Industry Consortium, and water distribution utilities and waterboards around the Netherlands including Vechtstromen, Vitens and WMD Drinkwater.  2.2.2 Exploitation Plan  The Exploitation Plan will define a set of Key Exploitation Results (KERs) – Table 2.5, strategies to address barriers related to maximizing impact, Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs), individual exploitation plans, organisation of a focus group for project exploitation and a business plan. The Consortium foresees the main KERs will result from WP2: DBPs Sensing, Analysis and Visualisations, WP3: Environmental Impact and Risk Assessment of DBPs, WP4: Advanced and cost-effective technologies for the treatment of drinking water, and WP6: Guidance on measures, policy and public engagement.   The consortium is committed to making the data available in open formats during the project and free of charge for the EC and all stakeholders to use and publish, along with other relevant reports tailored for the use of the EC. In the post-project period, one of the key challenges will be balancing this with the need to develop revenue streams to finance the maintenance and further development of the DPBs treatment solutions and processes.        
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 26 
Table 2.5 KERs description and target groups Key Exploitable Result  Description  Target Groups  
KER1  Patents  
Sensors and sensing infrastructures for the identification of DBPs (T2.1, T2.2, T2.3, T2.4)  Municipal and private water utilities organisations, water treatment and supplier companies, operators and regulators; National & European policy makers particularly those related to water safety policies  Cost-effective treatment technologies for drinking water (T4.2.5)  Water utilities organisations, water treatment and supplier companies, water operators and regulators; National & European policy makers particularly those related to water safety policies; Community groups, NGOs, professional associations, foundations and citizens  
KER2  Open access tools  
Real-time interactive maps of DBPs from sources to supply (T2.5)  Higher education institutions, research organisations and research networks connected to water issues; Municipal and private water utilities organisations, water treatment and supplier companies, water operators and regulators; National & European policy makers particularly those related to water safety policies; Community groups, NGOs, professional associations, foundations and citizens. CKB with information about DBPs (T2.5)  KER4  Processes   Disinfection processes to prevent/minimize DBPs production (T4.1)  Municipal and private water utilities organisations, water treatment and supplier companies, operators and regulators; National & European policy makers particularly those related to water safety policies  
KER5  Guidelines  Recommendations on Prevention Measures for Safety Planning (T6.2)  Indices for drinking water safety plan (T3.2)  
Higher education institutions, research organisations and research networks connected to water issues; Municipal and private water utilities organisations, water treatment and supplier companies, water operators and regulators; National & European policy makers particularly those related to water safety policies; Community groups, NGOs, professional associations, foundations and citizens. Online news outlets   Furthermore, within the Exploitation Plan, partners will define and develop individual exploitation plans. 
UC  UC will use to disseminate the collected information to the public by open access publications. UC intends to apply for follow up project calls to develop the drinking water disinfection and treatment technologies to reach higher TRLs targeting their commercialisation (aided by the companies and/or eventual spin-offs). Cutting-edge achievements will be included in MSc course topics. Training of MSc and PhD.  UULM   UULM intends to pursue the development of the optical sensing devices for water monitoring to higher TRL levels so that such structure will be commercially available. IRIS IRIS will be using the findings and results prior and within the H20forAll for market deployment. Will be keen on possible licensing and/or patentability of the developments made within the tasks carried out.    ULeic ULeic will use the key findings on the MCMD approach and the experimental results from the work packages in H2OforAll to present in international conference, and publish in open access international journals, figshare/metadata repositories.  CYENS  CYENS will inform the water boards of Cyprus on treatment technology opportunities as well as new ways for detecting pollutants by way of the project’s results.  UHaifa  UHaifa will publish the research results in at least 2 peer review journals and include the results in a master student thesis. The findings will also be disseminated in at least 4 national/international conferences. UGdansk  UGdansk will use the results of the project for further research. Promising data will be disseminated in publications as well as presented at the conferences.  KTH  KTH will write at least 2 scientific journal papers and use the results for the education of 50 master students/year at KTH. Project results will be part of KTH PhD thesis; inform the Swedish Water Committee through the KTH Water Centre; and contribute to the scientific conference and workshop EU Water JPI. UNIVLEEDS   Will pursue the public engagement and awareness by maintaining and updating the web-platform. Adven-tech  Adventech is planning to uptake the technologies beyond the project and to provide larger scale demonstrations to reach market readiness.  
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 27 
UT  UT is collaborating with various water distribution utilities and waterboards around the Netherlands. These bodies are striving for new technologies that provide better sensing possibilities for real-time detection of pollutants, and they are very interested to invest on these technologies, using UT as a potential partner. Results of the project would be part of the curriculum of various courses of the university and will create new opportunities for research and PhD fellowships.  
WE  WE as the European Technology Platform for Water and leveraging from its extensive network (over 18,000 readers) will promote H2OforAll in its conferences as well as in all its media channels. WE will promote H2OforAll in its new series of dedicated events (Water Project Europe) to gather and capitalise the experiences of compatible projects for policy, collaboration and further development of the TRL and will collaborate with existing Water oriented Living Labs for the dissemination and exploitation of results.  Atlan-tium  Atlantium will communicate the results to their global representatives and costumers, and their marketing department which will distribute it on various channels, including direct communication of R&D with company representatives and big clients in US, China, and Southeast Asia. Patent applications are foreseen.  IVL  IVL will share project results with the scientific community by means of scientific publications, and with relevant public bodies and industries through applied consultancy projects in the water supply sector.  AC AC will present project results in water sector conferences and meetings of stakeholders. In addition, “Museu da Água” is a platform used to reach all types of public and generations, through a diversified set of initiatives, seeking to transform citizens into active participants in the protection and defence of water.   Wetsus  Wetsus has a broad network of water technology partners, both companies (>100) and knowledge institutes (>20) and will focus on capacity-building and forging partnerships, including collaboration with external stakeholder-partners to ensure early adopter’s uptake of the project results. This includes patenting. SPI  SPI will use the knowledge, expertise, and network developed during the previous and current Horizon Europe and H2020 projects to widen H2OforAll’s exploitation and market deployment.   2.2.3. Strategy for IP management   The project will adopt a policy of protection of the project’s results that are suited to be commercially exploitable and to be protected. Strategies for innovation and IPR management will be defined within WP7 and integrated in the project’s final exploitation plan. A Consortium Agreement will be signed at project start and will act as the legal framework. To rightfully determine the ownership of results, the following approach will be adopted: Definition of pre-existing knowledge of the partners (Background). The Consortium Agreement will state each background included and excluded from Access Rights; Mapping of existing patents and potentially overlapping IPR; Assessment of the new knowledge to be generated during the project, including the creation of an IP directory to determine which partners are the owners of what IP. During the project duration and beyond (several years, to be agreed in the CA), the contractors shall treat any information that is designated as property by the disclosing contractors as confidential. They shall also impose the same obligations on their employees and suppliers. The ownership of the knowledge developed within the project will be governed by an open-source license and approach.   
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 28