1.4 Interdisciplinarity and integration with social sciences H2OforAll features a versatile and multidisciplinary consortium with complementary skills regarding analytical techniques development, drinking water management, hydraulics, toxicity analysis, water disinfection, advanced water depollution technologies design, regulation, and citizen engagement. Moreover, it encompasses also important players in the field, such as drinking water management companies, water organizations and technology development (analytical and environmental treatment equipment) stakeholders, ensuring the applicability potential for the targeted technologies. The forthcoming work of the consortium will be focused on the technologies’ replicability and scalability (beyond the case-studies analysed within the H2OforAll framework) and their real-scale implementation (helped by the stakeholders). The versatility of the methodologies developed will allow to target other pollutants and ecosystems. The flexibility of the team composed of scientists and stakeholders with the same target zero-pollution solutions to securing drinking water quality by protecting water sources against pollution, providing innovative monitoring and treatment solutions and ensuring safe distribution will impact Europe innovation capacity in this field and contribute to a more healthful and prosperous society. To meet the objectives of WP6 and Task 6.1 on citizens’ awareness and engagement, we will rely on social science experimental methodologies. Social sciences methods will be applied as follows: (i) to create engaging and effective graphical user interfaces that support the adopted experimental methods. (ii) to assess the level of awareness and engagement by using rigorous experimental methods with control and treatment groups. (iii) to improve the preference elicitation process in the prioritization of the interventions for water quality improvement by relying on insights from social choice theory. An application for ethical approval will be submitted and data will be managed responsibly (GDPR compliance). The engagement of citizens in the study will aim for gender balance and age balance via, for instance, stratifying sampling.
1.5 Gender dimension The gender dimension is an important consideration in both research scope and the operations of H2OforAll. H2OforAll partners and their organisations are fully aware of the importance of gender issues and are committed to complying with acts, directives and opinions at National and European level (e.g. article 8 of the EC Treaty), Directives 76/207/EEC of 9 February 1976 and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In addition, the H2OforAll consortium demonstrates its commitment to promote women in science through direct implementation, as women are expected to lead at least 2 WPs of the project, as well as several tasks within other WPs. The H2OforAll consortium confirms that the partners will take the following actions: i) commit to gender equality in terms of human resources taking into account salary and working conditions; ii) promote an equal opportunity recruitment policy for both genders; iii) the management board will be gender balanced, i.e. max. 2/3 of one gender is allowed; iv) the gender equality aspect of the project will be monitored on a regular basis; v) when selecting stakeholder groups, gender balance and gender representativeness will be pursued; vi) the project aims to maintain a gender balance regarding the experts who will be invited to participate in the workshops, conferences, seminars, etc.
1.6 Open science  Data management plan (WP7) will be the central point for data handling. This will follow the FAIR principles, to ensure that researchers can find, access and re-use data. All scientific publications of this project will be open access, predominately golden open access following the Open Access policy. A H2OforAll ZENODO community will be created where it will be uploaded the bibliographic metadata and related research data linked to the publications as well as other dissemination material such as presentations and posters. At the same time, when articles containing the project data will be published, the article will refer to the data by its DOI and contribute to the success of the project during and beyond the funding time. Articles publication will be leveraged by short webinars to be made available online summarizing the importance of the results. These webinars will be distributed via H2OforAll and 
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 19 
the Consortium partner’s network. Edited records of webinars will be grouped and made available on YouTube.
1.7 Data management The actual data management plan (DMP) will be written in the first 3 months after the funding of the project, following the data management policies of every partner. This will be done in a written agreement aiming to share as much data as possible. The DMP will be regularly reviewed and updated to ensure that the data management is consistent throughout the project lifetime. During the project kick-off meeting, also a data-management expert group will be established. This will be responsible to create and maintain the DMP. To create a DMP the HORIZON EUROPE template will be used. Using such a DMP source enables to share the data management plan with all co-owners, as it provides access to the DMP to every consortium partner. The DMP will describe the type of data produced and collected, the owner of the data and the access rights and modalities, how data will be cured and preserved during the project duration and how it will be handled afterwards. FAIR principles will be applied. This will be ensured by adding the data to national data repositories and at an international repository like Zenodo. By adding the data to such repositories, the data get a DOI, a meta data description gets created, including clear licensing by creative common licenses (cc). Both Zenodo and national repositories are trusted repositories. The DBPs monitoring around Europe will be made available to drinking water operators and regulators. Moreover, an interface with summarized information (to protect local operators’ sensitive information) will be made fully available to the public. These data will also be shared via the IPCHEM platform. Adding data will be done at the time of submitting a publication the latest. Additionally, information on the research design for each scientific research will be added to the data so that research reproducibility can be provided. To ensure that the research data are secure and preserved the data will also be saved in the institutional archives.  Personal data collected in the project (e.g. in engagement activities in WP6) will be treated carefully and confidentially and will not be shared without the prior written consent of the data subjects, in line with the EU Data Protection Directive. Data will be kept available at least 5 years after the project ends. The ownership and commercial rights of the results generated within the project will be detailed and agreed upon the Consortium Agreement-CA (DESCA model). Also, all partners will sign a Non-Disclosure Agreement to guarantee the confidentiality of the results and will observed the European Charter for Researchers and Commission Recommendation on the management of the intellectual property. The results considered as potentially patentable will be made fully available as soon as the patent application is submitted.  2. Impact 2.1 Project’s pathways towards impact The Section below shows how the proposed activities of H2OforAll address the expected outcomes (EO) and impacts (EI) of the topic HORIZON-CL6-2022-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-04.  EO1. A wider use of a better understanding and an enhanced knowledge base is required to assess pollution sources, pathways and combined effects on drinking water systems, including forward looking approaches aimed to anticipate and prepare for future or emerging challenges. A better understanding of DBPs formation, and transmission pathways will allow to stablish measures to prevent/minimize their production. The interaction of the contaminants present in raw water with the disinfectant will be unravelled aiming to establish preventive measures to avoid DBPs formation. The knowledge of DBPs behaviour along space and time as well as their interaction with natural occurring materials and pipelines will allow predicting with high precision where, along the distribution network, DBPs monitoring infrastructure shall be introduced. This will allow an intelligent decision of where and how disinfectants reinjection will be required along the pipeline from the source to the consumers reducing the need for disinfection. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; consumers; scientific community  EO2. Implement advanced preventive and mitigating strategies and measures to protect drinking water sources, treatment and supply against harmful effects of global and climate change. H2OforAll research will provide a wide range of preventive measures to protect drinking water that will be built based on the regulations and practices of different countries (EU, USA, Israel and Australia) giving a guideline for practices that should be applied by stakeholders and private households in order to avoid the need of intense disinfection. The preventive measures will bear in mind emerging challenges regarding climate change and extreme events by establishing strategies that allow to protect the water sources and supply even from extreme events. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; consumers; Industrial stakeholders; Policy-makers   EO3. Apply effective risk assessment and risk management strategies enabling early warning systems and delivering ready-made outputs for decision-making and governance.  MCDM will allow to prioritize the main DBPs based on their risk. Moreover, the new disinfection technologies will lead to different DBPs whose ecological and human health will be predicted based on silico QSAR and MCDM. The data and tools generated will be key for assessing the quality of novel disinfection strategies as well as helping on the design of novel sensing systems 
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 20 
enabling suitable monitoring of the drinking water chain for early warning systems and supporting decision-making and new regulation. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Policy-makers; Scientific community  EO4. Exploit advanced, integrated and cost-effective water quality sensors and analytical methods.  H2OforAll targets the development of high-resolution sensors able to promptly determine and quantify targeted DBPs in drinking water. We aim to further develop (after the project lifespan) the prototype that will be reached. Thus, robust, validated, and portable analytical tools will be available to follow DBPs concentration. The project will also give the scientific basis for further analytical technologies development. Depending on the costs of the sensors to be developed, this may be made available to the public so that the consumers can assess the quality of the water there are receiving. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; public  EO5. Deploy innovative and robust monitoring systems and real-time information on drinking water quality, from sources to supply. The novel sensors for DBPs detection and quantification that will be developed will be part of a robust monitoring structure. Within H2OforAll framework, algorithms will be developed (based on the knowledge of DBPs behaviour along time and interaction with materials) to wisely choose the locations for monitoring the water distribution network. To be efficient, this monitoring will target the key DBPs that will be prioritized based on their potential risk. This innovative infrastructure will give real time information on drinking water quality from sources to supply. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; policy-makers; public  EO6. Disseminate and use a robust knowledge on the occurrence, persistence and degradability of disinfection by-products (DBPs) in drinking water with due consideration to operational parameters, chemicals, materials and biofilms interactions, including the pathways related to human exposure A CKB will be developed where geographical space and time information about DBPs will be feed by authorized users. It will be available to regulators, policy-makers and drinking water infrastructure operators. It will have an interface for the public to raise their awareness to the occurrence, persistence and degradability of DBPs giving a big picture of their distribution in several EU countries. The risk assessment studies to be performed will allow identifying the DBPs more likely to impact on human health. The public engagement will create awareness for the pathways related to human exposure to DBPs and potential consequences.  Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; policy-makers; general public  EO7. Spread the use of advanced and cost-effective drinking water treatment and disinfection processes and technologies, including transformative approaches Alternative drinking water technologies will be targeted in H2OforAll involving unravelled potential of MP UV radiation. This will reduce the need for chlorination leading to lower levels of DBPs in drinking water. Moreover, innovative treatment approaches involving adsorption and advanced oxidation using novel and costs effective materials will be developed to remove contaminants from water before disinfection (to abate potential DBPs precursors such as algal blooms precursors) and/or after the disinfection stage (to remove DBPs that were formed during that stage). Environmental and economic sustainability of the proposed processes will be compared with the reference water treatment case to ensure their cost-effectiveness. The data that will be obtained will impact in water treatment science and technology with potential for commercial novel processes that will lead to a safer drinking water. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; policy-makers; public  EO8. Broad uptake of advanced knowledge, breakthrough solutions and innovative technologies to enhance the competitiveness of the EU water sector and fostering the EU’s position and role in the global water scene. H2OforAll will provide advanced knowledge, breakthrough solutions and innovative technologies for the water sector at several levels: - by developing advanced sensing solutions in a breakthrough real-time monitoring infrastructure. By developing innovative methodologies to prioritize DBPs. By unravelling the DBPs formation mechanism and interaction with materials along the drinking water distribution network. By developing breakthrough technologies able to disinfect water without the formation (or with lower concentrations) of DBPs and innovative procedures to remove DPBs precursors and DBPs from drinking water. By protecting the water sources from pollution through prevention as well as by developing raw water treatment technologies. The results to be obtained will be the scientific and technological basis to make the EU a leader in the global water sector Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; policy-makers; general public  EO9. Increasing the EU scientific and technological base and guidance on measures to manage drinking water quality and evidence for policy-making, safety planning and implementation. H2OforAll consortium is committed to the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) data approach. Thus, bearing in mind IPR management, the results obtained in this project will be made accessible and comprehensive to the public. H2OforAll will also have a strong impact on supporting policy development, regulatory action and communication at different levels based on the scientific and technological developments that will be achieved within the framework of the project. All data (DBPs monitoring, behaviour, prevention and treatment) will give support to future legislation and actions to protect drinking water. Moreover, H2OforAll will provide suitable cost-effective assembled solutions for water treatment and disinfection with the lower formation of DBPs, giving a key tool to the stakeholders to fulfil the 
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 21 
future tighter environmental legislation. The respective dissemination activities (including online events addressing the broad policy circles – decision-makers, monitoring bodies and authorities) will increase the visibility of the above outputs and so maximize the support to policy-making. Dedicated policy recommendations produced in WP6 will gather key findings to policy makers from H2OforAll WPs. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; policy-makers; public; Stakeholders  EO10. Science and evidence-based implementation of the European Green Deal and the Sustainable Development Goals, notably the SDG 6 “Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all”. H2OforAll is totally aligned with the SDG6 as follows: Development of prevention strategies for protecting drinking water that will help educate stakeholders and the public about the importance of protecting drinking water from sources to supply also involving wastewater management and disposal (SGD target 6.1). This public engagement will also target education regarding appropriate water behaviour by enrolling the global water quality and scarcity issues related with consuming habits in order to reduce water waste and contamination. The innovative disinfection and water treatment technologies using sustainable materials will allow proper water treatment (source) and disinfection without the formation of noxious DBP (or limiting their production) – SGD targets 6.3 and 6.6. The technologies to be developed may be optimized to be more cost-effective and made available to lower-income countries contributing to ensure available and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. The development of suitable DBPs sensing strategies within a suitable monitoring infrastructure will allow water management companies, regulators and consumers to follow up the quality of their water and putting in action the preventive measures that will be stablished within H2OforAll whenever necessary (SGD target 6.5). The strong public engagement and policy recommendations that will be made available within the framework of the project as well as preventive measures that will be stablished and novel disinfection and water treatment strategies will push policy-makers and regulators to establish harsher drinking water protection regulations to ensure availability and sustainable management of safe water for all (SGD targets 6.1 and 6.b). Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; policy-makers; public; regulators  EI1. Advanced understanding of diffuse and point sources of water pollution in a global and climate change context, enabling novel solutions to protect water bodies, aquatic ecosystems and soil functionality, and further enhancing water quality and its management for safe human and ecological use, while fostering the EU’s and Associated Countries’ position and role in the global water scene. A better understanding of DBPs formation pathways that will be reach through H2OforAll will give the necessary tools to understand the role of water pollution on DBPs formation as well as to predict the behaviour of water treatment and disinfection technologies efficiency as function of the source water quality. The preventive measures that will be stablished in WP3 aiming to protect drinking water quality whole chain will bear in mind also the protection of the water bodies (sources of drinking water). Besides, advanced water treatment technologies aim to remediate water from the source by reducing its pollution load leading thus to better aquatic ecosystems and enhancing water quality and its management for safe human and ecological use. Target groups: Drinking water management companies; Scientific community; policy-makers; public; regulators  2.1.1 Requirements and potential barriers  Some barriers and limitations may arise that may hinder the complete fulfilment of expected impacts (Table 2.1). This consortium of 18 partners from all regions of Europe will gather synergies and do whatever possible, during the project time period and beyond that, to mitigate all the shortcomings that may appear. Moreover, future projects will certainly be proposed to follow-up the work and face these challenges. Table 2.1 Possible barriers/obstacles to achieve the expected impacts  Type  Barrier  
Regulation  Regulation change is a time-consuming process. The new data gathered by H2OforAll that will allow identifying target DBPs and their toxic effect as well as their “map of contamination” will surely impact decision-making, but it will take time for a new related regulation to enter into force. The preventive measures that will be proposed will imply habit and procedures changes. There is always some inertia and fear towards change. The consortium aims, within the framework of the project and beyond it, to engage the public, stakeholders and policy-makers on this problematic to overcome such barriers.  Standards  New standards for source water and drinking water quality will be proposed based on the H2OforAll results. The adopting of such standards by the drinking water management companies may be a barrier. We aim to provoke the public and policy pressure within the project (WP6) and beyond it through follow up actions such as workshops, press-releases and from results communication to overcome the barrier.   Public acceptance  H2OforAll will require the public acceptance to change the consumption pattern to avoid water pollution and waste. This change may be difficult since it will imply correcting “old” habits. The public may fear the safety of the drinking water coming from the novel disinfection and treatment technologies 
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 22 
proposed. Also, stakeholders’ acceptance of new water treatment and disinfection technologies is challenging. The public engagement strategies by disseminating the science in an understandable way and by targeting mainly the young generation will surely impact in habits changing. The novel technologies will be validated both in efficiency and LCA/LCC. The data will be shared among stakeholders and the public to motivate their acceptance. The legislation and regulation change we aim to provoke will also promote the acceptance.  Workforce considerations  
Specialized workers will be required to implement and operate at the industrial scale the novel monitoring infrastructure and water disinfection/treatment technologies. This may be a barrier to the implementation of H2OforAll technology if the industrial stakeholders are not willing to invest. On the other hand, if well accepted, it gives new job opportunities to qualified human resources. Since we have in the consortium companies that develop the technologies (Adventech, IRIS and Atlantium) as well as end-users (AC), their action in the field will overcome such barrier.  Financing of follow-up steps  
H2OforAll will lead to validated integrated assembled technologies for DBPs monitoring and removal from drinking water as well as novel disinfection strategies. At the end of the project validated lab-pilot units will be reached. However, further investment will be required after the project to obtain a demonstrative unit at a larger scale to demonstrate the efficiency at the stakeholders’ premises. Thus, H2OforAll consortium will further seek for new financial incentives both at the national and European level.  Cooperation of other links in the value chain  H2OforAll success will require the involvement and cooperation with stakeholders’ from water treatment companies, drinking water distribution stakeholders, consumers as well as decision-makers. This cooperation will be facilitated with the involvement of main players as partners in the consortium as well as in our advisory board.  2.1.2 Scale and significance of the project’s contribution to the expected outcomes and impacts  H2OforAll results will contribute to the call outcomes and are described in scientific, societal and economic impacts that will be the fostered by dissemination and exploitation measures described in section 2.2.  Scientific impacts: 80% of the technologies that will be studied in H2OforAll (involving sensing systems, monitoring infrastructures, drinking water disinfection and water treatment) are based on the high risk – high gain principle. The remaining 20% (e.g. toxicity assessment) are based on satellite work, leveraging the potential of the technologies to demonstration level. The success of the project will create and diffuse (through WP7) high-quality new knowledge in the field of analytical techniques and devices; intelligent monitoring systems and water treatment and disinfection using innovative and integrated technologies. Moreover, new algorithms will be stablished for selecting monitoring spots by grasping DBPs behaviour and interaction with materials along the drinking water system. This will allow reaching prediction models able to simulate DBPs fate along the network as well as which are the most likely DBPs formed when different disinfection technologies are applied. Also, new knowledge and tools will be developed by integrating MCDM techniques that will allow to identify the most problematic compounds as well as predicting the risk of new molecules through in silico QSAR predictions. Scientific innovation will render 20 peer reviewed scientific publications as well as participation in 40 international conferences. H2OforAll strengthens human capital at the individual and consortium levels through scientific training in the form of 8 PhD and 18 MSc in the framework of the project. Some supervision/mentoring activities will be shared between H2OforAll partners, this will allow young researchers career development by engaging them in a multicultural and multidisciplinary research environment. The know-how generated in H2OforAll regarding the DBP behaviour and fate as well as the efficiency and design of novel disinfection and water treatment technologies will be included in 4 curricular units at pre- and post-graduation levels. Besides, a technological facility at the lab-pilot scale will be made available to further tests at the relevant environment (monitoring infrastructure prototype and integrated disinfection and water treatment facilities) making a bridge between the academia and stakeholders. After H2OforAll, the impact on human capital at the scientific level will be assessed as the number of trained researchers with impact on the scientific field they develop in H2OforAll or new lines of research created after knowledge integration.     Societal impacts: H2OforAll strengthens the uptake of innovation in society. H2OforAll will develop a CKB with updated information about DBPs through the visualisation of their occurrence in several countries. This will be an interface for operators and regulators to get real-time information related to DBPs. Moreover, an interface for the public aggregating summarized information will be available. H2OforAll fosters the diffusion of knowledge and open science by sharing all public research outputs (i.e. 70% of total: not protected by IP) through open knowledge infrastructures. Care will be taken to make science and technology understandable by public (see section 2.2). Also, the preventive measures to protect drinking water will target water distributors, stakeholders and consumers. This will raise societal awareness on DBPs issues which will have an impact as a driving force on policy-making and regulations. H2OforAll addresses EU priorities in line with the European Green Deal’s zero pollution ambition by 
   
 [101081963] - [H2OforAll] - Part B - Page 23 
enabling novel solutions to protect water bodies and further enhancing water quality and its management for safe human and ecological use. H2OforAll will also contribute to increase the quality of living of 68% of the world’s growing population estimated to live in urban areas by 2050 by promoting a higher quality of drinking water supplied (reducing the DBPs levels below WHO guideline values) and by preventing water sources contaminations. The reliable monitoring system and cost-effective treatment and disinfection technologies to be developed as well as the preventive measures to be widely spread will help to ensure availability and sustainable management of water for all (in line with SDG6). H2Oforall expects that at least 50% of innovation and scientific results targeting EU goals are shared and integrated thus contributing to policy-making through norms, standards and regulation (WP6).    Economic impacts: H2OforAll foresees 4 potential innovative technologies/patents and IPR (based on the novel sensing and monitoring system as well as advanced disinfection and water treatment technologies to be developed). All submitted applications will be followed in the medium term and the number of awarded (e.g. Patents) will define the impact of H2OforAll, as well as the market shares that developed the innovations (e.g. water treatment companies). The implementation of novel raw water treatments able to remove DBPs and algal blooms precursors will reduce the drinking water disinfection costs by at least 5%.