1.2 Relation to the work programme   
 
HOUSEFUL responds to the topic “CIRC -01-2016-2017: Syst emic, eco -innovative approaches for the circular 
economy: large-scale demonstration projects [b] Systemic services for the circular economy (2017)”.   
Systemic services for the circular economy. CIRC-01b-2017  
Specific CHALLENGE of the topic  What does the HOUSEFUL project do?  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          7  
  
Replace current linear economic models with circular models of production and consumption; reduce GHG 
emissions.  
HOUSEFUL facilitates the transition to circular models in housing sector, improving resource efficiency and reducing 
the negative environmental impact throughout the full life cycle of residential buildings. We propose a conceptual 
framework for the transition from a linear to circular Business models (BM) as key elements to reduce GHG 
emissions.   
[…] systemic approach to eco-innovation that encompasses value & supply chains in their entirety and engages all 
actors involved in such chains […] impacts that transformative innovative solutions can have on economy, 
environment & society  
HOUSEFUL adopt s a systemic approach that goes beyond conventional BM by demonstrating an innovative 
integrated systemic service for residential buildings. The project comprises actors from different areas collaborating 
in a symbiotic manner including: construction exper ts (ITeC), Social Housing Organisations (AHC, Neues Leben, 
CECODHAS), environmental & technological experts (ALCN, AIGUASOL, LEITAT, Cartif, IDP), social architects 
(GWR), social innovation and humanities areas experts (WE&B), circular BM experts (Turntoo, LGI), IT applications 
(VISUM) and communication experts (ICE). The project will promote and facilitate the interaction of these actors 
with different stakeholders of the housing value chain identified from the beginning of project execution (including 
building developers and investors, design teams including architects and engineers, construction companies and 
contractors, facilities managers, housing organisations, public bodies and dwellers).  
Bring end-users closer to the design and production phases, […] boost new consumption patterns that add greater 
value and reduce over-production, waste and other negative environmental impacts and involve end-users in circular 
economic model  
Circular economy business models to the housing value chain will increase new demands and open new markets for 
a more efficient use of resources in the housing sector. HOUSEFUL proposes a path towards an EU reindustrialisation 
economy, creating better market conditions for products and services. HOUSEFUL will also provide property owner 
and inhabitants with a tool for the analysis of the energy and resource efficiency of the build- 
ings they live in, empowering them to make informed decisions regarding improvements and innovations to be 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
implemented, driving more sustainable consumption patterns, and ultimately placing them in the position of manager, 
owner and even energy provider, instead of consumer and waste producer.   
SCOPE of the topic  What does the HOUSEFUL project do?  
Demonstrate through large scale projects the economic and environmental feasibility of circular economic business 
models that underpin new services based on performance/functionality and/or on mass customisation.  
HOUSEFUL will demonstrate an innovative circular economy BM for the housing sector, looking at the whole 
lifecycle of a residential building from the selection and extraction of materials, manufacturing of construction 
products, construction, use and maint enance, demolition and waste & water treatment. The environmental and 
economic feasibility of new services, as underpinned by circular solutions, will be demonstrated in 4 representative 
European buildings named as Frontrunner residential buildings. In order to ensure a major potential implementation 
of HOUSEFUL services and solutions, also theoretical scenarios corresponding to different all over Europe latitudes 
will be implemented through the analysis of several building archetypes in at least, 6 geoclus ters zones. Also, an 
adaptation of the obtained results and services will be made by replication activities foreseen in 10 Follower buildings 
to ensure the large-scale impact.  
Solutions should entail the environmentally sustainable recovery, recycling an d/or re-use of resources and energy 
flows, including by cross-sectorial symbiosis from resources to marketed products  
The circular solutions demonstrated in the 4 frontrunner buildings will address the most critical environmental 
impacts associated with the entire life -cycle of a residential building. New services will be provided promoting 
efficient processes and procedures in the construction and demolition phases, and systems for the efficient treatment 
of BW and WW for reuse within a building and the generation of renewable energy for self-consumption.   
Adopt an eco -approach through a Life Cycle Thinking to all forms  of innovation which fosters new forms of 
collaboration between stakeholders; support of co-creation  
The HOUSEFUL business model includes a wide variety of circular solutions, from sustainable technologies to 
innovative services for the housing value cha in, boosting dwellers’ choice for sustainable consumption patterns. 
Environmental, social and economic impacts of the 4 frontrunner buildings will be assessed by applying LCA, LCC 
and social assessment. New forms of collaboration among stakeholders will be encouraged.   
Business models will require support to end-users in the transition to circular economy by sharing knowledge and 
activities  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          8  
  
A SaaS will be created to support actors from the housing value chain to redesign their BM according to circular 
economy principles. A user-friendly circularity tool for professionals but also for owners/dwellers/tenants will also 
be delivered to raise awa reness of circular economy models. A Business Plan of the HOUSEFUL model will be 
developed to provide circular services/products as new leasing and/or renting conditions to the housing sector. Special 
attention will be paid to the leasing and/or renting models for such physical solutions developed (i.e.: modular facade, 
AnMBR, etc.). Policy restrictions and safety guarantees will be reviewed and overcome major risks in the new 
commercialisation of solutions under new circular business models adapted to services.   
Contributions of regional/national schemes under the ESIF, such as under the ERDF, or other relevant funds such as  
IPA II  
HOUSEFUL will collaborate with pre -identified local authorities from two different geographical regions (Austria 
and Spain) to find EU-complementary funding schemes, like under the RIS3, the ESF, through regional funds, and 
ethical banks, to cross-finance the renovation process as such and generally deepen the impact of project’s results at 
local level.  
Possible regulatory barriers should also be addressed  
Drivers and barriers for the circular economy in the built environment will be addressed including  regulatory, but 
also financial, societal and organisational ones. The incorrect, sub -optimal or delayed implementation of the 
environmental policy framework (e.g. Energy Efficiency Directive) might lead to insufficient savings, having a 
negative impact on  2030 target and the decarbonisation of the economy in 2050. Thus, HOUSEFUL will identify 
regulatory barriers and propose recommendations to overcome them in order to facilitate the market up -take of 
innovative solutions.
1.3 Concept and methodology  
 
1.3.1 Concept  
1.3.1.1 Overall concept   
 
The housing sector is a major contributor to current global problems of pollution, resource depletion and climate 
change, representing from a life cycle perspective one of the most important and resource consuming  sectors at EU 
level: accounting for about 50% of all extracted materials, 40% of final energy consumption, 33% of water 
consumption and 33% of all produced waste (EC, 2014). Buildings in the EU have a floor area of 25 billion m2, with 
about 75% of this being residential buildings. The low annual renovation rate of existing buildings (only 0.4 -1.2%) 
(EC,2016), the low annual demolition rate (only 0.1%) and the low annual construction rate of new buildings cause 
that much of the EU building stock is in need of renovation, with more than 40% of it built before 1960 and 90% 
before 1990 (EU Parliament, 2016 ). In addition, population growth, migration to cities, and increasing levels of 
wealth and lifestyle changes will all contribute to significant increases in building resources use.   
As a consequence of the environmental pressure caused by the ho using sector, the EC has recently launched a set of 
policy initiatives promoting the construction and refurbishment of buildings in a resource efficient way: the Roadmap 
to a Resource Efficient Europe - COM(2011)571 highlights buildings as one Associated wit h document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 of three key sectors to be ad- 
dressed to make significant resource savings; the Resource Efficiency Opportunities in the Building sector 
COM(2014)445 describes the need for a common EU approach to assess the environmental performance of buildings 
throughout their lifecycle, considering relevant resources such as energy, materials, water and waste; Towards a 
circular economy: A zero waste programme for Europe -COM(2014)398 encourages the design for better 
management of CDW; and Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the Circular Economy-COM(2015)614 considers 
“construction and demolition” as one of the five priority areas to be tackled in the context of the circular economy, 
and presented four legislative proposals on waste, containing targets for landfill, reuse and recycling, to  be met by 
2030. On November 2016, European Commission presented a package of measures known as Clean Energy for all 
Europeans to speed the clean energy transition in Europe. The packa ge includes sets of legislative measures and 
several communications that will have an impact on housing sector, highlighting the proposals for revising the EPBD 
2010, the Energy Efficiency Directive, the Renewable Energy Directive, the Ecodesign Directive and a spe cific 
communication called Accelerating Clean Energy in Buildings - COM(2016) 860 Annex I.   
HOUSEFUL project is aligned to the EU policies and initiatives  in terms of combating climate change and 
sustainable development, supporting their targets and recommendations to enable the transition of the housing sector 
towards a circular economy. HOUSEFUL aims at improving resource efficiency (energy, materials, wa ter and 
waste) of residential buildings and bringing them into the circular economy , supporting EU policies and 
priorities.  
Under traditional business models, investments related to retrofit actions are considered a liability, even contrary to 
clear evidence that the market value of retrofitted buildings is higher than energy -poor buildings. In addition, 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          9  
  
monetary savings redeemed from retrofit actions, specifically in the housing sector, do not yet out-perform the initial 
investment. To overcome both barriers, various EU projects (See Table 5) have developed new solutions aimed at 
lowering the investment requirement and maximising monetary savings. Although there are physical and economical 
limits to these strategies, circular economy principle allows for their implementation and incorporation into 
economically viable and sustainable solutions and methodologies that convert retro fit investments from a liability 
into an asset, viable to renting and/or leasing models, thereby fully valorising the retrofit actions.   
Stakeholders in housing sector require attractive services and incentives to promote their involvement in valuable 
actions contributing to a more efficient use of resources.  
It is not always possible to close all the circles within one single building (especially if it is a smaller building) and 
we will anticipate the limits and in where closing bigger circles make more sense (like at district or city level).  To 
tackle all these challenges, HOUSEFUL has gathered industry experts (SMEs and large companies), RTDs and public 
administration figures who will collaborate closely to achieve and demonstrate the project objectives and the creation 
of new CEBO with high replicability at EU scale.  
HOUSEFUL CONCEPT  
In HOUSEFUL, an innovative paradigm shift towards a circular economy for the housing sector is proposed to 
overcome current Challenges in housing sector (Figure 1) by demonstrating the feasibility of an integrated systemic 
service composed of 11 systemic solutions  in the fields of energy, materials, water and waste . The integrated 
service will be driven and promoted as a SaaS, aiming at evaluating building circularity while offering different 
circular solutions as services to increase it for all stages of building life cycle. HOUSEFUL concept (Figure 2) 
pursues the transition from linear (take, make, consume and dispose model) to circular business models for the 
stakeholders by proposing new CEBOs. Indeed, HOUSEFUL favours the migration of the housing sector from the 
current PITO models (Product in, Trash out) to a new DIDO model (data in, data out).   
From HOUSEFUL, an innovative holistic model will be ready to be offered to stakeholders in housing sector as 
innovative and integrated services, replicable to other residential buildings. A Software as a Service (SaaS) will be 
developed in order to improve the replication of proposed 11 circular solutions as services based on 
performance/functionality rather than ownership.   
The SaaS will offer the following features:  1) a  Circularity Tool (CT)  to quantify the circularity level of 
residential buildings. Users will be able to work with data and calculation methods at two define d levels: a first 
level  (free access) with clear and adapted KPIs (such as water reuse (m 3/m3·day), total primary energy demand 
(kWh/m2·yr), share of renewable energies (%), etc.) and outputs and a second level (a pay per use) with really oriented 
results, where different types of interventions to enhance the circularity of the building will be suggested and 
quantifying also the effect of these interventions on the building. The CT addresses the current information deficit by 
proposing, whenever possible, a set of clearly defined and measurable indicators, for the assessment of the 
environmental performance of residential buildings; 2) an interactive sharing platform  created with the primary 
aim of promoting the co -creation of new CEBOs  by stakeholders in h ousing sector. The platform will contain 
successful circular solutions and services , the ones demonstrated in Frontrunner buildings (11 HOUSEFUL 
Solutions) but also other successful experiences collected, with the aim to promote the replication of these initiatives 
and facilitate the collaboration among stakeholders.   
The SaaS will help the housing value chain work on their value proposition, clients, activities, partners, cost structure 
and revenue streams in order to define a successful company. At this  moment, there exist some circular products 
offering repositories or greener building design (see C2C) or new brand methodologies (Level(s) by EC), but not the 
combination Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
of both. SaaS service will not only evaluate the building circularity (as Level(s) seems to be),  but will offer 
explicit solutions to improve it in a service mode . HOUSEFUL pursues the transition from linear (take, make, 
consume and dispose model) to circular economy business models for the stakeholders in current housing value chain, 
where sharing, reusing, repairing, refurbishing and recycling in an almost closed loop are the key principles of the 
circular economy.   
Different systemic solutions  offered in HOUSEFUL will be demonstrated in 4 frontrunner buildings, including 
social housing, with the aim to validate their technical, environmental, social, economic and regulatory feasibility.   
The 4 frontrunner buildings are located in Spain and Austria: 1) “El bloc dels Mestres” building, located in Sabadell 
(Spain) and constructed in the 1960’s is going to be retrofitted for social housing; 2) “La Grípia” building, located in 
Terrassa (Spain) is a social housing building constructed in the 1970’s; 3) “Baumgarten” a centenary building located 
in Vienna (Austria) and 4) “Donaufelderstrasse”, a new soc ial housing constructed in 2017 and located in Vienna 
(Austria). The buildings were selected with regard to: (a) a spatial/geographical distribution which will guarantee the 
feasibility and replication of solutions, ( b) differences in social, cultural and current practices on housing, (c) 
differences in national regulations regarding construction and refurbishment, (d) common in European building 
archetypes, scale and number of dwellers per building; (e) climate differences in promoting the different 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          10  
  
characteristics and typologies of residential buildings, and (f) common challenges shared by construction companies, 
related professionals and regional/national housing agencies. As it can be seen 3 of the 4 buildings are  
  
social housing buildings, since one of the HOUSEFUL challenges is to demonstrate solutions that can be implemented 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
for improving the circularity level of low-income buildings. In relation to energy poverty, savings from HOUSEFUL 
solutions seeks to respond to the increasing difficulty many tenants (more than 50 million people in the EU are at risk 
of energy poverty (EU Parliament, 2016) experience in paying water, waste and energy bills.   
DEMO 1 – Old Building (60’s)  
  
Location: Carrer de Campoamor, 98, 08204 
Sabadell (Spain) (Approximately 20 km North 
of the City of Barcelona).  
Basic data: Constructed 1960s; Ground floor + 
8 residential floors, 2 flats/floor; 16 x 100m 2 
approx. homes with 4 bedrooms +2 bathrooms; 
14 unoccupied , all in need of deep 
refurbishment.   
  
  
   
SABADELL 
  
Figure  
2 
. 
  
HOUSEFUL concept 
  
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          11  
  
Description: The so-called teachers’ block (“El bloc dels Mestres”) is a residential building built in the early sixties 
adjacent to an educational centre the current Joan Sallarès i Pla school), and initially intended as a teachers’ 
residence. It has become increasingly disused over recent years. There are now just two teaches left in the block and 
they are due to leave before the end of 2017. The AHC have a budget of about 1.5M Euros already committed 
for the refurbishment of the project (see letter of commitment in annexes) including the following planned actions: 
Building envelope refurbishment with insulated façade; Solar thermal; Maintenance of current size and distribution; 
Use as rented social housing for large families at risk of social exclusion. The timetable is to have the definitive 
project approved by March-April 2018 and launching the public tender procedurefrom May 2018 (see the details in 
the Gantt attached in section 3.1.2).    
HOUSEFUL will provide an advance in this building circularity by offering solutions for their calculation (S1), 
offering new methodologies for stakeholder engagement (S2) and co-creation of innovative solutions on materials 
(S3, S4), water (S5 in a minimum of 8 homes), waste (S7, S8, S9) and energy resources (S10, S11).  
  
DEMO 2 – Old Building (70’s)  
 
Location: C/Tibidabo 1, 3 /Ptge Calaf 81, 83, 
85, 08227 Terrassa (approx. 30 km North, 
northwest of the City of Barcelona).  
Basic data: Constructed 1970s; 2 four story 
buildings; 41 residential units (some 98m2, 
others 69m2); 3750m2 residential area in total; 
All occupied. All in need of refurbishment 
using circular solutions promoted in 
HOUSEFUL.   
Description: “The Grípia” is the name given to five blocks of residential buildings built in the 1970s. The AHC 
owns the buildings and rents the properties as social housing. HOUSEFUL project is seen as a valuable opportunity 
for the AHC to go further with its demonstrated commitment to sustainable development and to innovate in the 
Circular Economy. If HOUSEFUL is financed, the development of the executive refurbishment will become a top 
priority for the AHC (see letter of commitment in annexes). This means that refurbishment could commence within 
25 months of the start of HOUSEFUL the project. Co -creation of works for the successful ref urbishment will be 
done in stages to minimise disruption to the tenants who will continue to reside in the buildings throughout the 
project. Work will be completed within 24 months. A full 12 months for co-creation, monitoring and evaluation will 
be possible in some of the flats (minimum 2 flats from 1 of 5 blocks). HOUSEFUL will provide an advance in this 
building circularity by offering solutions for their calculation (S1), offering new methodologies for stakeholder 
engagement (S2) and co-creation of innovative solutions on materials (S3, S4), water (S5 in a minimum of 2 homes), 
waste (S9) and energy resources (S10).  
  
DEMO 3 – Centenary building  
  
Location: Vienna, Baumgartenstrasse 93. The 
building is located in the 14 th district of Vienna 
(“Penzing”).  
Basic data: Constructed 1900. 3 floors space of 
462.6 m 2 (occupation floor space of 370,1m 2) 
with a chemistry and microbial lab in the 
basement, an office area on the ground floor, and 
a residential unit on the first floor and a loft.  
Description: DEMO 3 is a residential building, including an office, laboratories and residential space. It is privately 
owned. Rental agreements are unlimited in time. The building is due to substantial refurbishment. This building 
reflects a typical building category of Central European centenary buildings that were not destroyed during the war. 
Main demo targets are to demonstrate the feasibility of HOUSEFUL services co-created by stakeholders and of- 
  
TERRASSA 
  
  
VIENNA CITY 
  
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          12  
  
fered to the users (and possibly the neighbours) of the building, while at the same timAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 
- 03/04/2018e reducing the energy demand of the building, and closing water and nutrient cycles by recovering water and 
nutrients from waste water and organic waste. This will be achieved by structural modifications concerning pipe 
installations, roof structure, facad e change, integration of winter gardens, and modifications in the garden. Main 
HOUSEFUL solutions will also involve the use of circular materials to almost passive house standards but including 
new functionalities on facades and roof such as nature based s olutions for WW treatment. The energy intake after the 
renovation will be done with photovoltaic and burning of biogas that is directly produced in the building. All the organic 
waste materials that are produced in the building will be used for biogas gene ration and further in-vessel composting. 
The WW will be treated in plant-based treatment systems and the dissolved nutrients further used for fertigation in urban 
farming applications, also in a greenhouse setup. The overall of proposed solutions will prov ide new opportunities to 
advance in this building circularity, previously developing an innovative method for this calculation (S1). These 
solutions will be based on new methodologies for stakeholder engagement (S2) and co -creation on materials (S3, S4), 
water (S6), waste (S7, S8, S9) and energy resources (S10, S11).  
  
DEMO 4 – New building (2017)  
 
Location: Vienna, Donaufelder Strasse 115. 
The building is located in the 21st district of  
Vienna (“Floridsdorf”).  
Basic data : Constructed 2017. Total area of 
4.626 m 2, with 54 apartments, 1 enterprise, 1 
supervised flat -sharing community for young 
people. Places for collective use exist. Exterior 
walls made of reinforced concrete.  
Description: DEMO 4 is a residential building with occupations of all 54 flats. Technically, the building corresponds 
to Austrian standards and is comparable to approximately 70% of residential buildings in Austria. Therefore, the 
DEMO 4 is an interesting role model for replication and dissemination activities in HOUSEFUL. NEUES LEBEN 
owns the buildings and rents the properties as social housing. The HOUSEFUL project is seen as a valuable 
opportunity for NEUES LEBEN to go further with its demonstrated commitment to sustainable development, to 
observe interventions in the other HOUSEFUL demos and to incorporate circular economy in future projects. Results 
from the HOUSEFUL calculations and interventions in the demos will be subject of discussions in organised 
stakeholder processes, introducing the topic of circular economy in the residents’ and neighbour’s daily life. 
HOUSEFUL will provide an advance in this building circularity by offering solutions for their calculation (S1), 
offering new methodologies for stakeholder engagement (S2) and co -creation of innovative solutions on materials 
(S3, S4), wastes (S9) and energy resources (S11).  
  
Co-creation among stakeholders: a key step for the successful demonstration of HOUSEFUL solutions  
A key aspect of HOUSEFUL project is the co-creation value for achieving understanding and effective engagement 
among stakeholders in the definition of what the building circularity is and what kind of solutions can be provided to 
increase its circularity at different levels and stages in building’s life cycle. HOUSEFUL will address the notion of 
“success” of the project in a process of stakeholder interaction  for identification (WP2,3) , analysis (WP3), 
development (WP4,5), replication and promotion (WP6,7) of the services offered to stakeholders from solutions 
to be demonstrated in 4 Frontrunner buildings. Therefore, activities seeking effective engagement will be a central 
and integrative element for the project and will be developed based on factors influencing stakeholders’ attitudes and 
behaviours towards circularity in buildings (including tenants and decision makers). Engagement activities includes 
12 co-creation workshops based in backcasting exercises (social sciences) , 4 technical workshops , 2 training 
sessions with stakeholders and 4 study tours  to the Frontrunner buildings. Effective engagement is going to be 
achieved by a multidirectional approach based on social sciences (backcasting exercises to identify ideal futures and 
prepare reliable scenarios with a selected combined group of stakeholders). Social interaction will address needs and 
concerns expressed by the stakeholders in the behavioural analysis, and integrate them into the creation of services 
of building circularity through knowledge brokerage practices. Based on this innovative stra tegy defined for 
HOUSEFUL, the following circular solutions will be developed and demonstrated at building scale in each 
Frontrunner building.  
Solution 1 (based on N1): 
Definition of a new method for the  
  
analysis of Building circularity  
Potential type of service:  
Customer service, 
Web-based tool  
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4, St5  Linked building life cycle:  All stages  
  
  
VIENNA CITY 
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          13  
  
Solution 1 is focused on the development of an innovative methodology for the quantification of building circularity 
considering current management and use of water, waste, energy and material resources in all stages of housing value 
chain. Stakeholders in  housing sector (such as businesses and dwellers) have little knowledge about the potential 
benefits of a circular economy and tend to be reluctant to adopt new circular business models. In HOUSEFUL, a new 
methodology will be created to calculate the Circularity Level of a residential building to aware the housing value 
chain about negative impacts caused by the use of traditional linear business models. HOUSEFUL building 
circularity methodology  
(BCM) will be developed in WP2 and will use these existing references by joining them in the appropriate way, and  
 
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          14  
  
  
improve them by adding thumb rules and tricks to easily and robustly define the degree of circularity of a building. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Building circularity will be calculated for Frontrunner buildings based on the calculation procedures and KPIs defined 
in HOUSEFUL project under a life cycle thinking approach. This solution will be offered to stakeholders as a web-
based tool for the evaluation of European buildings’ circularity. The web tool, which will also introduce specific 
solutions and circular services, will be improved in a loop process and will be the basis of the SaaS developed by 
VISUM in WP6.  
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)      Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)      Demo 4 -(2017)  
  
Capacity building 
Solution 2 (based on N2): Social engagement for co-creation Potential type of service:  
service   
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4, St5  Linked building life cycle:  All stages  
A cross-cutting solution, offered to stakeholders as a service (covering energy, materials, water and waste issues) 
will be provided in HOUSEFUL consisting in offering capacity development activities for co-creation of new circular 
business opportunities to stakeholders in current housing value chain. Currently, most of the housing sector 
businesses are lacking understanding to develop products or services in a circular approach and to uptake solutions. 
The cocreation process will address the variety of levels of acceptance from the political perspective, the community 
perspective and particularly, at the individual perspective of households and tenants in terms of the attitude and 
behavioral response or to the implementation and adoption of the HOUSEFUL solutions. Social innovation activities 
offered by this service include the analysis of drivers, enablers and barriers driving stakeholder decisions and 
behaviours. Although same research ques tion is proposed, the empirical approach will differ from the context 
variation of each demo sites, specifically at individual level of end -users (tenants and householders). In thus, when 
working in demo -site with potential tenants the approach will be bas ed in the provision of stimulus information 
materials and observation and integration of changes in attitudes and behaviors. When approaching tenants already 
leaving in the demo -sites the co -creation process should start earlier to foresee attitudes and be havior towards the 
potential change.  
Solution 4 (based on N4)  Searching local building material  Potential type of 
service:  
Customer service,         
Capacity building service  
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3  Linked building life 
cycle:  
Design, refurbishment, 
dismantling  
 
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          15  
  
  
Based on the findings and insights from the previous social and psychological analysis a definition of engagement 
activities and a knowledge sharing process will be based on online (web -access, online events, etc.) and offline 
sharing process based on face to face interactions (in a form of workshops). In this sense stakeholders’ will take part 
in the process of knowledge exchange (e.g. successful initiatives related to smart and sustainable buildings) aiming 
at fostering business and social innovation towa rds a circular economy. In HOUSEFUL, the completion of project 
co-creation activities will be led by WE&B in WP3 and include the stakeholder analysis and the development of 12 
co-creation workshops  based in backcasting exercises , 4 technical workshops , 2 t raining sessions  with 
stakeholders (public bodies, builders, architects, dwellers, etc.), and 4 study tours  to the Frontrunner buildings. 
Specific communication materials  to guarantee the stakeholder engagement in co -creation activities will be 
developed in WP7 by ICONS such as a call-to-action video (based on animations and infographics), different types 
of flyers customised for stakeholders in each Frontrunner buildings and other including web-based social media.  
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)      Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)      Demo 4 -(2017)  
  
Potential type of  
Solution 3 (based on N3): Material Passport + BIM  Customer service   
service:  
 Linked building  Design, refurbishment,  
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3  
 life cycle:  dismantling  
It is well known that the construction industry suffers from inefficient practices, resulting in high amounts of waste, 
duplication of processes and increased costs. A solution focused on sharing data about material s used in new and 
existing buildings and their impacts on the environment in a digital format to stakeholders across buildings’ value 
chain will be provided. As part of this solution, Building Information Modelling (BIM) and Material Passport (MP) 
will be jointly provided as services that will be offered to increase productivity and efficiency in the built 
environment, allowing for better decision making along the value chain, from design to construction/refurbishment, 
operation, maintenance and demolition. In HOUSEFUL, MP based on advance 3D model (BIM) will be carried out 
in each Frontrunner building to share asset data across building’s value chain. Generation of documentation in a 
MP, developed by TURNTOO in WP4, will give an overview of products, compon ents and materials used in the 
existing construction objects, in sequential years to be updated with a financial valuation. Advise on the architectural 
possibilities so safeguard as much of the existing materials and value into new building function. BIM w ill support 
the development of each MP, and it will be performed by ITEC for all Frontrunner buildings in WP4. Frontrunner 
building:      Demo 1 - (60’s)     Demo 2 - (70’s)      Demo 3 - (1900)      Demo 4 -(2017) potential material reuse at 
local scale. The search will be focused on EU c Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018ertified products 
including technical and environmental specifications clearly contrasted, allowing the complete material 
characterisation and calculation of potential building impact along the overall buildings’ value chain -manufacturing, 
design, construction, use and demolition phase. Results from this search will be included in a “Circular materials 
database”. The database itself will not include only certified  products (wood, steel, etc.), but also cost and supply 
conditions linked to these products. Some of these (more circular) products will be widely defined and detailed for 
potential use in Frontrunner buildings such as those contributing to the improvement  of energy efficiency or other, 
like paints, contributing to the improvement of indoor and outdoor air quality. In HOUSEFUL, the analysis of 
potential use of certified building material will be essential for the improvement of building circularity. This will also 
facilitate the potential modelling of building characteristics and the successful KPI quantification for impact analysis. 
Results can provide new circular business opportunities at local scale. This solution will be led by ITEC and 
performed in WP4.  Frontrunner building:      Demo 1 - (60’s)     Demo 2 - (70’s)      Demo 3 - (1900)      Demo 4 -
(2017)  
  
 Efficient treatment and reuse of  Potential type of  
Solution 5 (based on N5)  Renting/ leasing  
 rainwater and greywater  service:  
 Linked building  Design, refurbishment and  
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4  
This solution is focused on sourcing > 50 types of building materials  (existing or new commercial products) from 
secondary material platforms, databases and/or local producers, contributing to debate about quality, origin and  
 
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          16  
  
  
 life cycle:  use  
Greywater and blackwater can be separated with retrofitting measures in existing buildings. Greywater can be treated 
using innovative NBS for indoor application in multi-level green walls with minimum energy cost (<1.5kWh/m3) 
and disinfected using commercial O 3/UV systems for >90% water reuse  (we assume <10% losses by evapo -
transpiration). Water meters at household and building level can show the amount of water reuse for toilets recharge 
or irrigation. On the other hand, rainwater can be also pre -treated with NBS on the façade (developed in E eB-2016 
project by ALCN) or roof area (developed in an Austrian project by ALCN in 2014). Here, we will have also a loss 
through evapo-transpiration, potentially obtaining >95% rainwater reuse or minor in dry climates locations with 
low rainfall patterns. The service model will consider a payment fee per m 3 water treated and reused. This solution 
will be developed and demonstrated in WP4 at lab and semi -pilot scale (TRL 5) previous implementation at large 
scale (Demo buildings) (TRL7). Operating parameters obtained in lab scale tests with NBS will allow the 
optimisation of O 3/UV technologies as well as the proper dimensioning of NBS for final integration. NBS will be 
developed by ALCN. Disinfection using O 3/UV will be optimised at lab and pilot scale by LEIT AT and finally 
integrated in buildings by IDP (See Demo 1 and 2 in Figure 3).    
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)      Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)       Demo 4 -(2017)  
  
 Efficient treatment and reuse of  Potential type of  
Solution 6 (based on N6):  Renting/ leasing   
 un-segregated water  service:  
 Linked building  Design, refurbishment and  
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4  
 life cycle:  use  
WW can be combined in one single pipe with kitchen-shred organic waste including food-waste from all floors of an 
existing building. The liquid fraction of this combined WW can be separated from the solid fraction with a separation 
unit using centrifugal force and gravity. The liquid fraction can be treated with NBS indoor, a t facade and outdoor 
with a minimum energy cost (<1.5 kWh/m 3) and allowing >95% water reuse . The effluent water can further be 
disinfected (by using O3/UV) and used for toilet flushing, urban gardening and compost production. The solid fraction 
can be used for biogas production in a dry anaerobic digestion unit (Solution 8). The feasibility of this water treatment 
solution will be demonstrated at laboratory and pilot scale (See Demo 3 in Figure 3). The potential reuse of treated 
water for toilets or irrigation will be also quantified and demonstrated by ALCN in WP4.  
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)      Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)       Demo 4 -(2017)  
  
Solution 7 (based on N7):  Blackwater and BW treatment for 
biogas production  
Potential type of 
service:  Renting/ leasing   
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4  Linked building life 
cycle:  
Design, refurbishment and 
use  
This solution includes two core AD technologies for treatment of blackwater and BW at building scale, including the 
efficient BW collection and grinding at source. Main difference between anaerobic technologies resides in the water 
content of the effluent to treat. Solution S7a: is based on the joint treatment of blackwater and grinded BW at building 
(pilot) scale for wet anaerobic digestion using AnMBR solution. The solution foresees the recovery >95% food 
waste and >95% organic matter from blackwater for the potential generation of (1) >90% treated blackwater 
reuse for toilet or fertigation; (2) renewable energy from biogas (linked to S7c), (3) and compost (linked to S8) at 
home level for use by dwellers, neighbours or use in public gardens. In HOUSEFUL, L EITAT will design and 
construct an AnMBR system adapted for blackwater and grinded BW mixture at laboratory (5L bioreactor) and pilot 
scale (organic loading rate of 1520 inhabitant eq.) as a compact and transportable unit. The design will be addressed 
for a minor odour production. The systems will be started up and optimised in LEITAT facilities using real WW and 
grinded BW effluents. Biogas will be treated using absorption technologies developed by CARTIF ( Solution S7c) 
ensuring a biogas quality correspond ing to natural gas grid specification for potential grid injection, use in 
 CHP, 
combustion in a natural gas boiler or other valorisa- 
tion routes proposed by stakeholders. Once safety of the system is ensured and O+M protocols are Associated with document 
Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 prepared, the system will be emptied and transported in a container for final integration in 
the building (Demo 1) in operational environment at pre -commercial scale. The biogas conversion system will be 
initially dimensioned for the renewable energy recovery of 2600 kWh/y from biogas. Solution S7b: After separation 
of the un -segregated WW in Demo 3, the solid fraction and grinded BW can be mixed and used for production of 
 
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          17  
  
  
biogas and compost using a dry anaerobic digest er. Goals foreseen by these solutions include the minimum recovery 
>95% food waste and >95% organic matter from solid fraction of WW for production of renewable energy from 
biogas (linked to S8) and compost (linked to S7c) at home level. HOMEBIOGAS system will be adapted for biogas 
and compost production from BW or manure to the new feed. To make the existing system to work autonomously, 
some modifications like a feed slide need to take place. The sludge at the bottom of the anaerobic digester can be 
emptied regularly (once every 6 months), to produce high-quality compost. The generated biogas itself can be cleaned 
by using the absorption solution developed by CARTIF (Solution S7c) for increase of CH4 content (< 80%) and stored 
in inflatable and impermeable fabrics. This energy storage can be further used for potential grid injection, use in µCHP, 
or combustion in a natural gas boiler and can support the NZEB or even passive house claim to reach full autonomy 
(100%) even in winter times (December-February), when heating systems are mostly needed and sun heating will not 
be easily available. Demonstration of proposed solutions will be performed in WP4 activities.  
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)      Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)       Demo 4 -(2017)  
  
 High quality fertiliser/compost of  Potential type of  Renting/ leasing  
Solution 8 (based on N8)  
local origin  service:  Capacity building service Interested Stakeholders: 
 St4  Linked building life cycle:  Use  
Stabilised BW from anaerobic digestion systems (AnMBR or dAD, Solution S7), will be used as compost for local 
gardening (public parks, training activities in schools, etc.) substituting commercial compost. For that, on the one 
hand, reliability of different low-cost options for stabilisation of AnMBR digestate (from S7a) such as drying (IDP, 
LEITAT), domestic co-composting by mixture with fresh BWs (LEITAT) and vermicomposting (LEITAT) will be 
compared at laboratory (TRL5) before selection optimisation (TRL 6) and scale-up and demonstration at pilot scale 
in Frontrunner buildings (at TRL7 in Demo 1), in WP4. See Figure 3. Target foreseen includes the mass conversion 
yield of 0.55kg compost/kg digestate. On the other hand, an innovative compost cultivator prototype (developed by 
ALCN) will cocompost digestate from dAD in S7b solution together with fresh biomass clippings from the garden 
and greenhouse and will generate plants at the same time in a self -irrigating system. Any odours will also be 
eliminated by the plants and their roots in the closed system. A liquid fertiliser will be collected at the bottom of the 
system, hygienised, and can be sold or traded for organic waste with the neighbours. The best service model for this 
process will be co-elaborated with local and regional stakeholders. This model can possibly be expanded to bigger 
scale for decentralised urban composting activities. The operational performance of the prototype will be firstly tested 
at TRL6 before demonstration and installation in Demo 3 at building scale (at TRL7), both activities in WP4 . 
Replication of the optimal solution demonstrated in both demos will be offered to stakeholder as renting/leasing 
service.   
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)     Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)       Demo 4 -(2017) 
  
Solution 9 (based on N9):  Optimal management of waste at  Potential type of  Customer 
service the end of building life cycle  service:  
 Linked building  Design, refurbishment,  
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4  
 life cycle:  dismantling  
The Solution 9 is focused on the analysis of maximum recovery and valorisation potential of existing materials in 
buildings (i.e. envelope, facade, etc) at refurbishment or demolition stage, providing demolition guides to guaran tee 
the best and safety management of waste streams. In HOUSEFUL, this innovative solution will be offered to 
stakeholders as a service, focused on Design for Disassembly (DfD) principles impacting in the new design of 
residential buildings with increased longevity by easier renovation potential, using simple and modular building 
structures and systems during construction phase to make easier and much more efficient the dismantling process. 
The solution includes the selection of safety procedures for disass embly and reuse of non -hazardous materials in 
construction elements, aiming to achieve a potential reduction in 30% of CDW currently produced during building 
dismantling/demolition. The DfD will ensure materials are easily reused through the use of non-hazardous and durable 
materials. Thus, DfD service allows an easier maintenance, repair, recovery and reuse of components and materials 
that still have economic value for reuse in other buildings. Solution 9 will be demonstrated by ITeC in WP4 and in 
all  Demos.  
 
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          18  
  
  
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)      Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)       Demo 4 -(2017)  
  
Solution 10 (based on N10)  Improvement of energy efficiency 
by active and passive solutions  
Potential type of 
service:  
Customer service 
Renting/leasing  
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4  Linked building 
life cycle:  
Design, use and 
refurbishment  
Design of energy efficient facades and roofs using modular and more sustainable materials selected according to 
circular criteria. Assessing on the optimisation of global refurbishment actions according to energy efficient criteria. 
Including possible energy generation in site of the building, in order to compensate, as maximum as possible, the non- 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          19  
  
renewable primary energy consumption. An energy saving service will be offered to reduce the nonAssociated with document 
Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018-renewable energy consumption in the usage phase of buildings and reducing billing costs to 
the lowest level. Energy improvement solutions such as envelope interventions (e.g. innovative facades, energy-efficient 
windows, etc.), solar thermal systems, shared photovoltaic systems, etc will be proposed to reduce the energy demand 
of buildings and increase the share of renewable energies, contributing to reach Nearly Zero Energy Buildings (nZEB). 
The service includes an initial evaluation of the feasibility of the energy solutions proposed as well as energy tips for 
dwellers to reduce the energy bill, and the best renewable systems to be implemented, according to the building 
characteristics, the end-users’ profiles and the national regulations and energy markets backgrounds. This solution will 
be demonstrated in WP4 by AIGUASOL and ITeC, w ith the collaboration of project partners such as ALCN, IDP, 
GWR, AHC, NEUS LEBEN and CARTIF.  
Frontrunner building:       Demo 1 - (60’s)      Demo 2 - (70’s)       Demo 3 - (1900)       Demo 4 -(2017)  
  
 Guarantee the energy saving/  Potential type of  Renting/ leasing   
Solution 11 (based on N11)  
 production in buildings  service:  Capacity building service  
 Linked building  Design, use and refur- 
Interested Stakeholders:  St1, St2, St3, St4  
 life cycle:  bishment  
Co-creation based on performance rather than ownership for energy systems (i.e. ST, PV) finally installed in each 
building (Pay per performance business model). Monitoring of energy saving by active and passive measures adopted 
from material and energy valorisation points of view. Pay per performance business models will be promoted to be 
applied in the residential sector, in which the output generated is billed instead of the product ownership. For instance, 
a manufacturer or a technology supplier leases a  technology/equipment and retains their ownership, encouraging 
manufacturers to design long lasting and highly efficient products and encouraging technology suppliers to provide 
efficient products. As an example, a pay per performance service applied to renewable energies can consist in that an 
energy service company supplies, installs and maintains a solar thermal (ST) or photovoltaic (PV) system, 
guaranteeing an annual solar production defined in a contract of 10 years. By using this model, it is guarante ed that 
ST or PV systems operate correctly at least during the contract signed between the energy service company and the 
owner/neighbourhood community of the building. At the same time, these renting and leasing proposed models 
require from a continuous m onitoring not only of the renewable energy production, but also of the energy 
consumptions of the end -users. By giving them the related information will help to reach the energy savings goals 
and, by that, guarantee the service in the agreed conditions. Th is solution will be demonstrated in WP4  by 
AIGUASOL and ITeC, with the collaboration of project partners such as ALCN, IDP, GWR, AHC, NEUS LEBEN 
and CARTIF.  
Frontrunner building:      Demo 1 - (60’s)     Demo 2 - (70’s)      Demo 3 - (1900)      Demo 4 -(2017) Demonstration 
of HOUSEFUL solutions for water (S5, S6) and waste (S7, S8) vectors requires the technological implementation of 
solutions in Frontrunner buildings 1, 2 and 3. Figure 3 shows main water/BW flows and planned technologies behind 
HOUSEFUL solutions.   
Improved access to finance through investment planning for enhanced dimensioning of technical specifications 
and replication of proposed solutions  
Further than the EC contribution, other financial resources to create a feasible investment plan for proper 
dimensioning of technical specifications as well as for allowing the replication of 11 HOUSEFUL solutions 
marketable as services will be sought. Sev eral options will be analysed such as other national or regional funding 
schemes, RIS3, crowd funding through ethical banks, bank loans and/or guarantees through blending instruments 
from EIB (e.g. InnovFin, ESIF) and national banks, ERDF (if applicable). It is also foreseen to explore other 
alternative financial schemes, mainly those that will use as foundations an innovative public and private business 
models or even an only private model. New economic resources promoting the final definition and exploita tion of 
HOUSEFUL solutions as services will be welcome and offered for successful replication activities in Follower 
buildings or new case studies after the end of project execution.  
Environmental, economic and social assessment of the solutions demonstrated will be carried out by applying a life-
cycle thinking approach.  
The achievement of technical objectives foreseen for each HOUSEFUL solution will be supervised by a Technical 
Monitoring program, led by ALCN and developed in WP4. The program will include those sensors and protocols 
to evaluate the correct performance of technological solutions during their demonstration phase in each Frontrunner 
building. The implementation of solutions in HOUSEFUL will be accompanied by a pro-active market introduction 
(in WP6), using continuous interaction with stakeholders as a key management strategy along the whole value chain 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          20  
  
(in WP3). In addition to its practical demonstrations in Frontrunner buildings, the HOUSEFUL solutions will be 
environmental and economically evaluated in WP5 through LCA and LCC, as key tools to assess the impact of 
the transition from a linear approach to a circular model. The overall of proposed solutions in the 4 Frontrunner 
buildings will be also simulated with BIM, which will provide key data for conducting the LCA and LCC. In addition, 
the Level(s) tool developed by the European Commission will be used to assess the environmental performance of 
Frontrunner buildings with the aim to provide feedback and recommendations for improving the tool. In parallel, the 
evaluation of the social impact will be carried out in WP5. This measure will help boosting social understanding 
through the analysis of stakeholders’ attitudes and behaviour and the development and implementation of an 
engagement strategy aimed at undertaking social interactions. Therefore, HOUSEFUL will assess the 3 pillars of 
sustainability: environmental, economic and social.  
The co-creation of CEBOs will enable to offer the solutions identified as new systemic servicesAssociated with document 
Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 for the housing  
value chain. The identification of market constrains , social barriers and enables, a detailed definition of the 
exploitation plan and an effective strategy for the engagement of different stakeholders will be key factors to provide 
circular services. A Solution-to-Service Monitoring Plan (SSM Plan)  will be developed by LEITAT to monitor 
the transition process from solutions to services during the project execution.   
  
An innovative value added of HOUSEFUL will be the creation of a Collaborative Community of Housing Experts 
(CCHE) board. The CCHE will  accelerate the transition towards a circular economy in the built environment 
through the engagement of  10 additional demo sites (Follower buildings) spread around the world  for the 
replication of the HOUSEFUL services and the dissemination of the results among its network of contacts.   
  
 
Frontrunner building 1  
– 
  
Demo 1 (60’s) 
  
  
Frontrunner building  
2 
  
– 
  
Demo  
2 
  
( 
7 
0 
’s 
) 
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          21  
  
All the previous activities, along with a focused and accurate 
Communication and Dissemination, will allow a successful 
Market Uptake. Apart from the previously described 
complementary competences, project success will be achieved 
thanks to the suitable selection of HOUSEFUL partners and the 
collaboration of the CCHE board, which will act as an external 
scientific-technical panel for the definition of the optimal use of 
resources during different stages  of building life cycle. The 
CCHE will create synergies with previous and ongoing related 
projects. Since a multidisciplinary approach is required to 
define a fully circular model, the CCHE board brings 
together experts from different disciplines  such as e nergy, 
WW and solid waste treatment experts, architects, engineers, 
construction companies, technological providers, research 
institutions and public administration. The board will also 
include representatives from the HOUSEFUL partners (the Core Group, wh ich will retain the responsibility for 
scientific coordination, project objectives and the replication of solutions in the follower buildings). The CCHE board 
will be initially composed by local, regional and national stakeholders from each HOUSEFUL countr y, but open to 
relevant stakeholders from other EU countries to join discussion panels and roundtables. CCHE board will be 
involved in (1) the development and quantification of KPIs defining the new circularity value of buildings, (2) the 
definition of the optimal use of resources during different stages of building life cycle, (3) be the main recipients of 
project results, (4) the first actors receiving the status of project performance and (5) the main driver for replication 
of HOUSEFUL services and proposed solutions in existing and/or new buildings around Europe and engagement of 
10 Follower buildings for the replication of proposed services in Europe. All the potentially interested target groups 
representing the potential adopters and replicators of the HOUSEFUL services will be approached through dedicated 
dissemination (in WP7) addressed to different type of audience including stakeholders in Frontrunner buildings. The 
presence of EU and national housing associations in the consortium (CECODHAS, AHC, NEUES LEBEN) will 
maximise HOUSEFUL results’ dissemination potential through their existing communication channels. Project 
results will be disseminated at a minimum of 30 conferences and fairs, impacting on more than 200 companies.  
Figure 3 Main water/waste/energy flows HOUSEFUL solutions: water (S5, S6) and waste (S7, S8)  
 While there are several instruments which impact on buildings and construction products, such as the Energy 
Performance of Buildings Directive, the Energy Efficiency Directive, the Construction Products Regulation, the EU 
Emissions Trading System, the Industrial Emissions Directive, the Waste Framework and the Landfill D irectives, 
they focus on different resources and parts of the life -cycle and are not yet able to provide an overall life -cycle 
approach (EC, 2014). HOUSEFUL will provide policy recommendations (in WP6) at local, regional, national and 
EU scale to strengthen the legal framework with the aim to facilitate the trans ition in the housing sector towards a 
circular economy. Existing policies for promoting renewable energies and energy efficiency in Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
buildings need to be further strengthened and complemented with  policies for resource efficiency, which look at a 
wider range of environmental impacts across the life -
cycle of buildings. Recommendations for updating 
local, regional, national and EU regulatory framework 
will be provided based on project results and lessons learnt. Policy makers will be contacted during the execution of 
the project for the easier achievement of these actions.  
1.3.1.2 Positioning of the project   
The feasibility of HOUSEFUL strategy will be demonstrated and validated in 4 selected buildi ngs (Frontrunner 
buildings) aimed at increasing their circularity in water, waste, material and energy vectors. While an overall TRL 
around 7 to 8 will be achieved for HOUSEFUL concept, 8 specific technological innovations will make the jump 
from TRL 4-5 to TRL 7-8, offering/marketing proposed solutions as new services (TRL8) to stakeholders in housing 
sector at the end of project execution. In relation to HOUSEFUL innovations, the forecasted TRL evolution of 
mentioned individual technologies during the project compared to the current one is explained in Table 2.   
Table 2: TRL evolution of technological solutions implemented in Frontrunner buildings in HOUSEFUL  
Process/ 
Product  
TRL  Description of the technological innovations  
demonstrated in HOUSEFUL  
Beneficiary  
Start  End  
  
Policy recommendations to foster circular principles in the 
housing sector  
Frontrunner building  
3 
  
– 
  
Demo  
3 
  
( 
1900 
) 
  
CH 
4 
  
bag 
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          22  
  
Green façade for 
water  
treatment   
(Solution 5)  
5  7  
The green façade will be constructed at semi-pilot and pilot scale consisting of more 
than 70% CDW and is meant for circular building anyways with its modularity and 
upcycling character. The outer layer will include plants inserted to be used for 
rainwater and greywater treatment. This facade offers the services of micro-climatic 
benefits, water treatment and plant/food production.  
ALCN  
Constructed 
vertical wetland 
indoor  
(Solution 6)  
6  8  
The vertical ecosystem® (or short vertECO®) cleans greywater in a multi -layer 
green wall system, which has been developed and demonstrated as prototype in a 
real environment meant for indoor use with the water flow of up to 2 m3/day. Being 
able to offer this solution only for greywater is a big constrain for most households 
or touristic facilities (which are one target group of this product), due to the need of 
a second plumbing system, which in most cases do not exist. So, HOUSEFUL plans 
to separate the liquid from the solid fraction of conventional WW and treat the  
liquid fraction in subsurface flow. We will also try to combine the lower levels of 
the treatment area with the production of edible plants. This green wall is not only 
aesthetic and can support air purification, but it also offers the service of water 
treatment and food production at home level (TRL8).   
ALCN  
Interior winter 
garden for  
joint treat- 
ment of air and 
rain- 
water/treated  
WW (Solution 
6)  
5  7  
Currently ALCN develops an air treatment (temperature control, cleaning, 
humidification) system with plants in a winter garden (RECO 2ST, H2020 -EeB-
2017). This system will have flaps at the bottom and the top facing inside and one 
flap towards the outside. Depending on the temperature and the humidity in - and 
outside these flaps can open and close. Th e air that passes through the system, is 
also cleaned. In HOUSEFEUL we will install these prototypes for every level and 
will foresee automatic feed with rainwwater or treated WW to be completely 
autonomous. Air treatment will include temperature control, cleaning and 
humidification through automatically controlled systems whereby plants are 
fertigated by on site treated waste water. Operational feasibility of installed winter 
garden will be demonstrated from TRL 5 to TRL 7.  
ALCN  
Modular and 
transportable  
AnMBR for 
joint treatment 
of  
blackwater  
and grinded  
BW at building 
scale  
(Solution 7)  
4  7  
AnMBR is a commercial technology used for the treatment of agro-industry streams 
(TRL9). Companies such as ACWA, ADI Systems , KUBOTA or Veolia 
commercialise AnMBR systems. But this technology has never been tested and 
demonstrated for the treatment of WW and BW at building scale. In HOUSEFUL, 
optimal AnMBR configuration and membranes will be selected for efficient 
treatment of blackwater (↑COD) and grinded BW (↑COD,↑SS) mixed at optimal 
ratio at lab scale (TRL4). Operati onal results using real WW and grinded BW 
(TRL5) will be the basis for the design and development of a modular and 
transportable AnMBR at pilot scale for treatment of 8-10 hab-eq blackwater for first 
operation in LEITAT facilities (TRL6) and further integr ation demonstration at 
larger scale (TRL7) in Demo 1.   
LEITAT  
Dry anaerobic 
digestion  
(dAD) for 
valorisation of  
BW and solid 
fraction  of 
WW at resi- 
dential level     
(Solution 7)  
5  7  
HOMEBIOGAS commercialises compact, transportable and modular dry AD 
aimed at efficiently valorise BW and manure for biogas production (cooking) and 
compost at building scale (TRL9). HOMEBIOGAS will adapt their design at three 
family building scale for treatment of the solid fraction of WW and BW. The system 
needs to work in a semicontinuous mode, being able to be automatically fed with 
almost dry waste. For the sludge and liquid discharge together we will need to 
develop a suction unit that works in batch mode and directly feeds the compost unit. 
The technology will be designed according to energy needs of the Demo 3 but also 
considering energy/compost needs of the neighbourhood which can provide BW for 
renewable energy production and receive benefits from t heir engagement (i.e. 
compost). The system will be offered as a renting (TRL7) promoting the circular 
use and transition from ownership to functionality (pay per use).  
HOMEBIOGAS  
& ALCN  
Cleaning 
biogas for  
cost-efficient  
CHP conver- 
sion (Solution  
7)  
4  7  
Gas filters and scrubbers are technologies commonly used in biogas cleaning 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 
(TRL9). Many companies commercialise them (Siga -Tech, CJC, Parker, etc.). In 
the case of membrane contactors, it is a novel technology originally used for liquid 
gasification although it has been successfully demonstrated in the last years also in 
biogas u pgrading (TRL9). Companies such as 3M or Liqui -Cel commercialise 
these systems. In both cases, the mentioned technologies have never been tested 
and demonstrated for biogas valorisation at building scale. In HOUSEFUL, 
optimal configuration will be selected  for efficient treatment of biogas according 
to the predefined potential final use (CHP, grid injection, transport, etc.) in the 
different demos.   
 - 03/04/2018 
CARTIF  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          23  
  
Valorisation 
of biogas by  
CHP         
(Solution 7)  
5  7  
Small biogas CHP units are  so far only prototyped and not yet integrated nor 
verified. An exhaustive cleaning of biogas impurities (CO 2, H 2S, dioxins, etc) 
could allow its valorisation as natural gas -like fuel. Cleaned biogas can be stored 
and/or valorised for the production of ren ewable energy. HOUSEFUL will define 
the optimal energy valorisation options to cover energy needs of dwellers. For both 
anaerobic systems demonstrated in HOUSEFUL, the following alternatives will be 
evaluated: (1) in Spain: cleaned biogas combustion in a b oiler, valorisation using 
CHP and power storing in an electric battery, and others; and (2) in Austria: 
Biogas storing in inflatable and impermeable fabrics for  further used for potential 
grid injection, use in µCHP, or combustion in a natural gas boiler Solutions will be 
tested at TRL 7 and offered as services (i.e. equipment renting) for replication.   
ALCN/ IDP  
Compost  
production at 
local level  
(Solution 8)  
5  7  
Several solutions for the stabilisation of BW from anaerobic digestion systems will 
be tested at semi -pilot scale (laboratory environment) before demonstration and 
optimisation at building scale (TRL 7) once connected to foreseen AnMBR or dAD 
technologies in Demo 1 and 3. In detail, final stabilisation techniques for AnMBR 
digestate such as drying (LEITAT), domestic co-composting by mixture with fresh 
BWs (LEITAT) and vermicomposting (LEITAT) will be previously studied at 
laboratory (TRL5) before optimisation (TRL6) and scale-up and demonstration at 
large scale by IDP (TRL7 in Demo 1). On the other hand, an innovative compost 
cultivator prototype will be developed at TRL6 and optimised for composting fresh 
gardening wastes before mixing with dAD digestate at large scale in Demo 3.  
ALCN  
1.3.1.3 National or International research and innovation activities linked with HOUSEFUL  
Most HOUSEFUL partners have coordinated or collaborated in relevant projects with activities and actions linked to 
this demonstration project, exploring various innovations and circular solutions on water, waste, materials and energy 
vectors (Table 3). Other related projects and patents are listed in Table 5 and Table 6 to show HOUSEFUL progress 
beyond SOA.  
Table 3: Research and innovation activities providing outputs to the project  
Project  Description  Partner  Relevant results  
Project  
demEAUmed   
Closing the water cycle in Mediterranean tourist facilities 
(FP7 Water Inno&Demo, GA. 619116) - Greywater 
treatment with vertical ecosystem (indoor)   
ALCN, 
LEITAT  
Plant consortium for greywater 
treatment indoor, spatial arrangement 
in the building  
Project Green  
INSTRUCT  
Green INtegrated STRUCTural elements for retrofitting & 
new construction of buildings (H2020-EeB-04-2016, GA 
723825) - Grey- & rainwater treatment by green facade  
ALCN, 
LEITAT  
Grey- and rainwater treatment with 
green façade. Successful anchoring in 
the facade  
Project  
ReCO2ST  
Residential Retrofit assessment platform and 
demonstrations for near zero energy and CO2 emissions 
with optimum cost, health, comfort and environmental 
quality    
ALCN  
Indoor air treatment and conditioning 
with plants and automation in winter 
garden.  
Project  
Wohnwagon  
Includes NBS in the roof of the mobile home for water 
treatment/reuse. Includes full nutrient cycles, sustainable 
materials (PVC free, insulation, etc.), farming possibilities.   
ALCN  Closing resources-, nutrient- and energy 
cycles for mobile homes.  
4RinEU  
4RinEU (H2020) is about Robust and Reliable technology 
concepts and business models for triggering deep 
Renovation of Residential buildings in EU.   
AIGUAS 
OL,  
AHC  
Buildings energy behavior and BM 
analysis. Adaptation of the 
prefabricated facades to demos, 
including energy impact analysis and 
BM definition.  
InterGRIDy  
InteGRIDy (H2020) integrated Smart GRID Cross- 
Functional Solutions for Optimised Synergetic Energy 
Distribution, Utilisation Storage Technologies.  
AIGUAS 
OL  
Link among the detailed solutions and 
the DHC existing systems.  
GrowSmarter  GrowSmarter (H2020) is one of the Smart city projects that 
aim to transforming cities for a smart, sustainable Europe.  
AIGUAS 
OL  
KPIs on energetic & economic behavior 
of buildings used for LCA/LCC.  
Plug&Harvest  
Plug-n-play passive and active multi-modal energy 
Harvesting systems, circular economy by design, with high 
replicability for Self-sufficient Districts & Near-Zero 
Buildings  
AIGUAS 
OL  
First approach to end user’s 
requirements, SoA and market, 
limitations, KPIs and outputs of the 
circular economy BM to be used in 
HOUSEFUL  
URBAN  
GreenUP  
Aims at obtaining a tailored methodology to support the co-
development of Renaturing Urban Plans focused on climate 
change mitigation and adaptation and efficient  
ICONS, 
LEITAT 
CARTIF  
KPIs, monitoring and demonstration of 
the effectiveness of NBS; methodology 
and tools to support deci- 
Project  Description   Partner  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018Relevant results  
 water management through NBS.    sion-makers   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          24  
  
STARDUST  
SCC-01  
Lighthouse 
project (2017)  
Transformation of carbon supplied cities into smart, high 
efficient, intelligent and citizen-oriented cities, developing 
urban green solutions and business models, integrating 
buildings, mobility and efficient energy through ICT.  
ICONS  
KPIs, monitoring a nd social impacts 
through co -creation and engagement 
of citizens and stakeholders; 
replication and business models  
Project H2020 
AfriAlliance  
The Africa-EU Innovation Alliance for Water and 
Climate, building an alliance of stakeholders across Africa 
and Europe in Water and Climate issues and setting up 
communities of practice on specific local problems  
WE&B  
Stakeholders mapping, analysis and 
visualisation based on social network 
theory.   
GGGI Peru  
Pilot testing the Green Growth Potential Assessment 
(GGPA) in Perú to support the government in carrying 
out a gap analysis as a preliminary step toward the 
formulation of the National green growth strategy   
WE&B  
WE&B analysed the results and 
contributed to the final report of key 
recommendations for future Green 
growth interventions.  
  
1.3.2 Methodology  
1.3.2.1 Overall methodology  
HOUSEFUL activities have been structured as interrelated Work Packages described as follows:  
WP1. Project management  
LEITAT will be responsible for the coordination and monitoring of the overall operation and progress of the project 
with the support of the Technical Committee to ensure that all planned activities are properly executed. All partners 
will collaborate in order to: i) ensure that the milestones and WP deliverables are met on time and quality; ii) assist 
to project meetings, and iii) favour a fluent communication between partners and WPs.   
WP2. Methodology for the evaluation of 
circularity in the housing sector  
WP3. Effective social engagement: starting the 
cocreation of HOUSEFUL services  
WP2 involves the  development of a robust and 
reliable methodology to quantify the circularity 
level of residential buildings based on calculation 
procedures and KPIs (envi ronmental, economic and 
social), taking into account the whole life cycle of 
buildings. The methodology developed in this WP 
will be the basis to create the Circularity Tool (CT), 
which will be integrated in the SaaS (WP6). Existing 
market circular solutio ns and services will be 
researched in WP2 with the aim to be integrated as 
part of the SaaS.  
Based in a stakeholder analysis mapping the structures 
underlying behavioural and attitudes, WP3 will develop an 
engagement strategy to involve stakeholders from 
Frontrunner buildings in the co-creation of CEBOs and 
solutions that will be implemented in demo buildings 
(WP4). Thus, owners, dwellers, tenants, but also design 
teams (architects, engineers, etc.), municipalities, public 
housing agencies, manufacturers and technology suppliers 
will be involved in co -creation activities. Co -creation 
workshops will be organised to identify community 
knowledge needs  
and potential perceived barriers and enablers, as well as to 
inform about the benefits of implementing circular 
solutions.  
WP4. Large Scale Demo Buildings  
WP4 demonstrates the integrated systemic HOUSEFUL service  in four Frontrunner buildings, all equipp ed, 
adapted and prepared for the integration of existing and innovative technological and non-technological circular 
solutions, covering materials, water, waste and energy aspects. After conducting an exhaustive circular economy 
audit to determine the init ial status of the buildings, the technical specifications and execution projects  of the 
solutions to be demonstrated will be produced. Since innovative technologies  for the treatment of household 
effluents and BWs will be demonstrated, validation tests will be conducted firstly at lab scale in order to adjust and 
optimise the proper configuration and operation of proposed systems, and then deployed at full scale in Frontrunner 
buildings (TRL7-8) once approved permits for technological implementation in Demo  buildings are obtained. The 
performance of the HOUSEFUL solutions will be monitored by means of a technical monitoring program defined 
by project partners for ensuring the quality of the process and the obtained results. Sensors will be installed 
(photometric sensors, online microbial sensors, humidity sensors, temperature sensors, etc.) when required to monitor 
the solutions.   
WP5. Environmental, economic and social assessment  
An environmental, economic and social assessment of the circular solutions demonstrated in Frontrunner buildings 
(WP4) will be carried out by applying a life cycle thinking approach . First of all, an assessment plan will be 
developed to provide a common framework and guidance for evaluating the environmental, economic and societal 
impacts. The environmental and economic assessment will be carried out based on the BIM results (WP4) which 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          25  
  
integrate LCA and LCC related data and the methodology developed in WP2 for evaluating the circularity level of 
buildings. In addition, the new Level(s) tool will be tested with real data from HOUSEFUL demo buildings to provide 
feedback and recommendations to the European Commission for improving the tool. In parallel, a social assessment 
will be carried out for a better knowledge of how the integrated systemic HOUSEFUL service and solutions are going 
to be received in the socAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018iety. The impacts of the baseline scenario will 
be compared with the new circular HOUSEFUL scenario.    
WP6. HOUSEFUL Solutions as Services, market, policies and exploitation  
To achieve the expected project impacts, the exploitation activities will be carried throughout the project duration 
under the leadership of LGI and the support of all partners. WP6 includes a market entry strategy  of the most 
promising HOUSEFUL solutions as an integrated systemic service to facilitate the transition from a demonstration 
phase to a commercialisation phase. A Solution-to-Service Monitoring Plan (SSM Plan)  will be developed to 
monitor the transition process from solutions to services during the project execution. A multi-level perspective will 
be used as a basis for the evaluation of the disruptive impact of the  HOUSEFUL service on existing business 
models. Inputs from WP3 (social engagement), WP4 (Large scale demo buildings), WP5 (environmental, economic 
and social assessment) and from the market study will be used to identify key drivers and barriers to the deployment 
of the integrated HOUSEFUL service within the current linear business models. The HOUSEFUL service to be 
exploited will be integrated in a SaaS, which will facilitate the shift from linear to circular business models offering 
new CEBOs to the stake holders of the housing value chain. The SaaS developed will include a Circularity Tool 
(CT) based on the methodology defined in WP2 and an interactive sharing platform to exchange successful circular 
solutions. This WP involves the implementation of a Business Plan for the HOUSEFUL service for defined market 
segments and regions as well as the innovation management with relation to the IPR and project outputs 
protection/exploitation. Finally, policy recommendations will be provided at local, regional, national and EU scale 
in order to speed up the transition towards the circular economy in the housing sector.   
WP7. Communication and Dissemination   
Success stories and lessons learned will be transmitted in WP7, implemented through a Communication and 
Dissemination Plan. Developed knowledge and experience will be communicated to stakeholders and public through 
different outreach activities  (workshops, videos, website, webinars, study tours to demo sites, etc), with the 
contribution of all project partners and  the leadership of ICONS. Specific capacity building activities will be 
organised with the support of the Collaborative Community of Housing Experts (CCHE) to engage 10 Follower 
buildings to replicate the HOUSEFUL solutions demonstrated in WP4 and offered as a service in WP6. 
Dissemination actions are targeted to achieve social acceptance and end -user involvement, to promote market 
penetration.  
  
1.3.2.2 Gender analysis in HOUSEFUL Project  
Each project partner will implement a Gender Action Plan to promote equality in all possible 
forms; similar to the ones practised by some of the partners. In LEITAT, AHC, CECODHAS 
and ICONS more than half of the personnel involved are female. To contribute  to the EU 
Strategy for Gender Equality, the Action Plan will include the following measures: 1) Enforce 
gender equality in terms of human resources taking into account salary and working conditions; 
                                                           
1 .4.1 Advances that HOUSEFUL will provide beyond the state-of-the-art  
HOUSEFUL offers an innovative integrated systemic service for the effective transition from linear model to a 
circular model in the housing sector. This service is composed of 11 circular solutions as new services co-created 
by stakeholders in current housing value chain. Circular solutions will be demonstrated in 4 European Frontrunner 
buildings. The i ntegrated service pursues the circular management and efficient use of water, waste, energy and 
material resources in housing sector. To achieve this new paradigm in the co-creation of CEBOs in the housing sector, 
main challenges identified in Figure 1 are tackled as follows:  
Related to Challenge 1: HOUSEFUL approach fosters a new form of CEBOs’ co-creation, increasing the collaboration 
among stakeholders of the housing value chain. HOUSEFUL provides a new approach in the development of  
balance between the experts who participate in workshops, training sessions, seminars, etc.; and 
4) Balance and monitor gender aspects on a regular basis to tackle the gap for an “equal -
opportunities  
Figure 4. Percentage 
of women-men staff 
in HOUSEFUL  
  
Men 
59 
% 
Women 
41 
% 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          26  
  
2) Promote the recruitment of women executive and management positions in project implementation; 3) Maintain 
a gender  
policy”. Efforts will be made for better reconciliation between work and family life. With these measures 
HOUSEFUL will contribute to alleviating gender-based disparities and promote gender equality in accordance with 
the EU Strategy for equality between women and men ( EC, 2010). In order to eliminate gender bias, as a strategic 
priority, the consortium will take active measures to ensure that women are well represented in the partner’s 
organisations. Opportunities for mobility within the programme will  take account of the different needs of women 
and men in order to enhance participation by female scientists. This approach is coherent with EC policy: The Strategy 
for equality between women and men (Strategy 2010 -2015), adopted by the EC on 21 st September 2010, that 
considers that inequalities between women and men violate basic Human Rights and highlights the contribution of 
gender equality to economic growth and sustainable development. In HOUSEFUL (Figure 4) project gender equality 
will exist since already in the proposal phase 41% of the staff involved in the project are women. The key roles are 
led by women : Administrative and Budgetary Manager (Serena Salerno, LEITAT), Technical Manager (Marta 
Escamilla, LEITAT) and Communication and Dissemination Manager (Elisabeth Schmid, ICONS). In addition, Mrs. 
Sorcha Edwards (CECODHAS) will be the chair of the CCHE.
1.4 Ambition  
proposed solutions, combining technological and non -technological innovative actions, organisational, societal and 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
behavioural innovations aiming to promote leasing and/or renting mo dels of solutions as new services, promoting the 
performance/functionality of products rather than mass customisation.  
Related to Challenge 2 : Current standards for the evaluation of building circularity are focussed on partial linear 
processes of the overall building life cycle, on specific vectors (i.e. the cost optimal procedure established in EPBD 
2010 for the energy vector) and/or in limited data and quality labelling related to specific materials (i.e. C2C 
labelling). In HOUSEFUL, a robust, reliable and day -to-day market usable methodology will be developed to 
quantify the degree of circularity o f buildings which could be used by designers but also construction companies, 
promoters and financial institutions. The methodology will be developed considering the circular economy principles 
related to recyclability, reusability and waste savings of the materials and active solutions, and also other key factors 
such as the feasibility of HOUSEFUL circular solutions. The methodology will consider all the existing or brand new 
methodologies related to the key vectors of circularity, including LCC, LCA, S-LCA methodologies or the next future 
brand new EU Level(s) one. The methodology will focus on the establishment of replicable calculation procedure, 
validated on a set of building archetypes representing the main residential typologies for different European 
geographical locations.   
Related to Challenge 3: In HOUSEFUL, potential environmental and socioeconomic impacts of the circular strategies 
demonstrated will be evaluated by applying a Life Cycle Thinking approach: LCA, LCC and social -LCA 
methodologies.   
Related to Challenge 4 : Based on the findings obt ained through the analysis of stakeholders’ attitudes, beliefs, 
behaviour and concerns, HOUSEFUL will define an engagement strategy and thus, will organise several capacity 
building activities (technical workshops, training sessions, study tours to demo bu ildings) which will help to 
overcome existing cultural and social barriers for fostering the co -creation of new circular solutions and services.   
Related to Challenge 5:  HOUSEFUL will review current EU policies and Communications dealing with circular 
economy, resource efficiency, energy efficiency and renewable energies with the aim to provide policy 
recommendations able to speed up the transition towards a circular economy in the housing sector. Recommendations 
to launch circular procurement and circular tendering processes for public social housing will be provided to scale -
up new business models. The SaaS developed will be also a powerful tool to facilitate this transition in the housing 
value chain.  
Some HOUSEFUL partners (i.e. LEITAT, CARTIF, AIGUASOL , ALCN, AHC, TURNTOO) have participated in 
previous EU projects aimed to improve the sustainability of buildings, some of them focused on energy efficiency 
(4RINEU, Plug-N-Harvest), wastewater (RUN4LIFE) and materials (Urban GreenUP, Green Instruct) in a separated 
way. This previous partner experience orients the proposal of HOUSEFUL beyond the State of the Art (SOA), with 
the final aim to offer an integrated systemic circular service for the housing sector. By overcoming the insufficiencies 
and difficulties of earlier projects, improvements to the technologies and solutions have been defined, as well as 
organisational and social innovation actions. They will provide competitive and holistic demonstration of an 
integrated systemic circular service for the ho using sector with optimal, proven and accepted performance. 
Table 4 refers to the ground -breaking nature of the objectives, concepts involved, issues and challenges to be 
addressed, as well as approaches that will be used in HOUSEFUL compared to current state of the art. HOUSEFUL 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          27  
  
will give response to the following requirements for a more circular housing sector: i) designing new and more 
efficient processes and procedures for the construction/refurbishment and demolition phases; ii) efficient treatment 
of BW and wastewater; iii) reducing the non -renewable primary energy consumption of buildings; iv) making the 
strategy cost competitive and close to market by including LCA, LCC and social assessment, a new business model 
and prospective end-users participation, among others.   
  
Table 4: Progress beyond the state of the art and main breakthroughs.  
Co-creation of new circular solutions and services  
SOA  
• Most of the stakeholders of the housing value chain advance their own interests independently, which 
prevents the transition towards a CE. These stakeholders need to build new collaborative networks for value 
co-creation.  
• Currently, circular practices in the housing sector tend to occur at individual levels (i.e. energy efficiency, 
materials, waste and water), without considering an integrated approach of the different environmental 
aspects that cause an impact along life cycle of buildings.   
HOUSEFUL 
approach  
beyond the  
SOA  
• HOUSEFUL will develop a conceptual framework for shaping the linear systems towards circular economy 
and will propose how value circles and co-creation of value with a variety of stakeholders are crucial 
aspects in enabling circular economy. HOUSEFUL will provide a coherent vision for a collaborative 
network than can translate circular economy principles into housing value chain -specific processes and 
dynamics.    
• A social engagement strategy will be carried out for the co-creation of circular solutions and services.  
Breakthrough  
 HOUSEFUL will organise a wide variety of activities (12 co -creation workshops, 4 technical workshops, 2 
training sessions, 4 study tours) at EU level to foster the co -creation of new circular solutions and services 
with the aim of gathering the users’ needs, identifying potential barriers for the co -creation of solutions as 
well as raising awareness about the potential benefits of implementing circular solutions.     
A SaaS to bring buildings into the circular economy and promote the replication of HOUSEFUL solutions as services  
SOA  
• The full transition from linear to circular models in the housing value chain is still far from being achieved.   
• Lack of tools in the market able to quantify the circularity level of residential buildings considering 
different environmental aspects (energy, materials, waste and water) and based on a life -cycle thinking 
approach, while at the same time offering successful circular solutions and services to the housing value 
chain.   
 
HOUSEFUL 
approach  
beyond the  
SOA  
• A robust and reliable methodology to quantify the circularity level of residential buildings will be 
developedAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018.  
The EU Level(s) tool will be considered.  
• A new circular thinking approach will be provided as a starting point to introduce circular economy and life 
cycle thinking into building projects, thus raising awareness of stakeholders.   
Breakthrough  
• A SaaS will be developed and offered to stakeholders of the housing value chain to promote the redesign of 
traditional business models towards circular ones, encouraging professional development and life cycle 
thinking.   
• The SaaS will be a guidance tool composed by a CT to quantify the circularity level of buildings considering 
water, waste, material and energy vectors.   
• The SaaS will include an interactive sharing platform to share successful circular HOUSEFUL solutions in 
residential buildings as new services offered to stakeholders in housing sector, thus promoting the replication 
of this circular model in other buildings while raising awareness and knowledge sharing activities on circular 
economy models.  
Efficient processes and procedures for the construction/refurbishment and demolition phase  
SOA  
• Most of stakeholders in housing value chain does not have detailed information of buildings characteristics to 
guarantee the potential reuse or substitution of materials while guarantee the functionality of existing elements.   
• New buildings are being introduced MP and BIM models in design phase, in order to increase the knowledge 
of their characteristics, enabling the potential sharing of information with stakeholders in housing value chain 
while potentially increasing their circularity by an improved decision-making.   
• Lack of information regarding procedures used during construction of existing buildings impacts on the 
potential reuse of materials during disassembly/demolition of existing buildings.   
HOUSEFUL 
approach  
beyond the  
SOA  
• MP and BIM offer detailed information of building characteristics, allowing the definition of circular 
strategies for the improvement of the circular management and use of water, waste, energy and material 
resources.   
• In HOUSEFUL, analysis of alternative and safety methods contributing to maximum material recovery during 
building disassembly for refurbishment or partial renovation while minimising energy consumption and waste 
production will be carried out.  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          28  
  
Breakthrough  
• MP will be developed for selected Frontrunner buildings including a detailed inventory of their physical state 
of and the elements and materials it consists of by using BIM. A detailed identity of all construction materials 
used will be achieved. This solu tion will be offered to stakeholders as a service and will allow the 
quantification of KPIs for the evaluation of building circularity and detail the technical specifications of 
HOUSEFUL solutions.   
• In HOUSEFUL, an innovative service will be demonstrated focused on the Design for Disassembly (DfD) 
principles impacting in the new design of residential buildings for an easier renovation. DfD includes simple 
and modular structures and systems to make easier and more efficient the dismantling. DfD will contrib ute 
to minimise current CDW disposed to landfill from 40% to 10% in 10 years for housing sector as realistic 
scenario.  
Efficient treatment and valorisation of the organic matter contained in BW and blackwater   
SOA  
 BW is used to be collected for transportation and further treatment in centralised composting or AD plants. 
This treatment model generates a high cost for society, making difficult the participation of citizens in the 
decision making about how to use and exploit the resulted renewable energy and compost for own benefit.  
HOUSEFUL 
approach  
beyond the  
SOA  
• HOUSEFUL offers decentralised solutions for the successful treatment of segregated BWs and blackwater 
produced at building level. These solutions give to stakeholders in housing sector the opportunity to generate 
renewable energy for several uses and compost for gardening purposes.  
• An innovative AnMBR system will be developed and demonstrated at large scale for the efficient treatment 
of blackwater and BW produced by 8 homes. Treated WW will be hygienised (O 3/UV) for reuse in toilets. 
Resulted biogas will be treated with a small scale adsorption system and CHP or heat will be produced for 
use by dwellers.  Social engagement will contribute to decide how to exploit the renewable energy.  
• Besides, DryAD will be also demonstrated for the treatment of the solid  fraction of un -segregated WW 
streams produced at household level together with BW.    
Breakthrough  
• AnMBR systems are being operated at large scale in agrifood industries. In HOUSEFUL, a smaller scale 
AnMBR for treatment of WW streams at building scale (8 homes equivalent) will be demonstrated in Demo 
1.   
• In HOUSEFUL, HOMEBIOGAS will adapt its existing DryAD design at three family building scale for the 
joint treatment of the solid fraction of WW together with kitchen wastes. The technology will be designed 
according to energy needs of the Demo 3 but also considering energy/compost needs of the neighbour hood 
which can provide BW for renewable energy and receive benefits from their engagement (i.e. compost).  
Domestic WW treatment and reuse  
SOA  
• Although water reuse is an established practise in some European countries like Spain, obtaining reclaimed 
water from WWTPs (which is the common strategy) results in a big limitation due to the distance from 
application sites, and the threat of industrial pollutants usually present in centralised systems.   
• Reclaimed water from WWTP is usually gained from tertiary treatments, once the nutrients (N, P) have been 
removed. However, as > 70% of water reuse is irrigation in agriculture, these nutrients should remain in water.   
HOUSEFUL 
approach 
beyond SOA  
• In HOUSEFUL, rainwater, greywater and blackwater will be treated by using Natured Based Solutions (NBS) 
for obtaining reclaimed water for reuse in toilets or irrigation, ensuring its safety by new disinfection by 
commercial UV/O 3. Micropollutants and pathogens control to evaluate the toxicity to vegetable species in 
NBS.   
• In detail, the feasibility of the following NBS technologies for >90% water reuse in toilet recharge or 
irrigation will be demonstrated at building scale: (1) Green facades made by CDW for the  treatment of 
greywater and rainwater (Demo 1 and 2); (2) Vertical ecosystem for the treatment of liquid fraction from un-
segregated domestic WW (ver- 
 tical wetland indoor) (Demo 3); and (3) interior winter garden for joint treatment of air and rai Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018nwater/treated WW (Demo 3). A final disinfection step will be 
required for water reuse.  
Breakthrough  
• Modular NBS and O3/UV system demonstrated in HOUSEFUL for domestic WW treatment (segregated and 
unsegregated streams) will be offered to stakeholders as a service (renting/leasing, pay per m 3 treated and 
reused)  
• Reclaimed water will be tailored to end -users necessities. For instance, in Demo site 1 and 2 (Sabadell and 
Terrassa, Spain), reclaimed  water will be reused for toilet flushing. On the other hand, in Demo 3 
(Baumgarten, Austria), it will be used for toilet flushing and irrigation (in winter garden and external garden).  
Energy efficiency and renewable energies  
SOA  
• Many EU projects have been conducted so far focusing on reducing the energy demand and increasing the 
share of renewables in buildings with the aim to achieve NZEB.  
• New business models are needed to be applied in the residential sector (i.e. pay per perfo rmance).   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          29  
  
HOUSEFUL 
approach  
beyond the  
SOA  
• HOUSEFUL will design energy efficient facades and roofs considering a circular approach, where modular, 
prefabricated and off-site construction, design for disassembly, materials reuse and recycling aspects will be 
considered.   
• HOUSEFUL includes AnMBR and  dAD solutions for blackwater and BW valorisation, promoting the 
production of renewable energy at building scale.  
• HOUSEFUL will look into the possibility to boost the use of innovative services based on pay per performance 
BM, where energy savings or ren ewable energy production are guaranteed by contract. This type of BM is 
already applied in industries and non -residential buildings, but implementation in residential buildings is 
scarce.     
Breakthrough  
 Different energy efficient solutions and services will be demonstrated in Frontrunner buildings aiming to 
validate their technical, environmental, economic and social feasibility, reducing the energy demand up to 
50%.  
Development of circular tendering processes for public housing  
SOA  
 The current setup of tendering procedures launched when constructing new buildings or refurbishing existing 
ones does not stimulate circular economy principles. Tendering processes are too prescriptive, which results 
in business not being able to deliver the best solutions and creating little room for innovative solutions.   
HOUSEFUL 
approach  
beyond the  
SOA  
• HOUSEFUL approach pursues the public sector to lead the way in delivering resource -efficient buildings, 
as a way to motivate and inspire stakeholders of the housing value chain to apply circular principles in their 
projects. HOUSEFUL will encourage municipalities and public housing agencies, as parties in charge of 
initiating building projects, to set the right example when constructing or refurbishing buildings.   
• HOUSEFUL will increase knowledge on circular economy and how it can be adapted to public 
procurement.   
Breakthrough  
 The tendering processes that will be launched in 2 of the Frontrunner buildings by AHC will serve as an 
example of a whole new approach since circular principles will be considered. These experiences and the 
knowledge obtained w ill benefit not only the social housing agencies involved in the project (AHC and 
NEUES LEBEN), but also other public housing agencies willing to embed tendering processes that boost 
buildings’circularity. At least 8 public housing agencies will be engaged  during the project to promote the 
launch of circular tendering processes.   
  
Table 5: HOUSEFUL progress beyond existing projects.  
Project Name, approach and technology  Differences in HOUSEFUL project  
BAMB project (H2020) enables a systemic shift in the building sector 
by creating circular solutions that increase the  values of building 
materials. BAMB develops and integrates tools that enabling the shift: 
Materials Passports and Reversible Building Design. The BM enables 
waste reduction and use fewer resources during construction.  
BAMB shares with HOUSEFUL the circular economy 
approach, but only materials are tackled. HOUSEFUL 
focuses on being more resource efficient  in the 
management of energy, materials, water and waste at 
residential building scale, including social housing   
The 4RinEU project (H2020) will define robust, cost -effective, 
tailorable deep renovation technology packages supported by usable 
methodologies, feeding into reliable business models. It will minimise 
failures in design and implementation, from the preliminary audit up to 
the end-of-life. It will provide information on e nergy, comfort, users’ 
impact, and investment performance.  
HOUSEFUL will implement a specific software at demo 
sites that will permit to quantify building circularity 
based on standard methods. This will result in an 
innovative methodology that will be sh ared among 
interested audience by means of technical workshops and 
other engagement activities.  
During the IEE project TABULA, residential building typologies have 
been developed for 13 European countries. Each national typology 
consists of a classification scheme grouping buildings according to 
their size, age and further parameters and a set of exemplary buildings 
representing the building types, which enable a projection of the actual 
national building stock consumption and the energy saving potentials.  
HOUSEFUL will consider active and passive efficient 
solutions with the aim of improving building energy 
efficiency. To achieve this, specific facades and roof will 
be designed according to circularity criteria when 
selecting components and materials in the construction 
object. During refurbishment stage, best energy efficient 
actions will be detected. A step forward in reducing 
energy needs, will be the in situ generation of energy in 
the building facilities while treating domestic WWs 
together with organic waste.  
The Green INSTRUCT  develops a prefabricated modular building 
block that is superior to conventional precast reinforced concrete 
panels, improved acoustic and thermal performance and multiple 
functionalities. The Green INSTRUCT block consists of over 70% of 
CDW.   
The demEAUmed project demonstrates innovative technologies for 
optimal and safe closed water cycle in Mediterranean tourist facilities, 
leading to their eventual market uptak e. As well as, the reduction of 
fresh water consumption by using alternative water sources or the reuse 
of treated grey waters and/or WWs within the building.   
As for demEAUmed project, in HOUSEFUL, grey- 
water will be treated separately with a tailor -designed 
NBS technology and a hygienisation technology before 
water reuse based on O 3/UV. Also, rainwater will be 
conditioned with these technologies. This will be the first 
demonstration of the feasibility at residential  The UVOX-Redox combines the oxidising effect of O3with UV dis- 
infecton and highly effective advanced oxidation process (AOP) in one 
single system for treating different WWs.  
building scale. A 95% water reuse Associated with document 
Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 is foreseen, for irrigation 
and toilets use.  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          30  
  
Living Fuels is a UK based company that recovers used cooking oil 
into an environmentally friendly bioliquid which is used to generate 
carbon neutral electricity for residential homes and businesses.   
Blackwater and BW will be jointly treated using a 
compact tailor -made AnMBR and dAD reactors. The 
recovered biogas will be cleaned in -situ for (1) storage 
during winter for further valorisation aor (2) used for 
direct electricity and heat production, reducing building 
energy needs. Resulting digestate will be treated for use 
by local community as fertiliser. Treated blackwater 
from AnMBR will be disinfected for reuse.  
The BIOPAQ®UBOX, technology was designed by Paques for 
municipal/industrial applications, combining biological sewag e 
treatment with biogas purification. This leads to low operational costs, 
a small footprint and zero odour emission. The system modular design 
is suitable for capacities from 5 to 40 thousand population equivalent.   
1.4.2 Innovation potential of HOUSEFUL  
Table 6: Results of patent search.  
Patents  Approach and technology  Differences to HOUSEFUL   
Nr. 516363 Austrian Patent 
(ALCN)  
Greywater treatment with vertical ecosystem  
“vertECO”  
WW treatment including liquid phase 
of blackwater after hygienisation. No 
direct blackwater treatment.  
US13141082 (Huge Asia Ltd)  Multi-phase separation, generating sewage gas, 
and biological denitrification /dephosphorisation  
HOUSEFUL will produce biogas and 
treated waste in modular units.  
CN 203429173 U Novel domestic 
biogas digester (孔远萍)  
Characteristics of simple and convenient 
structure, low construction cost, small floor area, 
strong fermenting capacity, high pressure and 
safety and reliability in operation  
In HOUSEFUL, an optimised and 
compact dAD and AnMBR for 
blackwater and BW treatment will be 
implemented.  
CN202643583 (U) (Daqing Yulu  
Agriculture Technology Dev Co 
Ltd)  
House sewage disposal recovery fertiliser 
making device. Utilises agricultural waste (in 
combination with a poultry house)  
HOUSEFUL will produce compost 
from digestate obtained in the AD  of 
blackwater and kitchen waste  
CN106594886 (A) (Hangzhou 
Jiegao Env Prot Tech Co Ltd)  
System and method integrating air purification 
with plant cultivation  
HOUSEFUL will also provide WW 
treatment capacity.  
US 20110259832 A1 (Veolia 
Water Solutions)  
Treatment of municipal or industrial WW 
comprising a step of oxidation via O3 and 
another of disinfection via UV radiation  
HOUSEFUL envisages using small 
scale O 3/UV systems -based 
technologies available in the market to 
disinfect treated domestic WW prior to 
reuse at home level for toilet recharge 
or irrigation.  
US6200466B1 (New Lasers Inc)  Water treatment by photolytic reaction  
WO 2010000798 A1 - Waste  
water treatment  (Unilever Ltd.)  
Treatment of industrial waste with transition 
metal catalysts, H2O2 and a reactive radical.  
  
2. IMPACT
2.1 Expected impacts   
HOUSEFUL intends to develop and implement circularity 
principles in the built environment to see buildings as 
resource banks – demonstrated at large scale in 4 demo 
buildings and followed up in 10 additional buildings. The 
market success of the 11 circular  solutions co -created 
between stakeholders is favoured by implementing 
technological, organisational and social innovation through 
the whole value chain of the building life -cycle, including 
the endusers perspective along the project. HOUSEFUL 
will make possible the transition to a Circular Economy of 
buildings incorporating four dimensions:  economic, 
social, legal and environmental, through a systemic 
innovation approach including all the aspects depicted in 
Figure 5. Concretely, HOUSEFUL will address the  
expected impacts (EI) in the call as specified below.   
EI 1&2 : Markets for new products/services (…) more 
sustainable consumption patterns and innovative producer 
responsibility or (cross) sectorial governance schemes.  
Figure 5. Systemic approach of HOUSEFUL to achieve 
circularity principles in the build environment based on the EC 
Action Plan.  
New approaches for designing products/services considering end -users, tenants, brand owners, entrepreneurs, and 
researchers, and deliver the needs of end-users;  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          31  
  
First market niche for the application of HOUSEFUL services is social housing (three of the demo buildings are for 
social housing). The co-created services offered in HOUSEFUL for this sector are presented as CEBOs, which are 
based on customer services, capacity building services and renting/leasing of the innovative solutions for the 
whole life cycle of buildings. More precise information of the 11 CEBOS are shown in Table 1 with the respective 
explanation of the identified needs and vectors tackled. Current status of EU social housing market (based on the 
report: The state of Housing in the EU 2015 published by Housing Europe (next report is foreseen in October 
2017Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018). Two facts summarise the current social  
housing state in EU: a) There are more people without a home today in Europe than six years ago, and 2) there are 
not enough affordable homes available in most European countries to meet increasing demand. Additionally, in many 
countries the quality of the buildings is rather poor (especially in central and Eastern European countries). For 
example, running water is not accessible in 1 out of 3 homes  in Romania and only 65% of households have a 
WW system. With this scenario local governments and their respective social housing agencies are currently setting 
up programmes for urgent renovation of existing buildings (HOUSEFUL demos 1&2 in Spain) or even investing in 
new construction of social houses (HOUSEFUL demo 4) T able 7 summarises the Spanish and Austrian housing 
market status. With this scenario together with the identified needs in Table 1 is clear that the social housing sector 
demands for the creation of new services to foster sustainable consumption patterns d uring the construction, 
renovation and using phases.  
  
Table 7. Trends in social housing markets in the countries of HOUSEFUL frontrunner demo-buildings  
Trends in housing market – Spain (data 2015)ii    
Total nº of dwellings (thousand): 25,208  
Nº of dwellings/1000 inhabitants: 538  
Advantages: (1) Social housing funds: banks transfer a proportion of their housing stock into the 
social rental sector; (2) State Housing Plan subsidizes creation of public social rental housing.   
Disadvantages: (1) Numerous empty homes owned by banks; (2) Extremely high number of 
foreclo- 
sures undertaken from 2007-2012    
Trends in housing market – Austria (data 2015)    
Total nº of dwellings (thousand): 4,441 / Nº of dwellings/1000 inhabitants: 555  
Total housing completions in 2012/13: 52,000; Total nº of social rental dwellings: 891,000  
Advantages: (1) High quality of dwellings, large living space; (2) Stable housing market little 
impacted by the global financial crisis  
Disadvantages: (1) In terms of rent affordability, share of housing costs out of disposable income 
and  
housing overburden rate, Austria scores better in terms of share of housing costs than EU average, but  
slightly worse if we look at low income population  
i) Identification and analysis of stakeholders’ belief structures and its involvement through HOUSEFUL 
project and its co-creation process  
The HOUSEFUL Service will benefit the following stakeholders (St), which will be the essential elements in the 
cocreation process of HOUSEFUL solutions towards the adoption of more sustainable and responsible choices for 
their business and decision-making processes. The solutions will also address factors conditioning social choices and 
influencing behavioural intentions of stakeholders. The  following groups of St (described in p. 2) will form the 
CCHE: (St1) Construction companies, private promoters, technological and product suppliers  will be engage 
to redesign their linear products/services production towards circularity principles.  (St2) Design teams including 
architects, engineers and quantity surveyors  will participate in HOUSEFUL co -creation workshops and study 
tours to guide towards the circularity potential all buildings and encourage them to set up housing plans and projects 
considering such potential. (St3) Municipalities and regional/national housing agencies will be engaged towards 
the adoption of circular criteria in their tenders and housing local programmes of renovation and new construction of 
buildings. (St4) Owners/Dwellers/t enants: this group of stakeholders has key importance in the successful 
implementation of HOUSEFUL services, thus their involvement, and engagement from the very beginning is 
essential for the project’s success. (St5) Policy makers and implementers agencies: CCHE Board will count with 
policy makers around the housing sector to provide them with sustainable guidelines and policy recommendations 
on how to design a strategy to accelerate the transition towards the circular economy.  
ii) Implementation of innovative producer responsibility and cross-sectorial governance schemes  
Although sustainable building environment initiatives have already been partially established, the EC has identified 
challenges such as the changes in energy efficiency, more active uptake of new technologies and services, improving 
specialised training, and stimulating demand for efficiency improvements in existing building and renovations. This 
will require innovative manufacture responsibility and governance schemes across the stakeholders identified above 
to enable the housing sector to become more competitive, resource efficient, socially inclusive and sustainable. 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          32  
  
HOUSEFUL will enable the implementation of the proposed innovative services in 4 buildings involving not only 
the producers of materials/products and technologies but also directly the civil society, decision makers and public 
housing agencies.  
EI 3 & EI 6 : Reduce supply chain length, increase resource efficiency, and reduce environmental impact. EI 6. 
Economic, social, cultural and environmental sustainability and main elements of business plan. Assessment of 
possible positive and negative side-effects and risk and harmful substances present in recycled materials.  
As previously mentioned, the housing sector is one of the highest consumers of resources in EU, accounting for 50% 
of extracted materials, 42% of energy consumption, 35% of GHG emissions, 30% of water consumption and 
35% of total waste production 3. HOUSEFUL approaches the environmental, soc ial and economic aspects in a 
holistic manner: Sustainability assessments will be based on a LCA, LCC and Social-LCA that will enable detection 
of the positive and negative impacts of the HOUSEFUL services. Moreover, the project guarantees to reduce and 
close the current supply Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
chain length of the WW and BW services as well all the services along the construction phase of buildings. This will 
be possible by the creation of commercial software as a  service to calculate the Circularity Level of the demo 
buildings and of at least 10 additional follower buildings. This SaaS will contribute to the utilization of “ Level(s)”, 
the new tool developed by the European Commission together with industry stakeholders in order to enables building 
professionals and their clients to identify key a reas for better environmental performance. The inscription to 
“Level(s)” register will be proposed and warmly advice to housing stakeholders during the dissemination activities. 
Reduction of the housing vectors supply chains will contribute to these main expected benefits:   
ECONOMIC BENEFITS (also addressed in EI 1 & EI 5)  
 market 
opportunities  
HOUSEFUL provides new opportunities for (social) housing sector by offering new solutions with circularity 
principles having in mind the reuse of materials, resources (WW, BW) and increasing the energy efficiency of 
buildings by passive and active planning. The uptake of recycled construction materials by other industries boosts 
industrial symbiosis at local/regional level.  
 cost savings  
Waste prevention, re -use and similar measures could bring net savings of €600 billion, or 8% of annual 
turnover, for businesses in the EU4. Many companies have observed that linear business models increase their 
exposure to risks; notably 75% of EU SMEs have seen their material costs rise in past 5 years 5 along with 
increased supply disruptions.  
The situation can worsen if no action is taken due to the constant rise in urbanisation and resource extraction 
costs.   
On the other hand, the current saving cost of all HOUSEFUL solutions at building level depend on a case -bycase 
and the current normative at city level. These are first estimations based on a preliminary evaluation: 10% (on 
average) saving costs in the long run of using treated WW and recovering of energy at building level with 
respect of external energy and tap water costs; 80% (on average) saving costs of using treated WW and 
recovering of energy at building level with respect of all external costs (including externalised costs such as 
investment in infrastructure cost); 70% (on average) savings from current fees applied to citizens for the 
treatment costs of WW and waste management of BW.  
SOCIAL BENEFITS  
 
Employment  
Not only squandering of billions of  € of quality materials, many thousands of potential EU jobs are also being 
thrown away through the “cradle to grave” approach. At EU level, if a target of 70% for recycling of key 
materials is met, up to 322,000 direct jobs could be created and an additional 115m tonnes of glass, paper, 
plastic, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, wood, textiles and BW could be recycled . These jobs would have 
knock-on effects in up - and downstream sectors and wider economy, creating 160,900 new indirect jobs and 
80,400 induced jobsiii.   
 leasing/ 
renting 
services  
HOUSEFUL will co-create 11 CEBOs for EU markets for the waste, WW, energy and material flows will be 
designed in such way that renting, leasing, customer services and capacity building services are promoted over 
ownership. Since the responsibility of the service/product/technology lay on the provider and not on the 
costumers the quality of the services is higher and much more in demand. iv  
ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS  
GHG  
emissions  
Housing sector is estimated to cause 35% of GHG emissions 7. HOUSEFUL will tackle the energy efficiency of 
existing and newly constructed buildings in two different ways: 1) by using a µCHP to provide end -users with 
heat and power produced from WW and BW and 2) by planning and designing the use of more energy efficient 
products and services in the preventive, corrective and replacement phases of selected residential buildings. With 
these solutions, we estimate a  reduction of up to 60% of CO 2 emissions, contributing to the efforts to limit 
the global temperature rise to 1.5º C, as provided for in the COP21 Paris Agreement (as expected in the EI 
8 of the topic).  
resource 
efficiency   
The optimal use of the water, BW and materials cycles within the building will reduce by up to 40% waste 
ending in landfill, allow for the recovery of up to 95% of food waste and the recycling of >90% of WW (grey 
and black WW) for water reuse (e.g. irrigation, toilets), improving the energy efficiency of buildings of up to 
30%.   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          33  
  
hazardous 
substances  
The 40% reduction in wastes disposed in  landfill will significantly reduce the risk of hazardous substance 
released into the environment (e. bituminous mixtures, solvents, paints) strongly harmful to the environment and 
human health.  The project will also ensure the correct management of waste s/resources likely containing 
persistent organic pollutants and will follow standards published or under approval by the CEN/TC 351 to allow 
the selection of sustainable materials  
The outline of the business plan of HOUSEFUL is summarize in the following table:    
Targeted market, size and location  
Target market: Social housing market in Europe key figures (2012): 1) 267 000 new dwellings completed, 2)155,000 dwellings 
refurbished, 3) 38 529 430 000 Euros investment, 4) 88 480 107 000 Euros turnover, 5) 7,170 staff employed by the federations, 
6)369,024 staff employed by local housing shows the market status in Spain and Austria (countries where the demo buildings are 
located)  
Expected Market position  
  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 
 
CONSORTIUM Bio-waste 
sector 
(Source: ECN 
2017) 
Hous
ehol
ds(E
U) 
New 
jobs 
creat
ion:  
52,000 
(rur
al 
are
as) 
16,0
 
Vienna , Baumgarten 
S 
DEMO 3 
Sabadell, Edifici “Els Mestres”
DEMO 1 
Reduction 
from 
%  
40 
 to 
10 
% 
USE of  
RESOURCES 
Reuse 
% 
>90 
WASTEWATER 
Target  
Market 
Segregated 
WW  
treatment 
sector 
Source 
 Point 
: 
 - 
of 
- 
use  
water 
treatment 
forecasted 
2020) 
24.5 
  
billion 
$  
by 
2020 ( 
global 
) 
CAGR = 9.86% (2015 
- 
2020) 
Construction 
sector 
( 
Source 
: 
 SBS 
- 
Construction 
2016) 
% of GDP; 14
8.8 
 Mjobs 
( 
global 
) 
Target  
Market 
DEMO  
4 
S1     
S2   
S3 
S4 
S6 
S7     
S8   
S9 
S10 
S11 
DEMO 2 
S1     
S2   
S3 
S4 
S5     
S9   
S10 
S11 
tions: 
CO 
- 
CREATION  
CEBOs 
REPLICATION 
EXPLOITATION 
POLICIES 
SOFTWARE AS A  
SERVICE 
Vienna , Donaufelder Straße 115 
S1     
S2   
S3 
S4     
S9   
S 
11 
Solutions: 
Terrassa, “La Grípia” 
S1     
S2   
S3 
S4 
S5 
S7     
S8   
S9 
S10 
S11 
Solutions: 
Recovery 
% 
>95 
BIO  
WASTE 
Reduction 
% 
50 
Non 
- 
renewable 
energy 
consumption 
CCHE 
BOARD 
Target  
Market 
Target  
Market 
38 
Mtonnes of  
bio 
- 
waste 
in  
Energy 
efficiency 
in  
housing 
Energy 
investment 
14 
  
billion 
$ (EU, 2015) 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          34  
  
00 
(citi
es) 
sect
or 
Zeroenergy 
buildings 
construction 
(Source: IEA, 2016) 
   
Stakeholders (St) and their needs  
Stakeholders: The main stakeholders of the services developed in HOUSEFUL are local/national authorities owning and/or 
managing social housing infrastructures, as well as the potential tenants and dwellers The other important stakeholders are 
identified above (St1St5). / Knowledge needs/concerns: Identified needs are presented in Table 1 of the excellence section ( N0-
N11). Each need is linked with the corresponding solution (S1-S11) and the St implicated. Additionally a participatory process to 
address concerns and benefits perceived by the stakeholders will be integrated in the decision -making process and the co-creation 
of services.  
Circular Economy Business Opportunities (CEBOs) and value proposition of HOUSEFUL  
Business model: Mixed models combining the primary investment in purchasing and installing the technologies and participation 
to secondary services/products resulting from the “circularity” and shared services approaches. / Value proposition : The 
innovative circular eco nomy approaches and greentech technologies demonstrated by the HOUSEFUL can be integrated as 
recommendations and/or conditions in the documentation for technical projects of new builds, reconstruction and retrofitting of 
existing infrastructures.   
Market Barriers and Risks (more detail in Table 10)  
Legal Barriers: Lack of existing policies at European level for the proper regulation of the implementation of circular economy 
services at households including the use of treated WW, the production of biogas, and the installation of NBS at building level, 
may delay the market uptake and acceptance of HOUSEFUL services / Economical Barriers: HOUSEFUL services may have 
difficulties to reach niche market and other markers if there is an insufficient invest ment plans from public administration and/or 
the CEBOs are not properly replicated. The high cost of innovation may also hinder the implementation of circular services in  
social houses / Social Barriers : Low interest and acceptance based on unaddressed con cerns among homeowners and other 
stakeholders may affect the uptake of the services, as well as lack of capacity and understanding to implement and/or uptake 
solutions  
  
EI 4:  Facilitate the inclusion of resource or materials criteria in designing products/services (e.g. durability, 
reparability and recyclability).  
HOUSEFUL will promote the reparability, durability and recyclability of the technologies, materials and products 
by identifying the main materials-elements-products-components at the 4 demo buildings before taking further action. 
This will permit goal-specific maintenance operations (preventive, corrective or replacement) allowing for the use of 
more energy/material-efficient products and services, identification of current materials flows (resources used and 
wastes produced) and the reuse and recycling of construction materials from potential maintenance operation, 
refurbishment and/or demolition, together with the possibility of reverse logistics at local/regional scale.  
EI 5: Create new business opportunities for industry and SMEs in the EU.  
In general terms, circular economy solutions, enabled by the technology revolution, would allow Europe to grow 
resource productivity by up to 3% annually. This would generate a primary -resource benefit of as much as €0.6 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          35  
  
trillion per year by 2030 to Europe’s economies. In addition, it would trigger €1.2 trillion in non -resource and 
externality benefits, bringing the annual total benefits to around €1.8 trillion compared with today.   
For the housing sector, a key component of Europe’s economic growth (currently responsible for 9% of the EU 
GDP and the direct employment of over 18 million people )v, HOUSEFUL expects to have a hi gh impact on 
companies working in this sector, which especially characterized by 94% of micro -enterprises (less than nine 
employees). The implementation of the innovative CEBOs will enhance the circularity of the existing building stocks 
with the inclusion of new sustainability criteria driven by end-user demands. Accordingly, stakeholders involved in 
the value chain of the housing sector will have to adapt their current practices to satisfy user requirements. While the 
housing sector market is currently la cking the information, confidence and capacity to move towards and adopt 
circular economy solutions, there are already actions going on at EU level to foster the transition and create new 
business opportunities for European SMEs and industries. An example is the Partnership on Housing and Circular 
Economy of the Urban Agenda for the EU who has identified cities and their infrastructures as the main engines to 
carry out the Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
transition. In fact, adopting circular economy principles in cities, local SMEs and industries will take part in i) 
ecodesign concepts, ii) renovation and re-use of sustainable buildings, iii) in industrial symbiosis, iv) the creation of 
innovative business models for sharing/leasing services, v) valorising urban BW and WW, vi) in circular public 
procurement. vi Other important action is taken by the DG  ENV and DG GROWTH developing a common EU 
Framework of indicators to assess the environmental performance of buildings for all the building professionals. In 
fact, HOUSEFUL will carefully consider these indicators in the formulation of the circularity level of buildings.   
HOUSEFUL will allow SMEs and industries with different profiles to improve and demonstrate innovative solutions 
at a larger scale and to potentially transfer and replicate all the 11 solutions to other geographical area s or larger 
industries. Besides this, enterprises will be encouraged to shift their current business models towards a product -as-
service approach, relocating investment and modifying income sources placing a renewed demand on housing 
services such as maintenance, reparation and refurbishment of buildings, further impacting positively on the housing 
and construction market. The adoption of circular economy principles by SMEs and industries  will widen their 
entrepreneurial opportunities and create employment, with the re-investment of saved energy costs expected to create 
1M jobs by  
2020, with estimated net saving of €90 billion per year for business by 2020.vii   
How HOUSEFUL will contribute to deliver innovative solutions to the EU markets of Housing Sector: 
HOUSEFUL services will contribute to improve the energy efficiency of buildings of up to 50%, contributing 
significantly to save an amount of energy equals to save $ 272,366 M in electricity, gas and water at EU level.viii 
Passive and zero-net-energy houses are available in many segments of the market but still constitute only a minority 
of new buildings ix . Among the household’s related services, housing is the largest direct expense for European 
households, with an average annual cost of €9.600, o r 27% of direct annual spend  (€15,500, including societal 
and opportunity costs). Cash -out cost includes purchase price, maintenance, utility costs (energy and water), 
community development, water treatment, and waste managementix. HOUSEFUL aims to avoid the expenses due to 
externalization by offering an integrated and transversal services, tackling a wide range of issues: reduction by up to 
40% waste production, recovery of up to 95% of food waste and its utilization to produce energy for heating, recycling 
of >90% of WW (grey and black WW) for water reuse. Considering than heating and water treatment are two of the 
highest sources of expenses in household sector and that the construction the highest consumer of raw materials, 
HOUSEFUL will deliver innovative solutions to these sectors:   
• Segregated water treatment systems market (at home level) is estimated to reach $ 24.5 billion by 2020, 
with a projected CAGR of 9.86%, from 2015 to 2020. Demand for water treatment equipment is forecast to grow 
5.9% per year to $ 13 billion in 2017 while commercial and residential markets for water treatment are expected to 
be among the fastest growing markets for equipment worldwide; however, high equipment cost acts as a restraint to 
the market. Companies and manufacturer s have to continually invest in R&D activities for innovative solutions in 
order to adhere to the standards set by governments for water treatment systems. x To answer this challenge, 
HOUSEFUL offers innovative WW treatments by means of the utilization of two solutions (S5 & S6): outdoor and 
indoor NBS (green façades and vertical ecosystems) and O 3/UV disinfection systems. Such process will be carried 
out within the buildings, providing fresh and re -utilizable water without supplementary costs related with w ater 
transportation or storage. Moreover, the required energy for the generation of O3/UV is produced indoor, allowing a 
considerable saving for energy purchase.  
• Concerning the heating, around 85% of heating and cooling is produced from natural gas, coal and oil 
products, and only 15% is generated from renewable energy. xi Furthermore, as the cost of heating is an important 
element of household expenditure, which can amount to up to 20% of a household’s income, special attention should 
be paid to measures r elated to energy efficiency in heating and cooling systems along the entire energy chain. 
Considering the impact of heating on Europe’s final energy demand in the residential sector (65% in 2010), there is 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          36  
  
a clear need, but also an important opportunity, to involve households more in this area.xii As mentioned, HOUSEFUL 
services include the production of heating and power ( 2600 kWh/y renewable energy from biogas)  from the 
reutilization of home produced BW and blackwater using AnMBR and dAD for biogas produc tion: such approach 
will increase the energy efficiency of building up to 30% while reducing the price for energy purchase from external 
sources. Moreover, the utilization of an interactive tool will make the end -users self -accountable on the 
utilization/saving of energy in their own houses.  
• Construction materials: A relevant contribution to improve the heating/cooling services can come from the 
utilization of new sustainable construction materials.  Construction is one of the largest economic sectors of the 
European economy, representing 8.8% of GDP and almost 14M jobs. On average, 10-15% of building material 
is wasted during construction: 60% of discarded materials is either put in landfill or incinerated, while only 40% are 
recycled or reused. The lack of utilization of sustainable materials in buildings edification, together with a low level 
of recycling, generates 25-30% of all waste produced in the EU. In value terms, Europe lose 95% of the material and 
energy value. On average, Europe uses materials only once generating evitable expenses for materials supply. On the 
other hand, with a thorough utilization of sustainable materials, 20 -40% of energy in existing buildings can be 
profitably conserved.  99% of enterprises in the European housing sector are  SMEs, considered as a key driver for 
economic growth, innovation, employment and social integration; they produce 80% of the sectors turnover. xiii 
Despite this, SMEs find difficult to break into the market for larger projects. In 2013, 40% of SMEs active in housing 
sector were failing to win nine out of ten public sector contracts and more than half reported their success rate falling 
over the last five years. This is partly due to the cost and difficulty of prequalifying and tendering. xiv HOUSEFUL 
will stimulate this market segment by involving the SMEs, as well as all theAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 
- 03/04/2018 other partner of the consortium, in innovative circular models which will boost the creation of new jobs 
and a “greener” approach that considers the use of sustainable materials and will contribute up to 40% reduction of 
wastes disposed in landfill.xv   
• Market of BW treatment: BW accounts 42-60% of the total composition of municipal solid waste. Europe 
produces 90 Mt pear year of BW of these, 38 Mt from households) and is already recycling only 30 Mt. Thus, 60 
Mt are disposed to landfill being the actual potential of BW recycling with circular economy principles. In fact, the 
European Compost Network states that BW collection is t echnically and economically practicable in any 
municipality, and that the costs could be kept low if the treatment is optimise at home level. Overall, the potential 
of BW sector that is now unprocessed would add 52,000 new jobs in rural areas and 16,000 in urban areas.xvi 
Figure 6 shows HOUSEFUL contribution with the solutions S7 and S8 to the circular economy biological cycle for 
BW management.   
EI 7 & EI 8: Provide evidence-based knowledge regarding the enabling framework conditions (such as the regulatory 
or policy framework or cultural factors) that facilitate a broader transition to a circular economy in the EU; 
implementing SDGs, in particular SDG 12 and COP21 Paris Agreement.  
 i)  Policy framework in line with HOUSEFUL project  
HOUSEFUL will facilitate the separate collection and proper treatment of household BW producing environmentally 
safe compost and biogas, breaking the link between economic growth and the environmental impacts associated with 
the generation of waste. HOUSEFUL is thus in line w ith the Waste Directive 2008/98/EC 9. Furthermore, 
HOUSEFUL will increase the awareness and demand for sustainable buildings, fostering interest in resource and 
energy efficient practices and technologies and thereby 
working towards the fulfilment of the Energy 
Performance of Building Directiv e (2010/31/EU in 
review) and the Energy Efficiency Directive 
(2012/27/EU). Even though HOUSEFUL is in line with 
the most important regulatory framework, the consortium 
has already identified some social/legal/technical 
barriers such as:  
a) lack of sufficient information to end -users concerning 
the importance of an energy saving within the housing 
activities, b) an insufficient level of separate collection of 
waste (on average, only 19% of generated municipal waste 
is collected separately in EU capitals)10, c) lack of existing 
policy at EU level on resource use in buildings other than 
for energy efficiency 11, and d) lack of a common EU 
directive that fosters the reuse of WW ( Urban WW 
Directive 91/271EEC recognises the reuse of treated WW 
whenever possible, however no EU regulation and 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          37  
  
common standards for water reuse exists). In order to unlock the full potential of WW at residential level, the project 
will consider national/local legislations to choose the best approach to reuse water. HOUSEFUL will overcome these 
barriers by proposing a model that considers the wide range of EU priorities included in the EU Action Plan for CE12 
and 7th Environment Action Programme13. The consortium will identify regulatory  
uncertainties that may hinder the application of s olu- Figure 6. HOUSEFUL solutions S7 (valorization of biowate for tions 
and will raise its concerns to the EC via the “In- biogas production) & S8 (stabilization of BW for compost in the xvi novation 
deals”. The impact of HOUSEFUL in the biological cycle for circular economy (Source: ECN, 2017). main directives 
affecting the water, waste, material and energy vector of the housing sector are included in Table 8. In addition to the 
regulatory barriers, HOUSEFUL will have to overcome cultural barriers related to the willingness of inhabitants to 
use reclaimed water with confidence, to properly separate BW from other types of household wastes and to install 
the technologies available for domestic water and BW management cycles. To tackle cultural barriers the project will 
design strategic dissemination and awareness campaigns with the participation of two public bodies on social housing 
and the cooperative CECODHAS.  
Table 8. Regulatory and Policy Framework affecting HOUSEFUL and main activities of the project to address them  
Regulation  How affects HOUSEFUL services  What will HOUSEFUL do  WP  
 
The main objective is to promote a more efficient 
use of resources consumed by means of new and 
renovated residential and public buildings and to 
reduce their overall environmental impacts 
throughout the full life cycle.  
HOUSEFUL aims to minimise waste destined 
to landfills towards 30%; recovery >95% food 
waste at home level; recycling >90% of 
rainwater, greywater and blackwater; to 
improve the energy consumption of buildings 
of up to 30%.      
WP2  
WP3  
WP5  
 
A) Member States with high compliance rates 
usually show such trend all over their regions. 
However, lower compliance rates are often due to 
poor performance of some of their regions (i.e. 
Spain).  
B) Help Member States to achieve the 
objectives of the UWWTD, a number of actions are 
taking place, such as bilateral dialogues, developing 
implementation programmes, and improving 
management and dissemination of 
implementation data.  
A) HOUSEFUL will contribute to break with 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 
such tendency by targeting, thorough a demo 
site in Spain, the achievement of >90% water 
reuse at residential level.  
B) The Project dedicates an entire WP (WP7) as 
well as several activities in other WPs to the 
dissemination and spreading of the services related to 
the reuse/save of water in residential buildings.  
WP2  
WP3  
WP4  
WP5  
WP7  
 
Core on prevention, reuse and facilitation the 
separate collection and proper treatment of BW in 
order to produce environmentally safe compost and 
other BW based materials (35).  
HOUSEFUL main objective includes mini- 
mizing the waste destined to landfills  towards 
30%; recovery of >95% of food waste; the 
Project offers the generation of renewable 
energy for own consumption (i.e. 
 CHP) from 
biogas, and the compost production for 
gardening purposes for self and neighbours.  
WP2  
WP3  
WP4  
 
A) The building sector is expanding, which is 
bound to increase its energy consumption.  
B) A cost-effective or cost -optimal balance is 
mandatory to get energy efficiency levels.    
C) Major renovations of existing buildings, 
regardless of their size, provide an opportunity to 
take cost -effective measures to enhance energy 
performance.  
A),B) HOUSEFUL boost the energy efficiency 
of buildings of up to 30% and the generation of 
renewable e nergy (e.g. utilization of >95% 
kitchen waste for energy valorisation,  convert 
water and >95% food waste into a renewable 
source of heat/power and compost). C) Project 
services target new as well as zeroten year old 
buildings, regardless of their size.       
WP2  
WP3  
WP4  
WP5  
WP6  
 
Energy performance of buildings and resource 
efficiency in the use of products for the construction 
of buildings has an important impact on energy, 
climate change and the environment. Market 
support is also required for all market actors.  
HOUSEFUL services will increase 
significantly the energy performance of 
buildings; Project business models and market 
strategy are meant to exploit the HOUSEFUL 
services engaging a wide range of different 
actors.     
WP4  
WP5  
WP6  
 WP7  
ii) Alignment of European Circular Economy Roadmap with HOUSEFUL project  
HOUSEFUL is aligned with the global European commitment to create a more sustainable and Circular Economy by 
shifting the traditional industrial model of housing sector to a systemic eco-innovative model that goes beyond single 
technologies/services, creates new business models and involves individuals, political and community entities.  The 
project supports the roadmap for a systemic approach to eco-innovation, specifically by fostering the social housing 
sector market, especially the markets for new CEBOs in BW, WW, energy efficiency and building materials. 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          38  
  
Strengthening the adoption of circular principles in the construction of new buildings and in their renovation will be 
needed, supporting citizens/consumers in the transition to the Circular Economy, and continuing the progress towards 
a harmonized Life Cycle Assessment dataset.   
What HOUSEFUL has to offer in terms of Circular Economy is outstanding. Projects like this creates new circular 
economy business opportunities for the housing sector that are more innovative and less dependent on the import of 
materials and non -removable sources, while at the same time reduce adverse effects to the climate change. These 
initiatives are considered to be acting at a micro-level but it is important to point out that Europe’s economy is able 
to scale these ones up, hence opening the door to an enormous potential for economic growth.  
iii) HOUSEFUL project and the SDGs and COP21 Paris Agreement  
HOUSEFUL will also contribute to the implementation of the SDGs (EI. 8), especially SDG 12 by using reclaimed 
water and thus replacing the use of tap water where is not needed (e.g. gardening, flushing toilet, etc.).xvii Additionally, 
SDG 12 claims that residential energy us e is the second most rapidly growing energy use (after transport), thus 
HOUSEFUL will contribute significantly to the promotion of energy efficiency gains with its technological and non-
technological advances. Likewise, the promotion of BW valorisation and  compost use within buildings (i.e. 
greenwalls) or gardening purposes for self and neighbours will not only prevent waste generation, but also all waste-
related-energy consumption. For the first time ever, the housing sector’s critical role to fight against climate change 
was recognized at COP21 in Paris where it was stated that in order to achieve the global CO2 emissions by 60% in 
2025 compared to 2012, the building sector will require a substantial renovation of the existing stock buildings as 
well as the construction of new buildings with highly energyefficiency, near o net -zero energy consumption. With 
these measures, the housing sector will avoid at least 50% of the foreseen growth in energy consumption by 2030.xviii   
The improvement in innovation c apacity and integration of 
newAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 knowledge of 
HOUSEFUL consortium (Table 9) is key to achieve  the expected 
impacts: During the proposal preparation phase, the HOUSEFUL 
consortium has been already st rongly committed for the identification 
of the above identified needs in the housing sector and the subsequent 
co-creation of services. Such co-creation of services, the core objective 
of HOUSEFUL project, could only be developed if the project counts 
with the necessary stakeholders that involve the whole value chain of 
the housing sector. First of all, the project will tackle the identified 
needs in the social housing sector by involving two public agencies for 
social housing: The Catalan Agency of Housing (AHC) owners of the 
frontrunner demo buildings in Spain and Neues Leben  holding the 
Austrian demo building “Donaufelderstrasse”. Both agencies are key 
partners in the consortium, not only by proving three demos building 
but also to ensure an effective co-creation and social engagement with 
the one of the main stakeholders: homeowners, tenants, dwellers as well 
as with municipalities and other social housing entities. In fact, due to 
the participation of CECODHAS, the CEBOs will be expanded in other 
countries with the involvement of its network in 24 countries gathering 
43,000 housing providers. All together, they manage over 26 million 
homes, which is about 11% of existing dwellings in Europe . The 
social analysis and development of effective engagement strategies for 
an effective co -creation of the services (WP 3) will be driven by the 
experts of the SME WE&B working on social aspects influencing 
behaviour and choice-making of stakeholders within the environmental 
sector. The impact on society in terms of aw areness, capacity development, and uptake will be also supported by 
ICONS,  
with experience as leader in communication and dissemination activities in Figure 7. Forecasted growth of the SME IDP 
inlarge project in the urban environment.  From the technical point of view, volved in the Spanish frontrunner buildings 
the different systemic solutions are tackled by the participation of internationally recognized European SMEs with 
long trajectory in eac h of the market sectors of addressed vectors. Material vector: Turntoo are experts in future 
buildings and in the creation of material passports, a key decision tool to choose smart materials and safeguard 
existing ones for boosting circularity within buil ding retrofitting. Turntoo will closely collaborate with the RTO 
ITeC, a technological center working in the construction sector, by feeding the material passport with the appropriate 
BIM model. Water vector: Nature-based solutions implemented in the Spanish and Austrian demos for the treatment 
of segregated WW and rainwater are conducted by ALCN, an active SME in Austria and Europe in boosting natural 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          39  
  
resources with long -term sustainability and social benefit. ALCN brings to HOUSEFUL the 4 th demobuilding 
“Baumgartenstrasse”. ALCN foresees a broad co-financing campaign of the planned €1.700.000 for this demo house 
which will enable the creation of 5 new jobs with a net profit of 155 k€ by 2026 . IDP, an innovative and 
multidisciplinary SME well positioned in the WW and environmental engineering sectors in Spain and Latin America 
will be responsible of designing the works in the Spanish demos, both for the water and waste vectors. By 
participating in this project, IDP forecasts the creation of 15 new jobs and a ROI of 23% with a net profit of 470 
k€ five years after the end of the project  (Figure 7) Waste Vector: ALCN will be also involved in the treatment 
and valorisation of BW and blackwater at home level to produce biogas. For this purpose, two technological centers 
collaborate with this SME: CARTIF and LEITAT. CARTIF is the leader of the WP 4 of the demos due to the 
center’s wide experience with large scale demonstrations in buildings (see section 4). Moreover, CARTIF will 
perform the cleaning process of the biogas produced in one of the Austrian demos. LEITAT, the coordinator of the 
proposal and the generator of the idea will participate in the overall process of the project guiding the partners towards 
the successful implementation of all the tasks. LEITAT lead the environmental, economic and social assessment as 
well as the development of a compacted and transportable AnMBR to one of the Spanish demos. The collaboration 
and results of the project will expand LEITAT’s knowledge portfolio and support new projects and industrial R&D 
and innovation services with a total value estimated at € 1-2 million over the next 5 years. As a result, our circular 
economy department will grow by 1 -2 employees to support the increased business activity. In addition, 
HOMEBIOGAS will bring their AD innovation to treat food waste into biogas. Thanks to HOUSEFUL the company 
will increase the profit by 1.7million € and hire 36 new employees by 2023. For the energy vector AIGUASOL 
is participating due to their experience on energetic plans (i.e. the Barcelona energy improvement plan), building 
thermal and lighting simulations, and renovation proposals definition and validation through cost optimal analysis 
(i.e. the TOBEEM project introducing a semi -automatic cost optimal analysis for tertiary buildings, for more than 
20,000 scenarios). AIGUASOL foresees the creation of 7 new jobs and a ROI of 21% with a net profit of 725 
k€ five years after the end of the project (Figure 7) GWR is a social and sustainable architecture consulting 
company that similar than IDP will work for all the architectural and technical issues that will arise in the Austrian 
demos. Lastly, the Irish SME VISUM will develop the web-based platform to implement the HOUSEFUL SaaS to 
enable the users to access to the co -created HOUSEFUL services and foster their replication. VISUM foresees the 
creAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018a- 
tion of 1 new position 2022 and 7 by 2027. The project will improve the innovation capacity not only by the capacities 
of the partners of the consortium but also by counting with 31 experts of the whole value chain of housing sectors in 
the CCHE Board. These experts have expressed their interest with a LOS and include representatives of key experts 
in the sector of cons truction, environmental consultants and experts in circular economy. (Annex 1). HOUSEFUL 
also counts with the support of the following cities: Vienna, Viladecans, Valladolid, Ludwigsburg, Terrassa and 
Sabadell, which together with the CCHE Board (see secti on 3.2 and annex 1) will engage at least 10 follower 
buildings for the replication of HOUSEFUL.  
  
Table 9. Companies previous knowledge and innovation expected increase due to HOUSEFUL  
 Partner   Partner short description/previous knowledge  Innovation capacity increase  
ALCN has broad knowledge on circular economy Demonstration of the potential of NBS integration to 
ALCHEMIA topics and on NBS. They developed a series of close loops in building as showcases of innovation.  
(SME) different plant based tec hnologies in many EU These flagship buildings can set new opportunities for and national 
projects ALCN to get involved in further building projects.  
 VISUM  Several projects for software development, Process  
New sector and target application  
 (SME)  analytical technology (PAT) &industrial symbiosis  
Large experience on energy calculation proce - Increase its knowledge related to the energy vector dures 
including several own or shared with third understood as a service not for the designers and end - 
AIGUASOL parties commercial softwares. AIGUASOL also users of the buildings. Commercialization of circular (SME)  
has developed the design of buildings under some economy oriented services related to the new SaaS circular 
economy principles. developed and use r oriented consultancy services.  Value chain analysis for energy -
intensive sectors: Get deep knowledge on social housing market in Europe buildings, industry (process 
industries) and trans- and selected countries/regions. Understand the needs port (urban mobility). Mapping 
of business mod- and constraints of the residential infrastructures owners  
LGI els for emerging and existing energy systems.  and managers. Share and brainstorm on new business  
(SME) Market analysis, stakeholder mapping and busi- models for innovative service with different European ness model 
assessment to accelerate the market partners and actors uptake of Energy Efficient Buildings   
GWR works in cutting edge architecture with the  
GWR  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          40  
  
 specialisation on passive house buildings. We  Acquire knowledge on biogas production at households.  
(SME) work daily with innovations in the building sector.  
TURNTOO Designing and implementing new business mod - Creation of Material Passports for social housing sectors (SME) 
els to reduce resource dependency.  across Europe. Reviewing the creation of CEBOs  
 Experience in fostering access to decent and af- Contribute to the adoption of circular principles in the  
CECODHAS  
 fordable housing. They provide housing for so- social housing sector by close contact with their mem- 
(Non-profit)  
 cially sustainable people.   bers.  
Water and environmental solutions, innovative 
business practices and builds capacity to assist 
communities, companies and authorities to sus- 
 WE&B  tainably.  Social innovation practices to ensure  To gather more knowledge about social and environ- 
(SME) that society patterns and factors conditioning mental issues in circular economy of building sector choices are 
included in the development of new products, processes and services to foster market uptake.   
Improvement of human capital through public Improvement its capacity in terms of knowledge of 
communication of European research and innova- social assessment through new inputs coming from the tion achievements, 
cultural initiatives and citizens’ co-creation activities and stakeholders’ feedback. The participation for the benefit of society. 
Application increase of statistical data will also implement ICONS ICONS of and innovative integrated impact -based 
commu- baseline of data to benchmark the level of engagement  
(Non-profit) nication and exploitation approach for researchers with our similar projects. The involvement in coand innovators 
aiming at maximizing public and creation strategies in the p roject will also further improfessional impacts 
of their achievements. Indica- prove ICONS’s staff current expertise and provide tors to measure the research 
impacts on society in tools to implement its services with innovative comterms of awareness, accep tance 
and uptake. munication and engagement patterns.  
 Strong expertise in both building services and  New solutions to prescribe to the customers. Moreover  
 IDP  environmental sectors (mainly waste and water).  the development of Biogas AnMBR system at building  
(SME) Extensive use of BIM tools during all construction scale could end in a new product potentially able to be stages 
(Including Operation & Maintenance 7D) licensed or sold through a spin-off creation.  
 Exploitation of Homebiogas TG1, a system convert- Adaptation of the system to convert higher quantity of  
HOMEBIOGAS  
 ing household waste by AD into free clean energy  BW that the systems currently available.  
  
Factors affecting implementation of Expected Impact and measures to address themAssociated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 The following barriers and obstacles that may determine if the impacts will be achieved are 
identified in Table 10. A proper measure has been thought to counter any such risk.   
  
Table 10. Factors affecting implementation of impact and corrective measures  
Barriers/obstacles, 
framework conditions  
Effect on achievement of 
HOUSEFUL Impacts  
HOUSEFUL measures to address factors affecting 
implementation  
Legal Barriers  
CEN/TC 165 – (Waste Water 
Engineering)  
Compliance with the requirements 
of Standards could trigger delays 
in the implantation of services  
HOUSEFUL Consortium will provide with an update 
supply of materials and technology in the construction of 
new buildings as well as in the refurbishment of existing 
ones  
Directive 2010/31 ( Energy 
performance of buildings)   
The content of the Directive 
2010/31 can be modified so the 
Project could not fit at best its 
objective.  
HOUSEFUL main objective and services are in line with 
the content of the EU policies on energy, in particular with 
the ones of the Nearly zero -energy buildings, which 
inspires the mentioned Commission’ Proposal.  
Lack of existing policies at 
European level on resource 
use in buildings other than 
for energy efficiency  
Delay in the market uptake and 
acceptance.  
HOUSEFUL services and best -practices will boost the 
European policies path on resource use in buildings and 
households. Key local and European representatives will be 
invited to Project’ conferences/workshops.  
Need for information on  
integration within tenders    Slow uptake   Clear advice on how to write tenders which consider circular 
economy  
Social/Cultural Barriers  
Different awareness levels  
by countries regarding the 
need of “greener” activities   
The diffusion of the services and 
Project approach can be affected.  
Reticence of construction industry  
Tailored and specific dissemination and engagement 
activities (e.g. interactive workshops and conferences) will 
be developed to address all classes of stakeholders 
involved.  
(WP3, WP 7)  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          41  
  
Insufficient support from the 
local and public authorities  
Inadequate level of the Project’ 
diffusion and exploitation. 
Limitation on the spread of good 
practices.   
The Consortium includes local authorities and 
European/local contact point in order to ensure the 
involvement of public authorities.  
Difficulties/obstacles related 
with the definition of the 
CCHE board.   
Reduction of the expected 
outcome from the demo -sites. 
Limitation on Project’ 
sustainability.  
HOUSEFUL Consortium and network will ensure an 
adequate number of highly skilled experts for the 
composition of the CCHE board.   
Low interest and level of 
engagement of stakeholders 
at local level  Medium  
Continuous monitoring of communication and co -creation 
enabling to measure their effectiveness. A scalable 
approach to revise the strategy introducing corrective 
measures.   
Low level of acceptance of 
end users  Medium  
Transparent and easy to understand communication will be 
developed to convey clear messages about the benefits of 
the implemented solutions, and concerns and perceived 
risks will be addressed.   
Low dissemination impacts 
can affect possible future 
uptake and replication of 
HOUSEFUL methodology   
Low  
The multi -target/multi-channel dissemination and 
communication approach and the collaboration with other 
initiatives/projects in the circular economy  will guarantee 
the project maximum outreach towards broader audiences  
establishing a strong baseline for further replication of 
services   
Economical barriers  
Poorly development of BM 
and business cases.  
Difficulties on entering on market 
and consequent lack of investors.  
Difficulties/limitations to reach 
promising segment market (waste 
and water recycle, sustainable 
construction materials). Limitation 
on affordable innovation  
The WP4 elaborates engaging business models in order to 
offer to market an efficient package of services   
Insufficient financial support 
for SMEs to enter in the 
targeted segment markets.  
Cooperation and communication with contact points, 
clusters and local investors to schedule trade mission . 
Communication and Dissemination for social and market 
acceptance (WP7).  
Cost limitations for social 
housing and ↑innovation cost  
Cost sharing and demonstration of extra benefits in terms of 
the Circular Economy
2.2 Measures to maximise impact  
 
Before addressing the planned activities for the efficient implementation of the Dissemination, Communication, 
Engagement and Exploitation Plan through the WP 3, 6 & 7 and to achieve the impacts described in the previous 
section, HOUSEFUL partners will carry out three mayor activities with respect dissemination, communication, social 
engagement, business models and exploitation all we the goal to maximize the impact of HOUSEFUL results and 
CEBOs:  
• HOUSEFUL Business Modelling based on the commercialisation o f the proposed solutions as a service (“ from 
solutions to services”) and market study and Exploitation Plan for the above mentioned sectors (WP 6).  
• HOUSEFUL Software as a service, SaaS, as an exploitable sharing platform to promote new CEBOs that includes  
ideas for circular solutions and services for the housing sector and all the stakeholders involved (WP 6)  
• Complete strategy for the co-creation of CEBOS and engagement/activities with the societyAssociated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 together with the industry and public regional/national managing social housing programmes.  
• The project will be supported by the CCHE Board which will not only advise us with their technical/social expertise, 
but also will help us to engage follower buildings. Section 3.2 presents the first members of the board.  
The HOUSEFUL consortium is aware that for the implementation of all the necessary actions and innovative 
solutions/services in the Frontrunner buildings, additional co-financing support not covered by the EC Grant is 
necessary. This additional co-financing is covered by AHC for Demo sites 1 and 2. For demo site 2, other co-funding 
will also be investigated. For demo 3 additional co -funding commitments are necessary, however a ris k mitigation 
plan (ref Risk 18) guaranties the implementation of most solutions even if co -funding is not obtained. A Financial 
and Investment Plan for the frontrunner buildings is provided below:  
Financial and Investment Plan for the frontrunner demo buildings  
SPANISH DEMO 1 & 2 – Sabadell & Terrassa (Spain) – PARTNER: AHC  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          42  
  
Investment Plan:   
The refurbishment of demos 1&2 is a priority for AHC due to the extreme high demand and lack of supply of social housing in 
the area (see letter of commitment in annexes).   
Demo 1: AHC has secured an internal budget of 1.5 M€ for the refurbishment of Demo 1, including structural improvements in 
the envelope (roof and façade), insulation of the façade, solar thermal installation, electric and water installation work s, etc. Co-
financing would not be necessary for demo 1.  
For the investment as such following costs are foreseen:  
  
Investment 
renovation  
Anaerobic  
MBR  
Innovative materials, 
envelope solutions  
Nature-Based 
Solutions  
Commercial 
O3/UV  
Composting 
System  
Biogas 
Cleaning  
€1.500.000  € 175.000  € 200.000  € 55.000  € 35.000  € 18.500  € 47.000  
  
micro-CHP  Control, instrumentation, 
SCADA and power systems  
Biowaste 
Grinder  Total  
€ 45.000  € 70.000  € 20.000  € 2.165.500  
These costs sum up to 2.1 M €. The financing of this amount should be done in this way:  
AHC own funding  EC funding  Total  
€1.500.000  € 665.500  € 2.165.500  
  
Demo 2: AHC is committed to follow circular economy principles co-created by the HOUSEFUL project in demo 2. Renovation 
works are planned to start in 2020. Even though internal AHC funding is also committed, during this period of time different 
cofunding opportunities will be investigated. AHC has planned a budget of 1,2 M€ for the refurbishment of demo 2, including 
mainly envelope interventions.   
For the investment as such following costs are foreseen:  
Investment 
renovation  
Innovative materials, 
envelope  solutions  
Nature-Based 
Solutions  
Commercial 
O3/UV  
Control, 
instrumentation, 
SCADA and power 
systems  
Total  
€ 1.200.000  € 100.000  € 35.000  € 35.000  € 45.000  € 1.415.000  
  
These costs sum up to 1.4 M €. The financing of this amount should be done in this way:  
  
AHC own funding  EC-funding  ERDF-funding  Business Agency  Other  Total  
€ 1.200.000  € 215.000  To be defined 
(M4.5)  
To be defined 
(M4.5)  
To be defined 
(M4.5)  € 1.415.000  
 
  
Financial resources included in HOUSEFUL: The budget for renovation activities associated with the innovative solutions are 
not included in the own investment plan of AHC. HOUSEFUL solutions are expected to be financed with the EU contribution 
for the HOUSEFUL project (1.322.419€), together with the budget associated to other partners (see section 3.4.2):  
(1) Water saving measures. New  installations, including grey water recycling systems (ALCN and IDP) & greywater and 
blackwater separation (IDP)***, (2) Duplicating greywater discharge system for treatment using innovative NBS (ALCN) and 
commercial O3/UV higienisation (IDP)***, (3) Integrating water meters at household and building level: controlling water reuse 
(IDP)***, (4) Rainwater pre-treatment with NBS on façade or roof and integration in building (ALCN)***, (5) Higher standards 
of envelope refurbishment (e.g. energy efficient facades using modular and more sustainable materials), (6) Provision of space 
for separation of BW in kitchens, (7) Use of materials that contribute to indoor air quality (paint) and recycled raw materials, (8) 
Use of materials that include recycled raw materials, (9) Application of other measures from the SaaS, (10) Co-creation process 
with new tenants. (11) Pay per performance business model: guaranteed energy savings production of PV or Solar Thermal.  
***Water measures to be demonstrated and validated in just some flats. The precise number is to be decided and financed by the participant/installer/ supplier  
(ALCN). AHC will facilitate access for installation and participation of residents and assume maintenance during the lifetime of the project.  
  
  
DEMO 3 – Centenary Building, Baumgartenstrasse, Vienna (Austria)Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 – PARTNER: ACN  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          43  
  
Investment Plan: For the investment as such following costs are foreseen:  
Investment 
renovation  
loft expansion & 
general costs  
winter 
garden  
PV & solar 
thermal  
greenhouse, green 
facade, compost unit  
biogas, burner  
€530,000.0  €691,000.0  €228,000.0  €64,000.0  €80,000.0  €110,000.0  
These costs sum up to 1.7 M €. The financing of this amount should be done in this way  
Vienna city funding  EC-funding  ERDF-funding  Business Agency  Crowd funding  Bank loan  
€280,000.0  €441,919.01  €482,100.0  €342,600.0  €100,000  €66,381.00  
• Business Agency Vienna, Programme “Standortinitiative”. This funding programme offers companies in Vienna to 
scaleup their production sites. As ALCN is located in the building “Baumgarten” and HOUSEFUL is a large-scale demonstration 
project for services, business models and derived products, ALCN is eligible for this funding programme and contacted the 
persons in charge already during proposal preparation. This co-financing of 20% of the overall spending can go up to 500k€   
• Ethical banking crowd funding (GLS Bank, Bank für Gemeinwohl). GLS Bank and Bank für Gemeinwohl  offer 
crowd funding opportunities to finance projects with ecological and social impact. ALCN is a member of both banks and 
therefore eligible for submissions. This crowd funding programme is expected to deliver about 100 k€.  
• Funds within the Austrian cohesion policy like ERDF (S3 Smart Specialisation Strategy, EFRE, etc.) Will also be 
addressed.  Around € 1.235 billion are allocated for the Austrian regions in the peri od from 2014 -2020. The main challenges, 
that have been identified for Austria, required for the possible incorporation of these funds, are all fulfilled in this proj ect. They 
are related to innovation, the labour market, social inclusion and education, and  the reduction of CO 2 emissions together with 
other measures of environmental protection. The contribution of these funds is usually between 20 -50%. Possible schemes 
have been identified and as soon as the project receives approval, applications will be incorporated. For the broad participa tion 
and co-creation policy of this project, the Austrian ESF will be the right one to address.   
• Bank loan. If ALCN still needs to co-finance parts of the whole investment plan, the rest will be managed through bank 
loans. ALCN will first again try to work with ethical banks, EIB through the ESIF or InnovFin programme and the “Austria 
Wirtschaftsservice”. Ethical banks often give better conditions or even cross -fund projects with high benefits for the common 
good. So, this sustainable flagship project could also be a model example of generating common values .  
DEMO 4 – New Building (2017) – Donaufelderstrasse, Vienna (Austria) – PARTNER: NEUES LEBEN  
Neues Leben has already carried the construction of this buildings, thus no further investment plan is foreseen. The HOUSEFUL 
solutions applied to this demo are based on calculations on circularity, BIM Modelling and Material Passport as well as 
simulations concerning optimisation of energy efficiency and circularity. Main targ et of the building is to serve as a reference 
for other buildings, as this building type is equivalent to approximately 70% of all buildings in Vienna. For the building 
“Donaufelderstrasse”.  
2.2.1 Dissemination Plan towards defined stakeholders in housing sector and exploitation of results   
The introduction to this section summarised the overall approach. To make these activities truly effective they must 
focus on specific target stakeholders – different communication channels to reach them, different types of information 
to convey and messages to tailor. In the table below, main target stakeholders and corresponding dissemination 
activities are defined. The preparation of an executive D&C (Dissemination and Communication) plan, in line with 
the project dissemination and communication strategy will be the first task to be addressed in WP7. It will represent 
the first milestone governing the project’s internal and external dissemination activities. The Plan will identify 
fundamental elements of the dissemination and communication strategy including: the key messages to be conveyed 
(WHAT), the tools and channels employed (HOW) and the timing of the planned activities (WHEN), the geographical 
level (local, European, global) (WHERE) providing a guide for the project’s and partners’ dissemination activities to 
maximise the impact of HOUSEFUL results in terms of benefits and acceptance for the end -users (the citizens and 
the cities as a whole) and replication to support urban regeneration via circular -economy solutions in Europe and 
beyond.  Any effort used and resource invested will be useless, unless the benefits of the project can reach the 
European society who funded this initiative.   
  
Table 11. Target audience and dissemination activities in HOUSEFUL Dissemination Plan.  
Target Stakeholders  Specific dissemination activities  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          44  
  
Industry:  
Construction companies, private 
promoters, technological and product 
suppliers, architects, engineers  
• Participation in industrial events and workshops  like: Construmat, iWater, 
Circular Economy European Summit , European Biogas Conf erence, Smart Cities 
World Congress, European Conference on Sustainable Cities and Towns, , 
EUSEW, Metropolitan Solutions, CISBAT, BATIMAT, Sustainable Places, 
Ecobuild, Future of Building , Bauen und Energie , Smart City Expo , Renexpo, 
IFAT.  
• Visibility in sustainable development information networks : greenbiz.com, 
sustainablebusiness.com, businessgreen.com, greenoptions.com, and others.   
• Publication of HOUSEFUL CEBOs for the housing sector: The results from WP6 
will be published in relevant industry and technical magazines (e.g.  ISWA Waste 
Management World, Green Builder magazine, Sustainable Architecture).  
• Demonstrative sessions of SaaS will be prepared during the project workshops and 
events with private companies interested in early testing the service.  
• Three technical workshops, co -creation workshops, and 2 Open House Events 
and the Final event at European level will be organised to present HOUSEFUL  
 technical and social developments to Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018engage with potential industrial stakeholders.  
Municipalities and policy makers, 
Regional/National Housing 
agencies.  They will be an important 
target for dissemination to ensure 
replication of HOUSEFUL services in 
both in the new design or renovation 
projects of social buildings. Cities 
participating in the consortium will be 
targeted. To ensure the 
implementation HOUSEFUL, a policy 
framework needs to be tackled. 
HOUSEFUL will perform specific 
dissemination measures towards this 
audience.  
• Actively seek interaction with local authorities to engage with  them and with 
society.  
• Focused publications and communications to National and European public 
administration associations like: AVS (Asociación Española de Gestores Públicos 
de Vivienda y Suelo), AEEBC (The association of European experts in building 
and construction),   
• Co-identification of barriers and co-elaboration of ways to overcome them to ease 
process of admission through the participation in the co-creation workshops.  
• AHC and NEUES LEUBEN will actively be involved with Catalonian and 
Viennese municipalities throughout the provision of social housing. Also they will 
provide policy inputs together with CECODHAS  on housing issues  to 
government ministers and departments res ponsible for territorial development, 
housing, and social policy.  
• AHC has also identified the Institute of Chartered Surveyors of Barcelona  as 
an effective dissemination channel as their Sustainable construction agenda an d 
web site  is a relevant regional reference point. It has agreed  to support the 
HOUSEFUL.  
Academia (Research Institutes and 
Universities): To ensure continuous 
research and development of circular 
services and functionalities in the 
housing and construction sectors  
• Edition of scientific publications in open access peer-reviewed scientific 
journals:  
Waste Management, Water Research, Bioresource Technology, 
Energy&Buildings, Open Journal of Energy Efficiency, and/or Energy - The 
International Journal, CleanTech Republic, Emagazine, The Ecologist, etc  
• Presentation of results in International scientific conferences (besides those listed 
for the industrial sector above): Conference on Sustainable Solid Waste 
Management, UK AD & BIOGAS and WORLD BIOGAS EXPO, ECEEE 
Summer study.  
Related initiatives under the EC 
H2020 RDI programme and beyond: 
To create synergies, HOUSEFUL will 
seek to collaborate as much as possible 
with other ongoing projects in the 
same field.  
• HOUSEFUL partners will seek synergies with o ther ongoing projects (e.g. 
ENTRANZE, ABRACADABRA, Next-Building, 4RinEU, GreenINSTRUCT, 
DREEAM, Plug&Harvest, and BAMB. The project will look at future EU and 
international initiatives in the same field for example with the Partnership on 
Housing and Circular Economy of the Urban Agenda  for the EU, URBACT 
programme, EIP-SCC, EIP Water and the EU Building Stock Observatory.  
• Links with other projects under execution including a number of them in which 
members of this consortium are involved will be established in the form of 
common workshops and seminars to bring together the various technologies and 
services for the creation of circular models in buildings  
Public and private investors:  
HOUSEFUL, through links with pre-identified region/country authorities, will look 
for complementary or follow -up funding under the European Structural and 
Investment Fund (ERDF) , European Soc ial Fund (ESF ) and Cohesion Fund 
(CF), European Investment Bank  (ELENA, supporting investments in energy 
efficiency and sustainable transport), European Investment Fund, DNC Venture, 
Innovative financing schemes: PPP Public and Private Partnership.  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          45  
  
General public: Dwell- 
ers/tenants/citizens will be informed  
and engage for the co-creation of  
CEBOs  
• Personal, face to face contact to inform and engage the tenants  directly 
involved in the project supported with paper documents, posters and notificatio ns 
in the buildings as this is the only effective way to inform and actively engage 
these citizens. Work will also be done with local residents and neighbourhood 
associations in order to increase awareness and impact of the project locally in 
order to stimulate local circular economy initiatives.  This work will be supported 
by press releases aimed at local media (press, radio and television) in order to 
amplify the message and public meetings to support specific dissemination 
activities organized by the pr oject. All of these activities will be backed up by 
informative material on the project web site in local languages (Catalan and 
Spanish) about the project and specific activities.  
• Partners will reinforce its presence in professional and social network si tes (i.e. 
Facebook; Instagram; Linkedin) and proactively participate in the very active 
forums and blogs involved in environmental issues.   
  
Technical workshops activities and training sessions:  HOUSEFUL will organise 4 technical workshops (Table 
12) with the goal to share the knowledge and results generated by partners and selected stakeholders. Additionally, 
LEITAT will organize at the end of the project a Final Event in cooperation with the organizer of the European 
Circular Economy Summit by M54. The target audience are the industry, the academia, municipalise and policy 
makers researchers, with an estimated 100-200 participants. The Final Event will include presentations, workshops, 
hands-on training sessions and a poster session. External speakers will also be invited from other ongoing initiatives 
in the same field. The Final Event will enable the creation of synergies and facilitate the collaboration between 
partners to obtain more fruitful results. During the project and in connection to the project consortium meetings, 2 
training sessions and 4 study tours will be organised.  
  
  
  
  
Table 12. List of technical workshopsAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018  
Partner(s)  Objective/main topic  Type of 
training  When  Where  Type of participants  
ALCN + 
CARTIF  
Integration of nutrient and water cycles in 
buildings, barriers and benefits  
Water &  
Waste mat- 
ters  M40  Vienna  
Municipality staff, 
industrial delegates, water 
utilities, architects, policy 
makers  
ITeC + 
Turntoo  
The main objective of this workshop is to 
determine the Material Passport (identification of 
all construction materials used), documenting the 
products and raw materials used in a building.  
Material 
matters  M36  Netherlands  Construction companies, 
architects, plant operators  
AI- 
GUASOL  
+ IDP  
The main objective of this workshop is to 
determine the synergies among the current 
energy building regulations and RES directives 
with the circular economy business models. 
Defining how and who will implement specific 
energy efficiency and RES solutions i n leasing 
and renting models.  
Energy 
efficiency in 
circular 
building  
M30  Spain  
Industry, Manufacturers,  
ESCO companies and 
investment funds  
2.2.2 Exploitation plan and Implementation of results by HOUSEFUL  
Several activities will be carried out during the project to prepare the exploitation of the CEBOs, as explained later in 
this section. First we describe the vision beyond the project, including the initial envisaged business modelling and the 
activities needed to reach higher TRLs after the project. These activities will be confirmed during and after the project 
period.  
Table 13: Exploitation plan.  
Partner  Exploitable 
Results/Interest  Routes to Exploitation  Potential Users and 
Sectors  
Complementary 
funding  
LEITAT  
AnMBR and dAD applied at 
home level in the housing 
sector. Environmental  
performance of solutions in 
the demo buildings  
Licensing, R&D services, new 
collaborative projects, or other  
exploitation strategies such as start- 
ups or spin-offs in case of promising 
results and IPR potential  
Municipalities, big 
social housing 
planning  
Other collaborative 
projects  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          46  
  
AHC  
Assessment of the value of 
the waste WW and material 
in houses. Demon- 
strate the validity of this  
Catalan Law 21/2006) and 
also to provide feedback  
for future legislative action 
in this area  
Further collaborative research  
Internal product development: 
Developing, creating and marketing  
new products/processes as part of 
our commitment to innovation  
Internal service creation: Creating 
and providing new services 
provision for AHC’s clients  
 Families/people who 
use social housing 
services. Policy  
makers and regional  
politicians with 
competence for social  
housing and building 
refurbishment  
Own funding, Other 
collaborative projects  
Activation of local 
authorities with  
competence for social 
services and housing.  
LGI  
Knowledge on social 
housing market and the 
circular economy business 
models in residential sector.  
Potential support and/or partnership 
for future exploitation ac- 
tions of technological partners or  
service providers  
Project partners, 
service providers  in-kind contribution  
AIGUASOL  
BCM. Improvement of 
energy efficiency by active 
and passive solutions – 
Building physics service.   
Guarantee the energy saving/ 
production in buildings -  
ESG  
Exploitation with other partners of  
BCM as a SaaS exploited. BPS 
exploitation as a new service adding  
HOUSEFUL features and focus on 
other stakeholders. The ESG service 
expected to extend current portfolio 
by adding the residential sector.  
Construction 
companies, 
technological 
suppliers, Munici- 
palities and housing 
agencies, Owners,  
Dwellers and tenants 
and Policy makers  
No extra founding is 
expected. Additional 
funding to add market 
capabilities and 
introduce new features. 
Joint ventures to handle 
financial risks  
VISUM  SaaS  
To increase feedback and build the 
early adopters community and 
attract additional funding, the SaaS 
will be licensed for free to users. 
Further developments at project’s 
end.  
  
free - citizens, public 
bodies   
pay professionals,  
BIM sector  
Final stages of 
development will be 
covered by private fund  
of investors or further 
EU projects (i.e Fast  
Track to Innovation)  
ALCN  
Proving a real demonstration 
case - application of  
innovations in further 
buildings  
Results used for application in 
further possible building projects.  
Knowledge gain for strengthening 
consulting business  
Architects, 
coapplication in ten- 
ders, expert consulting 
for circularity   
National co-funding in 
this area, other 
financing options  
GWR  Providing energy all year for 
real passive buildings   
Know-how gain for passive house 
construction and application for  
new bids. Techno  
Official building 
tender processes, 
lectures  
Building investor 
groups, building 
developers  
NEUES 
LEBEN  
Possible dismantling of 
building after life-time, 
innovative solutions  
Applying for tenders with this 
know-how, possibly also with 
partners from the consortium  
Municipalities, big 
social housing 
planning  
City governments, 
private investors for 
buildings  
ICONS  
Increased knowledge 
about users’ behaviour,  
co-creation pattern, social 
acceptance and indicators 
for measurement.  
Knowledge on new BM 
and new areas to com- 
municate to ICONS audi- 
ence  
Background of future 
collaborative research projects.  
New items of HOUSEFUL 
services and concepts further 
communicated to the media and 
the general public through to 
boost the interest on this topic 
via online, social and TV media  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 
Other research 
organizations and 
collaborative 
research projects   
ICONS will further 
self-sustain these  
research activities 
based on the  
knowledge generated 
by the project  
HOME- 
BIOGAS  
Offer a product suitable 
for multi-tenant buildings 
to pocess organic kitchen 
waste and convert it to 
energy for heating and  
cooking  
Collaborating with other companies 
in setting ISOs standard for small 
biogas systems. Key role on 
defining the specifications required 
by biogas systems. Ensure that the 
system comply with requirements  
Homeowners or 
block of buildings  Own funding  
HOUSEFUL Project Business Model: In order to describe how the results are put forward by the HOUSEFUL 
project will maximise its impact, preliminary Business Plan is presented in the section 2.1 , summarising the 
expected output for exploitation and target end -users. The BM has served as ba sis for conceptualising the 
communication and exploitation included in the work plan. Additionally, each partner has already identified their 
specific exploitation interests covering products/services as described below and previously summarised. These 
initial business plans will be assessed in detail as part of the project, using data and intelligence obtained from the 
detailed market and competitive analysis, and stakeholder feedback that will be undertaken in WP7. The sales of 
HOUSEFUL CEBOs will not only create return on investment for end user but for the all components suppliers and 
developers in HOUSEFUL consortium and their subcontractors and suppliers thus creating the economic impact and 
company´s growth for the sector as detailed above.  
Partner: WE&B  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          47  
  
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: Social perception analysis,  stakeholder mapping and 
engagement strategies; Social engagement methodologies; Creation of BM tools to assist companies to bring their new 
solutions to the market quicker.   
Exploitation Team:  We envisage developing, together with the consortium partners of WP3 new strategies and 
methodologies for stakeholder engagement that can be brought to other industries and products, and increase knowledge on 
social studies about behavioural insights and attitudes towards building circularity. These techniques will assist our company  
to grow as we extend to industries that would not have been available to us previous to this project.   
Market:  WE&B has a strong base in Europe, Africa and Latin America. Social engagement and innovative business practices 
gained from this project will be transferred to the African and Latin American market.   
Business Model: WE&B is a consulting company that se lls its services to enable governments, companies and projects to 
better engage with one another and to develop and innovate in business practices. We have a strong customer base and a wide 
network of clients and partners. Results from this project will be used in our business model of selling consulting hours.  
Financial Projection:  The projection for selling these services in Latin America would be firstly in Mexico through 
established clients and markets with a modest projection of 57,600€ in the first year followed by 115,200€ in year 2 and as 
we expand to also Africa  (South Afri ca for instance as other major market) we would envisage 172,800€ income. By year 5 
we would want to sell our experience and services in other countries like, Peru, Chile and Argentina with a projected income 
that could reach 500 k€.   
Commercialization R oadmap: In order to leverage these services we would use existing channels such as projects 
(AfriAlliance, Run4LIFE, WaterClima LAC, WACA Programme of The World Bank, GGGI Peru, LCBA Mexico etc) and 
numerous presentations and working and focus groups that we run in Latin America and Africa to market these new services 
and experience that we would be able to offer our current clients.   
Financial Risk Assessment: The Financial risk for selling these services would be nil as mentioned above, we will use existing 
channels  and established clients.   
Partner: HOMEBIOGAS  
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: Affordable and high performance biogas solution tailored 
to fulfil specific necessities of households.  
Exploitation Team: HOMEBIOGAS have been involved in international projects for creating renewable energy from waste, 
for “off-the-grid” communities in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The company has been active in Israel since 2010 and 
formally incorporated HBG in February 2012. Based upon the knowhow and ideas that the founders accumulated during the 
previous years of field trials and scientific research, the team dedicated the last three years to develop and market family sized 
biogas systems. Revenues for 2016, the first year that we began offering our products for sale, exceeded €400K. HBG employs 
16 people and operates out of our 1,000 m 2 site on the campus of Hadassah Neurim in Beit Yanai, Israel. From its inception 
HBG decided to outsource all manufacturing work and has established long term relationships with large manufacturers who 
provide all of the product’s components to the company for final testing, packaging and shipping.   
Market: HOMEBIOGAS sells its products to end users and distributors in over 46 countries (e.g. Australia, Israel, Italy, 
Spain, Portugal, Sweden, France, Chile, Kenya, Mexico, Nigeria, South Africa, USA).   
Business Model: HOMEBIOGAS has clients in over 46 countries (e.g. Australia, Israel, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, 
France, Chile, Kenya, Mexico, Nigeria, South Africa, USA).  
Financial Projection: Revenues for 2016, the first year that we began offering our products for sale, exceeded €400K. Up  
 
to now, our funding has come from investors who provided us with approx. €2.5 million, in addition to a support of a Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018p- 
proximately €700 thousand through programs originating from the Office of the Chief Scientist in Israel. Our investors include 
a Florida-based cleantech venture fund and Israeli, American and British individuals.  
Partner: VISUM  
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: Describe briefly Development status, facts and figures that 
facilitate  the assessment of  the potential  impact,  differences from existing  competing products/services, the  main   IP R  
issues to  be   clarified   in  the consortium agreement.  
Market: The SaaS developed within HOUSEFUL will cover a current empty niche of the Building design and building 
information modeling (BIM) software. Of course the aim of the project is not to compete wi th the computer -aided design 
(CAD) products used commonly within the architecture and construction industries, but to offer a set of features currently not 
covered. Currently available products in the BIM market offer indeed tools and libraries specifically targeted for architectural 
design and construction, including for example mechanical, electrical, and plumbing. On the contrary the HOUSEFUL SaaS 
will use the information elaborated with this software to provide an estimation of the “circularity” of the building and will 
offer the possibility to get in contact new solutions to improve the sustainability of a building and co -create new business 
opportunity by suggesting new circular value chains. The BIM market is expected to grow from USD 3.56 Billion in 2017 to 
USD 7.64 Billion in 2022, at a CAGR of 16.51% during the forecast period. This projection in addition to the burgeoning 
growth of the green building market will create an unmet need of a tool able to evaluate the circularity of new designs and o r 
refurbishment interventions.   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          48  
  
Business Model: The business model for the exploitation of the SaaS will be based on licensing the software via monthly 
subscription. The pricing model will be the so -called Freemium, which means that basic features will be available for free to 
citizens and public bodies to allow the assisted evaluation of the circularity of a building. To evaluate improvements based of 
target interventions or to receive suggestions about further circular solutions a payment subscription will have to be activated. 
The target conversion r ate of free to payment account should be around 5% and 8% according to the volume of account 
created.   
Financial Projection: The development status of the SaaS at the end of the project will be an alfa version. Further investment 
will be needed by private funding or further European funding scheme (such as Fast Track to Innovation).   
Commercialisation Roadmap: The first need from the commercial point of view is to widen the market share of the SaaS to 
a minimum of 1000 accounts. This will be achieved with an aggressive price policy which will give free access to payment 
accounts advanced functionalities for 12 months. After 12 months, a discount offer will be offered to those confirming their 
payment account.  
Financial Risk Assessment:   Typically the SaaS business model drastically reduce the commercialization costs and the 
limited initial number of accounts will not require large infrastructure. Nevertheless, a lack of subscriptions to the service will 
represent a serious problem. For this reason, several measures to maximize the visibility of the SaaS have been planned.  
In the case of commercial failure the SaaS can be sold to a major BIM player to be included as module in its software.  
Partner: ALCN  
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: IPR of composting system, indoor green wall and green 
façade for water cleaning; winter garden for air condensation; own ICT and monitoring solutions for water and air quality 
measurement and automation; demonstration showcase for possible replication in o ther buildings. No directly comparable 
products on the market yet. Describe briefly Development status, facts and figures that facilitate the assessment of  the 
potential  impact,  differences from existing  competing products/services, the  main   IPR  is sues to  be   clarified   in  the 
consortium agreement.  
Exploitation Team: IPR formulation and development of marketing strategies by ALCN; possible partial licensing to spinoff 
company blue carex phytotechnologies GmbH; also, establishment of own compan y-intern marketing, consulting and selling 
department. Partners involved in the exploitation activities providing information on their previous experience and their 
business strategies, complementing external resources if not in the consortium.  
Market: Building developers, building owners, innovation-affin users of a building, people interested in sufficiency, further 
innovative projects for demonstrations, municipalities. The potential geographical and economic size of the market, market 
trends, main competitors and competitive advantage need to be addressed.  
Business Model: Organising open house days, talking at conferences, spreading the word, building up a network of possible 
clients, selling services and products, custom building solutions. Marketing strategy, main clients.  
Financial Projection: Until the demonstration case is ready, we will not sell any of the services. Afterwards we believe we 
can start with one to two cases a year and further developing up to ten a year until 2021. The first i nvestment needed for the 
demo case will be 1,2 Million €, which we will collect with five different funding mechanisms: we expect around € 280,000 
from the city of Vienna, around € 480,000 from ERDF funding, around 340,000 from the Vienna Business Agency, around € 
100,000 through crowd funding, and the rest of close to € 70,000 through a bank loan with a guarantee from the InnovFin 
programme. Sales forecasts, investment  needed for  covering  the costs, funding strategies,  including internal  sources, loans,  
equity, public   support through for  example ESIF , national programmes etc., complementary or parallel projects;   
Commercialisation Roadmap: The products developed in the project will be ready for the market afterwards. The 
prototypes, which will show proof of concept, will be tested thoroughly within this project. The barriers for marketing may 
still exist in some European countries, which is why we need to assure to be in-line with the countries’ legislative framework. 
This will also be part of this project to identify barriers and ways how to overcome them. the steps planned before the produ ct 
is ready for the market (i.e. proof of concept, prototyping, demonstrations of technological performance and cost  
effectiveness field trials, pilots, validation and standardisation issues, regulatory requirements, barriers and how to overc ome 
them);  
Financial Risk Assessment: The major risk in this project is the co-financing need. We acquired all possible financing 
schemes, but still it is not sure if we can secure all these fundings. We already have experience with commercial 
productisation, even without standardisation. Commercial and production risks, early standardization needs.  
Partner: AIGUASOL  
Planned key exploitable results and key areas of application: The main AIGUASOL’s exploitable results are related to the  
BCM SaaS (HOUSEFUL Solution 1), the Building physics service (BPS) (HOUSEFUL Solution 11) and the Guarantee the 
eneAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018r- 
gy saving/ production in buildings – ESG (HOUSEFUL Solution 12). Related to the BCM SaaS there are currently no other 
equivalent services on the European market. So, it’s expected that the potential of the service is more time -dependent on the 
maturity of the market than on the third parties’ competitiveness. To offer the BCM SaaS, specific issues will be fixed in th e 
consortium agreement with some involved HOUSEFUL partner’s mainly related to the circularity methodologies developed 
rather than previous specific knowledge. Related to the Building physics service (BPS), currently there exists several market  
energy consultancy se rvices focused to the building sector, Nevertheless, and because of the current market status of the 
circular economy, only a few companies offer particular circularity services, and usually focused on materials use. It is not  
expected specific IPR joint i ssues among partners; further on the one’s established for the other related issues as the BCM. 
Related to the energy saving/ production guaranties (ESG), currently some ESCO companies are trying to offer services like 
this one, but mainly focused in tertiary sector and/or only for energy generation. It is expected that the new ESG service will 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          49  
  
be part of a strategy to be joined with third financial parties once the basics are established within HOUSEFUL, also 
concerning to IPR issues.   
Exploitation Team: Related to the BCM SaaS, the involved team will be the main service developers joined in WP2; 
specifically, they’ll be involved AIGUASOL, LEITAT, CARTIF, ITeC, TURNTOO and WE&B. it’s planned that for this 
service, some of the partner’s (AIGUASOL, ITeC) will act as front officers for the SaaS commercialization due to its previous 
experience, while the rest will participate in the back office tasks (the service itself). Related to the BPS service this wi ll be 
specifically offered by the ene rgy consultancy partner’s (mainly AIGUASOL), even so specific collaborations are expected 
from other oriented partner’s (as ITeC, or TURNTOO) and specific collaborations with third parties in a future 
commercialization. Related to the ESG service, it’s exp ected to be exploited by AIGUASOL through its spinoff exsergy. 
Nevertheless, during the HOUSEFUL project developments, some third parties will be contacted and encouraged to join the 
service exploitation, mainly financial and ESCO companies.  
Market: The market for the new brand BCM SaaS, the BPS and the ESG services, is almost the major part of the stakeholders 
of the building residential sector. That is, the (St1) Construction companies, private promoters, technological and product 
suppliers, the (St2) Design teams, the (St3) Municipalities and regional/national housing agencies, the (St4) Owners, Dwellers 
and tenants, and the (St5) Policy makers. For the BCM SaaS, and considering the current inexistence of equivalent products 
or services at EU level, the potential of the BCM SaaS is quite high and will be more dependent on the time requirements to 
positioning the circular issues in the market sector. Related to the BPS service, the competitive advantage related to the existing 
energy consultancy service will be the capacity to offer an integral service and to be well positioned for the new brand market 
related to the building circular economy procedures and methodologies. For the ESG service, there exist currently several 
ESCO companies offering equivalent  services but mainly to the tertiary sector or related to energy generation. This is 
considered as a positive fact when launching this new service oriented to residential sector, because it will facilitate the 
commercial activities and, at the same time, the capacity to sign joint ventures with third parties.  
Business Model: The BCM will be exploited as a SaaS service. Some basic parts will be offered for free, while the main core 
of the service will be implemented probably as a pay per use business model. The BPS will be offered as a new service of the 
existing portfolio services of the mentioned involved partner’s. That will make easier the communication and market strategy 
to be implemented as the channels and the oriented actors will be the same that currently are on the focus of the related 
partners. For the ESG, the servi ce will be offered through existent commercialization channels and activities currently 
commercialized by the involved partners. Nevertheless, it’s expected to explore the joint ventures of financial third parties  
during the project and the exploitation by using these companies’ commercialization channels and clients.   
Financial Projection: For the initial version of the BCM services, no extra founding is expected. Nevertheless, for further 
versions of the service, additional funding will be probably requ ired to add market capabilities and introduce new features 
linked to the building design processes as BIM connection or other relevant characteristics. In this case, also joint venture s 
with other related companies (BIM providers or so on) will be studied.  For the BPS service, it is not expected extra funding 
to actively commercialize it. For the ESG service, once the new service is implemented in the exsergy spinoff or other involved 
partners portfolios, it’s expected to explore possible joint ventures wit h third parties (preferably investment funds and ESCO 
companies) to be able to handle the financial risks associated to the related activities.   
Commercialization Roadmap: At the end of HOUSEFUL project the BCM SaaS will be ready to be launched to the market 
as a beta version. During a reasonable time period of 6 months, the service will be available to reduced pay per use cost and  
by introducing special offers. From the gained experience, a commercialization campaign will be launched to the main focused 
clients through the current existing channels of the front office commercialization partner’s. For the BPS service, the involved 
partner’s will be able to directly commercialize the new brand service directly through theirs existing channels and by using  
their regular strategies. Related to the ESG service, during the HOUSEFUL project, and considering the possible joint ventures 
with interested third parties, a commercialization strategy will be developed. This is because the main expected risks will b e 
related to the financial issues rather than the technological one’s and, because that, the commercialization road will be adapted 
to the joint ventures’ models.   
Financial Risk Assessment: The financial risks in the first steps of the BCM SaaS commercialization is considered quite low 
because of the type of service and the capacity of the front office companies to add a service like this one in its current 
portfolio. Further developments for new versions of the service will be joined with third parties in order to minimize the 
potential service risks. For the BPS service, not relevant financial risks are expected by the own nature of the service and the 
experience of the involved partner’s in offering equivalent services. For the ESG service, the  financial risks could be quite 
high because of the leasing or renting models to be used in. because of that, the joint venture with financial third parties will 
be crucial by considering their specialization in the management of suck risks.    
  
  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          50  
  
  
  
Technology Market Transfer: SMEs have identified targeted markets and products to transfer as summarised 
below:Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018  
  
Table 14. Technology Market Transfer  
Partner  Product/Processes/ 
Innovation/ Services  
Target Market/ 
Sector  
Measures to deliver 
innovation to Market  
(during Project)  
Measures to deliver 
innovation to Market 
(after Project)  
Global EU  
Market  
Size  
(M€)  
Provisional  
Sales Forecast  
VISUM  SaaS  BIM market    
Participation to 
events and freemium 
business  
model  
USD  
3.56  
Billion in 
2017  
 
version 50 - 
100 acc; 
   
version 200 -
400  
  First 2 
commercial 
years 1000  
WE&B  
Social Innovation 
and Business 
Innovation  
Water and 
Environment 
sector  
Social and 
environmental 
economics methods  
Engagement practices  -  -  
ALCN  
NBS in buildings 
for water and air 
treatment  
Building developers  Interested parties  Sold systems in three 
years after project  
   7,7 billion 
worldwide  
After2021,     
100.000 € 
revenue  
ALCN  Compost cultivator  Composters, home 
owners  Interested parties  Sold systems in three 
years after project  
~ 40 M€ in 
Europe  
After 2021    
35.000 € 
revenue  
GWR  
Full energy 
sufficiency for 
passive buildings  
Tenders and 
competitions for 
buildings  
Application in 
tenders with 
developed innova- 
tions  
New projects 
received due to this 
innovation  
~ 1,6 
billion €  in 
Europe  
After 2021 
new projects 
worth 2,5 
M€  
AI- 
GUAS 
OL  
  
Building Circularity  
Methodology (BCM) 
SaaS  
(St1) Construction 
companies, 
technological and 
product suppli- 
ers, (St2) Design 
teams,  
(St3) Municipalities, 
housing agencies, and  
(St5) Policy makers  
The main 
innovation transfer 
during the project 
will be done 
through the  
focussed 
dissemination 
activities and related  
workshops with 
oriented stakeholders  
Measure related to the  
SaaS offering services, 
common market dis- 
semination activities 
as  
mailing 
communications 
and workshops.  
-  
In 2026, 725 
k€ of 
revenue  
Building physics 
service (BPS)  
(St2) Design teams, 
the  
(St3) 
Municipalities and 
regional/national 
housing agencies, 
and the  
(St5) Policy makers  
Main innovation 
transfer during the 
project through  
dissemination 
activities and related 
workshops with 
oriented 
stakeholders  
Transferability to 3rd  
parties ensured 
through the web 
explanation of  
real cases and the 
publication on 
scientific reviews.  
-  
HOME 
BIOGAS  
TGx Biogas System 
for  
European multi-
tenant households  
Urban and suburban 
communities  
Providing field tests 
and demonstration site  
Develop channels and 
proactively market our  
solution  -  -  
Research Data Management : HOUSEFUL participates in the Pilot Action on Open Access to Research Data 
(Horizon 2020 program). The goal is to provide, accurate and high-quality data to the research community so that the 
project will contribute to future advancements in the field of Circular Economy in the housing sector and the industrial 
sectors addressed. Table 15 summarises the Research Data Management where generated data and how it will be 
accessible (if possible) and preserved is presented. Commercially sensitive data are declared confidential and will be 
protected in accordance with the strategy for IP management.   
Table 15. Research Data Management Plan.  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          51  
  
Partner  Project Data Generated 
(WP)  
Standards  
(if applicable)  Routes of Exploitation 
and data accessibility   
Data curation and 
preservation proce- 
dure  
All partners 
involved in  
WP4  
Information regarding the 
optimization of water,  
waste & energy vector in the 
buildings  
Presentations: 
“ppt” or “pptx” 
Tables: “xls” or  
“xlsx” format  
Research data will be 
deposited in the free reposito- 
ry Zenodo  
Data will be stored on a 
separated server with strictly 
controlled access.  
ITEC &  
TURNTOO  Data created for the Material 
Passport  BIM  Confidential, accessible to 
demo partners  
The data will be made 
anonymous prior to any use 
by the project.  
VISUM  Data for the creation of SaaS 
functionalities  Not applicable  Data repository for final data 
(confidential)  
Data stored on a separated 
server with controlled access  
ALCN  Data through sensor data 
loggers in WP4  .txt, .csv, .xlsx  Data repository for final data  
Data stored online at own 
cloud servers and at a 
repository for final data  
GWR  Drawings in WP4  .cad, .xlsx, docx  Confidential, accessible to 
demo partners  
Data stored in own intranet at 
NAS  
AHC  
Personal identification data 
of tenants (WP 3-4). Ener- 
gy and water consumption  
data  
These are 
protected by  
Spanish data 
protection 
laws  
Information of tenants: No 
need for access to this data 
and it will be protected.  
Energy & Water 
consumption: Available 
for use by other 
participants subject to the 
consent of tenants  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 
The data will be made 
anonymous prior to any 
use by the project.  
WE&B  Social Studies (WP3)  
Social Network 
Analysis  
(KUMU)  
Public  
Data will be public through a 
visualization tool. Other  
social studies will be 
published through 
reports/articles  
ICONS  Web and social media 
statistics (WP7)  none  
All the data will be accessible 
through the public 
deliverables of WP7  
All the data will be included 
in the public deliverables  
that will be accessible to all 
via the public website  
AIGUASOL  
  
Building Circularity 
Methodology (BCM) 
Building physics service 
(BPS)  
Energy saving/ production 
guarantee (ESG)   
Energy saving/ production 
guarantee (ESG)  
Several 
standards and 
cur- 
rently existing  
methodologies  
listed in WP2 
and WP4  
The main data concerning 
to the overall methodology 
development will be 
available through the open 
deliverables and scientific 
communications.  
SaaS implementation of the 
BCM methodology as a  
commercial service protected 
as a commercial software. 
For ESG, no  
specific IPR protection 
will be considered.  
NEUES 
LEBEN  
Data exchange with partners  .docx, .xlsx  Confidential  Data stored in own intranet 
servers  
Homebiogas  
Statistics on the amount of 
waste disposed, biogas,  
consumption of other 
resources (i.e water, 
electricity)  
ISOs standard 
for small  
biogas systems  
Research data will be 
deposited in the free reposito- 
ry Zenodo  
Data stored in own intranet 
servers  
  
Data Management Plan (DMP):  
Each work package within HOUSEFUL is likely to generate significant data that will be managed according to the 
Data Management Plan. DMP aims at ensuring that the digital research data generated in the action will be made 
findable, accessible, interoperabl e and reusable in accordance with article 29.3 from the GA Option 1 for actions 
participating in the open Research Data Pilot, without changing the obligation to protect results, confidentiality, 
security and protection to personal data (Articles 27, 36, 3 7 and 39).  IPR will be taken into account to ensure that 
making data accessible does not go against the interests of any beneficiary with regards of protection of intellectual 
property.   
HOUSEFUL project will always obtain informed consent from persons p roviding data which participation will be 
entirely voluntary. All activities procedures will be designed according to Directive 95/46/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the pr ocessing of 
personal data and on the free movement of such data. Within the context of the HOUSEFUL project, procedures for 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          52  
  
personal data must be processed in accordance with national and EU legislation, limiting the impact of the persons 
involved whilst ensuring data quality and confidentiality. Moreover, the DMP will include detailed information on 
the procedures for data collection, storage, protection, retention, and destruction.  
The corresponding deliverable will be issued by M6.and will be updated as new data sets are produced during the project 
life.   
Management of Intellectual Property in HOUSEFUL  
Intellectual property (IP) generated within the project will be protected by patents, if appropriate, and its management 
will be regulated in compliance with the consortium agreement and the IP agreement among the partners. The 
consortium has identified three levels of IP which will be created in the course of the project: i) Individual and 
joint IP, which belongs to individual partners or is jointly owned by partners working in a particular task and is 
restricted to those partners. ii) Generic IP, which can be used by all partners of the consortium. Some of generic IP 
will be made more widely available to European academics, SME’s and other industrial organisations. Iii) Publicly 
available IP which will be published at conferences, on the public web site and made available with no restrictions. 
The general principles for Intellectual Property Aspects set out by the EC for Horizon2020 projects will apply in 
HOUSEFUL. Existing know how (background or preexisting intellectual property) of a specific partner shall be made 
available within the consortium, but strictly limited for use to the achievement of the project goals and for the duration 
of the project. Each partner owns the foreground he develops, and is responsible for securing IP of the knowledge or 
results created during the project. Results: owned by one or more of the partners shall be licensed to other partners 
of the consortium on favourable conditions to the extent necessary to enable these partners to exploit their own results. 
Publication of results (Table 16): While project results should be published in the usual scientific form, all concept 
publications must be submitted to all partners together with a request for permission to publish. An agreement is 
considered granted if no objection is raised within 1 month after manuscript submission.   
Strategy for Knowledge Management and publications:   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Implementation of procedures for assuring adequate protection of potential exploitable results  is critical. The partners 
will be instructed to create routines to critically evaluate the potential for patenting for all the technologies they develop 
(not necessarily the end products themselves), based on criteria such as innovation, novelty and industrial applicability. 
The HOUSEFUL CA will also outline the rules for publication issues, with the purpose of minimising related conflicts 
during the project. As part of the HOUSEFUL dissemination plan, the consortium will set up a specific strategy for 
publication of results. The HOUSEFUL coordination team will have a role in the follow-up of the publication approval 
process by the management team in distributing the publications and following up the approval process. The MC will 
be involved by screening the publication drafts. All partners will be responsible for publishing project results in local 
and international press (press releases or newsletters in magazines and newspapers, etc.) and in peer-reviewed scientific 
journals and conferences (Table 16). Th e D&C manager (ICONS) will maintain an overview of all published results 
and in cooperation with the Project Coordination. LEITAT and ICONS, will intervene in case of results which have 
been classified as publishable do not receive the necessary disseminat ion. In addition, the dissemination and 
communication manager will ensure that all project related publications can be read online, downloaded and printed. 
However, as any additional rights such as the right to copy, distribute, search, link, crawl, and mine increase the utility 
of the accessible publication, efforts will be made to provide for as many of them as possible. In particular, several open 
access schemes will be proposed for use to all consortium members. Depending on the nature, the importance, the cost 
and the available budget, a decision will be taken by the coordinator in cooperation with the dissemination and 
communication manager and the proposing partner as to the best open access scheme which is to be followed. A 
dedicated budget for open access scientific publications has been reserved, which will be used for “green” or “gold” 
publications in reputable journals. Alternative repositories such as the Open Access Infrastructure for Research in 
Europe (OpenAIRE), the Registry of Open Access Repositories (ROAR) and the Directory of Open Access Repositories 
(OpenDOAR) etc will be also exploited, as there are supported by the EC and there is no cost related to using these 
repositories. In all cases, as soon as possible and at the latest within six  months after the publication is performed, 
ICONS will be responsible to collect a machine-readable electronic copy of the published manuscript version in order 
to be deposited in the project website either, as a reproduction, if permitted by the publisher , or as a direct link to the 
publication. In addition, the research data and bibliographic metadata needed to validate the results presented in the 
deposited scientific publications will be stored in the respective area of the repository. Finally, ICONS will contact and 
exploit EC portals and tools (OpenAIRE, Horizon the EU Research and Innovation Magazine, research*eu results 
magazine, research*eu focus, etc.) to make the HOUSEFUL generated knowledge publically available. Since the tools 
provide free of charge, online access to the respective publications for any user, they will ensure open access of these 
publications. Table 16. Expected publications in HOUSEFUL  
Partner  Publishable results  Possible journals (Expected publications)  
LEITAT  BW treated by dAD and AnMBR  Bioresource technology (1); Waste management (1)  
CARTIF  Biogas treatment  Waste Management (1)  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          53  
  
AHC  
  
Use of innovative materials, products, 
installations and constructive solutions  Agenda de la construcción sostenible (4)  
Achievement of local project milestones and 
achievements  
Local media (2)  
Circular Economy achievements  Collaboration with the UNESCO Chair on Life Cycle and Climate 
Change at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra. (ESCI-UPF) (2)  
AIGUAS 
OL  
  
nZEB building design in refurbishment and  
retrofitting actions under circular economy 
principles. SaaS for the calculation and the  
increment of the circularity of buildings in 
refurbishment and retrofitting actions  
Energy&Buildings, Open Journal of Energy Efficiency, and/or  
Energy - The International Journal (2) Circular economy European 
Summit proceedings (1)  
ICONS  Journalistic articles  youris.com platform (8 journalistic articles)  
ALCN  Cleaning properties of NBS for water and 
air; compost generation  
Science of the total environment; magazines like ISWA Waste  
Management World, Recycling Magazine, Green Building (6 
publications, 1 in scientific journal, 3 in magazines, 2 in 
newslet- 
ters/blogs)  
GWR  Full energy sufficiency for passive house 
construction  
Sustainable Architecture, Energie & Wohnen (2 publications, 1 in 
magazine, 1 in newsletter)  
NEUES 
LEBEN  
Demolition of buildings with circular 
principles  Internal newsfeed (1 publication for internal information)  
WE&B  Factors influencing behavioural intentions of  
stakeholders in circularity building  Public understanding of science, newsletters  
2.2.3 Communication Plan  
While Dissemination is principally aimed at peers, researchers, technical experts and potential adopters and 
replicators, Communication activities will promote the HOUSEFUL project and its results to a non -specialist’ 
audiences, including the media and the  public at large and covering a wide range of audiences, at different 
geographical levels with the objective of increasing awareness and understanding. To this end, HOUSEFUL 
communication activities will focus on a few Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
key headlines outlining the project’s results, targeting a less specialised audience. Effective communication will be 
pursued through the project public communication channels and tools at the general public. HOUSEFUL has already 
identified the following communications activities divided in two groups: A: Communication materials for co -
creation activities with stakeholders in Frontrunner buildings , B: Communication materials for awareness 
raising activities, C: Public Communication m aterials to distributed public HOUSEFUL results towards wider 
audience (Table 17).  
Table 17. Communication activities  
Communication Materials  Objective  Timescale  KPIs  
A  
call-to-action video   Support citizen engagement  M8  >100 visits per month  
Simple HOUSEFUL  
Flyers  
 Engagement for the interactive calculation 
tool integrated in SaaS  M8  Distributions >1200  
Social media channels,   
(Facebook, Linkedin, 
twitter)  
 Foster dialogue, enhance public 
understanding, engagement and acceptance of 
local  
stakeholders’ and citizens  
M1-M54  >500 visits per month  
B  
Visual identity: project 
logo, graphic elements 
and templates  
 Inform relevant target groups about the 
project, its objectives and expected impacts.  
Promotion of HOUSEFUL towards different 
stakeholders  
M2  >500 visits per month  
HOUSEFUL Leaflet   M10  Distribution of > 1200  
posters, roll-ups   M1-M54  Presentation in >50 events  
project presentation 
video  
 Present the project, objectives and the circular 
economy concepts  in an easy-to-understand  
way for online distribution via website, social 
media, communication portals & platforms  
M8  >100 visits per month  
HOUSEFUL website  
 Main online communication channel and 
interface towards different target audiences.  
Direct link to SaaS developed in WP6 for 
stakeholders and citizens will be established  
M5  > 800 visits per month  
C  Articles and interviews   
8 independent articles and interviews 
around project-related topics written by  
professional journalists  
M6-M54  
Min. 8 articles in total, outreach of 
thousands online readers reached 
via project channels and the media  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          54  
  
Video News Release 
(VNRs)  
 1 VNR will be produced and distributed to 
European and Word TV  M50  At least 7 take-ups from TV stations, 
thousands of TV watchers  
short web video  
 HOUSEFUL demonstration outcomes,  
through simple and direct messages, 
facilitating the information transfer of more 
complex  
contents to a wide audience  
M48  > 200 viewers  
Press and News 
Releases  
 Promotion of project event (workshops, 
study tours, Open House Event, Final event)  M1-M54  Outreach of hundreds of readers  
Pageflow  
 Digital storytelling tool illustrating and 
transforming the HOUSEFUL outcomes into  
marketable solutions  
M1-M54  
60% of inhabitants of targeted 
cities  
  
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables   
3.1.1 Overall work plan structure  
The project work plan is structured in different types of actions: i) 
transversal and management activities (WP1 and WP7); ii) 
technical and social related activities (WP2, WP3, WP4, WP5) and 
iii) market and exploitation related activities (WP6). A graphical 
presentation of the WPs and their inter -relationships is shown in 
Figure 8. Project Management activities are all gathered in WP1, 
which has been conceived to follow up HOUSEFUL performance, 
thus interacting with all WPs in order to solve the occasional 
problems and achieve the smooth running of the project.  
A methodology to quantify the circularity level of the housing 
sector will be developed in WP2, based on calculation procedures 
and KPIs defined to measure the environmental, economic and 
social performance during the whole life cycle of buildings. The  
methodology obtained in WP2 will be used to assess the environ- Figure 8. Pert diagram of HOUSEFUL mental and 
economic performance of the HOUSEFUL solutions in  
WP5, and after its validation will be integrated in the SaaS developed in WP6 to be offered to stakeholders as a circular 
service. A social engagement strategy will be carried out in WP3 to involve local stakeho lders from Frontrunner 
buildings in the co-creation of CEBOs. The local stakeholders engaged will participate in the co Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018-creation workshops,  
with the primary aim of gathering the users’ needs, identifying potential barriers for the co -creation of solutions as 
well as raising awareness about the potential benefits of implementing circular solutions.  Societal concerns and 
knowledge requirements will be addressed in WP3 to identify in advance potential risks affecting the implementation 
of HOUSEFUL solutions in demo buildings (WP4). The HOUSEFUL service integrated by different circular 
solutions (technological and non -technological) will be demons trated in four demo buildings during WP4, Large 
scale demo buildings. The data obtained during demonstration activities (WP4) will be used in WP5 for assessing 
the environmental and economic impact of the HOUSEFUL solutions by means of LCA and LCC. In parallel, the 
outputs from WP3 will be used in WP5 to assess the social impact of the HOUSEFUL solutions.   
The methodology developed in WP2 will be refined during the project duration from the inputs received from WP3, 
WP4 and WP5. All WPs from 2 to 5, as well as dissemination and communication activities carried out in WP7 are 
oriented at a successful exploitation and market uptake of the project outputs in WP6. A market entry strategy of 
the most promising HOUSEFUL solutions will be developed in WP6 to facilitate the transition from a demonstration 
phase to a commercialisation phase. The HOUSEFUL service to be exploited will be integrated in a SaaS developed 
in WP6, which will encourage the shift from linear to circular business models. The SaaS developed wil l include a 
Circularity Tool based on the methodology defined in WP2 and an interactive sharing platform to exchange successful 
circular solutions and enhance the replication of proposed HOUSEFUL circular solutions as innovative services for 
housing sector . Success stories and lessons learned along the different WPs, including policy recommendations 
provided in WP6 will be transmitted in WP7 Communication and Dissemination, which will help to speed up the 
transition towards the circular economy in the housing sector.  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018   
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          55
3.1
 
A
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e
d 
w
i
t
h 
d
o
c
u
m
e
n
t 
R
e
f
. 
A
r
e
s
(
2
0
1
8
)
1
7
6
7
8
3
0 
- 
0
3
/
0
4
/
2
0
1
8   
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          
56