4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 Applicants   
 
  
Participant No.  1  
 
  
Short Name  LEITAT  
Country  Spain  
Organization Type  RTO  
Website  http://www.leitat.org/english/  
  
Partner Profile  
LEITAT is a Technological Center, member of TECNIO and recognized by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness, that aims to collaborate with companies and institutions by adding technological value both to 
products and processes, and focuses its activity on research, development and industrial innovation (R+D+2i). 
As Technological Partner, the Center is clearly committed to adaptation to transform the technological 
challenges into economic and social value. Since its foundation in 1906, LEITAT has prioritized its vocation of 
proximity by strengthening the principles of professionalism and respect to people and environment at the same 
time.  Leitat promotes the implementation of industrial innovation strengthening modernization of the productive 
structures and the development of new high technology value products in many different sectors.   
Leitat, from dynamism, provides flexible management in an “Open Innovation” as collaboration and 
cooperation driving force for technology transfer. LEITAT takes part each year in many projects financed by the 
regional and national governments, participates in projects co-funded by the European Commission, and develops 
private R&D projects funded by industrial partners.   
The Circular Economy Unit of LEITAT is formed by a multidisciplinary team capable of efficiently assess the 
demand of organizations on sustainability-related issues. It deals with Sustainable Consumption and Production, 
Life Cycle Assessment and Ecodesign, Environmental Communication and Training and environmental 
awareness. LEITAT applies the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) as an environmental management tool to assess 
the environmental impacts of a product/process over its entire life cycle, “from cradle to grave”, and promotes the 
incorporation of environmental criteria in design, in order to reduce the negative impact; therefore is fully capable 
of developing this task successfully.  
Role in the project  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          70  
  
In HOUSEFUL, Leitat’s main role will be the technical and management coordination of the overall project, 
monitoring the accomplishment of objectives, control of deviations and application of contingency measures and 
establishment of corrective actions.   
From the technical point of view, the main role will consist in testing different technologies at lab scale for the  
treatment of blackwater and grinded bio-wastes and for the optimisation of dry anaerobic digestion (dAD) for the 
optimal treatment of the solid fraction from non-segregated wastewater mixed with grinded biowaste (WP4).  
Several technologies for the stabilisation of AnMBR digestate will be tested at laboratory for optimal selection 
and scale up to large scale buildings.  
LEITAT will be also the leader of WP5 “Environmental, economic and social assessment”. LEITAT will assess 
the environmental performance of the solutions demonstrated in demo-sites (Life Cycle Assessment) and will test 
also the Level(s) tool created by the European Commission. LEITAT will carry out the Measurement & 
Verification of the energy savings achieved by applying the International Performance Measurement and 
Verfication Protocol (IPMVP-Option C) in two demo buildings.    
The role of LEITAT will also include the collaboration in other tasks such as support in the definition of the 
building circularity methodology (WP2), participation in co-creation workshops (WP3), definition of new 
business models concerning circular economy services and solutions in the housing sector (WP6) and 
participation in communication and dissemination activities (WP7).  
From the management point of view, the Administrative and Budgetary Manager of the project will be Lara 
Valentín, which will be responsible of the overall project administrative management and coordination as well as 
the overall budgetary management and coordination. Among other tasks, she will manage delivery and follow-up 
of administrative and financial documents to the project coordinator, who will transfer them to the EC, will 
ensure that the required resources are provided by each partner and that their work is consistent with the expenses 
and will organise project meetings.  
  
 
Detailed description of LEITAT’s role in WP4. (Total Person -Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018 )1767830 - 
03/04/2018months: 40) Task 4.1: Characterisation of the technological dimension of the four vectors (water, waste, 
energy and materials) for all the Demo buildings of HOUSEFUL (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.2: Definition of the technical specifications (TS) for the solutions including technological implementation: 
AnMBR system (S7.1), valorisation of biogas (S7.4) and composting (S8) (1 Person-months).  
Task 4.3: Leader of this task, in charge of optimizing water, waste and energetic technological so lutions at lab 
scale. LEITAT will specifically define the best operating conditions for commercial O 3/UV, AnMBR and 
composting strategies. LEITAT will also be in charge of designing and constructing a compact and transportable 
AnMBR unit able to treat the organic load rate of 8 -10 inhabitant equivalents (blackwater and grinded BW, in 
optimal ratio previously reported at lab scale) (10 Person-months).  
Task 4.4: Provide inputs to ALCN about water and waste solutions to adequately define and to update the technical 
monitoring programme to be deployed during Task 4.8 (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.5: Preparing technical content of water and waste solutions for the definition of the technical execution 
projects in Demos 1, 2 and 3 (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.6: Supporting the development of financing plans for demos (3 Person-months).  
Task 4.7: Supporting AHC in the tender procedure of Demo 2, providing information about water and waste 
solutions (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.8: Management of permits of the AnMBR pilot scale unit for its use in Demo 1 building. Supervision and 
support of the implementation and validation of water and waste solutions (validated at lab scale) in Demos 1, 2 
and 3. LEITAT will follow the commissioning process of the systems installed to ensure that the technical solutions 
are performing correctly (18 Person-months).  
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          71  
  
Marta Escamilla (F) graduate in Environmental Science from the University of Girona, has a widespread 
experience in environmental management, especially in Environmental Management Systems for SMEs and large 
companies, audits, sustainable production, life cycle assessment and ecodesign, Ecolabel, environmental 
awareness and training workshops among others.  
As the Sustainability Division Manager of LEITAT Technological Center, is in charge of coordinating projects 
and managing initiatives, at regional, national and European level. These projects promote a sustainable 
development, making a special effort on energy efficiency, rational natural resources consumption, waste 
management, to improve the environmental performance as well as contributing to substantial economic savings 
of the industrial sector.  
Dr. Julia García-Montaño (F) holds a PhD in Chemistry (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona) and is the Group 
Leader of the Environmental & BIO Technologies Division in LEITAT. Her professional career has been mainly 
centred in the study of alternative water and waste treatment & valorisation technologies: Advanced Oxidation 
Processes (AOPs), advanced electrochemical treatments, biotechnologies, nanotechnologies, membrane 
processes, high added value products recovery, water/waste-Energy nexus, among others. She has developed two 
research stays at the Plataforma Solar de Almería, has developed and coordinated several innovative national and 
international projects, has participated in various congresses and has numerous scientific publications in the 
water/wastes decontamination area. It is also noteworthy her educational experience as she combined her 
scientific career with her career as an assistant teacher in several Universities.       
Dr. Lara Valentin (F) works as an International Project Manager at Leitat and has experience in managing 
international projects in the area of Environmental technologies. She holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Environmental 
Sciences by the Autonomous University of Madrid and a PhD in Biotechnology by the University of Helsinki. She 
did her postdoctoral work in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Autonomous University of Barcelona 
where she was first introduced to project management.   
  
Dr. Sergio Martínez (M) holds a PhD in Environmental Science (University of Girona) and his career has been 
mainly focused on the evaluation of biomass as a renewable resource, covering aspects like biomass 
quantification, studying biomass conversion technologies, the economic feasibility of power generation using 
biomass, Life Cycle Analysis, physico-chemical and thermal analysis of biomass and the evaluation of 
atmospheric emissions. He has directly and indirectly participated in several national and international R+D 
projects. He has also participated in numerous conferences and he published articles in national and international 
scientific journals demonstrating his experience from projects which has been working in. His scientific 
experience during his PhD has been combined with teaching experience in the University of Girona, where he 
punctually participated in some lectures in Environmental Science Degree. After finishing his studies, he worked 
as plant manager in a  
 
biomass composting plant (treating organic fraction of urban solid wastes and sewage sludge). Nowadays SerAssociated 
with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018gio  
develops his professional work in the R&D Projects Department in LEITAT Technological Center. He works as 
a researcher in R+D+I projects for the development of new technologies for solid waste and wastewater treatment 
and valorisation using advanced technologies such as anaerobic digestion, pyrolysis and pre-treatment 
technologies. He enjoyed a post-doctoral fellowship (Torres Quevedo, 2011-2013), and today, he works as a  
Senior Researcher in LEITAT in the preparation, negotiation, execution, dissemination and management of  
European, national and industrial projects. He is  responsible of the Energy Valorisation and Waste recycling Unit 
in LEITAT.  
  
Marc Torrentellé (M) is graduated in Environmental Science by the Universitat Autònoma of Barcelona and he 
holds a Master’s Degree in Energy Efficiency and the Certified Measurement and Verification Professional  
(CMVP) qualification. Since 2009, he is a member of R&D Sustainability Division of LEITAT Technological 
Center. During this time, he has participated in several national and EU projects related to environmental issues. 
Highlight his involvement in energy efficiency and renewable energy projects, performing energy audits in 
industries and buildings, defining Action Plans for the energy renovation of buildings and monitoring the energy 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          72  
  
savings achieved after implementing energy efficiency measures. He has also conducted studies for the 
certification of determined products and services to obtain eco-labels, such as EU Ecolabel.  
Experience  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          73  
  
Related publications:  
▪ Hidalgo C. Environmental analysis of innovative sustainable composites with potential use in aviation  
 sector  –  A  Life  Cycle  Assessment  Review  SCIENCE  CHINA  Technological  Sciences    
 DOI: 10.1007/s11431-016-9094-y 2017 (Article).  
▪ Escamilla M., Hidalgo C., Riera MR. Using LCM to create shared value throu gh healthcare and 
pharmaceutical supply chains LCM Congres 2017 (Poster).  
▪ Escamilla M., Puigmal L. Sustainability assessment of innovative photovoltaic panel treatment to convert 
waste into resources promoting circular economy . SETAC LCA Case Study Sympos ium. Montpellier 
(France) November 2016 (Poster).  
▪ Escamilla M., Villaba R., Puigmal L. More sustainable textiles and improved laundry processes for 
mitigating the microplastics impact in the marine environment. MERMAIDS project. SETAC LCA Case 
Study Symposium. Montpellier (France) November 2016 (Poster).  
▪ Claret A., Escamilla M., Hidalgo C. Life Cycle Assessment as a tool to assess the sustainability of 
innovative materials: the case of second generation superconductors tapes. SETAC LCA Case Study 
Symposium. Montpellier (France) November 2016 (Poster).  
▪ Claret A., Escamilla M., Hidalgo C. Sustainability Assessment of integrated innovative wastewater 
technologies in Mediterranean tourist facilities (demEAUmed project). SETAC Europe. 22nd LCA Case 
Study Symposium. 2015 (Poster).  
▪ Gattringer,H., Claret, A., Radtke, M., Kisser, J., Zraunig, A., Rodriguez -Roda, I., Buttiglieri, G. Novel 
Vertical Ecosystem for Sustainable Water Treatment and Reuse in Tourist Resorts.  In: International 
Journal of Sustainable Development and Planing. Volume 11, No. 3 (2016) 263-274. ISSN: 1742-7601 (paper 
format), ISSN: 1743-761X (online).  
▪ Claret, A., Antón, A. and Montero, J.I. Eco-agro-industrial Park in Gran Canaria: conjunction  between 
agricultural and industrial sector. Ecotech & Tools: Environmental & Integrated Assessment of Complex 
Systems Conference. 2011 (Poster). Related projects:  
RUN4LIFE [H2020-IND-CE-2016-17-730285] Recovery and utilization of nutrients 4 low impact fertilizer.  
Run4Life demonstrates at large scale an alternative strategy for improving nutrient recovery rates, based on a 
decentralised treatment of segregated black water, kitchen waste and grey water co mbining existing wastewater 
treatments with innovative technologies.  
demEAUmed [FP7-ENV-2013-WATER-INNO-DEMO-619116] Demonstrating integrated innovative  
technologies for an optimal and safe closed water cycle in Mediterranean tourist facilities  
Project is aimed to demonstrate and promote innovative technologies for an optimal and safe closed water cycle 
in Mediterranean tourist facilities, leading to their eventual market upt ake. LEITAT is also in charge of testing 
innovative technological solutions for water treatment.  
RESSEEPE [FP7-EeB.NMP.2013-3 EeB.NMP.2013 -3] REtrofitting Solutions and Services for the 
enhancement of Energy Efficiency in public buildings   
RESSEEPE aimed to demonstrate innovative technologies to improve the energy performance of buildings.  
Infrastructures and facilities    Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          74  
  
LEITAT has all the necessary infrastructures, laboratories and arrangements to undertake the tasks envisaged in 
the project and fulfil its specific role. The following are main specific equipments that will be directly linked 
with activities of LEITAT within the project:  
• Physical-Chemical Analysis and microbiological: ICP-MS, Ec-Meter Basic 30+ (ionic conductivity), Karl fisher 
(H2O content, Coulometer KF 831), TG Q500, DSC Q20 (thermal), Climatic chamber (- 30 < T < 100 ºC, only 
small device, security), Ionic Chromatography (ion identification), various membrane pilot plants 
(MF/UF/NF/RO), Total Organic Carbon (TOC) and Total Nitrogen (TN) analyzer (Simazdu).   
• Synthesis, Manufacturing & Assembly: Glove box, Inkjet Ardeje, Vacuum Oven Chamber, and ovens (1000ºC, 
gas), Rotavapor, Plasma Air or atmospheric, Sonicator VCX750, planetary ball milling Pulverisette 7, Flat sheet 
membrane fabrication equipment, Microscopies, centrifugues, Microbiological cabines.   
• Electrochemistry: Potentiostat/galvanostat (Autolab, VMP3 and SP portatil from Biologic, 7 channels 400 mA, 
3 EIS, up to 20V, 1 channel 2A, 1 channel 10 A, and connected to glove box).  
• Bioelectrochemical reactors for different applications, including, MFC, MECs, MDCS, among others.  
• Anaerobic reactors, Methane potential analysers, Portable Biogas analyser (CH 4,  CO2, H2, O2), Micro GC for 
gas analysis.  
LEITAT holds license of the main LCA Databases such as Ecoinvent and Gabi databases, and the rest of 
commercial Databases included in the softwares. LEITAT works with different impact methods according to 
European guidelines: ILCD method, CML, ReCiPe, among others.   
     
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          75  
  
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Participant No.  2  
 
  
Short Name  ITeC  
Country  Spain  
Organization Type  Private non-profit fundation  
Website  www.itec.cat  
  
Partner Profile  
ITeC is a non-profit private foundation working in the field of construction. Our 
goals as an organization to support innovation are:  
• to be a benchmark institution in terms of information, knowledge, innovation and sustainability applied to 
the construction sector,  
• the provision of technological services to improve the competitiveness of the construction sector agents: 
organizations, companies and professionals.  
The ITeC Board put together the main representative stakeholders from the construction sector in Catalonia: 
regional public bodies, universities, professionals and builders’ associations.  
MAIN ACTIVITIES:  
1. European Technical Assessment Body specialised in the assessment and certification of nonstandardised 
innovative products*. Active Member of the EOTA - European Organisation for Technical Assessment of 
non-standardised innovative products:  
    - European Assessment Documents - EAD.     - 
European Technical Assessments - ETA.  
*Industrialized systems for façades and roofs, Fire protective products, Internal Partition kits, Industrialized 
Constructions, Technologies for Waterproofing, thermal and acoustic insulating materials, timber products, 
anchors and fixing systems.  
1. Methodologies for a proper calculation and management of the environment impact of buildings 
through their entire life cycle.  
2. Market research (member of EUROCONSTRUCT) combining the economic approach with our 
knowledge of the construction market from the technical, legal, environmental and commercial points of 
view.  
Role in the project  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          76  
  
Design and demonstration of circular strategies in maintenance operations and analysis of opportunities for the 
optimal use of materials during the life cycle of demo buildings (WP4). To carry out the BIM models of 
demobuildings.  
Monitoring the environmental impact of the new circular business models using environmental indicators such as 
energy, water and materials (LCC and LCA).   
  
WP’s participation: WP1; WP2 and lead the task 2.3; WP3; WP4 and lead the Action 4.1.1; WP5; WP6; WP7  
  
Detailed description of ITEC’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 34)  
Task 4.1: Providing data (economic) related to the baseline calculation of the circular economy audit. Leader of 
the sub -task 4.1.1. Material Passports integrating BIM for baseline definition and potential evaluation of 
deconstruction scenarios.  ITeC will be in charge of the BIM models of the 4 Frontrunner buildings and will give 
technical support to TURNTOO in the Material Passport definition and in the evaluation of the deconstruction 
scenarios (10 Person-months).  
Task 4.2: Supporting technical specifications of solutions S4, S9 and S10. Defining specifications to assure 
interoperability of Houseful solutions in the BIM models. Design for Disassembly (DfD) evaluation (9 
Personmonths).  
Task 4.3: Leader of the subtask 4.4.3 ‘Optimisation of Energy vector’ related to the S10 components: Feasibility 
analysis of innovative active and passive systems potentially installed as improved elements in building; Promoting 
the design and potential installation of optimal systems to be selected according to circular criteria as well as  
 
their cost (installation, maintenance and renovation cost); Modular façade definition Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018(6 Person-months).   
Task 4.5: Supporting the project documents production (e.g. Bill of quantities -BoQ- of innovative vs conventional 
solutions related to S4, S9 and S10 in the Spanish demos) (2.5 Person-months).  
Task 4.6: List of potential investors interested with the investment opportunity, generating the documentation to 
explain the investment opportunity at potential investors (2 Person-months). Task 4.7: Technical supporting AHC 
in the tender procedure (2.5 Person-months).  
Task 4.8: Technical assistance and supervision of works for solutions potentially installed in S10 (2 Personmonths).  
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          77  
  
Licinio Alfaro (M). Architect and technical architect, specialized in sustainability, master in architecture, energy 
and climate. Specialist in the calculation of environmental impact for the life cycle of buildings: process of 
Construction, use, maintenance and deconstruction.  
Project manager of environmental software to calculate waste, CO2 and Kwh in construction and civil works. 
Experience in management and execution of sustainable building projects. Analysis of environmental aspects in 
the field of architecture construction, environmental ISO application in construction promoters, specialist in waste 
management in construction.  
Gloria Díez (F). Gloria Díez. Degree in Architecture, School of Architecture of Barcelona, Polytechnic 
University of Catalonia (ETSAB - UPC). Specialist in construction and building sustainability with 15 years of 
experience. Expertise area in construction and demolition waste management as well as LCA of buildings and 
building products. Involved in 15 European and National co-funded projects as project coordinator/researcher, 
most of them focused on sustainable product development and environmental impact assessment. Member of the 
Spanish mirror committee CEN/TC 350 ‘Sustainability of construction works’ (since 2004). Co-author of several 
publications related to sustainability of buildings.  
José Lucas (M). Degree in Building Engineering, Barcelona School of Building Construction, Polytechnic 
University of Catalonia (EPSEB - UPC) and postgraduate in Project BIM Manager, Association of Surveyors, 
Architects and Construction Engineers of Barcelona (CAATEB). Specialist in modeling, analysis and BIM model 
management as well as LCA of buildings and building products. He has participated in the elaboration of the 
environmental information for the database BEDEC and in the development of the environmental management 
tool TCQiGMA of The Catalonia Institute of Construction Technology (ITeC). He has made more than 10 energy 
audits of public schools.  
Núria Vila (F). Degree in Architecture, School of Architecture of Vallés, Polytechnic University of Catalonia  
(ETSAV - UPC) and Master in Facility Management, Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC). Experience of 
25 years defining the state of conservation and maintenance of the buildings. Specialization in the field of 
maintenance planning and management of buildings with advanced technology as the software DicPla, PGMe 
and TCQi MNT, doing technical certifications, studying the problems of the concrete with aluminosis. Defining 
the informatic requirements for the software TCQi MNT. Coauthor in publications regarding Inspection, 
diagnosis and intervention in façades.  
David Sabatés (M). Degree in Architecture, School of Architecture of Barcelona, Polytechnic University of 
Catalonia (ETSAB - UPC) and Master of Buisiness Administration for IESE Business School. Ten years of 
expertise advising innovation projects and companies in the field of construction. Specialist in European programs 
-H2020, LIFE, INTERREG- and mergers and acquisitions -M&A-.   
Experience  
• BEDEC database. The ITeC database supplies technical, environmental and economic information regarding 
all kind of elements used in every situation in the construction market (building and civil works, urbanization, 
rehabilitation, maintenance, security and health, quality control). It is updated every year and since 2004 it 
has environmental information related to CO2, energy consumption and waste.  
• TCQGMA software. The mix of databas e BEDEC and the environmental software calls TCQGMA 
developed by ITeC, allows a to have the environmental impact of a construction process. The calculations 
are generated automatically. It is not necessary to have specific knowledge about the topic.   Related 
publications:  
• COAC - COAATB - ITeC (G.Díez). Sustainability Practices in Construction. ISBN 84-7853-495-4 (Spanish 
edition); 45 Pages; 2005  
• F. Mañà; A. Cuchí; D. Castelló; G. Díez; A. Sagrera. Sustainability parameters. ISBN 84-7853-4611 (Spanish 
edition) / ISBN 84-7853-455-5 (Catalan Edition); 96 Pages; 2003  
• F. Mañà Reixach; A. Cuchí Burgos; G. Díez Bernabé; C. Orgaz Tejedor. La Cubierta Captadora en los 
Edificios de Viviendas (Sustainable housing roofs); ISBN 84-7853-436-9 (Spanish edition) / ISBN 84-7853-
435-0 (Catalan Edition); 128 Pages; 2002 Related projects:  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          78  
  
• Project name: Development of the energy efficiency indicator TCU (Total Cost for the User) Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018  
Description: The TCU takes into account the energy cost of the construction product during the useful 
life cycle. It is a data which add to the cost of acquisition. It allows to have a complete vision and choose 
the product with more criteria.   
Year: 2017  
Customer: ICAEN  
   
• Project name: Environmental impact in public tenders.   
Description: Development of tools which modeling the building and allow to know the environmental 
impact and provide improvements. It has in consideration the CO2 emisions, energy consumption and 
water for each construction elements.   
Year: 2015  
Customer: private  
  
• Project N°: LIFE98 ENV/E/000351  
Project Title: Programme of technical actions to encourage the evaluation, minimization and selection of 
waste originated at the work sites during construction and demolition.  
Year: 1998  
Amount of the co-financing: 196.815,58 €  
Duration: 1998-2000  
Coordinating beneficiary: ITeC (ES)  
Other partners involved: GREMIO DE ENTIDADES DEL RECICLAJE DE DERRIBOS, GERD (ES); 
DRAGADOS Y CONSTRUCCIONES SA (ES); CONTROL DEMETER SL (ES).   
  
• Project N°: LIFE03 ENV/E/000150  
Project Title: RECONS - Reducing Construction Environmental Impact Year: 
2003  
Amount of the co-financing: 483,125.00 €  
Duration: 2003-2006 Coordinating beneficiary: GREMI DE CONSTRUCTORS 
D’OBRES DE BARCELONA I COMARQUES (ES)  
Other partners involved: ITeC (ES); DEPARTAMENT DE MEDI AMBIENT I HABITATGE DE LA  
GENERALITAT DE CATALUNYA (ES); UNIVERSITAT POLITÈCNICA DE CATALUNYA, UPC 
(ES); DEP. DE POLÍTICA TERRITORIAL I OBRES PÚBLIQUES DE LA GENERALITAT DE 
CATALUNYA (ES)  
  
• H2020 Project Grant Agreement number: 636709   
Project acronym: HOMESKIN  
Year: 01/02/2015  
Amount of the co-financing: 4.517.567€  
Duration: 2015-2017  
Coordinating beneficiary: ENERSENS, Dr. Brice FIORENTINO  
Other partners involved: ITeC (ES); USTUTT (GE); ARMINES (FR); Trocellen (IT); Parex Group (FR); 
FLAG (IT); CEA (FR); SORANE (SW); Wavestone (LU).  
Infrastructures and facilities   
Office building of 3 floors where 75 workers are developing their tasks. Advanced software to modelling and 
managing the whole life cycle of a construction: Data Base of materials with embedded information econ omical, 
environmental, brands, etc.-; Software to elaborate documents and managing construction processes; Software to 
managing the phase of use of the constructions.   
    
Participant No.  3   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 Short Name  CARTIF  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          79  
  
Country  Spain  
 Organization Type  Research and Technology Org.  
Website  http://www.cartif.com/en/  
  
Partner Profile  
Fundación CARTIF is a leading Spanish Applied Research Centre in terms of R&D and technology transfer 
activities created in 1994 formed up by some 150 researchers.  
CARTIF participation in international activities is promoted through the International Projects Department and 
has been materialised in the current participation in 34 ova n-going international projects, including 16 projects 
from H2020 (4 of them coordinated) and 7 FP7 projects.  
  
CARTIF has a wide experience with large scale demonstrations in buildings, since it coordinates the 
following H2020 Smart Cities projects, with several big demonstration sites in each of them: mySMARTLife 
“Smart Transition of EU cities towards a new concept of smart Life and Economy”, REMOURBAN 
“REgeneration  
MOdel for accelerating the smart URBAN transformation” (www.remourban.eu) and URBAN GreenUP “New  
Strategy for Re-Naturing Cities through Nature-Based Solutions”. Also CARTIF takes part as a partner in the 
H2020 Project SmartEnCity “Towards Smart Zero CO2 Cities across Europe” and in the project MAtchUP 
“MAximizing the UPscaling and replication potential of high level urban transformation strategies”.  
Other coordinated Smart Cities FP7 projects are: CITyFiED “RepliCable and InnovaTive Future Efficient 
Districts and cities” and R2CITIES “Renovation of Residential urban spaces: towards nearly zero energy 
CITIES”. CARTIF is one of the founding members and main promoters of the Smart City VyP initiative carried 
out in the Spanish cities of Valladolid and Palencia (http://www.smartcity-vyp.com).  
  
In the area of biogas, CARTIF has developed several projects related with the cleaning and upgrading of 
biogas, such as BIOFUEL_FOR_COOKING (Spain+India) and LIFE REVAWASTE “Demonstration of an  
integral and sustainable system for multi-waste recycling and valorization” (EU). In order to remove CO2, 
adsorption and membrane processes has been used, including membrane selection, optimization of the operating 
conditions, and pilot plan design and construction.  
  
Role in the project  
 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          80  
  
  
• WP2 Circular profile & baseline scenario of Demo Sites o Calculation 
of Circularity profiles and baselines of Driver buildings.  
• WP4 Large Scale Demo Buildings o Overall coordination and specially 
implementation of demos o Monitoring programmes  
o Biogas cleaning: Biogas generated in the anaerobic treatment will be treated in order to remove 
undesirable elements (as hydrogen sulphide, water traces, solid parti cles, siloxanes and VOCs) 
that could entail problems during biogas combustion.  
o The cleaning process will include the following steps: cooling to reduce humidity as well as partial 
removal of VOCs and siloxanes, gas washing to reduce acid gas (H2S) and amm onia (NH3) and 
complete removal of siloxanes and VOCs by activated carbon.  
• WP6 Monitoring Sustainability and Socio-economic assessment o 
Measurement & Verification of the energy savings (task 6.4) o LCA  
• WP7 Communication and Dissemination for social and market 
acceptance o Participation in scientific and technical congresses and 
dissemination events   
  
Detailed description of CARTIF’s role in WP4. (WORK PACKAGE LIDER) (Total Person-months: 34) Task 
4.1: Task Leader. Audit performance of the initial statu s of the four demo buildings in all four vectors: water, 
waste, energy and materials from the technological point of view.  
In order to align technical specification of all solutions to the further task of standardization under IFC4 (subtask 
4.1.1), CARTIF will participate in producing the detailed technical specification of all solutions with technological 
character behind the Integrated Systemic HOUSEFUL Service (Material (S3, S4), Water (S5, S6), Waste (S7, S8, 
S9) and Energy (S10, S11)).  
Collaboration in subtask 4.1.1, in two main aspects: a) specification (aspects related to standardization under  
 
IFC) of Material Passports and b) exporting to IFC the four Frontrunner buildings modeled with BIM. As far as 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
each constructive element of this model will incorporate specific KPIs to analyse the circularity of buildings and 
facilitate proposals for improvements focused on the building circularity, all this information should be assured in 
IFC models.   
CARTIF will be in charge of standardizing under IFC4 the materials information used in all four Frontrunner 
buildings as well as the BIM produced (7 Person-months).  
Task 4.2: Task Leader. Supervision of the different solutions designed. Definition of the technical specifications 
required for the proper demonstration of HOUSEFUL solutions.  
4.2.2: CARTIF will be in charge of each solution that will be specified under the standard IFC to assure the 
interoperability to include such solutions in the BIM models (5 Person-months).  
Task 4.3: CARTIF is in charge of optimizing biogas cleaning and upgrading technological solutions at lab scale 
and implementation of these solutions in Demo 2 and Demo 3 (8 Person-months).  
Task 4.4: CARTIF will proceed with a simultaneous real-time monitoring of CH4, H2S and CO2 after the cleaning 
stage in order to confirm that the gas stream fulfils the quality requirements demanded. CH4, H2S will be measured 
by dual wavelength infrared cell with reference channel, while H2S will be measure by electrochemical cell.  
In charge of linking the BIM server (IFC compliant) to the dynamic data repository (BACN standards compliant) 
to show all detailed information by means of a dynamic BIM visualisation tool (8 Person-months).  
Task 4.5: Task Leader. Production of the execution project documents. Collaborating on the Material Passports and 
BIM models enrichment (3 Person-months).  
Task 4.8: Supporting the implementation and validation of waste solutions (validated at lab scale) in Demo 2  and 
Demo 3 (3 Person-months).  
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          81  
  
M Dolores Hidalgo Barrio, pHD, (F) is currently R&D Projects Scientific Manager at the Environment and 
Biofuels Area in CARTIF Technology Centre and associated researcher of the ITAP Institute (University of 
Valladolid). She is also Editor in Chief of two international journals. Dr. Hidalgo studied Chemical Engineering at 
Valladolid University where she received her Doctor degree in 1999 (theme: anaerobic digestion). She has a 
degree in Environmental Technology received in 1993 and a degree in Finances received in 2004. Coordinator of 
numerous research projects, she is the author of over 50 articles, more than 70 papers at international conferences, 
organizer of a number of workshops and inventor of 3 patents.  Dr. Hidalgo has been working 17 years in the 
management, treatment and valorisation of organic waste.  
  
Miguel Ángel García-Fuentes (M): Architect and MSc Arch, both from the University of Valladolid (Spain).  
He participated as Construction Manager in the self-sufficient Urcomante Solar House project presented to Solar  
Decathlon Europe 2010. Currently he is working as Project Manager and Researcher at the Energy Division of  
CARTIF Technology Centre since 2012, in European RTD Projects in the framework of Smart Cities and Nearly 
Zero Energy Cities, mainly related to energy performance improvement in new buildings and building/district 
renovation, Building Energy Performance Simulation (BEPS) tools and Building Information Modelling (BIM), 
focusing the gap of data interoperability. He has participated in the coordination teams of the EU-FP7 funded 
BaaS (Building as a Service Ecosystem) and R2CITIES (Renovation of Residential Urban Spaces: towards nearly 
zero energy CITIES) projects, and currently is the Technical Project Manager of REMOURBAN (Regeneration 
Model for accelerating the smart urban transformation) H2020 Lighthouse project.  
  
Francisco Corona (M), Master of Science in Chemical Engineering by the University of Salamanca. Master of  
Engineering Research Processes and Systems. Master of Environment and Renewable Energy. He belongs to 
CARTIF Foundation since 2008 and he is a researcher of the Chemical Processes and Biofuels Area, participating 
in research tasks of processes and chemical products optimisation, waste valorisation, biogas process 
development, nutrient recovery, biomass pyrolysis and gasification, second generation biofuel, biorefineries and 
bioethanol and biodiesel obtaining processes. Besides, he has participated in regional, national and international 
proposals and projects. In addition, he has participated in the organisation of courses, workshops and seminars of 
waste valorisation as energy, bioproducts, etc. and he has participated as reviewer of JCR manuscripts.  
  
 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          82  
  
Dr. Ali Vasallo (M) graduated from the University of Valladolid in 2004 with a First Class Honours Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018degree in  
Industrial Engineering with the specialization in Theory of Structures and Industrial Buildings. He completed his 
PhD Thesis in 2009 in the field of vortex-induced vibrations of slender structures. He works at the Energy 
Division in CARTIF Technology Center. He is a project manager and researcher currently involved in several 
initiatives dealing with Energy Efficient Buildings, Smart Cities and Dynamic behaviour of slender structures. He 
is regularly attending events in connection with several Technology Platforms from the fields of building 
efficiency, district heating systems and Smart Cities. He also participates as Project Coordinator of the EU-FP7 
funded CITyFiED (Replicable and Innovative Future Efficient Districts and cities) project. Together with his 
activities in CARTIF Technology Center, he has been working in the School of Industrial Engineering of the  
University of Valladolid as Associate Professor of Industrial Constructions, Metallic Structures and Strength of 
Materials. He was appointed a Visiting Fellow at the School of Engineering at the University of Warwick (2011).  
  
Laura Pablos (F). Chemical Engineer since 2008 and Master of Engineering since 2011, both from the 
University of Valladolid (Spain). Executive Master in Innovation from Spain’s School for Industrial Organisation 
(Madrid) since 2011. Advanced knowledge and more than six years of a great experience in carrying out Life 
Cycle Assessment (LCA) studies, Carbon and Water footprint, Eco-labels, Environmental Management Systems, 
Environmental criteria for Green Procurement and Ecodesign (ISO 14006). Expert in assessing the environmental 
sustainability of different solutions via LCA studies, offering an added value in more than fifteen Regional, 
National and European projects, addressing the sustainability of the products and production processes involved. 
Three of them are: i) Eco-design for Eco-innovation. The Green Car case. Funded by STC SUDOE (Green-Car 
Eco-Design, Ref.:SOE2/P1/E326) from 2011 to 2013; ii) Sustainable design applied to industrial and business 
competitiveness. Funded by: Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce of Spain (DGPYME – 
INNOEMPRESA Programme, SUPRA-REGIONAL SUP-030300-2010-12) during 2010; iii) Introduction of 
environmental criteria in the purchase of several equipment in airport terminals. Private client: TECNOMA, in 
collaboration with AENA, during 2010. Diverse publications in different workshops and relevant platforms.  
  
Experience  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          83  
  
Related publications:  
- Hidalgo, D., Martín-Marroquín, J., Corona, F. (2017). “Biogas today, biomethane tomorrow”. DYNA (Q4).  
DOI: dx.doi.org/10.6036/8482  
- Hidalgo, D. , Martín -Marroquín J., Corona, F. (2017). “The effect of feed composition on anaerobic 
codigestion of animal-processing by-products”. Journal of Environmental Management (Q1). DOI:  
doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.06.033  
- Hidalgo, D., Martín -Marroquín, J., Corona, F. (2016). Biogas upgrading technologies: a mini -review. 
Advances in Chemical Engineering and Process Technology, Vol. 1 (1), pp. 1-10  
- Hidalgo, D., Martín-Marroquín, J. (2015). Biochemical methane potential of livestock and agro-food waste 
streams in the Castilla y León Region (Spain). Food Research International (Q1). DOI:  
10.1016/j.foodres.2014.12.044  
- García-Fuentes et al. (2014). Residential áreas retrofitting towards nearly Zero Energy Districts (nZED). A 
case study: Valladolid -Cuatro de Marz o district. Poster. Proceedings of World Sustainable Building 2014. 
Barcelona, Spain.  
  
Related projects:  
- “Production of renewable natural gas from wet biomass and all types of organic waste for cooking and 
micro CHP” (BIOFUEL_FOR_COOKING). Spanish+India n funds, Jan -17/Dec-18 - anaerobic co -digestion of 
organic waste streams + biogas cleaning and upgrading. Coordinated by CARTIF.  
- “Valorization of pig carcasses through their transformation into biofuels and organic fertilizers” (LIFE 
VALPORC project). EU funds. Oct-14/Sep-17 – anaerobic co-digestion of organic waste streams.  
- “Demonstration of an integral and sustainable system for multi -waste recycling and valorization” (LIFE 
REVAWASTE project). EU funds. Oct -13/Dec-16 – anaerobic co -digestion of organic waste streams – biogas 
cleaning. Coordinated by CARTIF.  
- “Smart Transition of EU cities towards a new concept of smart Life and Economy” (mySMARTLife) 
(H2020SCC-1-2016-2017 - Smart Cities and Communities lighthouse project). EU funds. Nov-16/Dec-21 Urban  
Transformation Strategy to support cities in the definition of transition models, as a suitaAssociated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018ble path to reach high  
level of excellence in its development process, addressing the main city chall enges and progressing to the smart 
people and smart economy concepts. www.mysmartlife.eu. Coordinated by CARTIF.  
- “RepliCable and InnovaTive Future Efficient Districts and Cities” (CITyFiED) (FP7 Smart Cities). Coordinated 
by CARTIF. CITyFiED project will concentrate its activities to develop a systemic vision and strategy to adapt 
European cities and its urban ecosystem into smart, sustainable and inclusive cities of the future. www.cityfied.eu  
Infrastructures and facilities   
  
• 1.2 m3 two-phase anaerobic digestion pilot plant for off-site experiments.  
• Lab scale membrane contactor for biogas upgrading assays.  
• Thermostatic chamber for biodegradability test.  
• Fully equipped chemical labs.  
  
  
     

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          84  
  
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Participant No.       4  
    
Short Name  ALCN  
Country  Austria  
Organization 
Type  
SME  
Website  http://www.alchemia-nova.net/en/   
  
Partner Profile  
Scientific expertise on natural resources and agricultural by-products: Development of cascading utilisation 
strategi renewables, evaluation of renewable and seondary resources;  
Phytotechnologies: biomining, constructed wetlands, water and air treatment;  
Circular economy: Cradle to Cradle® projects including certification as official partner, resource recovery;  
Sustainable buildings: Including ecosystem services into the building, sutainable materials;  
Sustainable product design: Design criteria, made for recycling;    
Research project conception, coordination and realisation: H2020, LIFE, ERA-NET, national or regional 
funds, etc.  
Role in the project  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          85  
  
ALCN will coordinate the Austrian demonstration sites; organise all stakeholder processes concerning the 
Austrian demonstration sites; closing the nutrient loops in the demonstration buildings in Austria and Spain; be 
responsible for the implementation of nature-based solutions in Austrian and Spanish demo buildings; define new 
business models concerning circular economy services and solutions in the housing sector; form new value 
chains; evaluate circular economy financing opportunities. Involvement mostly in WP4, but also other WPs 
regarding circularity, dissemination, exploitation.  
  
Detailed description of ALCN’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 42)  
Task 4.1: Characterise social dimension on the 4 vectors (waste, water, energy, materials) in the demo buildings 
with focus on demo building 3. Provide necessary information and access for BIM Modeling and Material Passport 
creation for Demo building 3 (4 Person-months).  
Task 4.2: Definition of the technical specification (TS) for the solutions including technological implementation: 
Modifying greywater discharge system for treatment and reuse using innovative NBS (TS 5.2.1), Rainwater 
pretreatment for reuse using NBS on facade or roof (TS 5.4.1, 5.4.2) and integration in building (TS 5.4.3), 
separation of liquid/solid fraction with NBS indoor and outdoor (TS 6.1), design and integration of dAD system 
(TS 7.2) (5 Person-months).  
Task 4.3: Leader of the subtask “Optimisation of water vector”: Optimisation of NBS (as green facade or green 
roof) for greywater and rainwater treatment for reuse in toilets in Demo buildings 1 and 2. Optimisation of NBS at 
laboratory (TRL5) before scale up (at TRL 7) and integration by ALCN (with the support of IDP in Task 4.8). 
Selection of plants, analysis of their performance according to (Spanish and Austrian) climate conditions on the 
treatment of selected WW. ALCN will provide calculations and experimental implementations concerning the size 
of treatment systems (i.e. m2 per litre influent), retention times, dilution factors and plant consortia.   
Subtask “Optimisation of waste vector”: Gas characterisation (outlet from biogas plant) in Demo 3 will be 
performed by ALCN. Quality of biogas will be monitored by ALCN with the supervision of HOMEBIOGAS. 
Twice a year tank will be emptied and the sludge with the foreseen outlet and a pumping system directly sent to 
the composting unit. Installation of proposed equipmen ts will be performed by CARTIF/ALCN in Demo 3.  A 
compost cultivator prototype will be developed by ALCN at TRL6 and optimised for composting fresh gardening 
wastes before mixing with dAD digestate at large scale in Demo 3. Optimisation of optimal ratio will be performed 
according to compost characteristics evaluated by ALCN.   
Subtask “Optimisation of energy vector”: Co -creation between AIGUASOL and ITEC with stakeholders 
(including AHC, ALCN and NEUES LEBEN) will promote the design and potential installation of optimal systems 
to be selected according to circular criteria as well as their cost (installation, maintenance and renovation cost) (14 
Personmonths).  
Task 4.4: Task Leader. Specifying a monitoring program to ensure a correct impact assessment of t he 
demonstration. Selection of suitable sensors (photometric sensors, online microbial sensors, humidity sensors, 
temperature sensors, etc.). Regarding solutions designed for WW treatment (S5 and S6), ALCN will include 
sensors for the evaluation of water quality after NBS treatment.  
Data acquisition and repository of data according to the KPIs will be done in cloud -based systems to oversee the 
data sets online at any time (5 Person-months).  
Task 4.5: Preparing technical content of water and waste solutions for the definition of the technical execution  
projects in Demos 1, 2 and 3 (3 Person-months).  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 Task 4.6: 
Development of a financing plan, progress monitoring of the implementation of the pla n for demo building 3, a 
risk/uncertainty assessment, mitigation plans and the evaluation of different potential scenarios and impacts for the 
project (4 Person-months).  
Task 4.7: ALCN with the support of GWR will be in charge of the selection process of companies for renovation 
works according to prize and trust (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.8: All permits for technological implementation of proposed solutions in Demo 3 will be sought for 
approval. Once approved, ALCN in Austria will be in charge of the technical assistance and the supervision of the 
works related to the technological innovation shown in S5, S6, S7, S8 and S9. ALCN will periodically report to 
the consortium the progresses and potential delays or difficulties. ALCN will follow the commissionin g process 
of the system installed to ensure that the technical solutions are performing correctly (5 Person-months).  
  
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          86  
  
Johannes Kisser MSc. (M), Degree in Chemical Engineering. Dissertation about recovery of metals from plants. 
Coordinator of Austrian research project on metal recovery from waste with plants. Environmental analysis at the 
Environmental Protection Agency in Austria. 3 Lectureships in Austrian Marketing University of Applied Science 
about sustainable product design. Working at alchemia-nova since 2002, since 2010 managing director of the re -
founded alchemia-nova OG and from 2014 onwards alchemia-nova GmbH.   
Theresa Heitzlhofer MSc. (F), Human ecologist. Degree in Biology/Ecology. Focus topics bio-geo-chemical 
nutrient cycles, microbial ecology, human ecology. Experience in Education for Sustainable Development, 
Participatory Approaches. Since 2017 staff member at alchemia-nova.  
Gianluca Vassallo BSc. (M), Degree in Geography. Focus topics resources criticality analysis, GIS location 
analysis for renewable energies and hydrology. Master student in Natural Resource Management and Ecological 
Engineering at the University of Life Science Vienna (BOKU) and the Czech University of Life Science (CULS). 
Since 2017 staff member at alchemia-nova.  
Andrea Zraunig MSc. (F). Biologist (phytochemist). Many years of experience in the isolation and 
characterization of complex natural compounds from plants. Natural ecosystems in Thailand, Costa Rica, 
Ethiopia, Tanzania and Sumatra. Since early 2014 permanent full time staff member at alchemia-nova, 
responsible for water treatment with plants, botany related issues, natural compounds, and management of 
laboratory tests. Heinz Gattringer MSc. (M), Studies and degree in agriculture/horticulture from Geisenheim 
University in Germany. From 1996 to 2007 more than 10 years practical experience in commercial plantations 
and agricultural enterprises in South America (Ecuador), as well as international development cooperation. Since 
2007 researcher at alchemia-nova in Vienna. Responsible for renewable resources, sustainable material sourcing 
and production. Commercialisation of the vertical ecosystem®.  
 
Experience  
Related publications:  
Andrea Zraunig, Heinz Gattringer, Johannes Kisser, Manfred Radtke; Building-Integrated Indoor Vertical 
Ecosystem for Treatment and Recycling of Greywater; Sustainable Sanitation Practice, Issue 23/2015;   
H. Gattringer et al., NOVEL VERTICAL ECOSYSTEM FOR SUSTAINABLE WATER TREATMENT AND 
REUSE IN TOURIST RESORTS; Int. J. Sus. Dev. Plann. (2016) 1–12; in evaluation  
Patent AT516363: Gradual vertical constructed wetland for purifying waste water, industrial waste water and the 
like, H. Gattringer, J. Kisser, M. Radtke, A. Zraunig, 2015  
H. Gattringer et al., "gugler! build & print triple zero - Integration of the Cradle to Cradle production into the 
flagship project Gugler”, (2010), nachhaltigwirtschaften.at  
  
Related projects:  
Greywater and storm water management, 
reduction 
  Green INSTRUCT. Green H2020-EEB-04- of air pollution, mitigation of heat islands effects, 
intergated sructural elements for 2016, project no. additional insulation of the building, noise reduction,  
retrofitting and new construction 723825, 2016 -2020 wit h facades. Pre -fabricated structural elements for of 
buildings.  water recovery using almost only recycled materials.  
• ReCO2ST. Residential Retrofit  
assessment platform and demon- H2020-EEB-2016- 
strations for near zero energy and  Indoor air purification and climate control with  
2017/H2020-EEB- 
CO2 emissions with optimum nature-based solutions. cost, health, comfort, and envi- 
2017 ronmental quality.  
• Gugler! Build & print triple Federal Ministry for  Including in-house water treatment of industrial  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          87  
  
zero.   Transport, Innova- effluents with plants. Cradle to Cradle design of Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 tion and Technol- building. Using 
only sustainable resources with ogy, Programme  full dismantlability.  
“Houses of tomorrow 
plus”, 2010ongoing  
 Feasibility Study,  Closing resources-, nutrient- and energy cycles  
• Wohnwagon  FFG Austria, 2015  for mobile homes  
• demEAUmed.  Demonstrating FP7 Water  
integrated innovative technologies Inno&Demo project  Development and validation of the vertical ecofor an 
optimal and safe closed no. 619116, 2014- system “vertECO”, set-up in Hotel Samba, Lloret water cycle 
in Mediterranean tour- 2017  de Mar, Spain ist facilities  
Project co-financed by 
Linz (city), Up- 
Innovative packaging for supermarket products.  
• Loop Linz. Model project with per Austria (state),  Investigating strengths and weaknesses of the 
bioplastics.  retail stores, indus- innovation.  
trial companies,  
  IBAW e.V.  
Infrastructures and facilities   
alchemia-nova GmbH runs a fully equipped laboratory for extraction and testing of all kinds of natural compounds 
as well as a vertical ecosystem laboratory test unit with electronic on -line sensors. A portable photometer and 
several offline sensors are also available for water quality measurements. A green façade element that cleans water 
is currently being developed. Modern computer and communications equipment is available to allow for 
international cooperation, teleconferences, cloud based management tools, and data sharing systems.   
  
     

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          88  
  
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Participant No.       5  
 
Short Name  Agència de l’Habitatge de 
Catalunya  
Country  Spain  
Organization Type  Public  
Website  www.agenciahabitatge.cat/  
  
Partner Profile  
The Agència de l’Habitatge de Catalunya (Housing Agency of Catalonia- AHC) created by the Law 13/2009, 
of 22th July has the purpose to endow the Catalan Government with an agile administrative tool to facilitate the 
management of all public actions in terms of housing.    
AHC has the aim to develop, implement and manage housing polices in Catalonia. The activity of the Agency is 
divided in three areas: Promotion of housing, Social Programs of Housing, Rehabilitation and Quality of Housing. 
It manages a social housing stock of 14.704 dwellings. It has established experience in retrofitting of the social 
and residential buildings. It has developed, during the past years, more than 400 refurbishment projects; 20% of 
them related to improvements of building envelopes. Owing to its past and ongoing experience in building 
retrofitting, AHC has played an important role in compiling the main refurbishment and buildings energy 
management best practices and barriers in Spanish context (legal, technical, social and financial barriers and best 
practices in refurbishment activities). In this sense, AHC staff has a large experience in social work as they are 
permanently in contact with public housing users.  
AHC as a regional housing legislator, public housing manager and renovation promoter is a key stakeholder in 
Spain. It is a member of energy efficiency platform of Social Hosing Promoters of Spain (called AVS), 
Environmental Product Declaration (EPD) Spain Committee and GBC in Spain. It is a member of the Circular 
Economy think-tank group of the Catalan Government.   
AHC is able to catalyse change in existing buildings and also influence behaviour amongst residents and housing 
organisations. It has direct influence through their realm of operation (housing stock, client portfolio etc.) and the 
capacity to influence other through involvement in relevant networks and associations. Also, as members of 
CECODHAS, AHC is able to access data from other organisations in order to extrapolate data and results for 
policy promotion purposes and also to influence other similar, private sector, through discussion, debate, and 
dissemination.  
Role in the project  
Tasks Assigned and Role in the Project: Provision of 2 demo sites (social housing buildings) and management of 
demonstration activities at these sites; communication with key stakeholders; dissemination to policy makers and 
politicians.   
  
Detailed description of AHC’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 20)  
Task 4.1: To introduce the required data in the Madaste r platform to generate the Material Passport for Demo 1 
and Demo 2: complete description of all product, components and raw materials. Adaptation of the BIM model for 
Demo 1 and Demo 2. Contribution in deliverable D4.3 (5 Person-months).   
Task 4.2: Facilitate the inspection and tests in the two demonstration buildings and the technical specifications for 
the recycling / reuse of materials at the end of their useful life (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.3: Provide knowledge for optimisation of Energy vector in De mo 1 and Demo 2 with a validated 
multicriteria model for energy renovation taking into account the different steps in energy refurbishment projects 
(audit, monitoring, measure selection, project development and implementation and energy performance 
validation) (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.6: Study the complementary financial mechanisms for Demo 2. For the intervention calendar, Demo 1 will 
serve as background for the definition of mechanisms in Demo 2 (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.7: Task Leader, in charge of adapting the tenders to the innovations of the "HOUSEFUL solutions S5, S7, 
S8 and S11" that will be implemented in the Demo 1 and Demo 2. Collaborate in the implementation of the 
solutions / services proposed during the useful life of the buildings and study  the adaptation of the usual 
management of public administration (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.8: Management of the rehabilitation works, signature of the works certifications and responsible for 
ensuring the correct implementation and control of the HOUSEFUL solutions by the contractors (7 Personmonths).  
  
 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          89  
  
Key personnel   
Ms. ANNA MESTRE (F). Technical Architect, Master in Rehabilitation Techniques of the Architectonic Patri- 
 
mony. Postgraduate in Environmental Management. Responsible of External Action Service of the Housing Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Agency of Catalonia. Project coordinator of RELS –ENPI project, and Technical person in charge of an 
agreement of collaboration with Tunis. From February 1990, Technical Architect in Architectural Projects 
Department from Adigsa developing refurbishment projects from different social housing quarters in Catalonian 
region. Ms. ANNA PUJOL (F). Building engineer. Project developer of refurbishment project in AHC with 
more than 16 years of experience. She has been involved of the implementation technical team of the 
RESHAPE- IEE and RELS-ENPI MED projects.  
Mr. JOSEP LINARES (M). Technical Director of the Housing Agency of Catalonia, Head of Operating Unit of  
Housing Refurbishment and Improvement. Teacher in maintenance and rehabilitation issues in Institut Gaudí of 
Catalonia; co- director and teacher of Ecohabitat postgraduate in Elisava University (Barcelona); teacher of 
edification engineering in Elisava University (Barcelona); teacher in rehabilitation work and accessibility in SERT 
School of Professional Association of Technical Architects of Catalonia (COAC). Member of the Judicial Experts 
Association in Catalonia.  
Ms. CRISTINA CARDENETE (F). Degree in Environmental Sciences, Master’s degree in Energy efficiency 
and renewable energies, Master’s degree in Local management and civil service. Project manager of European 
and research projects, driving strategy implementation, by piloting and coordinating new international initiatives. 
Horizon scanning for new international opportunities (or threats), coupled with research and analysis on select 
topics to enable better delivery on the company strategy.  
Experience  
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          90  
  
Related publications:   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
• “Why is a strategy for building energy renovation necessary in the Mediterranean?”, The Parliament 
magazine, Issue 28, September 2013.  
• The Catalan Strategy for Energy Renovation of Buildings has been drawn up as part of the MARIE 
European Project. This is due to the commitment of the Regions forming part of this project to achieve by 
December 2014 a long -term strategy to mobilise the renovation of public and private residential and 
tertiary. It was approved by Catalan Government on December 2013 and an Executive Committee was set 
up to implement it as a collective body in the department responsible for Housing. The Strategy Road Map 
aims to achieve UE’s settled basic targets in 2020.   
• The RELS methodology is a validated multicriter ia model for energy renovation of Mediterranean 
buildings taking into account the different steps in energy refurbishment projects (audit, monitoring, 
measure selection, project development and implementation and energy performance validation), which 
has been implemented in 2 buildings of the AHC. Apart from the 20-20-20 EU objectives, it is focused on 
social dwellings and it incorporates the human behaviour as an added value. In the regions where the 
methodology has been implemented (Tunisia, Italy, Spain)  it has figured out a singular context: most of 
the families cannot afford an acceptable comfort in their homes due to their low-income conditions. Indeed, 
the influence of users is important in the final energy performance of their homes.   
  
Related projects:  
• 4RinEU (H2020) [Started: 01-10-2016 (48 months)] is about Robust and Reliable technology concepts 
and business models for triggering deep Renovation of Residential buildings in EU. AHC will contribute 
by following the implementation of 4RinEU deep r enovation packages and providing support and 
feedbacks for the definition of business models, investigation of financial mechanisms and analysis of 
replication potential starting from our building stock.   
• RELS (ENPI CBC MED)  [Finished: 31 -12-2015 (50 mont hs] main objective was to develop a 
methodology for energy renovation in social housing and to implement and test it in pilot projects around 
the Mediterranean. AHC coordinated this project, which studied relevant factors to reach the integral 
approach for renovation was: the empowerment of the demand side (housing associations and tenants), 
including new business models / value cases, and a life-cycle view of the renovation process.  
• MARIE (MED)  [Finished: 31 -12-2014] main objective was to develop a Medite rranean Strategy for 
Energy Renovation of buildings, focusing on proposing tools and financial mechanisms for energy 
renovation of Buildings, providing marketing and training programmes, an innovation laboratory and 
cooperation hub. AHC was on charge of th e characterisation of the building stock for the Catalan region 
and it participated on the identification of the barriers and solutions for the promotion of energy renovation 
of housing.  
• GrowSmarter (H2020) [Started: 15-01-2016 (60 months)] one of the Sma rt city projects which aims to 
transforming cities for a smart, sustainable Europe. AHC signed a collaboration agreement with Gas 
Natural, in order to propose buildings that fulfil the technical requirements developed in the project so they 
could be retrofitted according to the proposed GrowSmarter solutions.  
• REHABITAT (POCTEFA) [Finished: 30-06-2012 (36 months)] Renovate specific pilots to achieve a 
better coexistence and maintenance of common areas throughout the combination of training and 
participation of citizens.  
Infrastructures and facilities   
The AHC has established experience in retrofitting of social and residential buildings. It has developed, during the 
past years, more than 400 refurbishment projects; 20% of them related to improvements of building envelopes. 
Owing to its past and on-going experience in building retrofitting, AHC has played an important role in compiling 
the main refurbishment and buildings energy management best practices and barriers in the Spanish context (legal, 
technical, social and financial barriers and best practices in refurbishment activities).   
  
In addition to the staff expected to work directly on the project, AHC will call on technical staff and their extensive 
experience in the retrofitting of residential buildings that has knowledge about all the phases of the life cycle of a 
building, but specifically the use and maintenance.   
  
Also, the External Action Unit, has expertise and experience in the coordination and the management of European 
and international projects.  
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          91  
  
    
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
  
Participant No.  6  
   
Short Name  VISUM  
Country  Ireland  
Organization Type  SME  
Website  www.seeingnewdata.com  
  
Partner Profile  
VISUM (www.seeingnewdata.com) is an optical engineering company from Dublin that specializes in the 
development and commercialization of Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS)-based portable and inline analyzers 
and measurement systems for process monitoring and quality control applications in the food, pharmaceutical 
and chemical applications. The company was established in 2014 and currently employs 9 staff from its facilities 
in Nexus UCD (technology park at the University College Dublin campus). In 2016, the company launched the  
VISUMPalm (a handheld NIR measurement instrument) and has secured first sales. An integration platform 
(VisumNIR) for the inline version is currently under development in cooperation with early adopter clients from 
the food processing industry (dairy, meat and olive oil) and pharmaceutical industries. VISUM Ltd. is an SME 
Champion-awarded a Phase 1 and a subsequent Phase 2 Grant under H2020’s SME Instrument.   
  
  
  
Role in the project  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          92  
  
VISUM will be responsible for the development of the SaaS that will be used to implement the HOUSEFUL 
service. For this reason VISUM will designing the architecture, coding the tools, establishing the API with the 
cloud provider and building the databases (data provided from other entities). A testing and troubleshooting 
system will be implemented to validate the platform. VISUM will also contribute their skills in knowledge/IPR 
management, as well as in commercial branding, reaching industry, the development of SaaS products and 
business models. They will also contribute to knowledge transfer and training activities and gearing up for the 
postproject phase. Finally VISUM has extensive expertise in collaborative R&D project (FP7, H2020, BBI) and 
industry-driven business-to-business actions. Their project management procedures are ISO and UNE certified, 
and they have an internal PMO that has the necessary resources and skills to ensure smooth administrative and  
 
 financial reporting to the project coordinator.   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Detailed description of VISUM’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 4)  
Task 4.4: VISUM will integrate sensors and monitoring required for the operation of AnMBR system foreseen in 
Frontrunner building 1. According to the design and operational need provided by LEITAT and IDP, VISUM will 
propose a monitoring system to e nsure the proper functioning of the AnMBR and evaluate its performance over 
the time (4 Person-months).  
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          93  
  
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE (M) PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland- developed an IR 
photometric measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronics, 
Queens University Belfast. Designed an Echelle spectrometer while based at Andor Technology Ltd. Worked at 
Tyndall National Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, Barcelona, developing diffractive 
optical and acousto-optical metrology techniques for nanotechnology applications, in particular for characterision 
of nanoscale structures fabricated by nanoimprint lithography and directed self-assembly. Other research 
activities: quantification of ordering in self-assembled structures by image analysis techniques and optical sensors 
using hydrogel materials. Tim is the VISUM Palm Product Manager, as well as the Technical Lead at VISUM 
Ltd. and he brings vast optical integration and device instrumentation expertise.   
DR. SEVERINE PHILIPPE (F) graduated with a 1st class Hons. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences (Physics and 
Physics Technology) from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland, in 2002 and received her PhD in Physics from 
Trinity College Dublin in 2007, for the study of polarisation effects in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA). 
She went on to work on the development and characterization of low noise SOAs, as well as THz generation by 
multimode lasers and their detection using four wave mixing in SOA, both in the Semiconductor Photonics 
Group, Trinity College Dublin, and the School of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University. She previously 
worked as a R&D technician for the plastics industry and in quality control for electronic appliances. She joined 
VISUM in 2014 as an optical engineer and is currently involved in projects including various microscopy 
techniques, planar waveguide technologies and MIR spectroscopy.   
NIKOLINA MIKULCIC (F) User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design and development 
background with more than 15 years of experience in this field and she is an expert on UI/UX design strategy 
and front-end development (CSS/HTML). She studied graphic design and she started to learn web design due to 
her deeply interested for digital world. Since joining VISUM in September 2016, she has been creating a new 
User Interface for the VISUM product lines. Prior to VISUM, she has an extensive experience in the online 
world, having worked in companies such as EuroArt93 – digital agency, BlueBOX IT, Biroval. She also was a 
founder of design studio In Love With Blue and she worked as Project Manager, UI/UX designer and front-end 
developer. She was leader numerous digital projects for different clients as Erste Bank, Unicredit Bank, Telenor 
Bank, Komb Bank, ZAMP etc.  
  
CHRIS DERMODY (M) Software Developer. Bachelor’s degree in Product Design from Dublin Institute of 
Technology. Chris excels in creative problem-solving, using the latest technologies to transform ideas into real 
opportunities that provide exponential value to business operations. With a keen eye for user experience, Chris 
builds robust, responsive applications that stand the test of time. Since joining VISUM, Chris has been hard at 
work developing both front and backend features that push the VISUM product lines forward. Prior to VISUM, 
Chris enjoyed working across the full spectrum of business, founding startups and overseeing product 
development throughout the lifecycle of many successful businesses.  
  
Experience  
1. PREVIEW- PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection mold sEtup in Wireless sensor networks. (Grant 
Agreement number: 636892). VISUM Ltd. is responsible for the development of the Data Acquisition System 
and in in developing the Signal Co nditioning, its integration with the ARM main board, as well as 
implementing a prototype.  
2. Phase 1 SME Instrument: An IR-spectroscopy-based platform for the rapid integration and customisation of 
affordable, real-time monitoring solutions for the food and pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement number: 
684767).  
3. Phase 2 SME Instrument:  Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and 
customisation of affordable, real-time chemical monitoring solutions for food and pharmaceutical industr ies 
(Grant Agreement number: 731043)  
4. Development of a portable LIDAR device for the detection of pesticides for the University of Lerida in Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Spain (B2B contract)  
Development of a NIR device  for at-line measurement of quality of oil in industrial frying equipment for bakery 
products (B2B contract).  
Infrastructures and facilities   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          94  
  
Spectroscopic Laboratory: equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR-ATR (Interspectrum), two 
UVVIS (PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), one Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) 
spectrophotometers as well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are trained 
and skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad 
hoc noncommercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes).   
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops: equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software 
[SolidWorks], among others. ZEEMAX software for the design of optical systems and design setup by means of 
advanced optical components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related 
“opticalware”).  
  
     
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          95  
  
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Participant No.  7  
    
Short Name  AIGUASOL  
Country  SPAIN  
Organization Type  SME  
Website  www.aiguasol.coop/en  
  
Partner Profile  
Founded in 1999, the SME AIGUASOL (www.aiguasol.coop/en) team is made up of more than 20 professionals 
with a high level of technical and scientific experience. They include engineers, PhDs, architects and physicists 
who have notable experience both in private companies and research centres, and distributed among offices in 
Barcelona, Basque Country, and Santiago de Chile.  
AIGUASOL provides engineering and research services, promoting innovative solutions to reduce the impact 
associated with energy consumption (experience in urban planning, construction, industrial processes and power 
generation, with a focus on energy planning, savings measures, energy efficiency, process integration and 
renewable energy implementation). AIGUASOL is the official TRNSYS distributor for Spain and Portugal, and 
develop energy-advanced tools for third parties. AIGUASOL has participated in several Tasks of the 
International Energy Agency and is member of the Steering Committee of the ESTTP.  
AIGUASOL have a wide experience on energetic plans (i.e. the Barcelona energy improvement plan), building 
thermal and lighting simulations, and renovation proposals definition and validation through cost optimal analysis 
(i.e. the TOBEEM project introducing a semi automatic cost optimal analysis for tertiary buildings, for more than 
20,000 scenarios). We also have wide experience on monitoring HVAC systems (both, generation but also 
distribution and emission elements) in order to understand their operation, and to detect improvements (linked to 
emulation and simulation techniques) both to substitute physical elements (retrofit) and/or to operate the existing 
or the new ones in the correct way. Those methodologies are linked to BEMS-BEPS integration. In 2014 
AIGUASOL founded the spinoff exsergy (www.exsergy.com) which aim is to promote the building retrofit 
operations under ESCO models, by offering a technological and consulting intermediation to the involved parts 
(properties and ESCO companies).  
  
Role in the project  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          96  
  
AIGUASOL employs a high quality scientific group of personnel that will lead the development of the Circular 
Economy methodology to easily evaluate circularity in building retrofit scenarios (WP2 leader), considering the 
transversal tasks related to the rest of the key objectives. AIGUASOL will participate in the technical 
coordination of activities in the Spanish demos site (WP4) and will support the development and application of 
the new modular facades (S10) by analysing the materials and methodologies to be implemented and sizing the 
energy savings expected to be reached. AIGUASOL will also offer oriented feedbacks related to national 
regulations and RES implementation, which will be part of several objectives and the core of the S11 service 
related to pay per use energy generation.  
  
Description of detailed AIGUASOL’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 21)  
Task 4.2: Engagement of the previously defined KPIs (in WP2) to be implemented and applied in the development 
of the technical specifications (TS) for any of the HOUSEFUL solutions (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.3: Developments in 4.3.3 subtask (Optimisation of Energy vector). With the collaboration of other partners, 
AIGUASOL will be in charge of the feasibility analysis of innovative both active and passive systems potentially 
installed as improved elements in building structure in all Frontrunner buildings. AIGUASOL with other partner’s 
collaboration will promote the design and potential installation of optimal systems to be selected according to 
circular criteria as well as their cost (considering the cost optimal methodology and the circular principles 
established in previous WPs) (4 Person-months).  
Task 4.4: Contribution to the definition of the main energetic monitoring system, considering the different active 
and passive final solutions implemented and in coherence with the main cloud -based system to be developed (1 
Person-month).  
Task 4.5: Collaboration in the definition of the execution documents related to the technical specifications for the 
HOUSEFUL solutions (1 Person-month).  
Task 4.6: Analysis on national, regional and local available financial resources. Analysis on existing funding 
schemes and validation of new one’s related to circular economy business models (3 Person-months).  
Task 4.7: Collaboration with the local demos site (partner AHC) in the development of the execution technical 
documents required for the public tender and construction development procedure, specifically in those solutions 
related to reduce the energy consumption (5 Person-months).   
Task 4.8: Jointly with other partners, technical assistance and supervision of works for solutions potentially in- 
 
stalled in S10, evaluating the resulted energy performance in S11. Continuo Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018us commissioning of the implemented solutions and report to the rest of the partners (5 Person-months).   
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          97  
  
Jordi Pascual (M), Physicist and PhD Engineering, senior expert  
Since 1999, Project coordinator in the company at AIGUASOL in subjects related with building physics, and 
district networks. TRNSYS simulation of energetic systems and building behaviour. Since 2010, General Team 
Manager in AIGUASOL.  
  
Oriol Gavaldà (M), Mechanical Engineer and Economist, senior expert  
Since 2006, Project co-ordinator in the company AIGUASOL in subjects related with solar thermal energy, solar 
cooling, district networks and cogeneration. TRNSYS simulation of energy systems and buildings. Participation 
of TASK 25 and TASK 38 IEA Solar Heating & Cooling Program.  Since 2010, research manager in 
AIGUASOL.  
  
Àngel Carrera (M), Physicist, senior expert  
Since 2005, Project co-ordinator at AIGUASOL in subjects related with energy systems, simulation of stochastic 
processes, statistical applied to the engineering field and surface-response methods (machine learning techniques). 
TRNSYS simulation of energy systems and buildings. Participation of TASK 25 and TASK 38 IEA Solar Heating 
& Cooling Program. Since 2012, General Manager in AIGUASOL.  
  
Eva Majoral (F), Economist  
Since 2007 Controller at AIGUASOL in subjects related with the management of several European and R+D 
projects.  
Experience  
Related publications:  
In recent years, AIGUASOL has published over one hundred articles in indexed journals and conferences. 
Noteworthy because of the issues related to the proposal, the following:  
• Vergleich verschiedener Konzepte für den Einsatz erneuerbarer Energien in Rechenzentren. Nirendra Lal 
Shrestha, Noah Pflugradt, Thorsten Urbaneck, Oscar Camera, Angel Carrera, Jaume Salom, Eduard Oro, 
Albert Garcia, Mieke Timmermann, Hans Trapman, Gilbert de Nijis, Joris van Dorp, Bastian Beerens. 
DKV-Tagung 2015, Dresden, Energieeffiziente Klimatisierung in Rechenzentren.  
• Methodology for TRNSYS Large -Scale Simulation Studies using Experimental Design. Nirendra Lal 
Shrestha, Noah Pflugradt, Thorsten Urbaneck, Oscar Camera, Angel Carrera, Jaume Salom, Eduard Oro, 
Albert Garcia, Mieke Timmermann, Hans Trapman, Gilbert de Nijis, Joris van Dorp, Bastian Beerens.  
DKV-Tagung. 2015, Dresden, Energieeffiziente Klimatisierung in Rechenzentren.  
• Evaluation of air leakage and its influence on thermal demands of office buildings in Madrid. Jordi Pascual, 
Oscar Cámara, Aleksandar Ivancic, Damien Tavan and Maria Casanova. REHVA HVAC European 
Journal. 01/2013.  
• New calculation methodology for solar thermal systems. Angel Carrera, Oscar Camara, Maria Casanova, 
Merce Farré and Isabel Serra. Kassel (Germany) 2011. ISES Solar World Congress 2011.  
• Pluridisciplinar analysis of energetic behaviour on glazed façades office buildings. How they work?. J. 
Pascual, M. Capdevila, B. Tena, D. Perez, E.M. Mitre. Palenc 2010, Rhodes (Greece). Second prize of the 
best paper of the congress.  
• Energetic Approach of Zorrotzaurre Master Plan Energetic viability of variations to the actual master plan 
according to use, orientation, height and building intensity. Pascual J., Vallejo C. CISBAT 2007 
International Scientific Conference, Lausanne, Switzerland.  
• Barcelona Forum 2004. TRNSYS Simulations of a solar assisted District Heating and Cooling Network. 
L. Sisó, H. Schweiger, E. Wiemken, H.-M. Henning, H. Zinko, A.Ivancic, G. Torres), Proc.  
EuroSun2002-Congress. ISES-Europe. Bologna (Italia), June 2002.  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          98  
  
At the other hand, AIGUASOL is the official distributor, for Spain and Portugal, of difAssociated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018ferent energetic calcula- 
tion tool (TRNSYS, EnergyPro, Meteonorm, Einstein, etc.), and produces and distributes their own tools (as  
TRANSOL).  
Related projects:  
• 4RinEU (H2020) [Started: 01 -10-2016 (48 months)] is about Robust and Reliable technology concepts 
and business models for triggering deep Renovation of Resid ential buildings in EU. AIGUASOL will 
contribute by developing a tool that enables to define, in the first design stages, the best RES options. Also 
an expected contribution to the definition and adaptation of the prefabricated facades to the local demo is 
expected, including the energetic impact analysis, and the business model definition. Finally, AIGUASOL 
is in charge of the technical management of the solutions implementation for the local demo case.  
• InteGRIDy (H2020) [Started: 15 -01-2017 (48 months)] integrated Smart GRID Cross -Functional 
Solutions for Optimized Synergetic Energy Distribution, Utilization Storage Technologies. AIGUASOL 
will develop thermal-electrical models to evaluate the different measures to be undertaken and will design 
the monitor ing scheme and its integration with the existing SCADA system and engineering, 
commissioning, follow-up (IPMVP).  
• GrowSmarter (H2020) [Started: 15-01-2016 (60 months)] one of the Smart city projects which aims to 
transforming cities for a smart, sustainable Europe. AIGUASOL, as a subcontracted company of the DSO 
Gas Natural, has a specific role related to the technical definition and implementation of building the 
retrofitting solutions (including energy savings dimensioning and business impact definition).  
AIGUASOL also is responsible for the development of the Home Energy Management System (HEMS) 
to be implemented in the local demo cases.  
• Plug&Harvest (H2020) [Started: 01-09-2017 (48 months)] Plug -n-play passive and active multi -modal 
energy Harvesting systems, circular economy by design, with high replicability for Self-sufficient Districts 
& Near-Zero Buildings. AIGUASOL will lead the development of the circular economy business models, 
considering the transversal tasks related to the rest of the key obj ectives. AIGUASOL will lead the 
technical coordination of activities in one of the demo sites and will support the development and 
application of the intelligent modular facades by analyzing the materials and methodologies to be 
implemented and sizing the energy savings expected to be reached. With its wide experience in DHC 
designs and operation, AIGUASOL will also contribute to the Plug-n-Play Optimal Energy Management 
System at District/Grid Level by offering oriented feedbacks related to national regula tions and RES 
implementation.  
• See other AIGUASOL’s R+D projects at https://aiguasol.coop/solutions/r-d/   
Infrastructures and facilities   
  
N/A  
  
    
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Participant No.  8  
 
Short Name  LGI  
Country  France  
Organization Type  SME  
Website  www.lgi-consulting.com  
  
Partner Profile  
 

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          99  
  
LGI is a French sustainable innovation SME, founded in 2005. It offers the following services: project 
development and management, in particular for EU projects, communication and dissemination, IT developments 
(webbased mainly) and strategy and innovation studies. LGI has a positioning in high tech sectors: energy, 
transport, security, ICT, health and environment. LGIs approach is usually multidisciplinary and European (LGIs 
consultants have competences in law, finance, engineering, chemistry, IT and are fluent in French, English, 
German, Spanish and Czech). LGI has more than ten years of experience with EU projects. LGI offers a wide 
range of services to support our clients’ decision-making with a strategy base. The firm’s strategic marketing 
approach is based on insight into both advanced technological developments and novel business models, with 
innovation at the heart of the process. LGI’s approach combines the analysis of technological development with 
market and social drivers to support our customers with a global innovation approach. Our services include market 
research and forecasts, global industry analysis, stakeholder mapping, which enable our clients to address their 
key challenges and exploit their strategic opportunities. LGI has developed a recognised expertise on business 
modelling, technologies and market assessments. LGI is used to lead the work packages in the EU projects on 
innovation management, market surveys, IPR and result exploitation, financial analysis and technology 
assessments. It has its headquarters in Paris and branches in Valencia (Spain) and Hamburg.   
Website: www.lgi-consulting.com   
Role in the project  
LGI will be in charge of the exploitation under the WP6 and will actively contribute to the communication and 
dissemination activities of the project. It is also envisaged to contribute to the LCC analysis in the WP5.   
  
Key personnel   
Martin Pecanka (M) contributes since 2010 to the development of LGI through his experience in building and 
managing collaborative projects. He drafts exploitation & IPR protection strategies and contributes to particular 
market and opportunity studies in a number of sectors (energy, climate, transport, security, health, etc.) for private 
clients and public organisations. Since 2014 he has been representing LGI in Spain, office in Valencia. Before 
joining LGI he worked for an engineering firm in Spain managing urban civil infrastructure projects cofunded 
from structural funds and in France supporting cooperation and infrastructure development projects on 
international level. He also spent 14 months on a post of junior transport attaché within the diplomatic services of 
the Czech Republic at the Czech Permanent Representation in Brussels. His economic and legal background 
allows him to contribute to a number of projects in the portfolio of LGI to enhance the dissemination of the results 
and increase the market uptake potential project outcomes. He was actively involved in the demEAUmed project 
finished in June 2017.   
  
Camille Auriault (F) performs strategic marketing studies, conducts analyses of technological systems and value 
chains, performs competitive analyses and assists LGI’s clients and partners with technology transfer and 
roadmapping activities in high-tech and scientific sectors. Prior to joining LGI, Camille worked for the 
international chemical group Solvay, performing market research and value chain analyses. She also worked in 
R&D at CEA, the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission, and at Trinity College Dublin 
performing laboratory research. She holds a Masters degree in Intelligence Marketing from the French Business 
School HEC and a Chemical Engineering degree from the Dublin City University and ENSIACET.  
  
Mathieu Salel (M) is an experienced professional with more than 4 years’ experience in various industrial 
domains. He carries out strategic studies and analyses of innovative technologies particularly in the energy, 
transport and water sector. He has a background in aeronautics and energy sectors across France, Germany and 
China. Before joining LGI in 2016 he worked for the Smart Grids department of a French DSO (ENEDIS) where 
he analysed technical results of innovative smart grids solutions. In a previous research project on renewable 
marine energies in China he developed a model to estimate the global potential of electricity production from 
OTEC. Before joining the energy sector he spent three years working on behalf of Airbu, co-managing continuous 
improvement projects within the system engineer`s department. He holds a general engineering degree  
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          100  
  
(ICAM, Toulouse) and an power engineering degree (Tsinghua University, Beijing). He completed his education 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
with a post-masters in future energy alternatives (Mines ParisTech, Paris). Mathieu was involved in the second 
part of the demEAUmed project, in particular on drafting the exploitation strategy.   
  
Chloe Chavardès (F) has 10 years of experience in public communication. She is in charge of communication 
and dissemination activities throughout the entire life cycle of projects, develops targeted strategies and 
implements action plans. Her work covers online, print and multimedia communication as well as event 
management and planning. She actively contributed to the communication activities for many FP7 and H2020 
projects, as well as international associations (ex: PROMETIA) and technological platforms (ex: SNETP). Her 
international background in technical and scientific sectors has allowed her to acquire the necessary knowhow to 
communicate at European scale to the general public, to decision-makers and to a more technical audience. She 
began her career in a communications research firm in Washington D.C. specialised in the energy sector. She 
then spent five years working in corporate communications at the European Space Agency in the Netherlands and 
France. Chloe is the official couch of LEGO Serious Play.   
Experience  
• Boo et al., 2014: “How Innovative Business Models Can Boost The Energy Efficient Buildings Market”, 
40th IAHS World Congress on Housing - Sustainable Housing Construction, December 2014  
• Dunphy, N., Boo, E., Dallamaggiore, E., Morrissey, J., 2014: “Developing A Sustainable Housing 
Marketplace: New Business Models T o Optimise Value Generation From Retrofit”, 40th IAHS World 
Congress on Housing - Sustainable Housing Construction, December 2014  
• Morrissey, J., Boo, E., Dallamaggiore, E., Dunphy, N. (2015). The Role of Innovative Business Models to 
Kindle Sustainability in the Built Environment. Round Table on Sustainable Cities: Research, Business 
and Local Government. Invited Paper, The Russell Group -China Workshop on Sustainable Cities. Xi'an 
Jiaotong-Liverpool University (XJTLU), Suzhou, China, 3-5 June.  
• Joly, P., Boo, E., 2015: “Roadmap Actinides separation processes 2015” ISBN 9782919313099  
Infrastructures and facilities   
• (Since 2005) Involvement in approx. 30 FP7/H2020 projects – energy, transport and environment sectors 
(demEAUmed)  
• (Since 2014) Support to PROMETIA association creation; PROMETIA secretariat coordination and 
communication since the association creation (www.prometia.org)   
• (2012-2013) Value chain analyses in energy & transport, for UK & Spanish research houses   
• (2012) Mapping, analyses and prospection on EU innovation schemes (current & foreseen)   
• (Since 2011) Contribution to NUGENIA Association creation, development of online Open Innovation 
Platform (www.nugenia.org)   
  
    
Participant No.  9   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
  
 
Short Name  Reinberg  
Country  Austria  
Organization 
Type  
SME  
Website  www.reinberg.net  
  
Partner Profile  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          101  
  
Architect Reinberg is CEO and owner of “Architekturbüro Reinberg ZTGmbH” in Vienna.  
He is “Ziviltechniker” (ZT), a special status for an engineering offices in Austria, a free business with specific 
obligations concerning high quality work, which is guaranteed by the chamber of architects.  
  
The office is specialisesd on ecological buildings, passive house construction, closed cycles in constructions 
within ecological cycles.  
  
The office is working as an independent planning office since 1980, the company has served as a civil-technical 
office since 1985 and as “Architekturbüro Reinberg” - limited company since 2006.  
  
The company currently employs a staff of 7 people. Five of them have finished University studies.   
  
The office has realized more than 100 projects with special high ecological qualities. The office is engaged in 
numerous research projects concerning alternative energy and sustainability. Architect Reinberg is teaching in 
numerous Universities in Europe and outside Europe. He is visiting Professor at the University of Krems (future 
building solutions) and at Politecnico di Milano for the academic year 2017-18  
Role in the project  
Assistance of the project partners in the field of architectural design, technical solutions in the field of architecture 
and ecological building (the office has experience more than 30 years in sustainable building). Architect Reinberg 
will be responsible for architectural and technical questions during the realization and the planning of the demo-
projects (WP4). GWR will contribute with financial information, technical solutions and optimisations with details 
about architectural and aesthetic solutions. Architect Reinberg will work on optimised solutions to integrate the 
circular strategies within a high architectural standard.  
  
Detailed description of GWR’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 24)  
Task 4.1: Support in circular economy audit for the Austrian Frontrunner buildings (Demo 3 and Demo 4), 
specifically addressing the material passports and possible deconstruction plans (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.2: Definition of the technical specifications (TS) for the solutions not including technological 
implementation (S4 and S9) in the Austrian Frontrunning buildings (Demo 3 and Demo 4) (6 Person-months).  
Task 4.7: Support in the selection process of companies for renovation works according to prize and trust for Demo 
3 and Demo 4 (1 Person-month).  
Task 4.8: Implementation of the selected solutions for the Austrian demo buildings (Demo 3 and Demo 4) (15 
Person-months).  
Key personnel   
Primarily responsible: Architect Georg W. Reinberg, born 1950, has his office in Vienna. Study at Vienna 
Technical University and Syracuse University NY, USA. Received grants from Schütte and Fulbright. Arch. 
Reinberg leads a civil engineering office specialized in ecological green building. He has planned more than 330 
projects; about 100 have been built. His office specialises in research, design, planning and supervision of 
ecological buildings since 1984. Reinberg is visiting professor at the Danube University Krems "Centre for 
Construction and Environment"; lectures at the Technical University of Vienna ( MSc Program "Renewable 
Energy in Central and Eastern Europe", "Green Building Solution", inter alia.); and at the University of Applied 
Sciences in Vienna. Is member of the Board of Advisory Committee at the Danube University inter alia. He is 
also teaching and giving lectures internationally e.g. Latin-American, USA, Europe, China and Iran. He has 
several times received the Lower Austria building in wood Prize and the Prize for Green Building; the 
international prices Fassa Bortolo Prize for Sustainable Architecture 2003; Fassa Bortolo honourable mention 
2008; Golden Medal from the City of Vienna 2010; Culture Prize from Upper Austria 1993, the Price of 
Architecture Burgenland 2002 and the Culture Prize Lower Austria 2012. He is an honorary Member of the IG 
Passive House and member of “Innovative Gebäude”. Since 2017 he is certificated Passive House Planner. 
Others:  
DI Wolfgang Csenar (M), specialist in building regulations and technical norms. He has many years of experi- 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          102  
  
ence in design and execution plans and detailing ecological projects. He also is experienced in supervising during 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 construction.  
DI Marina Glaser (F), specialist in design and ecological architecture. Many years of experience in master plans, 
execution plans and detailing ecological buildings.  
Marta Enriquez Reinberg (F), lic. Arq. Works within the office since 27 years and she is organising the office, 
specialist in communication and ecological design. She studied in Mexico and has special experience in passive 
cooling solutions.  
DI. Martin Presich (M), was born 1961 in Eisenstadt, Austria. In 1991, he finished his studies of Architecture at 
the Technical University of Vienna. From 1988 on he was working as independent architect on numerous projects 
such as single-family houses, renovation projects in Passive-House Standard, hotel renovation in Moskau and a 
holiday Inn in Cuba. Since 1992 DI Presich is working in the Architecture Office Reinberg being assigned with 
many different projects like Passive-House Childrens day care center, total renovation of an apartment- and office 
building, Planning and Construction of a nursing home for the elderly and a home for the handicapped. He is 
employed for 25 years in the office, specialist in financial calculation, tenders and building inspection for 
sustainable buildings.  
Experience  
- List of up to 5 publications and/or products, services (including widely-used datasets or software), or other 
achievements (e.g. patents) relevant to the proposal:  
  
1. "Ökologische Architektur – Entwurf, Planung, Au sführung / Ecological Architecture – Design, Planning, 
Realization",07. 2008 , Georg W. Reinberg, Matthias Boeckl 348 p., ISBN: 978-3-211-32770-8   
  
2. "Georg W. Reinberg: Solar Architecture", 2003  
Hrsg. Adriana Labella, Librìa Verlag, Melfi (Italia), 112 p., ISBN 88-87202-48-6   
  
3. Monitoring als Erfolgskontrolle (Monitoring as a performance control), 03 /2016, Greenbuilding #73, S. 24 - 29  
  
4. Detail Green Book - Gebäudeintegrierte Solartechnik  11 2016  
ISBN 978-3-95553-325-0 - www.detail.de   
p. 80-91 (Design and Construction) Solarthermie  
p.90-91 - Gneis-Moos_56  
p. 91 - Schellenseegasse_172   
p. 110-111 - Kindergarten Dt. Wagram_215  
  
5. Verwaltungsgebäude Windkraft Simonsfeld, Gebäudenutzung: GOLD 02/2017, Info -Heft Projekte 2015 und 
2016, Auszeichnungsveranstaltung 2017, ÖGNB - Österr. Gesellschaft für nachhaltiges Bauen und klimaaktiv 
- ÖGUT Gmbh, S.16 Projekt Ernstbrunn_270  
  
- List of up to 5 projects and activities which are connected to the subject of this proposal (show previous 
experiences in relation to the project´s tasks; participation in other (EU) research & innovation projects; activities 
related to the project´s subject etc.:  
  
1. Straw-Clay Office Building: Tattendorf: http://www.reinberg.net/architektur/119  
2. Solar Active House: Schellenseegasse: http://www.reinberg.net/architektur/172  
3. Solar Active House Kraig: http://www.reinberg.net/architektur/207  
4. Plus Energy Office Building: Ernstbrunn: http://www.reinberg.net/architektur/270  
5. Active House Renovation: http://www.reinberg.net/architektur/288  
  
Please have a look at our webpage www.reinberg.net, for some more information to our research work please have 
a look to the last page of CV Arch. Reinberg.  
  
Infrastructures and facilities   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          103  
  
  
Our Office is an architectural office with 8 Working Places, each with 2 monitors, we use AutoCAD 2016 and 
different other programs like Adobe CS (different versions), SketchUP, Archiphysik, Microsoft Office (different 
versions), Adobe Acrobat Professional  
  
Participant No.  10   Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
  Short Name  Turntoo  
Country  The Netherlands  
Organization Type  SME  
Website  www.turntoo.com  
  
Partner Profile  
A circular economy frontrunner offering solutions and consultancy services. Designing and implementing new 
business models that alleviate resource dependency by preventing the degradation of materials into waste. In 
Turntoo's vision, a product is a materials depot: its content is known and all materials remain the property of the 
manufacturer. Products are designed in such a manner that upon termination of use, materials can be recovered 
and reused in new products.   
Turntoo's mission is to facilitate the continuity of life by designing a different relationship between mankind and 
earth. This results in, among others, innovative concepts, products, and services. In striving to create impact 
Turntoo works cross-sector and has coined many circular economy concepts and business models such as Light as 
a Service, washing on performance basis, raw materials passport or products as a materials depot.  
Turntoo works for and with a vast array of organisations, both profit and non-profit. Its activities consist of:  
1. Sharing vision and mission in a call to action and change of perspective; in lectures, workshops and 
publications.  
2. Assisting organisations in the transition to a future-proof organisation, by consulting on the (re)design of 
business models, organisational processes, financing structures, contract types, services or products.  
3. Designing and implementing circular economy showcases to inspire and elaborate on in the future.  
Role in the project  
Turntoo will:  
• Definition of KPIs related to materials aspects (WP2)  
• Lead the creation of Material Passports for every demo building, documenting and valorising materials in a 
globally accessible technology (WP4);  
• Advice on architecture and sourcing of materials for the demo sites (WP4);  
• Contribute to workshops for stakeholders in order to align propositions (WP7);  
• Participate in brainstorm and reviewing the business model design and implementation (WP6).  
  
Detailed description of TURNTOO’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 5)  
Task 4.1: Providing the Madaster Platform to the 4 frontrunner buildings (the 4 Demos). Madaster will be used to 
produce the Material Passport. Turntoo will subcontract the Madaster service (1 Person-month).  
Task 4.2: Advise on design principles and choice in technical solutions. 2 countries*2 sites with: hours of 
preparation, meeting travel time, debriefing (4 Person-months).  
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          104  
  
Thomas Rau (M) is the founder of RAU architects and Turntoo, both based in Amsterdam. He studied fine art 
and dance in Bonn and architecture at RWTH Aachen University. For years Rau has contributed to national and 
international discussions about sustainability. RAU Architects have been on the forefront of designing 
environmentally conscious buildings and healthy indoor climates since 1992. He founded Oneplanetarchitecture 
Institute  
(OPAi) in 2008, focusing on social and economic questions of our time with regard to architecture. RAU and 
OPAi have contributed several innovations and set new standards first in the field of CO2-neutral and energy 
neutral building, later for energy positive building and more recently circular architecture.  
Thomas Rau has performed as keynote speaker for large conferences as well as for smaller audiences of boards of 
directors, policy makers and politicians. He is ranked among the Top 5 Dutch key players in sustainability, a 
ranking published by national daily Trouw. He was elected as Dutch Architect of The Year 2013 and awarded 
with the ARC Oeuvre Award for his widespread contribution in both promoting and realising sustainable 
architecture in the last 20 years.  
  
Marijn Emanuel (M) holds a Master’s Degree in Architecture and Building sciences and built up 23 years of 
experience at RAU Architects. In his position as senior architect he has contributed to the design and development 
of various iconic buildings, including examples of energy positive buildings or material neutral buildings such as 
the Townhall in Brummen or Liander. In his role as project architect he both facilitates in design and 
materialisation assignments and in stakeholder and team management. Marijn Emanuel is involved in activities for 
both RAU Architects, Turntoo and Madaster Services.  
  
Debbie Appleton (F), Master's Degree in Anthropology and since 2013 part of the Turntoo team in the role of  
new business developer. In this role she has helped develop the Philips Light as a Service proposition, several 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
office interior as a service propositions and guided in the development of circular procurement for governmental 
bodies and institutions. Responsible process management and consultancy services; ranging from drafting 
strategies to implementing processes and designing roadmaps.  
Experience  
Related publications:  
Book: Material Matters  
Thomas Rau, Sabine Oberhuber. ISBN 9789461562258  
  
Documentary: The End of Ownership  
VPRO Backlight, https://youtu.be/oOO-pYUl9-w  
  
Report: The path towards a circular category office furniture  
https://www.pianoo.nl/sites/default/files/documents/documents/reportcircularcategoryenoktober2016.pdf  
  
Related projects:  
2010: First circular Light as a Service (“pay per lux”) contract developed with Philips.  
2012: Model for renting out washing machines on performance basis implemented with BSH.  
2013: RAU Architects designed the first circular building as a raw materials depot in the municipality of 
Brummen and Turntoo developed the first version of a Materials Passport for it.  
2014: Facilitation of the collaboration between Schiphol Airport, Philips and Cofely to realize circular Light as a 
Service at Schiphol Airport, including the contract design.  
2015: The head office of Liander has opened its doors, a 20.000m2 building where more than 80% of all materials 
are used in a second cycle and which produces 1.5million kw/h of electricity per year. In this project Thomas Rau 
formulated the ambition to create the first energy positive, remountable circular building with a material passport 
thereby inspiring the whole team of builder, advisers and suppliers to deliver the most circular building possible - 
Turntoo was in lead of the development of the Materials Passport, an iteration of the first version for Brummen.  
  
In addition to this Turntoo is one of the first members of the CE100 of the Ellen Mac Arthur Foundation, which is 
designed to advance the circular economy through collaboration and the sharing of knowledge  
Infrastructures and facilities   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          105  
  
-  
  
    
Participant No.       11  
 
  
Short Name  NEUES LEBEN  
Country  Austria  
Organization 
Type  
NPO building cooperative  
Website  http://www.wohnen.at  
  
  
Partner Profile  
The not-for-profit association “Neues Leben” was funded in 1950. Its purpose is to provide affordable and 
highquality housing for a broad share of the population.  
At the moment it manages about 11.500 dwellings. In the past three years about 200 new units were finished 
each year. The total assets of 2016 amounted to 545 mio. Euro.  
Neues Leben has a focus on high-quality architecture that accomodates to the need of the end-users. In the years 
2003, 2010 and 2014 it was awarded with the Austrian builder-owner award.   
Role in the project  
NEUES LEBEN holds and manages the Austrian demo “Donaufelderstrasse” and will provide relevant data and 
will give access to scientists involved in HOUSEFUL for calculating circularity of buildings; organize 
stakeholder meetings and dialogs for co-creation of circular economy business options; will communicate project 
results and findings to partners; They want to include dismantling competences in future projects.  
Detailed description of NEUES LEBEN’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 2)  
Task 4.1: Provide necessary information and access for BIM Modelling and Material Passport creation for Demo 
building 4 (0.5 Person-month).  
Task 4.2: Definition of the type, number/quantity, origin and functionalities, among other main characteristics for 
those building materials available for renovation/refurbishment at local scale will be defined (S4).  Results from 
Material Passport and BIM will be used as basis information for the development of Design for Disassembly (DfD) 
evaluation of Frontrunner buildings (S9) (1 Person-month).  
Task 4.3: Subtask “Optimisation of energy vector”: Co-creation between AIGUASOL and ITEC with stakeholders 
(including AHC, ALCN and NEUES LEBEN) will promote the design and potential installation of optimal systems 
to be selected according to circular criteria as well as their cost (installation, maintenance and renovation cost) (0.5 
Person-month).  
Key personnel   
Mag. Wolfgang Kiselka MSc.  (Male, 32, project manager), Degree in Urban and Regional Planning and 
Economics. Experience in participatory projects on the local level. Employed at the Viennese Urban Renewal 
Office from 2011 to 2016. Working at NL since 2016, managing new building projects.  
Experience  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          106  
  
Related projects:  
• Global Park   
Subsidized residential units. Passive house with integrated controlled ventilation. Intercultural inclusive 
project with intensive social support service. Built 2012-2014.  
• Sonnwendviertel  
Passive house with integrated controlled ventilation. Broad range of shared common rooms like indoor 
cinema, wellness-center with pool and sauna, shared kitchen for events, boulder-area, rehearsal room, 
bicycle repair workshop, indoor playground etc. Built 2012 – 2014.  
• Paulasgasse 22  
Wooden building with 60 subsidized residential units. Fully removable and recyclable elements. Built 
2014 -2016.  
• Mühlgrundgasse  
120 partly subsidized residential units. The whole building will be heated and cooled by a heat pump via 
thermo active building systems. This is the first residential building on such a scale to use this sys- 
  tem. Planned start of construction: End of 2017.  
Infrastructures and facilities   
Full office building with all needed equipment. All services at the building through sub-contractors  
  
  
  
  
Participant No.  12   Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
  Short Name  CECODHAS  
Country  Belgium  
Organization Type  Non-profit   
Website  www.housingeurope.eu  
  
Partner Profile  
Established in 1988, CECODHAS is the European Federation of Public, Cooperative & Social Housing - a 
network of 43 national and regional federations which together gather about 43.000 public, social and cooperative 
housing providers in 23 countries. Altogether, they manage over 26 million homes, about 11% of existing 
dwellings in the EU.  
Social, public and co-operative housing providers have a vision of a Europe which provides access to decent and 
affordable housing for all in communities which are socially, economically and environmentally sustainable and 
where everyone is enabled to reach their full potential.  
For CECODHAS, the priority of the European Union and its member states in the field of sustainability, energy 
and climate in the next decade should be to develop a positive business environment for the reduction of energy 
consumption in the housing sector, with a specific attention paid to the affordable housing sector.  
Role in the project  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          107  
  
CECODHAS participates in the WP 3 for the identification of stakeholders and the co-creation of CEBOs and 
their engagement,   
Also, in the WP6 leading the task of policy recommendations to foster the circularity of housing sector. 
CECODHAS will contribute to disseminate project results (WP7) among its wide network of contacts.  
  
Detailed description of CECODHAS’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 5)  
Task 4.6: Task Leader. Reviewing of the financial frameworks and existing funding policies for building 
renovation in the countries where the pilot projects will take place. This review will be in particular based on inputs 
by CECODHAS members.  
Support for the development of financing plans (including alternative funding mechanisms) for the HOUSEFUL 
solutions, taking into account existing programs as well as potential future EU funding opportunities (ERDF and 
EIB).  
Monitoring of the implementation of the plan for each Frontrunner building, including risk/uncertainty assessment, 
mitigation plans and the evaluation of different potential scenarios and impacts.  
Organisation of an event where potential projects fulfilling HOUSEFUL criteria could meet potential financing 
institutions (5 Person-month).  
Key personnel   
Sorcha Edwards (F), joined CECODHAS team in 2003. She is the Secretary General and Energy Co-ordinator 
and is in charge of the so-called CECODHAS Energy Expert Network, a group within CECODHAS gathering 
experts from 20 national housing federations from all across Europe.   
She led the POWER HOUSE EUROPE Project, an initiative aimed at creating National and European Platforms 
of key stakeholders in order to promote energy efficiency and sustainable energy in housing. Sorcha is currently 
coordinating the POWER HOUSE Nearly Zero Energy Challenge project, aimed at engaging local housing 
organisations to share experiences and identify avoidable mistakes to meet the nearly-Zero obligations outlined in 
the Energy Performance of Building Directive.  
After her Communication & Language degree during which she studied a year in Germany, she completed a  
Master in European Policies at the University of Leuven, Belgium. She has also worked for the Irish Institute for 
European affairs developing training seminars on EU policies and to the TACIS EU Technical Assistance Office 
to monitor the implementation of the TACIS programme.  
Sorcha speaks English (mother tongue), French, German and Spanish.  
Dijol Julien (M), Since 2007 is Policy Coordinator at CECODHAS, the European Social Housing Federation.  
He has been mostly working on the interlink between EU policies in the field of territorial cohesion and social 
inclusion and national housing policies. He has been working on various EU projects, in particular in the field of 
Cohesion Policy (URBACT, IEE).  
He is an URBACT Thematic expert and was until recently external expert for the European Commission for a 
“study on sustainable regeneration in suburbs – promoting social integration in deprived neighbourhoods through 
housing interventions by ERDF”.    
 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          108  
  
Julien was also member of the Board of the Social Platform, the European network of social NGOs (2011Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018-2013)  
Beyond this, he liaises with other EU organisations within the framework of EU projects in the field of urban 
development and social inclusion (EU programmes: URBACT, FP7, PROGRESS). He also coordinates 
CECODHAS publications on EU policies and housing as well as Structural Funds and housing, and is from times 
to times called to deliver training courses on EU policies related to housing to various audiences including local 
civil servants.  
Julien is a sociologist and political scientist by education and has been trained at the Institute of political studies 
(IEP) in Bordeaux (France), the University of Stuttgart (Germany) and the Université Catholique de Louvain 
(Belgium).  
Julien speaks French (mother tongue), English, German and Spanish.  
Edit Lakato (F) is a Policy Officer at CECODHAS. She has been mostly working on the impact analysis and 
monitoring of the implementation of European public policies in relation to the social housing sector, in particular 
cohesion policy and its tools. Besides, she is also monitoring the activities of the European Parliament and 
proposals for action impacting the area.  
Before joining CECODHAS in 2015, she gained experience on regional and urban policies at the European 
Commission and at different Regional Agencies in France and Hungary. Edit holds several degrees in social 
sciences (Law, political sciences and Economics) from the University of Reims (France) and University of 
Debrecen (Hungary) and she also made a specialisation in European and International law at the University Paul 
Cézanne (France). She speaks Hungarian (mother tongue), French, English and currently learning German.  
Experience  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          109  
  
Publications  
• Publication: “POWER HOUSE NEARLY ZERO ENERGY CHALLENGE”, published in June 2015 
  
Publication: “ENERGY REFURBISHMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE SOCIAL, PUBLIC AND 
COOPERATIVE HOUSING: INSIGHTS ON THE CURRENT MARKET & TRENDS TOWARDS 2020”, 
published  
in April 2014  
• Publication: “EXEMPLARY FINANCING MODELS FROM ACROSS THE EUROPEAN UNION”, pub- 
lished in January 2014  
• Publication  “STUDY ON FINANCING OF SOCIAL HOUSING IN 6 EUROPEAN COUNTRIES”, pub- 
lished July 2013  
• Publication “FAIR ENERGY TRANSITION TOWARDS NEARLY-ZERO ENERGY BUILDINGS”, pub- 
lished in February 2013   
• Publication: “THE HOUSING EUR OPE REVIEW 2012 - THE NUTS AND BOLTS OF EUROPEAN 
SOCIAL HOUSING SYSTEM”, published in 2012  
• Chapter Social Housing in STUDY ON SOCIAL SERVICES OF GENERAL INTEREST FINAL REPORT  
- European Commission DG for Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion”, published in October 2011  
• Publication “THE PLACE OF INHABITANTS RESIDENTS’ PARTICIPATION IN CREATING 
SUSTAINABLE HOUSING & NEIGHBOURHOODS”, published in May 2011  
• Publication  “URBAN REGENERATION IN EUROPE: THE PLACE OF SOCIAL HOUSING IN 
INTEGRATED URBAN POLICIES - CURRENT PERSPECTIVES”, published in May 2009  
• Publication “FINANCING SOCIAL HOUSING AFTER THE ECONOMIC CRISIS”, published in September 
2009  
• Publication “WELFARE TRANSFORMATION AND DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE IN EUROPE: CHAL- 
LENGES FOR THE SOCIAL HOUSING SECTOR”, published in September 2007  
Previous projects or activities relevant to the subject of this proposal.  
  
 POWER HOUSE Nearly Zero Energy Challenge (IEE) 2015  www.powerhouseeurope.eu   
  
 POWER HOUSE EUROPE (IEE)  2011  www.powerhouseeurope.eu    
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
E3SoHo (ICT-PSP)  2013  www.e3soho.eu   
  
SHELTER (IEE)  2013  www.shelterproject-iee.eu   
  
SF-Energy Invest (IEE) 2013  www.sf-energyinvest.eu     
  
SUITE (URBACT)  2013  http://urbact.eu/en/projects/quality-sustainable-living/suite/homepage/  
  
ERHIN Responsible Housing  2014  www.responsiblehousing.eu   
  
HELPS 2015  hwww.helps-project.eu  
  
HOST (AAL) 2014  www.host-aal.eu/cms/welcome-host/about-host-project-description  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          110  
  
Infrastructures and facilities   
-  
  
     
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          111  
  
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Participant No.  13  
    
Short Name  WE&B  
Country  SPAIN  
Organization Type  SME  
Website  www.weandb.org  
  
Partner Profile  
Water, Environment and Business for Development (WE&B) is a consulting company focused on the Water 
and Environment sectors, offering services in Social and Business Innovation. Our highly educated and globally 
experienced team participates in research projects to remain at the cutting edge of innovation while processing the 
skill and expertise to adapt to and enhance these innovations to bring them to our clients in the development 
sector. Under social innovation, WE&B brings its expertise in: (i) Socio-environmental site characterisation and 
analysis; (ii) Communication and stakeholder engagement strategies and implementation; (iii) Science – practice 
interface. Under Business innovation WE&B excels at (i) Sustainable Business and Economic Models; (ii) 
Market Studies / Analysis (iii) Cost – Benefit Analysis and (iv) Circular Economy and Economic Analysis. 
WE&B are members of the European Water Supply and Sanitation Technology Platform (WssTP), founding 
members and vice chair (together with UNESCO-IHE) of the WssTP working group on “Water Beyond Europe” 
and Administrators of the public authority network: Network for Water in European Cities and Regions 
(NetwercH20). WE&B are also members of the International Water Association and more specifically as active 
members of the specialist group Ecosystem Services. In addition, WE&B is part of the business networks The 
Practitioner Hub for Inclusive Business, Global Network on Sustainable Innovation and Entrepreneurship and 
Global Network on Sustainable Lifestyles. WE&B are implementing a number of Water, Climate Change and 
Environmental projects in Europe, Africa and Latin America on behalf of the World Bank, GGGI, European 
Commission, H2020, EuropeAid amongst others.   
  
Role in the project  
WE&B is the WP3 leader that will aim at developing and implementing the Social Engagement Strategies, where 
WE&B will work together with the other HOUSEFUL participants and the selected key stakeholders outside of 
the project consortium in the co-creation of the services for a circular economy at building scale. Within this WP, 
WE&B will lead the tasks Task 3.1. where stakeholders will be identified and analysed according to their interest 
and influence. Furthermore WE&B will lead task 3.2 on the engagement and co-creation strategies where WE&B 
will design and draw up the framework for 3 workshops using the innovative backcasting methodology for each 
of the case studies. WE&B will also lead task 5.4 that will assess the social impacts of the project through 
devising a number of social indicators and undertaking a baseline assessment to which the social impact can be 
assessed. WE&B will also participate in WP6 on business modeling and  developing the HOUSEFUL SaaS 
functionalities. Under task WP7, WE&B will give valuable input into the communication strategy and 
coordinating the tasks related in WP3. WE&B will take an active role in the dissemination and communication of 
the project activities under WP7.   
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          112  
  
David Smith (M) is the director at WE&B. He has a MSc from Loughborough University (WEDC), United 
Kingdom,  in Water and Environmental Management (2015), a Bachelors (2000) and Honours (2001) degree 
from the University of Cape Town, South Africa. His expertise in economic and social development is focused on 
environmental management, integrated water resource management, water technology, business models, 
economic viability for water and sanitation treatment, ecosystem services and capacity building. David was 
elected as a board member of the WssTP from 2012 - 2014. He is also the vice President and co-founder of 
NetwercH2O. He is currently a core member of the IWA Ecosystem Services Specialist group. David has also 
worked for four and a half years as a project coordinator at the research centre CTM in Spain, where he sourced 
and managed funding for consortiums of several water and environmental projects. David has worked for 5 years 
(2003 – 2008) for the water and wastewater treatment company Thames Water Utilities Ltd, in London England.   
Beatriz Medina (F) is MSc in Environmental Sciences from the University of Alcalá de Henares and Master on 
Science, Environment and Health Communication degree. Beatriz is a partner and consultant at WE&B as an 
expert in the field of socio-environmental studies. Working experience in the field of science communication and 
knowledge brokering, public participation processes and analysis of risk perceptions in environmental issues. 
Related projects where she gained experience have been funded at Latin American level (WaterClima LAC by 
Europeaid, EcoQuito by AECID and Green Growth Potential Assesment in Peru). She developed broad ex- 
perience in developing R&D&I projects by the European Commission (OBRA, PACHELBEL, MUSTANG, Associated 
with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
WaterDiss2.0, DEMOWARE, DESSIN, Water RtoM, INSITRATE, AfriAlliance, Run4LIFE). Additionally, she 
has published topic related articles and chapter books at scientific recipients.   
Moreover, Beatriz is research associate in  the Sociology Department in the Autonomus University of Barcelona 
(UAB), working in the context of Honest project, which focuses on gaining understanding on how societies have 
engaged with nuclear energy, and how the nuclear energy sector has engaged with societies over the course of the 
past 60 years, focusing in the Spanish case study. Specially, collaborating in understanding perceptions and 
mechanisms of societal engagement.   
Experience  
- Related publications  
• Development of a tool (Systematic Tool for Behavioural Assumption Validation and Exploration - 
STAVE) designed to support policy-making for sustainability in real-world settings in 6 countries, as part 
of the PACHEBEL project – Beatriz Medina  
• Medina, B. (2014). Research to Market, can we speed-up the knowledge transfer process? In. Herve-
Bazin, C. (ed.) Water Communication Analysis of Strategies and Campaigns from the Water Sector. 
International Water Association Publishing, IWA, ISBN: 9781780405216  
• Amorsi, N.; Medina B.; Midgley, S.; Nickel, D., Stein, U.; von Toggenvrug, J. (2016). Analysis and 
uptake of FP water research results in  Martinuzzi, R-A., Sedlacko, M. (eds.) Knowledge Brokerage for a 
Sustainable Europe - Innovative Tools for Enhancing the Connectivity of Research and Policy Making on 
Sustainable Development Issues (Greenleaf).  
Related projects  
• Innovation & demostration for a competative and innovative european water reuse sector (CAD, 
DEMOWARE, FP7 2016 - 2021)  
• Green Growth Potential Assessment (GGPA) in Peru and Nepal (GGGI, 2016)  
• Watershed and coastal management in latin america and the caribbean (WATERCLIMA LAC, 
EUROPEAID)  
• Africa-EU innovation alliance for water and climate (AFRIALLIANCE, H2020, 2016 – 2021) - 
Stakeholder Mapping and Engagement Strategies for Water and Climate actions between Africa and 
Europe   
• Low carbon business action in mexico (IDOM, EuropeAid 2015-2016)  
• Recovery and utilisation of nutrients 4 low impact fertiliser (RUN4LIFE, H2020; 2017 - 2021)  
• Demonstration of an environmentally-friendly desalination system concept: transforming seawater into 
valuable resources (LIFE+DREAMER; 2017 - 2020)   
• to reduce the energy consumption in wastewater treatment plants and minimize its environmental impact. 
(LIFE+ BRAINYMEM; ACCIONA AGUA, 2017)  
Infrastructures and facilities   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          113  
  
Central offices in Barcelona (Sant Cugat) that can be used for project meetings.   
  
    
Participant No.  14   Associated 
with document 
Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
  
Short Name  ICONS  
Country  Italy  
Organization Type  Non-Profit Private Organisation  
Website  http://www.icube.global  
  
Partner Profile  
Fondazione iCons (ICONS) is a private non-profit organisation, whose mission is to improve human capital 
through public communication of European research and innovation achievements, cultural initiatives and 
citizens’ participation for the benefit of society. ICONS brings together the know-how in market exploitation of 
the founder company iCons srl (www.icons.it) and the expertise in public research communication of its media 
spinoff youris.com (www.youris.com), established and managed since 2004 by ICONS founders and 
acknowledged today as one of the most important on-line information centres on research and innovation in 
Europe.  
ICONS communication, dissemination and exploitation activities are managed and developed under the umbrella 
of the iCube Programme (www.icube.global), an innovative communication and exploitation programme for 
researchers and innovators aiming at maximizing public and professional impacts of communication and 
exploitation activities within public funded European and international projects. ICONS adopts an innovative 
integrated impact-based communication and exploitation approach. Its capability to effectively distribute contents 
and to assess, measure and demonstrate the effectiveness of communication and dissemination activities enables 
a scalable and optimized implementation of the project strategies to effectively reach the expected project 
impacts. To this end, ICONS studies and develops indicators to measure the research impacts on society in terms 
of awareness, acceptance and uptake.   
ICONS partners with consortia in EU and public-funded projects and non-profit organizations (research centres, 
universities, associations, etc.) to enhance dialogue with stakeholders and the public at large. It supports research 
activities and outcomes through targeted communication services and strategies to increase outreach and impacts 
on society as a whole. ICONS masters a wide range of communication formats and channels including, among 
others, web-based knowledge transfer tools, public innovative communications formats (including, among others, 
journalistic articles, multimedia story-telling and various video formats) and social media strategies, global 
distribution via online, social and TV media and monitoring of outreach and engagement, design of 
dissemination materials, networking and dialogue with stakeholders’ communities, exploitation modelling, 
coordination and management of the overall communication, dissemination and exploitation activities within EU 
projects’ consortia.   
The top management and key personnel of ICONS has successfully managed dissemination & communication 
activities in over 30 EU-funded projects (FP7 and H2020) in different research domains: Smart Cities, 
Bioeconomy, Environment, Security, Energy, Health, Transport, Nanotechnologies, Society, ICT. Out of them, 
fourteen projects cover energy efficiency domains.  
Role in the project  
The iCube department of the Fondazione iCons will carry out the overall management of communication and 
dissemination activities to maximise public and professional impacts of dissemination and exploitation activities 
within the HOUSEFUL project. ICONS will lead WP7 Communication and Dissemination for social and market 
acceptance, designing and implementing an impact-based Dissemination, Communication and Engagement 
strategy to support awareness, acceptance and replication at local and European level.   
Key personnel   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          114  
  
Elisabeth Schmid (F), iCube Progamme Director, has a four-year B.A. Hons in Linguistic Communication and 
Multilingual Mediation Sciences with a specialization in Translation. Elisabeth has been working as consultant 
for EC projects in various research domains and as a coordinator of EU project office activities since 2005. In 
2009 she joined youris.com in charge of the coordination of youris.com communication activities. Since then she 
has worked as project manager in a number of EU-funded projects on energy efficiency, smart cities, 
environment, transport and society. In the past 6 years she has successfully initiated more than fifteen EU-funded 
projects and has coordinated the dissemination of 6 major EU-funded projects. She’s currently managing the 
communication, dissemination and stakeholders’ engagement activities of the SCC-01 Smart City Lighthouse 
project REMOURBAN and is coordinator of the FET-Open project EFFECT. In the Smart City area she also 
launched and coordinated the dissemination and communication activities of two FP7 Smart City projects, 
R2CITIES and CITyFiED and she has been one of the initiators of the MySmartCityDistrict clustering platform. 
She has been working as project manager in different communication and management activities in a number of 
Coordination and Support Actions (CSA) and Specific Support Actions (SSA) coordinated by ICONS founders 
on bioecon- 
 
omy, environment, health, mobility and nanotechnologies.   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
  
Marcello Bardellini (M) - Project Manager at iCube Programme has a Master Degree in Economics and  
Political Science at the University of Milan and a Master Diploma in Marketing and Communication  
Management. He has a professional background in market analysis, more than four years experience in European 
Projects with a focus on e-procurement and mistery shopping on e-government covering different European 
countries. He is in charge of project management & communication activities of EU-funded projects, 
stakeholders’ relations management, development of dissemination and communication strategies and 
measurement of impacts. In the Smart City area he is dissemination and communication leader of the R2CITIES 
and CITyFiED (FP7) projects and he is directly involved in the citizen engagement activities and interaction with 
local correspondents in the H2020-SCC-01 REMOURBAN project. In the EeB and energy area he is responsible 
for exploitation activities in the BUILDHEAT project and for communication in the ISOBIO project. He is also 
the communication leader of the H2020 bioeconomy projects iMETland and SKIN.  
  
Charlotte Michi (F) - iCube social media and community engagement strategist, holds a degree in physics and 
in classical piano. Combining her two passions, she worked as a researcher and as digital marketing specialist for 
brands of the classical music world. Over the past three years she has been working as social media and  
communication strategist in a number of EU-funded projects: EFFECT (H2020) in the FET area and in the Smart 
Cities projects CITyFiED (FP7), R2CITIES (FP7) and REMOURBAN (H2020). In the latter she has been 
involved in building citizens engagement strategies. Charlotte is now in charge of the communication activities of 
the UrbanGreenUP project (H2020 SCC-02). She joined Fondazione iCons from its foundation year (2016).  
Experience  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          115  
  
Related projects:  
URBAN GreenUP “New Strategy for Re-Naturing Cities through Nature-Based Solutions”  Funding 
programme: H2020-SCC-02-2016 Contract No. 730426.  
Description: Leader of URBAN GreenUP Communication and Dissemination activities, also involved in the 
definition of strategies for citizen engagement  and co-creation activities, replication and exploitation activities. 
Urban GreenUP aims at obtaining a tailored methodology (1) to support the co-development of Renaturing Urban 
Plans focused on climate change mitigation and adaptation and efficient water  management, and (2) to assist in 
the implementation of NBS in an effective way.  
Duration: 2017-2022  
Website: www.urbangreenup.eu  
  
REMOURBAN “Regeneration Model for accelerating the smart urban transformation“ Funding 
programme: H2020-SCC-01-2014 Lighthouse project – GA 646511.  
Description: leader of Dissemination and Communication activities with a key role in other specific tasks related 
to citizen engagement, replication and exploitation strategies. The project aims at the development and validation 
in three lighthouse cities of a sustainable urban regeneration model that leverages the convergence area of the 
energy, mobility and ICT sectors in order to accelerate the development of innovative technologies, organisational 
and economic solutions to increase resource and energy efficiency, improve the sustainability of urban transport 
and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.   
Duration: 2015-2019  
Website: www.remourban.eu  
  
iMETland “A new generation of Microbial Electrochemical Wetland for effective decentralized wastewater 
treatment”  
Funding programme: H2020-Water-1a-2014 – GA 642190.  
Description: iMETland aims to construct and validate a full-scale application of a eco-friendly device to treat urban 
wastewater from small communities at zero -energy operation cost through the integration of Microbial 
Electrochemical Technologies (MET) with the biofilters used in constructed wetlands. Duration: 2015-2018  
Website: www.imetland.eu  
  
BuildHEAT “Stand ardized approaches and products for the systemic retrofit of Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018residential Buildings, focusing on HEATing and cooling consumptions attenuation” 
Funding programme: H2020-EeB-08-2015 - GA 680658.  
Description: BuildHeat develops standardised approaches, products and solutions for the systemic retrofit of 
residential Buildings, focusing on heating and cooling consumptions attenuation, improving residential wellbeing 
and bringing high-energy performance, comfort and healthiness.   
Duration: 2015-2019  
Website: www.buildheat.eu  
  
CITyFiED “Replicable and Innovative Future Efficient Districts and cities“ Funding 
programme: FP7-ENERGY-2013-8.8.1 – GA 609129.  
Description: A replicable, systemic and integrated strategy to adapt European cities and urban ecosystems into the 
smart city of the future, by designing, constructing and managing large scale district renovation pro jects for 
achieving nearly zero energy cities. Leader of Dissemination and Communication activities, cooperation and 
collaboration framework through a dedicated communication and engagement approach towards the CITyFiED 
network of cities (cluster cities and a community of interest of 40 cities) to guarantee replication, development of 
exploitation-supporting tools. Duration: 2014-2019  
Website: www.cityfied.eu  
  
Infrastructures and facilities   

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          116  
  
youris.com public communication and distribution platform (www.youris.com ).   
The youris.com platform, established in 2004, is managed by ICONS. The platform will be made available for the 
distribution of the HOUSEFUL public communication contents. youris.com is one of the most important European 
primary information sources on European innovation for global media: its contents regularly taken up by online 
newspapers and magazines, journalists, information multipliers and social me dia networks, TV broadcasters. 
youris.com holds a record of more than 500 stories (videos, articles and interviews) produced on EU research and 
innovation, a global network of 120 national public TV broadcasters and an audience of over 150 million TV 
viewers worldwide on TV media. More than 10 million unique users worldwide have come across youris.com 
articles and videos online.  
  
    
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Participant No.  15  
   
Short Name  IDP  
Country  Spain  
Organization Type  SME  
Website  www.idp.es  
  
Partner Profile  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          117  
  
IDP is an innovative and multidisciplinary SME (Small and Medium Enterprise) with services ranging from civil 
& infrastructure engineering, environmental sciences, ICT to project management & consultancy. With six offices 
between Spain and Latin America, IDP currently consists of a team of approximately 250 professionals working 
nationally and internationally in multidisciplinary projects in Electrical and Control Automation Engineer ing, 
Mechanical Engineering, Waste Treatment and Environmental Engineering, Information and Communication 
Technology, Chemical, Civil and Structural engineers, Architects and Project Managers.  
INDUSTRIAL & ARCHITECTURE . More than 1,000 projects in all pro ductive sectors (including Cement, 
Mining and Waste Industry) endorse IDP as a leading engineering company specialized in developing engineering, 
construction and consulting services for projects of industrial plants and logistic infrastructures. The 
multidisciplinary technical teams of IDP have the capability to design any type of facilities and is always looking 
for the most advanced solutions and efficient, technologically innovative and environmentally friendly. Therefore, 
the most innovative tools are early adopted and used in all our projects, like the know -how acquired through of 
BIM technology (Building Information Technology),  making it able to address crosscutting and 
comprehensively any project with the aim of achieving the most efficient, cost effective and secure facilities.  
ENVIRONMENT. IDP is a world leader in management and treatment of urban and industrial waste. Nowadays 
is working for multilateral organizations such as the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) in areas related to 
the management, handling and treatment of Waste, as well as strategic planning, definition of collection systems, 
projection and recovery of treatment facilities, or research and development in treatment processes. In the water 
sector, IDP operates throughout the c omplete cycle (collection, purification, water supply, sanitation and 
treatment) with a shared objective to optimize water use and applications.  
CIVIL WORKS. IDP has become lately in a world -leading company regarding the design and construction of 
civil works, including both railroads and roads as well as tunnels, bridges and so on using BIM methodology. IDP 
has invested money as well as human resources in order to internally develop this methodology in order to integrate 
it with GIS technology in order to develop GeoBIM models: BIM geo-located models that include all the necessary 
BIM information in addition to geo-location data. This has allowed IDP to produce highly accurate models of roads 
and railroads with all the physical info, which has enabled show ing clients a very realistic view of the final 
outcome. In addition, these GeoBIM models allow simulating the performance of every sort of vehicles on these 
infrastructures, making clients sure that the civil works at issue will fulfil both the current reg ulations as well as 
user needs regarding visibility, driving comfort, etc.  
SMART CITY. Thanks to the integration of BIM methodology and GIS technology, with GeoBIM models as an 
outcome, IDP has developed what we call CIM models (City Information Modelling). This new concept 
addresses the management of city infrastructures, roads/streets, public/private buildings, energy as well as water 
installations and production units and so on in a single city model. This aims at enabling city administrations to 
carry out an easier and unified management of city assets. The enormous amount of information that these models 
can take into account allows these administrations to carry out studies, simulations (new/different mobility routes, 
PV plants…), etc. of any action that is to be undertaken before actually carrying them out, thus having a better 
decision-making, saving future costs due to wrong decisions, etc.  
  
Role in the project  
The role of IDP in HOUSEFUL is twofold. Firstly, we will be responsible for the engineering of the 
implementation of the some of the proposed solutions inside all the Spanish demo-sites (WP4), which will 
afterwards be used for the execution of the works until their commissioning. In this way IDP will provide its 
expertise in both water and waste sector as well as in architecture and building services to act as the technology 
integrator who will develop the best solutions for Greywater Treatment, Biowaste disposal & valorization and 
Supply of high quality fertilizer/compost. Secondly, pairing with LEITAT, we will guide the advance from Lab 
to the pilot sites of Biogas production from blackwater and grinded biowaste until its effective implementation in 
the selected buildings.  
  
Detailed description of IDP’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 35)  
 
  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          118  
  
Task 4.2: Definition of the technical specifications (TS) for the solutions including technological implementAssociated 
with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018a- 
tion: Greywater and blackwater separation (S5.1), commercial O 3/UV hygienisation (S5.2), integration of water 
meters at household and building level for the control of water reuse (S5.3), integration in Building of NBS on 
facade or roof (S5.4), Treatment of liquid fraction with NBS indoor, at facade and outdoor (S6.1), AnMBR system 
(S7.1), and valorisation of biogas (S7.4) (9 Person-months).  
Task 4.3: IDP will collaborate in the design of the compact and transportable AnMBR unit able to treat the organic 
load rate of 8 -10 home equivalents. Then, IDP will carry out the integratio n of it and the other water and waste 
technological solutions such as commercial O3/UV into the different buildings (in Task 4.8) (5 Personmonths).  
Task 4.4: Installation of water meters for quantification of water reuse in toilets at home and Building le vel after 
O2/UV treatment in Demo buildings 1 and 2 (5 Person-months).  
Task 4.5: Preparing technical content of water and waste solutions for the definition of the technical execution 
projects in Demos 1, 2 and 3 (1 Person-month).  
Task 4.7: Provision of technical support to AHC for the preparation of tendering documents (1 Person-month). 
Task 4.8: Task Leader, in charge of the technical assistance and supervisión of the Works related to the 
technological innovations shown in S5, S6, S7, S8 and S9, as well as the implementation of the different solutions 
and monitoring elements in the building (14 Person-months).  
Key personnel   
Eduard Loscos (M) BSc in Physics (UAB) specialized in Optics and Master in Environmental Engineering (UPC). 
After 10 years of e xperience as Sales Manager and CEO at ATIPIC TEN afterwards, he started as a Business 
Developer of R&D projects inside CETEMMSA Technology Centre. Now he is Deputy Business Development 
and Innovation Manager at IDP.   
Vicenç Jimenez (M)  Manager of Energy, Environment and Industry Department at IDP. He has an extensive 
experience as a project manager in Environmental: eg. Projects like a Municipal Solid Waste Facilities, Municipal 
Solid Waste Landfill at Catalonia (Refuse fraction from MBT's plants) Municipa l Solid Waste Masterplan Santa 
Catarina (Brazil) or Industry: Inter- American Investment Corporation - Mexico Paper Manufacturing; Operations 
mechanical design for mining process and product processing industry or CEO Mechanical Engineer HVAC 
Laboratories (Medichem Combino Pharm) – Malta, etc.  
Eduard Millet de Balanzó (M)  MBA and Industrial Engineer with more than 15 years working on the field of 
waste management. He had worked in the URBASER company before he became a Project Manager in the Energy, 
Environment and Industry Department at IDP.  
Jordi Hernández Sapé (M) MSc in Industrial Engineering (UPC) with more than 10 years in installations design 
and planning, with special focus on energy efficiency.   
Andreu Cortada (M) Architect, Revit specialist and BIM Manager at IDP. He received his degree from UPC in 
Barcelona and afterwards finished Master Degree in Digital Architecture and Advanced Design from Universitat 
Internacional de Catalunya.  
Mikel Borràs (M)  Junior architect (UPC) after five years of exp erience carrying out projects in architectural 
rehabilitation, developing both draft and executive projects as well as construction management duties, he is now 
R&D projects deputy manager at IDP. He is responsible for the writing of R&D projects and their  financial 
management within IDP.  
Experience  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          119  
  
Related publications:  
▪ Master plan for the control and treatment of MSW in the Santa Catarina State, Brazil.  
▪ Technical assistance for the supervision of the Project and Works for the Biomethanization and Compost Plant 
of Can Barba (Sabadell) Spain.  
▪ Closure and Sanitation Project for a Municipal Solid Waste Landfill of 400 Ha, in Mexico  
▪ Development of 13 public investment projects for the redevelopment and the recovery of the areas degraded 
by the solid was te (landfills) in the cities of Andahuaylas, Bagua, Huamanga, Oxapampa, Chancay, Pozuzo, 
San Juan Bautista, Yauyos, Abancay, Aymaraes, Huaura, Tarma and Chincha.  
▪ Project, Works management and setting into operation of Disposal Center and Pneumatic Collection Center for 
MSW, Sabadell city centre.   
Related projects:  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 
03/04/2018 
▪ METGROW + - Building upon its EIP RMC status and its core role in EIT Raw Materials, METGROW+ 
develops an industrially viable, fle xible “New Metallurgical Systems” Toolbox, which consists of a broad 
range of already existing and newly developed “metallurgical unit operations”. The unit operations follow a 
value-chain approach, from pre -treatment, to metal extraction, metal recovery a nd (residual) matrix 
valorisation. The industrially -driven, interdisciplinary METGROW+ consortium involves all relevant 
stakeholders along the value chain, from the (upstream) pretreatment to the final (downstream) residual matrix 
valorisation in building materials.  
▪ INTERMODEL EU – H2020 Project under the call MG-8.4a-2015: Smart governance, network resilience 
and streamlined infrastructure innovation , which aims to develop a BIM -based methodology and its 
integration with physical simulation tools to improve the decision making regarding the design, construction 
and management of intermodal terminals. This shall aim at the their optimization from a holistic point of 
view, taking into account energy efficiency and environmental sustainability, Costs, facility management and 
maintenance and logistics & mobility performance, both in and outside the terminal.  
▪ DOF - District of the Future, under the 7th Framework Program of Research and Development (ICT2013.6.4 
Optimising Energy Systems in Smart Cities) of the European Union, which aims to develop a solution based 
on information technology and communications to facilitate the monitoring, management and optimization of 
energy production and consumption in three districts in three cities in Europe (Corby, Orleans and Sabadell).   
▪ IPAN - Innovate Popular Low Density Structural Panel, under the 7th Framework Program of Research and 
Development (ENV -2012.6.3 Innovative resource efficient technologies, processes and services) of the 
European Union, which aims to design the process of large-scale production of industrial structural panels of 
wood, using both wood waste as the treetops (specifically fast growing trees), optimizing surface finish with 
innovative resins, minimizing emissions and resource consumption.  
▪ HERMES - Development of Smart and Flexible Freight Wagons and Facilities for improved transport of 
Granular Multimaterials, under H2020 Program of Research (RIA, MG-2.2-2014), aims to improve Bulk  
Freight Transport. IDP leads the development of Bulk Cargo Terminals using BIM Methodology  
Infrastructures and facilities   
▪ Autodesk – Revit. A specific program for BIM (Building Information Modelling), consisting on the computer-
aided design for 3D drawings.  
▪ Autodesk - Infraworks 360. BIM preliminary design softwa re helps to settle BIM 3D models using real 
environment data like Google Maps files.  
▪ Presto. Software tool for budgets, measures, temporary planning, security and health, quality control, 
environment and costs control.  
▪ Autodesk – Plant 3D. BIM Process & Instrumentation Design software.  
▪ CivilCad2000. Software tool for the design, the calculation and the sizing of structures (usual structures, bridge 
abutments, reinforced bridges, prefabricated beams, mixed structures).  
  

  
                                                   776708 – HOUSEFUL – Part B                                                          120  
  
    
 
 
   
Participant No.  16  
    
Short Name  Homebiogas   
Country  Israel  
Organization Type  Small Medium Enterprise (SME)  
Website  https://homebiogas.com/  
  
Partner Profile  
  
HOMEBIOGAS LTD (HBG) is an Israeli small enterprise founded in 2012. We develop and market 
technologically advanced, affordable and easily assembled biogas systems.  
HOMEBIOGAS LTD (HBG) develops and manufactures market-leading, best of class, small scale biogas systems; 
i.e. integrated solutions for waste management and the generation of clean renewable energy. We aim to realise the 
huge market potential in this field and become a large, successful and highly-valued company.   
Since 2006, the founders have been involved in international projects for creating renewable energy from waste, for  
“off-the-grid” communities in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The company’s founders have been active in Israel 
since 2010 and formally incorporated HBG in February 2012. Based upon the knowhow and ideas that the founders 
accumulated during the previous years of field trials and scientific research, the team dedicated the last three years to 
develop and market family sized biogas systems.   
Based on extensive field trials and user feedback, during 2014 we started a complete redesign of the product and a 
new approach to sales, with the strategic decision to tackle the business opportunity for HBG in the market of 
organic waste management and onsite renewable energy generation in Europe. We successfully adapted our products 
to high income markets through the development and commercialisation of HOMEBIOGAS TG1: a household 
oriented, convenient and technologically advanced biogas system. To date, we have sold more than 1000 units of 
HOMEBIOGAS TG1 to end users and distributors in over 73 countries (e.g. Australia, Israel, Italy, Spain, Portugal, 
Sweden, France, Chile, Kenya, Mexico, Nigeria, South Africa, USA). We are in the process of establishing our 
distribution channels and marketing presence. Revenues for 2016, the first year that we began offering our products 
for sale, exceeded €500K.  
HBG employs 16 people and operates out of our 1,000 m2 site on the campus of Hadassah Neurim in Beit Yanai, 
Israel. Up to now, our funding has come from investors who provided us with approx. €2.5 million, in addition to a 
support of approximately €700 thousand through programs originating from the Office of the Chief Scientist in 
Israel. Our investors include a Florida-based cleantech venture fund and Israeli, American and British individuals. 
From its inception HBG decided to outsource all manufacturing work and has established long term relationships 
with large manufacturers who provide all of the product’s components to the company for final testing, packaging 
and shipping. This concept reduces HBG’s capital expenses and manpower outlays, and since these large 
manufacturers can manufacture in large volumes; lack of production resources will not be a bottleneck.  
Role in the project  

 
 
Homebiogas will demonstrate the feasibility of a conventional HOMEBIOGAS system for the valorisation of 
grinded biowaste together with solid fraction of domestic wastewater (WP4). Homebiogas will install this system an 
open area (a large garden) of a centenary house located in Austria. The system will be also feed with other kitchen 
wastes from neighbors. The biogas produced is planned to be stored for winter or be used for cooking in the same 
house that generates bio-waste and blackwater. The dried digestate can be used as fertilizer in the own garden (with 
a wintergarden installed). Homebiogas will demonstrate the feasibility of circular economic business models that 
underpin new services based on performance/functionality rather than ownership.   
To achieve this objective, the innovation needs to progress from the current TRL6 (Technology demonstrated in a 
relevant environment) and CRL1 (Hypothetical commercial proposition) (Commercial Readiness Level, see section 
1.3A for further information) to TRL9 (Final technology system proven through successful implementation) and 
CRL3 (Commercial scale up). The commercial and technical objectives will be achieved on time and on budget 
through the constant and effective management of all the technical, commercial, financial, legal and administrative 
aspects of the project.   
  
Detailed description of HOMEBIOGAS’s role in WP4. (Total Person-months: 15)  
Task 4.2: Definition of the technical specification (TS) for the solution S7 to be demonstrated in Demo 3 (TS 7.2), 
aimed at offeri ng a compact, transportable and modular dry AD aimed at efficiently valorise the solid fraction of 
wastewater (WW) and bio-waste (BW) at continuous mode. The TS 7.2 will include a new sludge and liquid discharge 
system, based on a new suction unit. The suction unit will feed digestate to the compost system developed by ALCN 
(S8) (2 Person-months).  
Task 4.3: Modification of current dry AD HOMEBIOGAS according to TS 7.2. Preliminary tests of the new dry  
AD system using real wastes from Demo 3. Collaborati on with ALCN and CARTIF in the valorisation of digestate 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 as compost (S8) and biogas (S7) (5 Person-months).  
Task 4.4: Collaboration in the definition of the monitoring program related to the biogas quality evaluation made by 
ALCN and digestate valorisation (1 Person-month).  
Task 4.5: Collaboration in the preparation of the execution project related with the innovation made in the dAD (1 
Person-month).  
Task 4.8: Collaboration in the management o f permits for implementation of the dAD system at building scale. 
Development of optimisation works of the dAD system by using WW and BW at continuous mode in Demo 3.  
Direct collaboration with ALCN in digestate and biogas valorisation (6 Person-months).  
Key personnel   

 
 
Mr. Erez Lanzer (M):  Project Manager;  HBG Chief Operating Officer. He is a business savvy operator and 
organizer who combine management skills with business, sales and organizational skills. Previously, he was CEO at 
Lenopark, a $20 mill ion private international B2C company manufacturing and selling consumer products. 
Education: B. A. Business Administration; Ruppin Academic Center, Israel.Mr Lanzer will be responsible for the 
overall running of the project, ensuring the different tasks in the Work Plan (Section 3.1) are performed according to 
deadlines and budget and that the project objectives are achieved. He will be the contact person for the project, being 
responsible for the communications and reports to the EC Project Officer.   
Oshik Efrati (M): Technical Manager, HBG CEO and founder, is an entrepreneur who is a very focused and task 
oriented leader of people. He combines multi-disciplinary technology know-how and product management skills with 
people skills. Prior to HBG he was the  Product Line Manager at SourceOutdoors (www.souceoutdoor.com), where 
he introduced and developed a product line which grew to be 50% of that company’s income. Education: B. Sc. in 
Marine sciences, Ruppin Academic Center School of Marine Science, Israel.Mr Efrati will supervise all technical 
tasks of the HOMEBIOGAS project, ensuring the technical objectives are achieved and technical deliverables are 
produced and submitted on time.  
Yair Teller (M): Chief Scientist Yair Teller is HBG Chief Scientist and founder, a visionary entrepreneur, committed 
to the cause of sustainability and fully motivated to help the poorer, underserved communities of the developing 
world. Yair became actively involved in sustainability, biogas and social change 9 years ago, during his stay in 
Mexico. Since then, he has become an internationally recognized evangelist, leader and authority on small biogas 
systems and in -situ recycling. Educ ation: B. Sc. in Marine Sciences, Ruppin Academic Centre School of Marine 
Sciences, Israel. Mr Teller will play the leading role in the development and performance evaluation of 
HOMEBIOGAS TG6 alpha pilots and beta versions.  
  
Experience  
  
1. Patent 1: WO 2013190361 A1 System and method for biogas and fertilizer production from household organic 
waste  
  
2. Patent 2: WO 2014203047 A1 Lightweight assemblable appliance and respective method for production of 
biogas and liquid fertilizer,  
  
3. HBG has filed a design patent, which covers the physical look and feel of our product, in China, USA and 
Germany,  
  
4. Our systems are the only small biogas systems that were tested and certified to 
meet the European CE Standard for safety,  
  
HBG achieved world recognition by meeting United Nations Secretary General Ban 
Ki Moon , who wholeheartedly approved of the company’s solutions for developing 
communities and blessed the collaboration with the    
  
  
Infrastructures and facilities   
-  
    
4.