3.1 on stakeholders’ identification and the organisations who have already signed a LOI), and representing the 
potential adopters and replicators of the HOUSEFUL servic es will be approached through dedicated dissemination 
activities. The presence of EU and national housing associations in the partnership will maximise the HOUSEFUL 
results’ dissemination potential through their existing communication channels and tools an d addressing their 
communities and networks beyond the ones that will be approached via the project dissemination activities. In 
addition, the members of the CCHE board will also act as ambassadors of the project concepts and results towards 
their communities: 
The Dissemination tools will include: 
• e-Newsletter - a periodic e -Newsletter will be issued every six months and distributed to the stakeholders’ 
database ofregistered users. It will be produced with innovative self -publishing tools enabling content p ublishing 
and aggregation from multiple external sources in the format of an interactive and easy -to-read e-zine. 
• At least 6 info -packs (on both the specific areas: water, waste, energy and material resources and the 
implementedsolutions) will be produced and distributed to registered web users and key stakeholders and circulated 
through the partners’ channels and promoted via social media; 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 54 of 61 
• Dissemination webinars – four webinars will be organised on the four vectors and the related HOUSE -FUL 
solutions(water, waste, energy and material resources). 
• HOUSEFUL Best practice book - in electronic and printable format, containing the main project achievements,is 
foreseen at the end of the project, providing information about the results, best practices, lessons lear nt and 
recommendations derived by the implementation and demonstration of the HOUSEFUL services in the Frontrunner 
buildings as well as the challenges tackled. It will be widely promoted towards the HOUSEFUL community and 
CCHE board. 
• Scientific and technic al publications dedicated journals as well as conference papers will be performed by 
academicand technological partners. The objective will be to increase peer -to-peer dissemination and knowledge 
sharing among expert stakeholders in the circular economy ar ea and to position the project al -so in professional and 
scientific journals and conferences. 
Stakeholders relations, networking and clustering: 
• Participation in fairs and conferences - HOUSEFUL partners will participate in conferences and fairs; 
• Results f rom developed solutions will be disseminated in 4 technical workshops, covering advances in 
buildingcircularity on energy (M30) in Barcelona (Spain), waste (M33) in Terrassa (Spain), material (M36) in 
Netherlands and water (M50) in Vienna (Austria). 
• Clustering activities with projects and initiatives on circular economy will be fostered through the organisation of 
jointdissemination activities, such as, organisation of common events, workshops, production of dedicated editorials;  
• A final event (in the format of a workshop, conference, or roundtable) will be organised at EU level by LEITAT, inthe 
framework of another planned circular economy event, where the results and services developed and demonstrated 
during the project will be shared with other European stakeholders. 
Task 7.5 Public communication (Leader: ICONS, LEITAT; Participants: all) [M1 -M54] 
This task aims at producing and distributing original HOUSEFUL contents through key and targeted messages to raise 
awareness, acceptance and impact towards wider audiences. Public contents will be widely distributed through EU and 
global information multipliers and online media (such as, Alpha Galileo, Physorg, Cordis Wire, youris.com etc.) and 
other information platforms and thematic portals, as well as through the partners’ communication tools and will include: 
• At least 8 independent articles and interviews around project-related topics, written by professional journalists will be 
produced and distributed to information multipliers, online newspapers, dedicate d portals and promoted via social 
media networks. 
• HOUSEFUL videos. The audiovisual strategy of the project will include: one Video News Release (VNRs) forTV 
distribution and four web videos. Focusing on innovative outcomes related to the Front-runners buildings and raising 
media and public interest the VNR will be produced and distributed to European and Word TV stations through 
youris.com audiovisual platform, managed by ICONS, and by exploiting the satellite gateways of the Eurovision 
department of the European Broadcasting Union. One short web video (30 seconds – 1 minute) including animations, 
infographics and real footage will be produced on the HOUSEFUL demonstration outcomes.  
• Press and News Releases: at least 10 press and news releases focusing on spe cific project issues and 
milestones,promoting project events and progress, will be produced and distributed. They will be made available to 
local partners for translation into local languages and distribution through their existing channels.  
• Pageflow – a d igital storytelling tool, enabling to incorporate many editorial formats (background videos, 
images,text…) into a richer narrative illustrating and transforming the HOUSEFUL outcomes into market -able 
solutions. 
Task 7.6. HOUSEFUL impact monitoring and assessment. (Leader: ICONS) [M1-M54] 
Measuring outreach, community engagement and gathering citizens and stakeholders’ feedback is essential to assess 
the effectiveness of the designed D&C strategy and HOUSEFUL impacts. A continuous monitoring activity of the 
effects of the widespread distribution of the HOUSEFUL contents on web and social media channels via analytics and 
dedicated state-of-the-art software tools or through direct data retrieval via the information multipliers’ platforms will 
enable the project to measure its outreach. Outreach measurement is aimed at the definition of the absolute impact data, 
which provide an input to the Community Engagement Index analysis. The Community Engagement Index (CEI) 
measures the actual engagement of the project com munity with the project contents delivered on the internet and on 
social media. The CEI creates a univo-cal relation between any project content made available on the web and the actual 
interactions made by visitors coming across that content. The weighted  aggregation of all CEI values calculated on 
single project con-tents will then generate the Project Engagement Index (PEI) representing the engagement capacity 
of the entire project communication and a fundamental key to the definition of the impacts of t he project. 
  
Participation per Partner 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 55 of 61 
Partner number and short name  WP7 effort  
1 -  LEITAT    
2 -  ITeC    
3 -  CARTIF    
4 -  ALCN    
5 -  AHC    
6 -  VISUM    
7 -  AIGUASOL    
8 -  LGI    
9 -  GWR    
10 -  Turntoo B.V.    
11 -  Neues Leben    
12 -  CECODHAS    
13 -  WE&B    
14 -  ICONS    
15 -  IDP    
16 -  HOMEBIOGAS LTD    
 Total   
List of deliverables 
  
Deliverable 
Number14 Deliverable Title Lead beneficiary Type15 Dissemination level16 
Due 
Date (in 
months)17 
D7.1 Dissemination & 
Communication plan 14 - ICONS Report 
Confidential, only for 
members of the 
consortium 
(including the 
Commission 
Services) 
43 
D7.2 HOUSEFUL website 14 - ICONS 
Websites, 
patents 
filling, etc. 
Public 5 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 56 of 61 
D7.3 Project presentation 
video 14 - ICONS 
Websites, 
patents 
filling, etc. 
Public 8 
D7.4 Call-To-Action video 14 - ICONS 
Websites, 
patents 
filling, etc. 
Public 8 
D7.5 
Flyers (Communication 
materials for stake-holder 
engagement) 
14 - ICONS Report Public 8 
D7.6 Project leaflet 14 - ICONS Report Public 10 
List of deliverables 
  
Deliverable 
Number14 Deliverable Title Lead beneficiary Type15 Dissemination level16 
Due 
Date (in 
months)17 
D7.7 
Report on public 
communication, 
networking and 
clustering activities 
(version I) 
14 - ICONS Report Public 18 
D7.8 
Multimedia tools: 1 
PageFlow, 1 VNR and 1 
web video produced and 
distributed 
14 - ICONS 
Websites, 
patents 
filling, etc. 
Public 50 
D7.9 Best Practices book 14 - ICONS 
Websites, 
patents 
filling, etc. 
Public 52 
D7.10 
Communication and 
dissemination activities 
impact assessment 
14 - ICONS Report 
Confidential, only for 
members of the 
consortium 
(including the 
Commission 
Services) 
54 
D7.11 
Report on public 
communication, 
networking and 
clustering activities 
(version II) 
14 - ICONS Report Public 36 
D7.12 
Report on public 
communication, 
networking and 
clustering activities 
(version III - final) 
14 - ICONS Report Public 54 
Description of deliverables 
Deliverables: D7.1) Dissemination & Communication plan [M4 with internal updates at M18, M30, M43, ICONS] / 
D7.2) HOUSEFUL website [M5. ICONS] / D7.3) Project presentation video [M8, ICONS] / D7.4) Call -To-Action 
video (Communication materials for stakeholder engagement) [M8, ICONS] / D7.5) Flyers (Com munica-tion 
materials for stakeholder engagement) [M8, ICONS] / D7.6) Project leaflet [M10, ICONS] / D7.7) Report on public 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 57 of 61 
communication, networking and clustering activities [M18, ICONS] / D7.8) Multimedia tools: 1 PageFlow, 1VNR 
and 1 web video produced and distributed [M50. ICONS] / D7.9) Best Practice book [M52, ICONS] / D7.10)  
Communication and dissemination activities impact assessment [M54, ICONS] / D7.11) Updated version of D7.7 
[M36, ICONS] / D7.12) Updated and final version of D7.11 [M54, ICONS]  
D7.1 : Dissemination & Communication plan [43] 
Definition and monitoring of a common and well organized communication strategy, identifying target audiences 
(closely related to stakeholders’ identification and analysis in task 3.1), defining key messages t o be conveyed per 
target group and establishing the most important communication formats, actions and channels, in accordance with 
article 28 of the GA (“Promoting the action-visibility of EU Funding”). The plan will be updated periodically 
throughout the project. This deliverable is related to Task 7.1. 
D7.2 : HOUSEFUL website [5] 
Design and launch of the HOUSEFUL website, where a description of the project (objectives and expected impacts), 
news, progress and milestones accomplished, direct connection with the SaaS solution developed in WP6 and other 
related external platforms and initiatives will be available for consultation. This deliverable is related to Task 7.3.  
 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 58 of 61 
D7.3 : Project presentation video [8] 
A short animation video addressing multiple stakeholders with key basic messages, facts and features of the 
HOUSEFUL project and its foreseen impacts in the circular economy of buildings will be produced to present the 
project in an easy-to-understand way. The video will be accessible on the website, promoted on social media and 
used in events to introduce the project. This deliverable is related to Task 7.3. 
D7.4 : Call-To-Action video [8] 
A specific video format based on animations and infographics aimed at engaging stakeholders in frontrunner 
buildings and inviting them to undertake actions will be produced to support citizen and stakeholder engagement 
activities. This deliverable is related to Task 7.2. 
D7.5 : Flyers (Communication materials for stake-holder engagement) [8] 
The flyer will inform local citizens and stakeholders about the HOUSEFUL solutions demonstrated in the project, 
including the SaaS, with simple and easy-to-understand messages. The flyer will have a common visual identity, but 
contents will be customized according to the specificity of each Frontrunner building. This deliverable is related to 
Task 7.2. 
D7.6 : Project leaflet [10] 
The HOUSEFUL leaflet, addressing European stakeholders at large, will provide information on the main  
characteristics of the project and its expected results and impacts. Key key information and messages will be adapted 
to properly engage the different stakeholders identified in Task 3.1. This deliverable is related to Task 7.2.  
D7.7 : Report on public communication, networking and clustering activities (version I) [18] 
Report regarding the activities related to communication strategies deployed during the project with respect to 
public communication, including articles and interviews, videos (D7.3, D7.4 and D7.9), press and news releases 
and pageflow (D7.8); networking and clustering activities, such as participation in fairs and conferences, activities 
with other circular economy projects and events attended and organized by the project. This deliverable is related to 
Task 7.4. 
D7.8 : Multimedia tools: 1 PageFlow, 1 VNR and 1 web video produced and distributed [50] 
Production of a PageFlow (digital storytelling tool, enabling to incorporate many editorial formats into a richer 
narrative to enhance HOUSEFUL marketable solutions), a Video News Release to dissemina te the project’s main 
outcomes addressing the broad audience via TV media and a web video summarizing the main project outcomes. 
This deliverable is related to Task 7.5. 
D7.9 : Best Practices book [52] 
The Best Practices book will provide an overview of the main project achievements, best practices, lessons learnt and 
recommendations. Contents will be retrieved from the main outcomes of the demonstration activities (described in 
the deliverables of the different WPs) and will be packaged in a direct and eff ective graphic layout. The Best 
Practices book will be available in both electronic and printable format. This deliverable is related to Task 7.4.  
D7.10 : Communication and dissemination activities impact assessment [54]  
Report on the impacts achieved through the implementation of the Dissemination and Communication Plan and 
Strategy established at the beginning of the project (D7.1). Continuous monitoring activity of outreach and 
community engagement (both online - through dedicated indicators - and off-line through qualitative analysis) will 
provide measures to assess the project impacts in terms of awareness, engagement and acceptance. This deliverable 
is related to Task 7.6. 
D7.11 : Report on public communication, networking and clustering activities (version II) [36] 
Updated version of D7.7 
D7.12 : Report on public communication, networking and clustering activities (version III - final) [54] 
Updated and final version of D7.11 (being D7.11 and update of D7.7) 
Schedule of relevant Milestones 
  
Milestone 
number18 Milestone title Lead beneficiary 
Due 
Date (in 
months) 
Means of verification 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 59 of 61 
MS12 
Definition of the 
Dissemination and 
Communication Strategy 
14 - ICONS 4 
D7.1) The Dissemination 
and Communication Plan 
is finalised and approved at 
consortium level 
MS13 Project website online 14 - ICONS 5 
D7.2) The HOUSEFUL 
website is available in internet 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 60 of 61 
Work package number 9 WP8 Lead beneficiary 10 1 - LEITAT 
Work package title Ethics requirements  
Start month 1 End month 54 
Objectives 
The objective is to ensure compliance with the 'ethics requirements' set out in this work package. 
Description of work and role of partners 
WP8 - Ethics requirements [Months: 1-54] 
LEITAT 
This work package sets out the 'ethics requirements' that the project must comply with.  
  
List of deliverables 
  
Deliverable 
Number14 Deliverable Title Lead beneficiary Type15 Dissemination level16 
Due 
Date (in 
months)17 
D8.1 H - Requirement No. 1 1 - LEITAT Ethics 
Confidential, only for 
members of the 
consortium 
(including the 
Commission 
Services) 
1 
D8.2 POPD - H - Requirement 
No. 3 1 - LEITAT Ethics 
Confidential, only for 
members of the 
consortium 
(including the 
Commission 
Services) 
1 
D8.3 GEN - Requirement No. 
4 1 - LEITAT Ethics 
Confidential, only for 
members of the 
consortium 
(including the 
Commission 
Services) 
3 
Description of deliverables 
The 'ethics requirements' that the project must comply with are included as deliverables in this work package.  
D8.1 : H - Requirement No. 1 [1] 
The procedures and criteria that will be used to identify/recruit research participants must be submitted as a 
deliverable by the end of M1, before the start of activities involving humans. The applicant must clarify whether 
vulnerable individuals/groups will be involved, and the measures to protect them and m inimise the risk of their 
stigmatisation must be submitted as a deliverable by the end of M1, before the start of activities involving humans.  
D8.2 : POPD - H - Requirement No. 3 [1] 
The informed consent procedures that will be implemented for the particip ation of humans and for the collection, 
storage, and protection of personal data, must be submitted as a deliverable by the end of M1, before the start of 
activities involving humans or collection of personal data. Templates of the informed consent/assent forms and 
information sheets (in language and terms intelligible to the participants) must be submitted as a deliverable by the 
end of M1, before the start of activities involving humans or the collection of personal data.  
D8.3 : GEN - Requirement No. 4 [3] 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 61 of 61 
An independent Ethics Advisor must be appointed to monitor the ethics issues involved in this project and how they 
are handled. The Advisor must be consulted at least on the following points: data handling, vulnerable people, 
consent and recruitment. A report by the Ethics Advisor must be submitted as preliminary scoping document at the 
end of month 6 to indicate the procedures and ethical requirements in the project. There must then be a final report to 
be submitted at M54. It is recommended that the ethics advisor is involved in the project throughout. 
  Schedule of relevant Milestones   
       
Milestone 
number18 Milestone title 
 
Lead beneficiary 
Due 
Date (in 
months) 
Means of verification 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 62 of 61 
1.3.4. WT4 List of milestones 
Milestone 
number18 Milestone title WP 
number9 Lead beneficiary 
Due 
Date (in 
months)17 
Means of verification 
MS1 
Methodology for 
evaluating the 
circularity level of 
buildings 
WP2 7 - AIGUASOL 26 
D2.5) The methodology 
defined in WP2 will be 
validated using real scenarios 
(all Frontrunner buildings) 
and integrated in the SaaS 
developed in WP6. 
MS2 
Desk research of 
existing circular 
solutions & services 
WP2 7 - AIGUASOL 36 D2.4) Existing market 
circular solutions 
MS3 Social engagement plan WP3 13 - WE&B 26 
Stakeholder analysed process 
finished for all buildings, 
related to D3.1) Social 
engagement strategy. 
MS4 Co-created services WP3 13 - WE&B 36 
Engagement workshop 
organised, related to D3.3. 
MS5 
Baseline of Frontrunner 
buildings completed WP4 3 - CARTIF 12 
D4.1) Baseline calculation for 
4 Frontrunner buildings 
MS6 Execution project 
documents ready WP4 3 - CARTIF 26 
D4.2) and D4.3) Technical 
specifications and execution 
projects of Frontrunner 
buildings 
MS7 
Technological solutions 
ready to be validated at 
demonstration scale 
WP4 3 - CARTIF 24 
D4.4) Optimisation of 
technological solutions (Task 
4.3), Financial scheme (task 
4.6), and technical monitoring 
programme (task 4.8). 
MS8 
Environmental, 
economic and social 
assessment of the 
circular solutions 
demonstrated 
WP5 1 - LEITAT 54 
D5.2) Environmental and 
economic impact assessment; 
D5.3) Measurement 
&Verification; D5.4) Social 
assessment 
MS9 
Launch of the market 
study WP6 8 - LGI 24 D6.1) Market study 
MS10 Launch of the SaaS WP6 8 - LGI 36 
D6.3) SaaS ready to be used 
by stakeholders 
MS11 
Complete list of 
potential HOUSEFUL 
services for 
stakeholders/end-users 
WP6 8 - LGI 54 D6.7) Final Exploitation Plan 
MS12 
Definition of the 
Dissemination and 
Communi-cation 
Strategy 
WP7 14 - ICONS 4 
D7.1) The Dissemination 
and Communication Plan 
is finalised and approved 
at consortium level 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 63 of 61 
MS13 Project website online WP7 14 - ICONS 5 
D7.2) The HOUSEFUL 
website is available in internet 
 
Milestone 
number18 Milestone title WP 
number9 Lead beneficiary 
Due 
Date (in 
months)17 
Means of verification 
MS14 Financial plan for 
Demo 2 WP4 3 - CARTIF 18 
In task 4.6, delivery of D4.5 
due on M18 and updated 
version on M48 (D4.8). It 
includes a Financing plan, a 
progress monitoring of the 
implementation of the plan, 
risk/uncertainty assessment 
and mitigation plans. 
MS15 Financial Close for 
Demo 3 WP4 3 - CARTIF 24 
Complementary financial 
access for demo 3 is 
completed. Associated 
deliverables - D4.6 (in M24) 
and updated version D4.8 
(M48). 
MS16 Tenants occupy the 
"Els Mestres" building WP4 3 - CARTIF 23 
They begin to participate 
in co-creation activities 
(D3.2) for final definition 
of technical specifications 
(D4.2). 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 64 of 61 
1.3.5. WT5 Critical Implementation risks and mitigation actions 
Risk 
number Description of risk WP Number Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
1 
Difficult in identifying the 
key parameters for 
quantifying the circularity 
level of residential 
buildings 
WP2, WP6 
A robust and reliable methodology to quantify 
the circularity level will be developed based on 
calculation methods and indicators which take 
into account a life-cycle approach. Partners’ 
expertise will assure the successful definition 
and quantification of KPIs. 
2 
A robust and reliable 
methodology to quantify the 
circularity level will be 
developed based on 
calculation methods and 
indicators which take into 
account a life-cycle 
approach. Partners’ 
expertise will assure the 
successful definition and 
quantification of KPIs. 
WP3 
A robust and reliable methodology to quantify 
the circularity level will be developed based on 
calculation methods and indicators which take 
into account a life-cycle approach. Partners’ 
expertise will assure the successful definition 
and quantification of KPIs. 
3 
Low participation of 
stakeholders in co-creation 
workshops 
WP3 
A very thorough engagement strategy, 
framework and protocol will be developed at the 
start of the project to ensure a high level of 
engagement of the project stakeholders. If 
participation is nevertheless low, the engagement 
plan will be revised. 
4 Delays in demonstration 
activities WP4 
All actions committed in HOUSEFUL are aligned 
to the action plans of the building owners/tenants. 
Long term plans supported by already committed 
funds and a solid ecosystem of private partners 
that are strongly committed to the project are the 
measures to mitigate the impact of this risk. 
When necessary, funding opportunities will be 
searched and applied (WP4-task 4.6). Regarding 
task 4.6, periodic review of the progress 
monitoring of the imple-mentation of the 
financing plan will be done, including a 
risk/uncertainty assessment and realisation of 
mitigation plans. 
5 Planned investments not 
materialised in demo 1 and 2 WP4 
Investment plans foreseen, in which innovative 
business models accompanying each specific 
action were included, demonstrate the strong 
commitment of both public bodies and private 
companies to implement the activities in three 
two Frontrunner buildings. Search of new 
funding sources, review of the financing plan, 
progress monitoring, risk/ uncertainty assessment 
and review of mitigation plans. 
6 
Implementation of NBS does 
not fit into vegetation period WP4 
Pre-grow plants in nurseries, adjustment of 
timetable 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 65 of 61 
7 Low biogas production or 
quality WP4 
Review of lab tests regarding C/N/P ratios 
according to new blackwater:BW mixture. 
Testing of alternative inoculums. Review of 
biogas 
 
Risk 
number Description of risk WP Number Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
   cleaning system for proper dimensioning of 
energy conversion system. 
8 Digestate with low nutrient 
content WP4 
Use of digestate as raw material for cocomposting 
using gardening waste or kitchen wastes. 
9 Low water reuse potential by 
high evapotranspiration WP4 
Review of NBS design. Selection of plants 
adapted to regional climate conditions where 
NBS are implemented. Better control of inlet 
water flow in NBS. 
10 
Lack of environmental data 
to assess the environmental 
impact of implemented 
solutions 
WP5 
In case of not obtaining enough environmental 
data from BIM, scientific literature and existing 
LCA databases such as Ecoinvent or GaBi 
Professional will be used. 
11 
Not sufficient inputs for the 
market assessment WP6 
Identify with all project partners a broad list of 
stakeholders to be consulted 
12 
Low participation of 
stakeholders in knowledge 
sharing activities (i.e. 
technical workshops, training 
sessions, study tours) 
WP7 
A very thorough communication strategy will be 
developed at the start of the project to ensure a 
high level of visibility of the project for the 
targeted audience and will seek for a strong 
involvement of the stakeholders. If participation 
is nevertheless low, the communication plan will 
be revised. 
13 Technical failure in the 
demo-sites WP4 
Several demo-sites have been prepared in order 
to guarantee an efficient and smooth process of 
demonstration 
14 
Demonstrated technological 
solutions (water-S5,S6; 
waste- S7,S8,S9) includes 
high investment and/or 
O&M cost 
WP4 
Review of technical specifications, designs 
and dimensioning of each technology at pilot 
scale. Evaluation of alternative circular 
materials for construction. Reviewing O&M 
costs. Search of additional funding schemes 
for improved feasibility 
15 
AnMBR installation in 
buildings is not permitted 
due to biogas risk issues 
WP4 
A risk assessment will be conducted during unit 
design in order to define whether ATEX 
equipment is required in order to fulfil 
installation requirements. Additional CHP unit 
will be considered to avoid biogas storage, 
directly transforming it to electricity. 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 66 of 61 
16 
Low interest, lack of 
understanding from the 
stakeholders’ perception (not 
acceptance) and misuse of 
new technologies and the 
SaaS. 
WP3, WP6, WP7 
The project will adopt a scalable approach to the 
dissemination and engagement strategy. Thanks 
to continuous monitoring process of 
dissemination, communication and social 
acceptance indicators it will be possible to 
implement corrective and customised measures 
(new dissemination tools, 1-to-1 communications, 
focussed meetings) to ease understanding and 
knowledge sharing and increase the level of 
interest among stakeholders 
17 
The project is ambitious 
and it could undermine the 
credibility 
WP1, WP2, WP3, WP4, 
WP5, WP6, WP7 
The extensive expertise of all partners of 
HOUSEFUL guarantees a high chance of success 
the achievement of project objectives. Moreover, 
a strong project management progress interaction 
 
Risk 
number Description of risk WP Number Proposed risk-mitigation measures 
   (thorough three-monthly updates or throughout 
extra technical meetings or conference calls) will 
ensure the suitable progress of the project and 
thus the feasibility of HOUSEFUL. If any 
technical delay or problem is occurred during the 
project, scientific coordination along with 
advisory board will give the most proper solution 
for achieving the minor dispersion of the 
objectives. 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018 
Page 67 of 61 
18 Planned investment not 
materialised for Demo site 3 WP4 
Several other co-financing schemes will be sought 
during the project execution including Vienna city 
funding, funding for being part of international 
fairs like the International Building Exhibition 
which will take place in 2022 in Vienna, other 
H2020 projects, further nationally funded projects 
with the Austrian Research Promotion Agency, 
bank loans with European guarantees, etc. If no 
additional funding would be available, most of the 
technology demonstration will be incorporated in 
other ways. For Demo site 3, only the innovative 
winter garden will be difficult to implement 
without deep refurbishment. All the other 
technologies in Demo 3, including biogas, green 
walls, green house, composting system, 
incorporation of nutrients, etc., will, in the worst 
case scenario, be realised in the same scale at the 
same site without full refurbishment of the 
building. We will still separate the wastewater and 
use all the organic solid residues of the whole 
building for biogas generation and further 
composting and all liquid residues in green 
infrastructures and nutrient use in urban farming. 
The incorporation of rainwater is planned mostly 
within the innovative winter garden, but if this 
cannot be installed the rainwater can only be used 
for conventional garden irrigation. In this case we 
would lose one innovation, which can also be 
realised in a smaller scale as double window 
embedment in about 0,5m2 surface area instead of 
originally planned 12m2. We can still use this 
window system as smart window and regulation 
of indoor air ventilation. It will not have the same 
cleaning effects as there will be space for three 
plants instead of 40 plants in the large setup. This 
innovation is currently being developed in the 
running project ReCO2ST (Residential Retrofit 
assessment platform and demonstrations for near 
zero energy and CO2 emissions with optimum 
cost, health, comfort and environmental quality. 
H2020-EeB-05-2017, grant agreement nr. 
768576) and will be demonstrated in Denmark 
and the UK. 
 
 
of 61 
 
 
3    
   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2018)1767830 - 03/04/2018