2.3 Integration of HW and SW, functionality testing and optimisation work D3.5 ■
3 Chemometric models ML3 # #
3.1 Chemometric model building D3.1, D3.2 ■
3.2 Model validation D3.3 ■ ■
4 Trials in industry ML6, ML7, ML9 # # #
4.1 Installation in industy D4.1 ■
4.2 Processing trials and comparative testing D4.2, D4.3 ■ ■
4.3 Demonstration to food processors D4.4 ■
5 Production ML8, ML11 # #
5.1 Certification and Testing D5.4 ■
5.2 Design documentation package D5.1 ■
5.3 Production Engineering D5.2 ■
5.4 Production D5.3 ■
6 Gear up to market ML10 #
6.1 Technology Watch D6.3 ■
6.2 Knowledge management D6.4 ■
6.3 Communication, dissemination and training activities D6.1, 6.2, 6.5 ■ ■ ■
7 Project Management
7.1 Monitoring and reporting
7.2 Quality and Risk Management
7.3 Innovation Management
7.4 Fulfilment of Contractual Requirements
■ Deliverable / # Milestone / ◊ Project Kick Off Meeting● Meetings of the IRIS Management Board
■ 
◊
●
■
●
■
●
■
●
■
●
■
●
■
■
D7.1, D7.2
●
■
●
■ 
■

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
25 | P a g e
3.2 MANAGEMENT STRUC TURE AND PROCEDURES (ONLY TO THE EXTENT RELEVANT IN SINGLE 
ENTITY PROPOSALS)  
As this is a single entity project, the or ganisational structure 
(Figure 5 ) is practical and simple, yet highly effective. The 
Project Manager (PM) for the project is Dr. Edurne Gaston. 
She is the leader of t he Food Technology group in IRIS and a 
highly experienced project manager. She also has strong 
experience in researching the use of HSI technology in food 
processing applications. For the HYPERA® Innovation project, 
Edurne will be responsible for ensuring that the work 
programme adheres to its schedule, fulfils its objectives  
(according to the principles of on -time, on-budget and to high 
quality), and that the project meets the requirements of the 
company. The Project Milestones (Table 3.2 a) will be used as a valuable tool for determining whether or not the project is on schedule. 
She will be responsible for the management of the internal project development team, as well as in managing the relationship with 
stakeholders (early adopters of the HYPERA® system from the IRIS existing client base) who will be involved at different stages of the 
work plan. She will be active in steering the evolution of the project by closely monitoring and controlling the progress of the work, as 
well as the engagements and contributions from the stakeholders. She will be responsible for ensuring that the project is man aged in 
adherence with the internal  project management procedures that are certified by ISO 9001:2008 and UNE -EN-ISO 166002: 
Management Systems for R&D&I, and with support from the IRIS Project Management Office (PMO).  Edurne will also be the interface 
with the sponsors (the European Commis sion) on behalf of IRIS, and she will ensure that all contractual obligations are fulfilled. 
Edurne’s CV in Section 4.1 highlights her proven experience in managing collaborative and B2B R&D projects.   
The IRIS Management Board, Chaired by General Manager , Mr. Colm Digby, will be responsible for the strategic management of 
the project in line with the business and commercial strategy of the company. The IRIS Management Board will take all strateg ic 
decisions in relation to the project (e.g. decisions with regard to any major technical decisions, budgetary decisions, knowledge 
management/IP protection. Decisions will be taken following the normal decision making procedures and voting rights of the IR IS 
Management Board. The PM will formally report the progre ss of the project to the Management Board every month and every quarter 
the budget spend will be reported to the board. Extraordinary meetings with the Management Board will be called as required  to 
address, discuss and arrive at a swift resolution should any extraordinary problems or issues arise. Mr. David Montes, the Technical 
Manager in IRIS, will lead the IRIS Product Development Team that will implement the work according to the project work plan.  He will 
meet with the Project Manager and the developm ent team on a weekly basis for steering technical discussions, monitoring the 
evolution of the work, measuring progress against the work plan, analysing potential risks and bottlenecks, contingency plann ing, etc. 
Issues that could have a strategic or criti cal impact on the project will be reported immediately to the General Manager, who will 
convoke an extraordinary meeting of the Management Board as appropriate. Mrs. Johanna Granda, the Commercial Director at IRIS, 
will lead the Commercialisation team, and she will be responsible for building the sales agent/distribution network internationally as 
well as further developing the business plan (with the inputs and approval of the Management Board). She will also coordinate  with the 
marketing team to ensure th e project dissemination and communication campaigns are aligned with the commercial strategy and she 
will lead the project’s engagement with the ‘first clients'/early adopter end -users (CASA TARRADELLAS, PLATOS TRADICIONALES, 
MARÍN GIMENEZ). Together the T echnical Manager, the Commercial Director will establish the Application Team  that will provide 
technical support to the sales team.  
■APPROPRIATENESS TO T HE COMP LEXITY AND SCALE OF THE PROJECT : The HYPERA® project will be 
managed following the same structure and decision making mechanisms as an internal product development project within IRIS, and 
this is considered as a highly appropriate approach. ■INNOVATION MANAGEMEN T: Innovation Management is a function that 
exists within the IRIS organisation s tructure, and is part of our ‘ UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems for R&D&I’ certification. 
The structure consists of an Innovation Committee  (comprised of the General Manager, Director, Deputy Director and the 
Commercial Director), and an Innovation Unit (which is led by the Innovation Unit Head - a role that is occupied by the Science and 
Technology Manager in IRIS, along with senior scientists, researchers and engineers from the company). The Innovation Committ ee 
(which is an advisory body to the Manage ment Board) meets with the Innovation Unit on a monthly basis in order to track the 
innovation potential of all active projects, to analyse IP, to discuss technology watch, state -of-the-art, competition, and market 
considerations around the R&D lines that the company is actively investing in. The Innovation Unit also assist the Innovation 
Committee in the development, maintenance and updating of the R&D Roadmap and the technology portfolio. The innovation 
management of HYPERA will be performed by these Inno vation Bodies within IRIS. ■CRITICAL RISKS : The critical risks 
(technology-, commercial -, and organisation -related) that could jeopardise this Innovation Project and appropriate risk -mitigation 
FIGURE 5 - MANAGEMENT/ORGANISAT IONAL 
STRUCTURE  

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
26 | P a g e  
 
measures are provided in Table 3.2b. Through Task 8.2, a conti nual process of risk assessment and monitoring will ensure that the 
status of all risks is effectively managed and that action plans for all mitigation measures and contingency plans are implem ented, 
monitored and reported. The process of risk identificati on and management will be based upon the principles and guidelines of the 
FERMA (ISO 31000 related) Standard47.  
  
                                                           
47 Federation of European Risk Management Associations (www.ferma.eu)  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
27 | P a g e  
 
ANNEX 1 - LETTERS OF SUPPORT  
 
 

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
28 | P a g e  
 
 

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
29 | P a g e  
 
  

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
30 | P a g e