4. Members of the consortium .............................................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
4.1 Participants ...................................................................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) .................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
5. Ethics and Security ........................................................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
5.1 Ethics ............................................................................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
5.2 Security ............................................................................................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Annex 1- Letters of SUPPORT ........................................................................................................................................................... 27 

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
2 | P a g e  
 
 
1. EXCELLENCE
1.1 OBJECTIVES  
SUMMARY  
Foreign body presence in foods is among the biggest source of complaint and prosecution in the food industry1. To the food processor 
or manufacturer, foreign body contamination can be costly as a result of product recalls, legal expenses and ultimately, the costs of lost 
reputation and consumer confidence.  There is a growing deman d for affordable and reliable foreign body detection technology that is  
fast enough for its in -process use in modern food processing plants. Through this SME Instrument project,  we, a Spanish advanced 
engineering company specialising in on-line process monitoring and control systems, aim to accelerate the final stages of development 
and gear  up for the commercialisation of a new  hyperspectral imaging (HSI) system  (HYPERA®) for the  cost effective on -line 
detection of foreign bodies and chemical composition analysis that will be targeted to the global food industry.  
Thanks to its novel and disruptive combination of Shortwave Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging (SWIR -HSI) in reflectance with Near 
Infrared Multispectral Imaging (NIR -MSI) in ref lectance/transmittance, the innovative HYPERA system (Figure 1) , which has been 
awarded ‘Seal of Excellence’ certification from the European Commission (see Annex 1), will differentiate itself in the market for its high 
resolution, its ability to penetrate foodstuffs, its composition differentiation, its compact design and affordability, and its high speeds and 
versatility. The system will be deployed with its own software package that will contain specialised chemometric tools, to of fer the food 
industry with a turnkey solution that is readily customisable for foreign body detection of a range of contaminants, in a wide variety of 
matrixes and suitable for integration in multiple modern food processing environments. Building on a prototype system (see fi gure 2 
below), which has been validated to TRL6 as a forerunner to this project, over the course of the Phase 2 SME Instruments, fou r 
application cases will be developed in foreign body detection in pizzas, ready -to-eat (RTE) foods, processed fruit and vegeta bles, and 
cooked meats, whereby the imaging systems will be integrated into a rugged system hardware and the software and chemometrics will 
be further developed installed and trialled in processing lines in the industry in order to demonstrate their correc t functioning in an 
operational environment at pre-commercial scale. Positive results from this industry demonstration work will enable  us to translate the 
prototype to a first commercial system and to ensure that manufacturing issues solved) by the end of the project. 
 
FIGURE 1 - THE HYPERA® HSI FORE IGN BODY DETECTION S YSTEM  
                                                           
1 Rotimi Toki (2016). Foreign Bodies in Foods - Effective Techniques for Prevention, Control and Detection. http://www.compliance4all.com/control/w_product/~product_id=500617LIVE  

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
3 | P a g e  
 
In the immediate post-project phase, we will fine tune as necessary to a full commercial application ensuring that the technology is 
available for consumers by January 2019. In parallel with the product and application development work, we will also prepare for the 
commercialisation phase to deliver on a business plan,  whereby the commercial targets are to sell 500 units in the first 5 years of 
market entry, leading to a cumulative turnover of €46M for that period, and 42 new jobs being created in IRIS.    
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES OF THE PROJECT  
With a view to having a near commercial HYPERA® systems for affordable, rapid and non-destructive foreign body detection in foods 
by the end of this Phase 2 SME Instrument project, the following objectives will be fulfilled during the 24-month workplan: 
1. To develop the overall system specifications and to establish the KPIs for validating the system (Linked to WP1) 
The user requirements of our collaborating early adopters 2 will be systematically established so that detailed system specifications can be 
drawn up: 1) CASA TARRADELLAS, a leading Spanish pizza manufacturer; 2) PLATOS TRADICIONALES, an important Spanish producer 
of Ready-to-Eat (RTE) foods such as lasagne, rice dishes and roast dishes (supplying MERCADONA, one of the leading retail chains in 
Spain); 3) MARÍN GIMENEZ an important Spanish fruit and vegetable p rocessor; and 4) DAWN FARM FOODS from Ireland, a leading 
European supplier of cooked and fermented meat ingredients to the foodservice and manufacturing sectors, as well as a wider group of food 
processors. A key aspect of this process is the early impleme ntation of a pilot test with existing prototype equipment to assist the 
identification of key performance goals. Foreign body detection success criteria should be carefully defined on the basis of considerations 
that take into account their probabilistic nature, which is governed by the Poisson distribution whereby foreign body occurrence is essentially 
a “rare event” if the production process has been designed following a HACCP analysis.  Performance Indicator(s): By M3, the system 
specifications are defined and the KPIs for determining the success of the developed system are established.  
2. To develop the chemometric predictive models for each application (Linked to WP2) 
The aim is to use the New powerful data processing tools will be implemented based on the most recent advancements in chemometrics for 
the high speed and multifunctional chemical analysis of the data coming from the sensors and for minimizing the image distortion caused by 
scattering. In fact, derived from early developments for imaging through both irregular atmospheric paths and biological tissues (medical  
diagnosis), a variety of non -invasive techniques are currently available for overcoming blurred outp uts by means of purely mathematical 
approaches. We will merge such available mathematical tools with chemometric routines in order to simultaneously attain spati al and 
chemical information regardless the scattering due to the nature of the medium. Using the feasibility prototype system in IRIS, initial tests 
with product samples sets from our four beta testing clients will be performed for obtaining test data for the development pr oject and for 
model development. The models relating spectral data will be validated in the laboratory with selected chemical, physical and 
microbiological parameters in selected food matrixes and against available detection methods following traditional (such as artificial vision in 
the VIS range) and laboratory (i.e., destructive inspection scheme) methods. An initial set of lab -scale ready-to-use predictive chemometric 
models will be developed, validated, and pre-installed in the respective HYPERA units to be validated. Novel chemometric methods (MCR -
multivariate curve resolut ion- and MLR –multivariate linear regression - improved with wavelengths selection pre -treatment –genetic 
algorithms- as well as robust classification methods like SVM –support vector machines -) will be implemented for improving accuracy in 
relation to stan dard methods like PLS or PLS -DA, for example. Performance indicator: By M7, digital files for the first versions of each 
model are ready for laboratory validation and by M9, optimised versions are delivered for coding into the system software. 
3. To design and build the instrumentation hardware and software prototype (Linked to WP3) 
The Shortwave Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging (SWIR -HSI) in reflectance with Near Infrared Multispectral Imaging (NIR -MSI) in 
reflectance/transmittance will be scaled up and combined testing performed to verify the effectiveness of the novel combination for  offering 
penetration (NIR) in foodstuffs and for composition differentiation (SWIR) in the target application cases. The industrial HY PERA® system 
will be designed in keeping with industry specifications to deliver the following threshold requirements: a) operation at a speed of 1 m/sec; b) 
penetration at depths of 25 mm (depending on the nature of both foreign body and medium); c) achieving false negative detection rate of <5-
10% of foreign bodies cases which cannot be detected by means of X -ray systems or inductive detectors d) ease of integration into existing 
processing lines. Five functional HSI prototypes will be designed and built (one each for integration into our four food processing end -users- 
CASA TARADELLAS, PLATOS TRADICIONALES, MARÍN GIMENEZ and DAWN FARM FOODS for industry trials)- and one for optimisatio 
work. Each will have extended infrared bands using novel detectors to acquire the most important object features, employing t he latest 
technologies for compact hyperspectral imagers, and such  that the cost of the instrument can be efficiently limited. The system control 
software will be developed, incorporating the chemometric models and the user-friendly User Interface. Performance Indicators: By M10, 
design details, system building instructions and code of the integrated system are ready. By M13, the hardware and software are ready for 
integration. By M16, the integrated system is tested and ready for installation in the industry. By M24 the system has is delivered to TRL8-9.  
4. To integrate the system hardware and software and to perform pre -validation tests to ensure proper functio ning of the hard - 
and software (WP3) 
Performance indicator: By M12, tests with the integrated system confirm readiness for industry integration work to commence and the 
Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) according to ISO 2001:9008 is approved. 
5. To install and trial the HYPERA® system in the food processing industry application cases (Linked to WP4) 
The HYPERA system will be installed in: 1) a pizza processing line of CASA TARRADELLAS for the detection of plastic and other   foreign 
                                                           
2 See letters of support that have been provided by these companies - Annex 1 of this bid 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
4 | P a g e  
 
bodies in pizza, detection of fragments of fruit seeds (kernels) and extrinsic foreign bodies (plastic, stones…); 2) a pa cking line of PLATOS 
TRADICIONALES industry to greatly facilitate quality control (which is currently performed by sampling of raw materials, X -Ray and metal 
detectors and tedious visual inspection); 3) in fresh cut fruit conveyor at MARÍN GIMENEZ; and, 4) in one of the cook lines at DAWN FARM 
FOODS, whereby they are mainly concerned with plastic detection. We will extensively test the prototypes and evaluate their p erformance 
during commercial processing for foreign body detection according to the pre -defined KPIs. Comparisons will be made with conventional 
quality control methods in use at each plants in order to industrially validate the system. Necessary modifications will be identified to improve 
the productised system. Performance Indicators: By M14, the systems are successfully installed at the facilities of our 4 early adopters is 
obtained from each of the sites. By M24, the impacts and KPIs of having the systems installed and in operation for 10 months are quantified 
and compared vs. historian data.      
6. To demonstrate to food processors the ease of integration of the system, and its advantages for rapid, non -destructive 
foreign body detection during commercial processing (Linked to WP4) 
A public workshop will be organis ed by IRIS to showcase the system in operation targeting the Quality Managers from the food industry . 
Results of the long term operational tests at the industry test sites will be presented by our collaborating End Users. To facilitate 
demonstrations a pil ot scale installation will be provided. Performance Indicators: By M24, the system is demonstrated to >150 food 
processing companies and actors from the value chain.  
7. To translate the validated prototype designs to a product through the creation of the ma nufacturing documentation package 
using the engineering information and specifications and to establish the manufacturing. (Linked to WP5) 
Standardisation and regulatory issues will be addressed to ensure compliance with production conditions.  The aim is to reach Technology 
Readiness Level 8/9 and to arrive at MRL9 -10, whereby the manufacturing infrastructure can be set up in order to be in a position to serve 
first orders by January 2019. Performance Indicators: By M19, the product manufacturi ng documentation packages are passed to 
purchasing and production engineering to enable manufacture. By M23, the first 5 product units pass the quality assurance tests. 
8. To gear up to the market (Linked to WP6) 
This will involved the establishment of the HYPERA Application Team, the training of the Sales Team, the finalization of the pricing structure 
and policy, and the commercial/distribution networks for delivering on the sales targets in our business plan . Performance Indicators: By 
M22 the Application Team is in place and trained, the first tier commercial network is in place and our pricing has been vali dated for timely 
progression to the Commercialisation Phase.  
PROBLEM OR BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY   
Food safety and quality control are essential parts of the food industry.  EU has one of the highest food safety standards in the world – 
largely thanks to the solid set of EU legislation in place, which ensures that food is safe for consumers . Food processors are mandated 
by law to produce safe foods; EU legislation requires that food complies with various hygiene regulations specifying that food must be 
safe. All potential hazards must be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level. A key tool to ensure the cross -border follow of 
information to swiftly react when risks to public health are detected in the food chain is RASFF – the Rapid Alert System for Food and 
Feed. 
Foreign body detection  in food products is a priority for every established food producer. Foreign bodies can be present  in products 
from the field (stones, metal, insects, undesirable vegetable matter such as thorns or wood, dirt, or small animals), and can  also result 
from processing and handling (bone, glass, metal, wood, nuts, bolts, screening, cloth, grease, paint chip s, rust, and so on). While the 
unit operations in processing plants should be designed to remove or e liminate these physical hazards, despite the best efforts of 
producers, foreign bodies can be present in food that reaches the consumers, leading to injury (sometimes death, especially in infants), 
loss of loyalty, product rejections and recalls. Indeed, foreign body contamination is recognised as one of the most common 
reasons for food product recalls3.  
There has been a dramatic increase in the number of food recalls over the last few years, contributing factors including the increasingly 
global and complex food supply chain.  Recent h igh profile  and large scale recalls include the countless recalls as a result of the 
horsemeat scandal in Europe, the intentional shipment of salmonella contaminated peanut products by the Pe anut Corporation of 
America, the recall of over a half billion fresh eggs from Wright County Egg and Hillandale Farms in the US, to mention but a few.  
While food recalls are first and forem ost a public health issue, they also pose significant economic impacts. In fact, product recalls 
are considered one of the biggest threats to profitability for the food industry 4. According to a joint industry study by the Food 
Marketing Institute and the Grocery Manufacturers’ Association, the average cost of a recall to a food company has been estimated at 
$10M in direct costs5, in addition to brand damage and lost sales (while this is a US study its results are transferable to the international 
context). For SMEs this could put them out of business. The costs for larger brands may be significantly higher based on the 
preliminary recall costs reported by firms of some recent recalls 6. In short, the impacts can be devastating for food manufacturers and 
can cost them millions in damages and lost revenue, as well as severely damaging brand image that can take years to recover.  
                                                           
3 Aoife A. Gowen, Colm P. O’Donnell (2013). Near infrared hyperspectral imaging for foreign body detection and identification in food processing. Spectroscopy Europe. VOL. 25 NO. 6 (2013). Pages 6-11 
4 Food Defense Whitepaper Series: Part Two. Recall: The Food Industry’s Biggest Threat to Profitability. TYCO Integrated Security 
5 “Recall Execution Effectiveness: Collaborative Approaches to Improving Consumer Safety and Confidence,” Deloitte on behalf of the Food Marketing Institute (“FMI”), the Grocery Manufacturers Association (“GMA”), and GS1 U.S., June 2010 
6 SAGE Food Safety Consultants 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
5 | P a g e  
 
The industry's key focus is to prevent these problems and incidences from ever occurring in the first place . Consequently, 
manufacturers and producers are increasingly investing in identification methods of foreign bodies  in order to protect their brands and 
for obtaining third -party certification to demonstrate their compliance with legal food safety requirements, to promote customer 
confidence and brand value.7 Glass, metal and plastic are the most frequently cited foreign bodies in processed foods3. Currently, there 
are multipl e types of foreign body detection systems available in the market ranging from simple to complex. Metal detectors are 
commonly implemented in food processing chains to prevent metal fragments occurring in finished products; however, these 
instruments are not capable of detecting glass, plastic and other contaminants in food. X -ray transmission radiography has long been 
used for online detection of foreign bodies in food products relying on the absorption contrast between the foreign body and food 
product8. While X-ray can detect a variety of foreign bodies such as glass, dense plastic, conglomerations, bones, and other objects 
with different densities, they cannot always detect very small contaminants such as hair, fine glass, or low -density contaminants such 
as cardboard, wood or insects9. Moreover X-ray is expensive and poses safety concerns.  
HOW OUR SOLUTION SOLVES THE PROBLEM OR AVAILS OF  THE BUSINESS OPPORTU NITY  
In order to bridge a market gap for improved, affordable, rapid, non -destructive techniques for foreign body detection and 
identification, and for real-time chemical composition analysis in products in the food 
industry, IRIS is developing a hyperspectral imaging (HSI)- based system for foreign body 
detection in foods. HSI integrates both spectroscopic and computer vision techniques in 
one system for providing both spectral and spatial inf ormation simultaneously. This 
combination of imaging and spectroscopy enables enhanced non -destructive analysis of 
materials3. One major advantage of HSI over other methods of foreign body detection is 
the ability to detect, as well as classify, foreign bodies according to their spectral 
properties3. In short, if conventional spectroscopy is a technique to provide the answer to 
the question of “What”, and conventional computer vision is a technique to provide the 
answer to the question of “Where”, HSI provides the answer to the question of “Wh ere Is 
What”.  
When combined with chemometric (i.e. multivariate) analysis, HSI can be applied 
for prediction of the concentration and distribution of multiple components in a 
sample. This makes the technique attractive for many routine quality inspections  
within the food industry , such as body detection in food processes 3. Recently, the 
technique has been widely studied for its applications in the food industry  (discussed in 
more detail in Section 1.4) and p ositive results have been shown for example for the 
ability of HSI to identify glass, rubber, plastic, and other objec ts on the surface and 
subsurface of various food matrixes.  
Numerous experimental and engineering research in the field of HSI have resulted in 
many successful applications in the food and pharm aceutical quality control. Despite 
striking advantages of HSI, such as its chemical -free, non-destructive detecting nature, 
together with the abundant information provided that enables multiple quality features to 
be examined10, moving this technology from the laboratories to the industry production lines poses a real challenge . This is 
mainly due to the  low cost-efficiency of current HSI systems  and the insufficient speed and accuracy of analysing complex 
information. In particular, the rich information req uired for high accuracy, and the simplified design of the instrument to ensure high 
speeds and low cost, are currently contradictory industrial demands. Solutions are needed that displace this contradiction. T his is the 
proposition of the HYPERA® system, w hereby we bring a revolutionary new vision of real -time quality and safety assessment to the 
food and pharmaceutical industries.  Our solution is based on  a series of revolutionary design thinking concepts and developments 
(Table 1). 
TABLE 1 - REVOLUTIONARY NATURE OF THE HYPERA  SYSTEM  
1. “Specialised food assessment hyperspectral imager” vs. a “general hyperspectral imager for the food industry” that can perfor m a 
multifunctional and highly efficient inspection at significantly low cost  
A number of hyperspectra l imagers for food inspection have been developed over the last 5 -7 years (see Table 4 in Section 2). However these 
systems use the same principles and working modes as classical remote sensing hyperspectral systems, typically acquiring a lo t of superfluou s 
information, which occupies a large part of the system resources and reduces the working speed. Based on the in -depth analysis of the industrial 
demands (whereby for example we take into account the lower resolution requirements for food inspection vis -à-vis that offered by general 
                                                           
7 Frost & Sullivan, Breakthrough Technologies Enabling Food Safety.  
8 Mikkel Schou Nielsen, et. al. (2013). X-ray dark-field imaging for detection of foreign bodies in food. Food Control. Volume 30, Issue 2, April 2013, Pages 531–535 
9 Melissa Lind (2013). 5 Methods For Foreign Body Contamination Detection. July 30, 2014. Available at: http://www.foodonline.com/doc/five-methods-for-foreign-body-contamination-detection-0001  
10 Yuan-Yuan Pu, Yao-Ze Feng andDa-Wen Sun (2015). Recent Progress of Hyperspectral Imaging on Quality and Safety Inspection of Fruits and Vegetables: A  Review. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science 
and Food Safety. Volume 14, Issue 2, pages 176–188, March 2015. DOI: 10.1111/1541-4337.12123 
FIGURE 2 - HYPERA PROTOTYPE 
INSTALLED IN A MINI PILOT 
LINE  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
6 | P a g e  
 
hyperspectral imagers , and inspired by recent research results that have indicated that only a small number of spectral band s and potentially a 
special region of interest (ROI) will be enough for each function, employing the l atest technologies for compact hyperspectral imagers we have 
designed and built a hyperspectral imaging system (currently at TRL6) based on an affordable and flexible design concept that  has been 
conceived for its suitability for industrial lines. 
2. Combination of chemometric tools and hyperspectral imager design for increased efficiency in terms of data acquisition and 
analysis to enable high processing speeds 
Chemometrics is an essential tool for extracting useful information from massive spectral data of hyperspectral images, and there have been 
many applications of chemometrics to food and pharmaceutical products together with hyperspectral imagery. Unfortunately, how ever, each 
present chemometric method can only satisfy a few purposes with specif ic observing wavelengths, resulting in a low universality and efficiency of 
the system. Meanwhile, the analysis of huge amounts of data causes a low inspection speed that does not meet the demands of i ndustry 
production lines. The combination of chemometri c tools and hyperspectral imager design, however, is a potential way to significantly increase the 
efficiency of data acquisition and analysis by selecting useful spectral bands to read out according to the chemometric requi rements. In doing so, 
the data volumes of both the instrument and the data processing system will be greatly reduced, resulting in shorter detecting periods making it 
possible to realise real-time assessment for production lines. 
3. Obtaining more information by extending the observing spe ctral range 
Extending the observing spectral range to infrared bands has been investigated as a potential way for obtaining more informat ion. Over the last 3 
years, visible and near -infrared (VNIR, 400 –1000nm) as well as short -wave infrared (SWIR, 900 –2300nm) HSI inspection systems have been 
active fields of research. These systems integrate VIS, NIR and SWIR ranges within the same hypercube (dataset); however, suc h ranges are not 
totally compatible in terms of penetration and composition. These existing m ulti-range systems are only suitable for some infrequent situations 
when a trade -off among the specific optical features of each spectral range can be achieved. HYPERA® on the other hand combines NIR and 
SWIR ranges in two solidary but independent modules that sum up the advantages of each region as each module is optimized in terms of 
lighting, signal gain and raw data processing methods. Moreover, the extended detecting spectral range will give the chemomet ric tools more 
available spectral bands to choose  from and will allow the system to integrate a variety of chemometric methods and select different ones for 
various purposes and objects, thereby realising multifunctional inspection.  
4. A powerful HSI software for acquiring hypercubes and visualizing foreign bodies or irregular spatial distribution of components 
and for improving the imaging capabilities and minimising the scattering effect  
Seamless compatibility with the only chemometric suite in the market (SOLO + MIA, Eigenvector Research Inc) that  includes tools for 
hyperspectral models. We will also incorpoporate MCR routines in Matlab. The compatibility with SOLO implies compatibility with Matlab and this 
converts our software in a semi -open tool, which permit limitless future applications that c an be incorporated based on the latest achievements 
generated in the academic world.   
In order to respond to a growing market demand for equipment that can assist food processors in guaranteeing the quality and safety 
of their fo ods and protecting their brands, this Innovation project will significantly advance the state -of-the-art by developing  and 
bringing to market a multifunctional, high speed HSI system suitable for quality control in production lines in the food and 
pharmaceutical industries, whereby the  cost will be significantly lower and the performance will be higher than the 
commercially available systems . As such, o ur project relates well with the SMEInst-07-2016-2017 work programme topic  
‘Stimulating the innovation potential of SMEs for sustainable and competitive agriculture, forestry, agri -food and bio -based 
sectors’, whereby we will contribute to the supply of safe, healthy and high quality food, through the development and deployment of a 
resource-efficient eco -innovative food process ing system. Moreover, HYPERA is in line with the  wider objectives of H2020’s 
Leadership in Enabling Technologies (LEIT) work programme, as it leverages photonics and ICT KETs (Key Enabling Technologies) to 
drive forward advanced processing technologies for improved industrial competitiveness. It is also in line with the Industry 4.0 paradigm, 
as it will contribute to food (and pharmaceutical) processors adopting data-driven production processes. 
OBJECTIVES AND EXPEC TED OUTCOME OF THE I NNOVATION BUSINESS PROJECT  
IRIS is positioning itself as an emerging player in the advanced monitoring and control space, whereby we have been offering bespoke 
turnkey on-line process monitoring solutions to a growing client base  in the food, and more recently in the pharmaceutical, industries. 
From a business perspective, our goal through this project is to complete the development of a commercial HYPERA® HSI hardware 
and software system by the end of the Phase 2, to have the manufacturing set up with the first product units  manufactured and quality 
approved, and to have finalis ed and validated our business model and pricing structure. The Phase 2 project enables us to accelerate 
this work so that we can be ready for market launch in Jan 2019; this acceleration will allow us to seize the market opportunity as early 
as possible and to be first to market with an affordable hyperspectral imaging system that is suited for in-line foreign body detection and 
chemical composition analysis in food processing. In parallel to the produc t development itself, we will also establish an Application 
Team (an internal team that will support sales and deployment activities: testing materials, performing detailed site visits,  installing the 
systems, provide training and handling both site and re mote customer support, etc.), and we will have our first tier international sales 
network established for Ireland & UK, Spain, Germany and Central Europe, the US and China. We will also work on comme rcialization 
planning for realis ing o ur business plan obj ectives of 500  units being sold (in Europe and worldwide) during the first 5 years of 
commercialization (rational provided in Section 2.2), which will translate into a cumulative turnover of €46 M (generated from 2019 to 
2023) and will enable 42 new jobs to be created in IRIS over that same period.  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
7 | P a g e  
 
  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
8 | P a g e
1.2 RELATION TO THE WORK PROGRAMME  
This proposal relates to SMEInst-07-2016-2017 work programme topic ‘Stimulating the innovation potential of SMEs for 
sustainable and competitive agriculture, forestry, agri-food and bio-based sectors’.
1.3 CONCEPT AND APPR OACH  
(A) CONCEPT  
CURRENT STAGE OF DEV ELOPMENT OF THE BUSI NESS INNOVATION PROJ ECT  
TAB LE 2 - SUMMARY OF APPLICATI ON TRIALS PERFORMED WITH THE HYPERA  PROTOTYPE TO TRL6  
Trial  Discussion/Results 
Detection of 
Polytetrafluoroet
hylene (PTFE) 
pieces in pizza 
toppings 
There is a risk of finding small (1 -3 cm) 
irregular Teflon pieces that drop from 
grinders and that can be easily mistaken for 
white cheese cubes in the topping. Trials 
with samples from CASA TARRADELLAS 
using the HYPERA SWIR hyperspectral 
prototype verified the ability to easily detect 
Teflon pieces after applying chemometrics 
(see image).  
Detection of 
small metal 
bodies in 
between sliced 
ham layers  
Small meta l bodies cannot be easily detected by metal 
detectors based on RF due to the minimum size and mass 
limit of detection of such a technology. The significant 
penetration of NIR radiation allows such bodies to be 
distinguished as they are totally opaque and c ontrast against 
the surrounding homogeneous and transmissive milieu. The 
image shows a thin metal disk (coin) hidden in a 1 -cm thick 
layered cooked ham. No chemometric pretreatment was 
required for unveiling the body because of the significant 
meat transparency at NIR range. 
Detection of 
Anarsia lineatella 
in Prunus 
persica 
The peach worm (peach twig borer, Anarsia Lineatella Zeller ) is a major 
pest of stone fruits, such as peaches, nectarines and apricots . Q uality 
control of processed peach pieces is currently carried out by means of 
human inspection.  However, there are no relevant colour differences 
between peach worms and peach pieces, making  difficult human -eye-
based larvae detection.  Typical pieces of peach –taken from the 
processing line- have been analysed with the HYPERA syste m: as peach 
worms differ in terms of chemical composition  from the peach pieces, the 
peach worm can be easily detected. F at, proteins and wate r are major 
components of worms, whereas peaches are mainly made of sugars, 
cellulose and water. 
Discrimination of 
beef vs. 
horsemeat and 
identification of 
the lowest 
percentage of 
minced meat 
adulteration that 
can be reliably 
detected.  
HSI in the NIR region is adequate for the detection of meat adulteration with a precision of 8.8% in a range of 0 to 100% usi ng a PLS 
model with a R2 of 0.94 and a RMSEP of 4.4. The HSI image prediction is able to detect meat adulteration as well as to study the 
sample heterogeneity and thus the meat mixture and the procedure elaboration effectiveness . Results show the promise of 

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
9 | P a g e  
 
establishing a rapid and non -invasive technique that can give rapid results. Meat image prediction. Image on the left corresponds to 
a 5% horsemeat, the middle image corresponds to a 50% of horsemeat and the image on the right side corresponds to a 95% 
horsemeat. 
This action is built on an internal development programme undertaken by IRIS to combine two complementary features of near infrared 
spectroscopy according to the spectral range for in-depth penetration (NIR) and compositional information (SWIR). To date a prototype 
unit has been designed and built and integrated into a mini -pilot processing line (see Figure 2 above), and a proprietary Hyperspectral 
Imaging acquisition and chemometrics software has also been developed to beta level for acquiring hypercubes and visualizing foreign 
bodies or irregular spatial distribution of components and for improving the imaging capabilities and minimising the scatteri ng effect (a 
screenshot of the main window can be seen in the image on the cover page and the impro ved setup for SWIR diffuse reflectance 
acquisition is also shown). This integrated system (HSI system combined with chemometrics) has been validated in  conjunction with 
food industry partners for numerous applications using client samples, as is summarised in Table 2.   
POSITIONING OF THE OF THE BUSINESS INNO VATION PROJECT  
The starting point for the technological developments involved in HYPERA® are at sufficiently high Technology Readiness Level s 
(TRLs), i.e. TRL6/7, for their acceleration to the market an d ensuring a swift time-to-commercialisation (by Jan 2019). Over the course 
of the Phase 2 SME Project, building on the existing prototype system that has been developed by IRIS (see figure 2 above), and 
already tested in intended food processing environments close to expected performance (TRL6), four applications will be developed in 
foreign body detection in pizzas, fruit, cooked meats, and Ready -to-Eat meals, and the systems will be installed, validated and 
demonstrated in the industry in order to demonstrate their correct operation in an operational environment at pre -commercial scale 
(TRL7). Positive results from this industry demonstration work will enable us to translate the prototype to a first commercial system and 
to ensure that manufactur ing issues solved (TRL8) by the end of the project. In the 6 -9 month project phase, we will fine tune as 
necessary to a full commercial application ensuring that the technology is available for consumers (TRL9) by Jan 2019. The sub-units 
of the HYPERA solution are each positioned with respect to their current TRLs and the expected TRLs by the end of this project (Table 
3).  
TABLE 3 - TRL ADVANCEMENTS THR OUGH THIS PROJECT  
System sub-units Current TRL TRL at end of project 
Shortwave Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging (SWIR-HSI) in reflectance  TRL6 TRL8/9 
Near Infrared Multispectral Imaging (NIR-MSI) in reflectance/transmittance  TRL6 TRL8/9 
Chemometric software TRL7 TRL9 
(B) METHODOLOGY  
CONCEPT AND ACTIVITIES THAT WILL  BE IMPLEMENTED DURING T HE PROJECT  
Our project concept is now to further develop the HYPERA® system hardware and software in order to advance the TRLs to 8/9 - i.e., 
to complete the development of a system suitable for  being successfully commercialised- and to demonstrate a system that is capable 
of tackling the widest set of typical foreign body detection challenges. In relation to our project approach to the work, our HYPERA 
project follows an application-oriented product development approach , which will involve a tight co -creation between the 
development team and our industry end-users (CASA TARRADELLAS, PLATOS TRADICIONALES, MARÍN GIMENEZ, DAWN FARM 
FOODS). These beta clients permit the p roject to use real applications as a basis for the development  (a s ummary of the target 
applications is provided in Table 4).  
TABLE 4 - TARGET APPLICATIONS FOR THE PHASE 2  PROJECT  
Company Sector/Target Products Target Foreign bodies Installation  
CASA 
TARRADELLAS 
Pizza Pieces of plastic from the packaging of topping 
components, wood, insects and PTFE pieces from cheese 
grinders in a variety of different toppings (more than 10 
types) 
At the end of the production line –after completing topping- just 
before the packaging machine.  Alarm to activate manual sorting 
of suspicious unit for further detailed visual inspection.  
PLATOS 
TRADICIONALES  
Ready-to-Eat (RTE) foods 
such as lasagne, rice 
dishes and roast dishes 
Plastic pieces and films, rubber, thread, insects, stones, 
wood, paper, hair, etc. 
At the end of the production line just before the packaging 
machine (sealing).  Alarm to activate manual sorting of 
suspicious unit for further detailed visual inspection. 
MARÍN GIMENEZ Processed fruit and 
vegetables 
Fragments of fruit pits and kernels, worms and larvae  Once the fruits have been cut in dices, just before packaging the 
product in cans. Identification of the suspected body for 
removing it and the surrounding bodies by means an existing 
sorter. 
DAWN FARM 
FOODS 
Cooked and fermented 
meat ingredients  
 
Plastic pieces and films, rubber and fragments of bones At the end of the production line just before the packaging 
machine (sealing).  Alarm to activate manual sorting of 
suspicious unit for further detailed visual inspection 
Using a feasibility prototype syste m that is available in IRIS (see figure 2  above) we will undertake an initial demonstration of the 
system on the applications to provide test data for the development project. An iterative product development cycle will be implemented 
to design and produce beta prototype systems that will be installed at each of our  end-user sites as test case s for performance 
verification, the success of which will confirm the acceptance of the prototype designs. Having validated the se designs we will 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
10 | P a g e  
 
translate the prototy pes to product through the creation of the manufacturing documentation package using the engineering 
information and specifications and we will set up our manufacturing facilities and produce and quality approve the first units . In parallel 
to the product development activities we will also implement market development activities , whereby based on planning within the 
framework of the classical 4 Ps (Product, Pricing, Promotion and Place)  Marketing Mix, we will perform comprehensive activities to 
gear up for the Commercialisation phase.   
In relation to methodologies that will be used during the development work, our teams operate under agile frameworks, whereby  
Kanban is employed  for hardware developments, and Scrum and Test Driven Development (TDD) for soft ware developments. 
Whenever creative thinking is needed, particularly for ideating specific solutions that cannot be addressed by finding a simple tradeoff 
among several technical constraints, the development will be based on TRIZ (Theory of the resolution of invention-related tasks), which 
is a widely recognized methodology for accelerating and simplifying the search for inventive and innovative solutions and a scientifically 
founded approach to the forecasting of the evolution of technological systems, pr oducts and processes 11. The IRIS TRIZ Team has 
been properly trained by recognized members of ETRIA (European TRIZ Association 12) for undertaking creative challenges associated 
to R&D tasks. The TRIZ approach will be particularly convenient for finding flexi ble (versatile) designs compatible with the most of the 
applications to be addressed by HYPERA. 
HOW THE PROJECT CONC EPT AND OBJECTIVES F IT INTO THE OVERALL PLAN TO REACH THE MA RKET  
The HYPERA concept and the planned development is oriented towards market t akeup; so this is a core business objective and the 
ultimate goal of the project. Our application -focussed approach will enable us to gear up for sales in foreign body detection in food 
processing applications which will be supported by clearly presented a pplication notes that clearly demonstrate the technical 
performance and benefits of the use of the HYPERA system. These validated applications will demonstrate: reliability, repeatability, the 
robustness of the device, its operational and industrial -level performance, its translation to product and establishing the manufacturing 
are all important steps of a development on its way towards commercialisation. With an injection of funds, and by gearing up right from 
system specifications, through design, prototyping, industry trials in compliance with all industry standards and regulatory requirements, 
we will ensure that there are no user-, technical-, market- or regulatory- obstacles to the uptake of the technology in the marketplace. 
Finally, our commercialisation-related activities will also be fundamental towards leading to effective market takeup. As such, IRIS will 
set up an Applications Team to support the Sales Team (this is important given that we are dealing with a process anal ytical system 
that will always require some level of customisation for a specific application, as well as specialist installation and ongoing support). We 
will also validate our pricing strategy, prepare our sales agent/distribution networks (our existing distributorships and new ones), and 
prepare all aspects of our market launch (first devices, replacement stocks, catalogues, datasheets, pricelists, etc.).    
HOW THE PROJECT DEVE LOPS SOMETHING NEW T O EUROPE AND ADDRESS ES EU -WIDE CHALLENGES  
Food safety concerns, accentuated by recent crises, have undermined public confidence in the capacity of the food industry and public 
authorities to ensure that food is safe, and are therefore high on consumer, political and food industry agendas worldwide 13. 
Assuring food safety and improving quality in the European food supply chain is of primary importance. The EC has identified food 
safety as one of its top priorities and, with Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 adopted by the European Parliament and the Council on 28 
January 2002, it laid down the general principles and requirements of food law. Food security  is also identified as one of the key 
societal challenges to be addressed during Horizon 202014. The ability to leverage the SME Instrument to accelerate the transformation 
of new knowledge for industry to conceive and develop new products, industrial processes and services, is an important tool f or 
creating a true Innovation Union: a European Union that thanks to its research and innovation performance can sup port sustainable 
growth. The H YPERA® project will output a European developed and manufactured specialised food  assessment hyperspectral 
imaging system that will respond to growing demand in Europe and globally for automatic food inspection technology that  is cost 
effective, reliable, and is capable of keeping up with the speed of modern food processing lines.  
From the technology side, photonics is regarded as a driver of innovation and plays an important “enabler” role for many industrial 
and customer mar kets. With a worldwide market value projected to hit €615 billion in 2020 and to remain stronger than the gross 
domestic product (GDP), photonics has moved from a niche application to a key enabling technology, according to Photonics Ind ustry 
Report 2013. The European photonics industry holds about 55 % of the world market in production technology. HYPERA® will advance 
the suitability of HSI for food processing applications in spectroscopy to increase EU competitiveness in the photonics field  by, as was 
seen in Table 1 earlier . By scaling up and integrating these novel combination of technologies into the HYPERA® system, we are 
bringing a technological evolution in photonics to lower the cost of the technology so that HSI spectroscopic technology can be broadly 
adopted as a system for the real-time monitoring of quality, safety, as well as the nutritional (through chemical composition analysis) 
                                                           
11 TRIZ. Innovation and Inventive Problem Solving Handbook", Pavel Livotov and Vladimir Petrov ©TriS Europe, Berlin 2 014. www.tris-europe.com 
12 http://etria.eu/portal/ 
13 http://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/food/policy/index_en.htm  
14 Brussels, 30.11.2011. COM(2011) 808 final.. Horizon 2020 - The Framework Programme for Research and Innovation 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
11 | P a g e  
 
and commercial properties of a wide variety of food products during all steps along the production chain. As such, t he innovation 
impacts of this project are high, as the knowledge generated will be industrialised and taken to market by IRIS.  
From the application side , a technology that can increase food  quality and safety, protect food producers and their brands, and 
ultimately contribute to raising  consumer confidence in the food industry is of high added value for Europ e, especially when we 
consider the importance of the food supply chain in the context of the European economy, whereby it connects the agricultural, food 
processing and distribution sectors that together constitute more than 7% of European employment. More specifically, the EU food and 
drink industry alone provides jobs for more than 4 million people in 310,000 companies, generating a turnover in excess  of €965 billion 
each year and serving over 500 million consumers 15. However, growth in value -added and labour productivity within the EU food 
industry is outpaced by that of the United States  and at world level, EU food products are losing market share to Brazil, Canada 
and Australia. HYPERA® will contribute to leadership in enabling and industrial technologies , which is synergistic with one of the 
priorities of H2020 for contributing to industrial leadership in Europe. To survive in an increasingly globalised and competitive market, 
agro-related enterprises have to form and count on close associations with clients and suppliers, whereby product quality and safe ty 
are increasingly intrinsic with such relationships. In fact, the EC appointed High Level Group on the Competitiveness of the Agro -Food 
Industry16 has urged the EU to maintain a high level of food safety and quality standards , and has identified a strong need for an 
improved innovation framework and targeted actions on the numerous SMEs in the sector and on the performance of the EU agro-food 
industry on world markets. Solutions such as HYPERA®, which are founded on a growing need faced by industry and the potential to 
apply knowledge for obtaining ambitious technological advances, to bring to market technologies that are accessible to wide 
communities of SMEs and can and improve the competitive capacities of the EU food and dr ink industry, will play a central role in 
treading this line between guaranteeing consumers the safest and most affordable food products possible while also ensuring t hat 
Europe’s food sector is as efficient, competitive and balanced as it can be. As was mentioned, technologies such as HYPERA will help 
companies transition to the Industry 4.0 paradigm. 
HOW GENDER ANALYSIS IS TAKEN INTO ACCOUN T IN THE PROJECT’S C ONTENT  
We will consider gender related design features, whereby the needs of female line operator s will be analysed in cooperation with our 
end-user early adopter companies, so that any gender -specific design features can be embedded. As such, d uring the co -creation 
process in WP1, female engineers/developers, as well as female professionals from the food industry will be involved to ensure gender 
related aspects are picked up. Moreover in relation to  business behaviour and decision making, gender analysis will also be important, 
especially in view of growing trends and commitments to see more women occupy high level and decision-making positions in industry. 
There is also a gender consideration in relation to our communication activities towards consumers, whereby our ability to su ccessfully 
inform and generate awareness among female consumers (many of  whom are still key household consumption decision makers) will 
be important. It is noteworthy that our Project Manager is a highly qualified female professional (Dr. Edurne Gaston),  who is also a 
recent mother. N umerous other members of the team  are female, such as the Commercial Director (Johanna Granda), among key 
researchers and engineers who will be working on the project  (see section 4.1). With regard to the employment opportunities that will 
be generated in IRIS for the implementation of the innovation project, and subsequent jobs through the commercialisation of the project 
outputs, a recruitment policy will be in place designed to ensure a reasonable level of balance between the sexes.
1.4 AMBITION  
NOVELTY OF THE INNOV ATION BUSINESS PROJE CT 
In terms  of a ‘business project’, IRIS has the ambition to  bridge the ‘integration gap’  that prevents the adoption of photonics in 
industry. The typical HSI landscape in Europe is made up of very competent providers of imaging cameras (such as INNOSPEC, 
SPECIM), providers of chemometric software (such as Perception Park), along with distributors of cameras and chemometric soft ware. 
There is a distinct lack of solutions providers offering turnkey solutions to industry. IRIS has i dentified a clear market opportunity, 
not only among the SME sector but also among the enterprises sector as well, for customised monitoring technology that shifts  the 
emphasis from “device” to “fully integrated turnkey solution” based on tailoring the dev ice to the line and to the specific operating 
environment of the client. Key to mainstreaming affordable monitoring solutions for industry is building flexible and reliable platforms 
based on novel combinations of spectroscopic analysers and chemometric da ta processing tools  that can effectively analyse 
the data, to deliver fast and reliable readings in real -time, to facilitate rapid calibration of the HYPERA® hardware that lends itself to 
easy set-up and customisation to specific client inspection and monitoring needs and industrial environments.  
Our vision is for the HYPERA® brand to become a leading global reference for highly affordable, rapid, accurate and high 
performance real-time food quality inspection turnkey solutions  that are supported by reliable integration, data management and 
maintenance services. Such a vision is fundamental for the widespread uptake of HSI equipment in the industry, whereby food 
processors typically lack the specialised in -house resources to be able to confidently invest in  and set up high -end spectroscopy real-
                                                           
15 Nurturing the competitiveness of the European food industry (07.10.10) Enterprise & Industry magazine (http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/e_i/index_en.htm), © EU, 2008 - 2010 
16 Commission Decision No 2008/359/EC of 28 April 2008. 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
12 | P a g e  
 
time inspection systems. HYPERA® will position IRIS  in the global food industry  as a 
leading European solutions provider of affordable, fully integrated HSI systems for the 
rapid, non-destructive detection of foreign bodies and chemical composition analysis in 
foodstuffs.        
EXPECTED MARKET APPL ICATION THAT DIFFERE NTIATES THE 
PROJECT AND PROVIDES  THE HIGHEST ADDED VA LUE  
As has been discussed, our application oriented development is centred on food 
inspection. The original and innovative nature of the HYPERA® system is hinged on 
the necessity to provide the food industry with an affordable, high performance, rapid, 
accurate and multifunctional HSI inspection system that can be easily integrated 
into food production lines (and in quick succession the pharmaceutical industry) for the detection of foreign bodies and for chemical 
composition monitoring during food processing . The system is founded on the promising results to TRL6 of the highly novel 
combination of Shortw ave Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging (SWIR -HSI) in reflectance with Near Infrared Multispectral Imaging (NIR -
MSI) in reflectance/transmittance and integrated chemometric software.  
Recently, optical sensing technologies such as spectroscopy and imaging have been investigated as potential tools for the non -
destructive evaluation and inspection for food quality and safety. Spectroscopy is a widely recognised technique for quality inspection 
based on the measurement of optical properties of food products  (Cen & He, 2007). Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) is rapid, non-
destructive, and relatively easy to implement for on -line and off -line applications. More importantly, NIRS has the potential for 
simultaneously measuring multiple quality attributes . However, whil e with these spectroscopic techniques it is possible to obtain 
information about the sample components based on the light absorption of the sample, it is not easy to know the position/location 
information. On the other hand, measurement of the spatial feat ures of food products can be achieved by conventional imaging 
system or more specifically computer vision with the minimum of human intervention  (Du 
& Sun, 2006b ). Yet, with computer vision systems , while it is easy to know the 
position of certain features , it is not easy to conduct the quantitative analysis of a component. Moreover, because it is operating at 
visible wavelengths in the forms of monochromatic or colour images, a conventional imaging system is incapable of inspecting 
specimens with similar c olour, classifying complex objectives, predicting internal attributes (e.g. chemical components) that are less 
relevant to colour, and in detecting defects not visible to the human eye.  
As seen,  Hyperspectral imaging (HSI)  combines imaging and spectroscopy for enhanced non -destructive analysis of materials 3. 
Looking deeper at this concept, for a hyperspectral image, the complete wavelength spectrum of a sample over the spectral range is 
obtained at each point in the imaging plane. On the basis of the combination of the series of images, a fourth dimensional 
“hyperspectral cu be” can be established (figure 3 ), which includes one dimension representing spectral information, two other 
dimensions for describing spatial information and the last dimens ion contains the optical signal level (sample radiance). In this cube, 
each 2D-image point (or pixel) has both spatial and spectral signature (spectrum) information. Therefore, HSI has the capability to 
capture both physical and morphological characteristi cs such as colour, size, shape, and texture, and some intrinsic 
chemical and molecular information (such as water, fat, and protein) from a food product. When combined with chemometric (i.e. 
multivariate) analysis, HSI can be applied for prediction of the concentration and distribution of multiple components in a sample 3. This 
makes the technique very attractive for foreign body detection in food pr ocesses, whereby HSI can detect, as well as classify, foreign 
bodies according to their spectral properties. Recently, the technique has been widely studied for its applications in the food industry, 
from non -destructive assessment of mushroom quality and shelf-life prediction 17, objective and quantitative determination of meat 
quality, including beef, pork, and lamb 18, inspection of moisture and fat contents 19, nematodes 20, and blood spots 21, freshness 
detection22 and production line sampling23 in fish (to mention a few).  
Indeed, since its development over 20 years ago, HSI has gradually expanded from its initial use as a research tool for government and 
mining industry use into more commercial application areas found in the industrial, agricultural, geological, environmental and 
medical communities. However, this transition has been slow, because most of the research has  focused on addressing the high -
performance demands of federally-designated tasks, such as airborne and space-based military surveillance. As a result, until recently, 
there had been little real  investigation of the commercial marketplace because manufacturers of optical equipment  were focusing on 
                                                           
17 A. A. Gowen, C. P. O’Donnell, M. Taghizadeh, E. Gaston, A. O’Gorman, P. J. Cullen, J. M. Frias, C. Esquerre and G. Downey. Hy perspectral imaging for the investigation of quality deterioration in sliced mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus) during 
storage Sensing and Instrumentation for Food Quality and Safety Volume 2, Number 3 (2008), 133-143, DOI: 10.1007/s11694-008-9042-4    
18 D. F. Barbin, G. Elmasry, Da-Wen Sun, P. Allen, Predicting Quality And Sensory Attributes of Pork Using NIR Hyperspectral Imaging, Analytica Chimica Acta, 719 (2012) 30– 42. 
G. ElMasry, Da-Wen Sun and Paul Allen, Near -Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging for Predicting Colour, pH and Tenderness of Fresh Beef, J.l of Food Engineering, 110 [1] (2012 ) 127-140. M. Kamruzzaman, G. ElMasry, Da -Wen Sun and Paul Allen, 
Prediction of Some Quality Attributes of Lamb Meat Using NIR Hyperspectral Imaging and Multivariate Analysis, Analytica Chimica Acta, 714 (2012) 57-67. 
19 ElMasry, G. & Wold, J.P.(2008) High-speed assessment of fat and water content distribution in fish fillets using online imaging spectroscopy. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56(17), 7672-7677 
20 Sivertsen, A.H. (2011) Automatic nematode detection in cod fillets (Gadus Morhua) by transillumination hyperspectral imaging. Journal of Food Science, 76(1), S77-S83 
21 Heia, K., Sivertsen, A. & Birkeland, S. (2009). Automated quality control of salmon fillets - hyperspectral imaging for on-line inspection. In (Eds.) 14th international conference on near infrared spectroscopy 
22 Menesatti, P., Urbani, G., Pallottino, F., D’Andrea, S., & Costa, C. (2007). Nondestructive multi-parametric instruments for fish freshness estimation. Instrumentation Viewpoint, 6. 
23 Wold, J. P. (2006). Non-contact transflectance near infrared imaging for representative on-line sampling of dried salted coalfish (bacalao). Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy, 14(1), 59–66. 
FIGURE 3 - HYPERCUBE 
CONCEPT  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
13 | P a g e  
 
the technical challenges of the federally-driven application segment, which had still not been fully addressed24. To date HSI technology 
has only been directly implemented to a very limited extent in on-line systems for automated quality evaluation purposes.25  
Of the few food quality control applications, these have been directly developed by the generic H SI camera manufacturers –mainly for 
demonstrating the possibilities of the systems, that is, for opening market opportunities - as opposed to by system integrators oriented 
to satisfy specific industry needs. As was seen key limitations are centred on th e speed of the imaging acquisition, which needs to be 
increased to keep pace with the rapid rate of novel food processing lines.  Moreover, current HSI systems are expensive due to the 
bespoke nature of existing solutions as well as the predominance of researc h and high value targets in the current HSI market, with a 
typical system integrated in a production line costing up to €150k; prohibitive to the majority of SMEs from the food sector , not to 
mention enterprises running numerous lines . As was discussed ear lier in the document and summarised in Table 1, we will bring a 
number of key advancements that will open up the food inspection application to HSI technology. To recap briefly on these, not only will 
we use very cost-effective imaging cameras (especially as the resolution requirements are not as high as typical applications, such as 
forensics and military applications, where HSI has been largely applied) that are specifically designed for application in food production 
lines. As was seen, h yperspectral ima ges contain a substantial amount of data, including much superfluous information, posing 
considerable computational challenges 25 that involve lengthy image acquisition and analysis  times, rendering current HSI systems 
as impractical for  implementation on-line in modern food processing facilities. To solve this problem,  the HYPERA® system will be 
designed based on the understanding that we do not need the image with the whole area and the whole spectrum to assess the fo od 
quality (on the contrary, only a small number of spectral bands and a special region of interest (RO I) will be enough), thereby enabling 
the ability to  increase the hardware speeds  for rapid image acquisition and analysis to ensure compatibility with typical processing 
speeds of 1 m/s. The spatial and spectral resolution requirements can also be reduced compared with general hyperspectral imagers.  
Moreover, as was discussed, HYPERA® combines NIR and SWIR ranges in two solidary but independent modules that sum up the 
advantages of each region as each module is optimized in terms of lighting, signal gain a nd raw data processing methods, and the 
extended detecting spectral range will give the chemometric tools more available spectral bands to choose from and will allow  the 
system to integrate a variety of chemometric methods and select different ones for var ious purposes and objects, thereby realising 
multifunctional inspection. These combined observing bands and the processing methods have, to date, never been used in food (or 
pharmaceutical) production applications. What is currently found in the market are simply just extended cameras (VIS+NIR+SWIR). 
They are tuned to reach a trade-off among such ranges. Consequently, they do not take advantage of each range -specific features: so 
if is sensitive in SWIR, the NIR signal is low; if sensitive in NIR, it is saturated in the SWIR…It is pretty much like putting wings on a car: 
too slow for flying and too wide for any street.  
In short, this project will design a hyperspectral imager that simply meets the requirements with n o (or few) surplus performances, 
enabling significant cost reductions, as well as greater speed and flexibility. The resulting HYPERA® system is on the cutting -edge of 
existing efforts in the field to produce reliable tools for food/pharmaceutical quality and safety assessment. Its unique advantages 
provide a versatile and highly cost-efficient solution to the problem of applying HSI technology to the real industrial world.  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE /IMPACT ON DEFINED N EEDS   
The ability of HSI to provide rapid and objective evaluation of various product quality and safety indicators simultaneously  is 
highly valuable for the food industry, and greatly advances the capability of computer vision -based technologies, which are inefficient 
in differentiating samples that present similar colour characteristics but are not of the same quality . Since such vision systems 
are operated at visible wavelengths, they can only produce an image registering the external view of the objects, and are una ble to 
register information related to the internal structure or the chemical composition of the products . HSI opens up the opportunity to 
register product features that are sensitive to wavebands other than visible, and use this information for the non-invasive and non -
destructive assessment of quality and safety of foods.  
HYPERA® will  be the first HSI complete solution that is specifically designed for affordable and seamless integration into food 
processing lines for foreign body detection  and chemical analysis of foodstuffs (in add ition to pharmaceuticals processing and other 
applications in the future). Major advances that will be offered by our HSI food inspection and foreign body detection system vs. 
competing HSI systems (discussed in Section 2) are the reliability, simplicity and affordability of the proposed HYPERA® system. 
Compared with current quality assessment hyperspectral imagers, there are 5 essential innovations of the proposed system (Tab le 5) 
which will fulfil industry requirements to ensure t he HYPERA system is suitable for use as foreign body detection system in modern 
food processing. 
TABLE 5 - UNIQUE FEATURES DELI VERED BY HYPERA®  
Desired 
feature 
Why is this important?  How the HYPERA solution ensures this feature 
                                                           
24 Bannon, D. and Thomas, R. Meeting the Optical Demands of Next Generation Hyperspectral Imaging Spectrometers. Source: http://www.headwallphotonics.com/Portals/145999/docs/photonics_tech_briefs.pdf 
25 ElMasry, G., &  Sun, D.-W. (2010). Principles of hyperspectral imaging technology. In D. -W. Sun (Ed.), Hyperspectral Imaging for Food Quality Analysis and Control (pp. 3 -43). London, Burlington, San Diego: Academic Press, Elsevier. ISBN: 
9780123747532 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
14 | P a g e  
 
Penetration Many foreign bodies are buried in t he food material 
and are not simply present on the surface 
NIR-MSI enables penetration of food matrixes to a typical depth of 5 cm - The use of 
chemometrics –even in such poorly informative spectral region s- contribute to 
address in some extent the issues caused by scattering: while shape and position 
information is blurred by scattering, the scattered rays hold composition -related 
information that can be unveiled by powerful chemometrics methods -this is a major 
advance for foreign body detection. 
Composition 
differentiation 
There is a need to be able to detect and classify 
foreign bodies, their type, vs. food materials that 
should be present in the food ; contrast is better in 
terms of composition rather than in terms of color.   
SWIR spectral ranges allow for better composition differentiation enabled by the 
ability of the extended infrared spectral bands to obtain more chemical information 
from the sample.  
Accuracy Image distortion caused by scattering is one of the key 
challenges with regard to the detection of bulk -borne 
bodies; even when transparency is not a problem 
many substances show poor optical absorbance in the 
NIR and SWIR ranges - the irregular nature of many 
bodies degrades the spatial information and the shape 
and position become undefined. 
Chemometric models will minimise the consequences of the image distortion caused 
by scattering, as explained above. For artificial vision and X -ray systems, defined 
shape is a key requirement because the detection is just based on identifying 
unexpected shapes (shades, refractions and reflections, for example).  
Chemometrics works with spectral data instead.  Moreover, redundant (corroboratory) 
information –provided by two different but complementary spectral ranges, NIR and 
SWIR- increases detection (identification) probability and reduces uncertainty.  
Compactness, 
low-cost design 
Low cost tolerance in food industry for equipment, 
installation and operational investments.    
Enabled by the extended infrared spectral bands to obtain more chemical informa tion 
from the sample using novel detectors. 
High inspection 
speeds, 
affordability and 
versatility 
Need to be able to keep pace with modern processing 
lines. For retrofitting purposes - seamless installation 
into existing lines causing as little disruption as 
possible, as well as easy access for maintenance. 
Software upgrades should enable additional products 
and objects to be inspected.   
By combining a flexible hyperspectral imager design with integrated chemometric 
tools based on the in -depth analysis of industrial requirements to adapt multiple 
application purposes and various objects, tackling one of the major reasons for the 
high cost and slower speeds of current HSI systems, whereby current food inspection 
hyperspectral imagers typically acquire much superfluous information which occupies 
a large part of the system resources.  
While currently available NIR and SWIR HSI systems offer good results in the laboratory, the HYPERA® system, with extended 
infrared spectral range, will offer improved qualities, lower cost and new features  to be welcomed and widely used by the industry 
production lines. The chemometric tools combined with the hyperspectral imager proposed in the present application will addre ss the 
long standing problem of low efficiency and single function. 
When compared with other competing inspection systems in use in the market today, such as metal detection and x -ray systems, in 
relation to foreign body detection, each product presents special technological challenges. For example, translucent and opaque liquids 
filled in bottles, coloured opaque plastic packages, tin cans or milk cartons all respond differently to available detection systems. Metal 
detectors find splinters from machinery, fractions of broken cutters and blades, needles, s crews or fragments of clips. X -ray detectors 
respond to metal, stone, bone, hard plastics and Teflon. Both systems can screen the product after the filling procedure. X -ray 
detectors may find glass pieces that result when a jar or bottle is crushed during malfunction of the packaging line. More recent 
developments such as near-field radar response enables foreign bodies to be detected by transmitting low -power microwaves through 
the material 26, whereby the dielectric properties of the food flow of processing  equipment is measured. Foreign materials produce a 
deviation from the norm, activating a pneumatic rejection unit. However, as was discussed earlier, some of these methods are 
expensive and not versatile enough for offering comprehensive quality control. This opens up enormous opportunities for our 
HYPERA® solution, particularly when the unwanted bodies are very similar –in terms of composition and density - to the foodstuff.  
Moreover, HSI is more sensitive than the homologue “1 -pixel” spectrophotometer because of a geometric fact: in the event of a small 
body whose chemical composition differs from the composition of the surrounding bodies, its spectrum will be “pure” and, 
consequently, easily identified; on the contrary, by averaging the whole image in onl y one optical channel –as the typical “1 -pixel” 
spectrophotometer does-, the contribution of such small body is not relevant and the body will not be detected. 
Another key advantage of the HYPERA system over competing HSI systems, its ability to penetrate materials. I n terms of 
transparency, can be partially addressed in the SWIR range –around 5 mm or deeper according to each particular case - and even 
deeper in the NIR range -5 cm or more depending on the case. VIS imaging (artificial vision) is not capable  of penetrating more than 1 
mm. of materials.   
Finally, in terms of improvement potential over time, the ability to completely eliminate the image distortion that is created due to light 
scattering would heighten further the competitive advantages of the HYPERA system. As foodstuffs are not homogeneous media in the 
widest sense, such non-homogeneities causes scattering and, consequently, loss of spatial information (position and shape). While our 
chemometric tools will significantly reduce this scattering problem, our ambition is to completely eliminate this over time, through the 
use of highly novel Imaging in Complex Media (ICM) tools, which will perform s pecial mathematical pre-processing for overcoming this 
drawback. Previous work with ICM on the analysis of seismic waves and surveillance through foggy media, improved by means of the 
newest “deep learning” solutions for extracting trends (order) from chaotic sour ces of data (big data paradigm) will be built upon in 
order to continue to add competitive advantages and breakthroughs to strengthen the market competitiveness of the HYPERA product.    
                                                           
26 Swedish Institute for Food and Biotechnology and the Food Radar System (FRS) in http://www.foodradar.com/assets/pdf/fruit_processing_0112.pdf  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
15 | P a g e  
 
2. IMPACT
2.1 EXPECTED IMPACTS  
Foreign body hazards represent one of the most significant risks associated with the production and distribution of food prod ucts. 
Prevention is key to minimising the risks to consumer health and safety and avoiding product rejections and recalls that can lead to 
high levels of food being wasted. The HYPERA® system for the cost -effective, rapid, reliable and non -destructive real-time inspection 
of foods for foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis . This non-invasive quality control method for preventing non -
spec products from entering the food chain, will avoid product rejections, product recalls, and will safeguard  consumer health and 
safety. It is a timely development that will deliver high impact.   
A) USERS / MARKET  
USER NEEDS THAT ARE BEING MET  
This project responds to a real and growing need among food processors, both large corporation s and SMEs to guarantee the 
quality and safety of their food products and to prevent foods containing foreign bodies from entering the food chain . Indeed, 
the production of safe food is considered one of the most challenging jobs in the world 27. All food pro ducers, distributors and retailers 
are surrounded by risk. Foreign body contamination of food and drink products is the single biggest cause of product recalls 28. Brand 
protection is an increasing preoccupation with food processors and the wider food supply chain, whereby central to the ability to protect 
a brand, is the ability to avoid a recall in the first instance. In modern food processing, the number of occurrences of foreign materials is 
decreasing as the food industry continuously improves the safety  and quality of their products. However, this trend also decreases 
public acceptance for such occurrences to a level that approaches “ zero tolerance .”29. There is increasing pressure on the food 
industry to adopt self-regulation for food quality and safety best practices and standards and are becoming critical to food processor’s 
business success . Any incidence of foreign material harms the consumer, undermines confidence in the brand and generates 
headlines. The name of the producer and the grocery chain th at sold the article are widely reported. 29 The ability to manufacture high -
quality products consistently is the basis for success in the highly co mpetitive food industry. It secures brand protection and 
encourages loyalty in customers and the ability to attract new customers to increase market share. Applying a rapid, accurate, and non-
invasive technique in food analytical procedure for quality eval uation and safety inspection has become an urgent need in the food 
industry10. Beyond the European context, globally food producers are also facing  mounting pressure. In the US for example, the food 
supply need to take actions in line with the Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA) that mandates all processing facilities implement 
comprehensive, science based preventive controls that are appropriate for their operations.  With increased consumer demand, and 
market and legislative expectations for food products with high quality and safety 30, the need for accurate, fast, and objective quality 
determination of these characteristics continues to grow.  Moreover, in modern food processing, as plant throughput increases and 
quality tolerance is tightened, it is necessary to employ automatic methods for quality assurance and quality control31. 
Four large and SME food processors - CASA TARRADELLAS (pizza processor ), PLATOS TRADICIONALES (Ready to Eat foods), 
MARÍN GIMENEZ (processed fruit and vegetables); DAWN FARM FOODS (cooked and fermented meats) - will collaborate with us in 
an early adopter capacity as they all, despite having different systems installed, such as X-ray systems, are seeking complementary 
and robust solutions in order to overcome the limitations of their existing systems and to reduce the burden on visual inspection. 
                                                           
27 http://www.foodindustrycounsel.com/2015/05/protecting-your-brand-by-finding-and-eliminating-food-safety-risk/  
28 Ray Gibson, (2000) "Foreign bodies cause most recalls", Nutrition & Food Science, Vol. 30 Iss: 4, pp.187 - 191 
29 http://www.foodsafetymagazine.com/magazine-archive1/octobernovember-2012/testing-foreign-object-detection-integration-in-food-production/ 
30 Nagata, M., Tallada, J. G., Kobayashi, T., & Toyoda, H. (2005). NIR hyperspectral imaging for measurement of internal quality in strawberries. Paper No. 053131, ASAE Annual Intl. Meeting, Tampa, Florida, US. 
31 Gunasekaran, S. (1996). Computer vision technology for food quality assurance. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 7(8), 245–256. 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
16 | P a g e  
 
An assessment of industry needs has been central to the conceptualisation of the  HYPERA HSI innovations (see Table 1) and in the 
unique features that the product will offer (see Table 5), whereby the key requirements that need to be met, according to our  early 
adopter companies and a wider consensus with companies that have been inter viewed from our client base and networks, as well as 
industry engagement at following trade exhibitions  and conferences: BTA Barcelona Food Technologies (May 21 -24 2015), Global 
Food Safety 2015 in Amsterdam (September 8 -9, 
2015), Anuga Food Congress in Co logne (October 
10-14 2015) are as follows: a) speed (to keep with 
processing speeds of 1m/sec); b) affordability (in 
terms of equipment cost, installation and operating 
costs- € 80k for an installed unit will give a ROI in 2-3 
years in terms of saved QC co sts ); c) accuracy 
(>95% in classification and better than 10% around 
the target value are considered acceptable 
accuracies for online applications).  
With the continued technical innovations in 
manufacturing and computing, it is now possible for 
us to develop a HIS system that is capable of  
performing in a low -cost and high -speed way for 
online and real-time detection of various products10.  
MAI N ECONOMIC BENEFITS FOR THE 
USERS AND UNIQUE SEL LING POINTS  
To be profitable, industry requires equipment that 
ensures high -quality production, and efficient work 
methods and cost. The ability to automate the quality 
control and inspection process will save time 
compared to manual or post -production product 
inspection, thereby increasing product throughput, 
involving less handling (and subsequent reduced risk 
of food infection with microbes and pathogens), 
reduced incidences of spoilage as it is a non-invasive 
method, as well as  removing human subjectivity 
and inconsistency. This fact is even more important 
in developed countries to enable companies to 
defend their position and competitiveness against 
others where labour cost does not account for such 
a significant part of the overall manufacturing cost 32. 
Considering that the productivity of a person 
working in a mechanised and automated environment is approximately ten times that of a manual worker33, if quality evaluation 
is achieved automatically, production speed and efficiency can be improved drastically in addition to increased evaluation ac curacy, 
with an accompanying reduction in production costs. Moreover, automation usually increases the productivity and cha nges the 
character of the work, making it less arduous and more attractive.   
If we consider, the costs of a product recall, HYPERA® system is a very worthwhile insurance policy: recall costs, which include getting 
food off shelves, handling lawsuits, repa iring public relations, and potentially revamping plants can pose an enormous burden on 
companies, in addition to damaged reputation and lost sales. The potential negative impact of publicity surrounding an incide nt means 
that manufacturers have to be meticulous, and their systems need to provide confidence that any complaints cannot have originated in 
their factories. If there is any doubt at all then this can lead to costly and damaging product recalls. For smaller companies, the ensuing 
economic impacts can result in them going out of business.  
The Unique Selling Points  of the HYPERA® system that will be promoted to Quality and Production Managers, and other key 
decision makers in the food industry , are summarised in the poster in Figure 3. These USPs (which will be revised and upgraded as 
necessary in the early stages of our Phase 2 project, and used as a communication tool towards the industry) will contribute to strong 
                                                           
32 Applications and Experiences of Quality Control. Chapter 33: Hyperspectral Imaging for Raw Material Sorting and Processed Pro duct Quality Control. Pilar-Beatriz García-Allende, Olga M. Conde and José Miguel López -Higuera. University of 
Cantabria Spain.  
33 Abdullah, M.Z.,Guan, L.C., Lim, K.C., & Karim, A.A. (2004). The applications of computer vision system and tomographic radar imaging for assessing physical properties of food. J. Food Engineering, 61, 125–135. 
FIGURE 3 - POSTER OF THE HYPERA  USPS.  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
17 | P a g e  
 
technology push as major drivers for stimulating market demand for the technology am ong food processors, opening up an enormous 
opportunity for HYPERA® to secure a leading position as the most complete, high performance HSI equipment in the market today and 
will make the system highly suitable for easy integration and use in industrial food processing lines for the real-time detection of foreign 
bodies and chemical analysis of foodstuffs (and other products).  
DESCRIPTION OF THE M ARKET  
We are addressing the global food processing market. Looking at the size of the market, in the context of the Europe alone, the food 
and drink (F&D) industry is the largest manufacturing sector both in terms of turnover (€1017 billion), Value Added (€203 bil lion) and 
employment (generating 4.25 million jobs) 34. SMEs make up 285,000 (or 99.1%) of the total food  companies in the EU 34. Globally the 
industry is increasingly concerned with food safety, as highly publicised, high profile food safety incidence s and scandals in recent 
years have undermined consumer confidence and trust, and more stringent legislation and market pressures are forcing the industry to 
improve quality control and safety standards and to take measures to protect their brands.  
In Europe the following scandals (to mention a few) are defining a market whereby food quality and safety are central concerns: the 
recent horse meat scandal in beef products that has disrupted the food chain in a major way throughout Europe; the 2011 E.Col i 
outbreak where some 30 people died and over 3000 people were sickened; the mad cow disease that wreaked havoc on the European 
beef industry in the 90’s (whereby the effects are still present and anybody that spend at least 3 months in the UK between J an 1 1980 
and Dec 31st 1996 is prohibited from donating blood). In the global context, in the People's Republic of China for example, food safety 
is of growing concern, fuelled by the high publicised cases of deaths and illnesses caused by melamine-laced milk and baby formula (in 
2008 when at least six children died after consuming milk that contained melamine, an industrial chemical that causes kidney stones in 
children), Salmonella-tainted seafood, and clenbuterol-treated pork. The misuse and overuse of hundreds of chemicals, many of them 
banned and toxic, have led to death for scores and sickness in hundreds of thousands of people throughout China. Recent opini on 
polls reveal that a majority of ordinary citizens mistrust their nation’s food suppliers and processo rs35. The situation has become a 
matter of grave concern. The problem affects not only China but also Europe, the US and other countries that import Chinese -grown 
and processed food. In the US, in 2011, the listeria outbreak in cantaloupe was noted as the d eadliest outbreak of food-related illness 
in more than 10 years in the United States. 30 people died and 146 were sickened. In 2012, there was another big cantaloupe r ecall 
from a different farm. The “pink slime” scandal, a controversial beef additive made  up of spare beef trimmings that have been treated 
with ammonium hydroxide to make them safe and at least semi -palatable shows the power of social media and how quickly news can 
go viral and brands can be irreparably damaged.  Celebrity chef Jamie Oliver br ought the “pink slime” term to light, and while the 
additive may have been safe enough for consumption, fear -mongering coupled with distrust of the beef industry led to a massive 
outcry, and the closure of three plants.  
Indeed, the food supply chain has b ecome a complex global system consisting of small to large domestic and foreign manufacturers, 
processors, packers, distributors, and transporters with few common business practices 36. As retailers, food service organizations, and 
marketers of branded products invest to promote their brands in the marketplace, many food processors are now being measured on 
their ability to help customers protect their brands, reputations, and profitability 37. Consequently, in addition to traditional metrics such 
as price, product consistency and service, brand protection is increasingly being used as a new competitive metric to earn and 
keep customer’s business and loyalty. Food processor who can demonstrate the most reliable means of brand protection can 
leverage a significant competitive advantage in the value chain . Food processors who can demonstrate they are taking measures 
to ensure food safety and quality are in a position to command favourable pricing and enjoy “preferred supplier” status with customers, 
while also benefiting by raising the barrier to entry by competitors and protecting their own existing market share 37. Real-time quality 
monitoring technology, such as HYPERA® can play a key role in brand protection by preventing off -spec products entering the supply 
chain. These are all major drivers for investment in the HYPERA® solution. Importantly, investments in equipment are increasing: 
Investment in food processing machinery has been climbing ~7.3 % per year since 2011 -2012 and is predicted to reach $53.3 
billion in the global market in 201638. 
MAIN COMPETITORS AND  THEIR COMPETITIVE SO LUTIONS  
A number of manufacturers of HSI equipment exist in the market today and Table 6  provides a comparative overview. Two of the HSI 
equipment manufacturers from Europe - SPECIM and INNO -SPEC- are already camera suppliers of ours, and indeed HYPERA® 
affords them with an opportunity to increase their sales an d turnover by acting as component suppliers (HSI cameras) to our 
HYPERA® solution (whereby depending on the application, the most appropriate camera will be selected). This could also be the case 
for and Norsk Elektro Optikk A/S. To this end, these European players in the HSI equipment field are all potential collaborators of ours, 
whereby their business models are based on equipment/device commercialisation , and they do not specialise in the integration and 
                                                           
34 Promoting an EU industrial policy for food and drink. Competitiveness Report 2013-2014. Food and Drink Europe.  
35 Eye on China by Ted Agres. Food Quality & Safety magazine, October/November 2011 
36 Paula Hollywood (2012). Using Your Laboratory to Protect Your Brand. ARC View. October 12th, 2012. ARC Advisory Group. 
37 Ensuring Food Safety and Brand Protection Through Supply Chain Traceability. White Paper. CDC Software. Available at:  http://www.foodprocessing.com/assets/wp_downloads/pdf/FoodSafetyBrandProtect2009.pdf  
38 Freedonia Group. World Food Processing Machinery to 2016 - Demand and Sales Forecasts, Market Share, Market Size, Market Leaders  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
18 | P a g e  
 
customisation of turnkey HSI solutions in the industry (which requires chemometrics, calibration and engineering/integration into the 
processing lines, as well as after-sales maintenance and servicing). The HYPERA® business model is based on a full turnkey solution 
that is commercialised based on a co re platform technology that is specifically designed for real -time food inspection applications. Our 
positioning in this `integration gap´ (as discussed in more detail Section 1), heightens the impacts for Europe, as the HYPERA® 
solution will serve to open  up applications for HSI in the global food industry  (and pharmaceuticals in quick succession) , which will 
increase demand for European manufactured HSI cameras/ imagers. On the other side of the Atlantic, providers of HSI such as 
CytoViva Inc. offer equipm ent targeted at research labs that cannot be scaled up for in -line monitoring. Headwall Photonics is a 
supplier of the Hyperspec® equipment in the UV to SWIR ranges and also covering the midwave infrared (MWIR) and longwave 
infrared (LWIR). Like SPECIM and  INNOSPEC for example, they do not develop integrated solutions. However, a number of 
companies are positioning themselves as solutions providers, with RESONON from the US and PPO from Canada being the most 
noteworthy in the context of industrial applicati ons. The unique features of the HYPERA® system in terms of high processing speed, 
penetration, chemical differentiation, minimal distortion and affordable price allow us to position ourselves against these c ompanies 
with a very favourable price/performance  ratio. Importantly, the existence of emerging competition is a healthy indicator of the 
existence of a very promising market opportunity. It is ideal timing for a European offering to step into the arena to domi nate the 
European market and leverage a strong and early foothold in the global market.              
TABLE 6 - COMPARATIVE OVERVIEW  OF COMMERCIALLY AVAI LABLE HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING EQUIPMENT  
Manufacturer Country HSI product/brand Spectral range Applications 
CytoViva, Inc.  US CytoViva Visible near infrared spectral range 
(VNIR) 
Targeted at research laboratories 
Headwall 
Photonics 
US Hyperspec® VIS, VNIR, SWIR and Extended -
SWIR 
Targeted at research, industrial applications and airborne 
platforms 
Resonon US Pika IIi   400- 900 nm VNIR  Targeted to harsh industrial environments and airborne platforms 
Pika XC  High-performance 400 to 1000 nm Core device for developing applications in VNIR range 
Pika NIR  900 to 1700 nm NIR HSI Core device for developing applications in SWIR range 
Specim Finland AISA VIS, VNIR, SWIR, MWIR and LWIR Airborne and defence usage 
SisuROCK VIS, VNIR, SWIR, MWIR and LWIR Drill core mineral mapping technology 
SisuCHEMA Breeze 400-1000; 900-1700; 1000-2500 nm Desktop pushbroom system for chemical and pharmaceutical 
samples 
Norsk Elektro 
Optikk A/S 
Norway HySpex 
hyperspectral 
cameras 
VNIR from 400 to 1000 nm and SWIR 
from 900 to 2500 nm 
Airborne platforms, research labs, industry.  
P&P Optica, 
Inc. 
Canada PPO SWIR 850- 2500 nm Industry applications: Tissue Differentiation; Standoff Detection; 
Aerial Surveying; Environmental Testing; Quality Control 
INNO-SPEC German
y 
Spectral imaging 
system NIR 1.7 
SWIR (900-1700 nm) Core instrument designed for being integrated in industrial 
applications 
Color combination 
NIR 1.7 
RGB (VIS) + SWIR (900-1700 nm) Core instrument designed for being integrated in industrial 
applications 
IRIS Spain HYPERA®  SWIR-HSI (900-1700 nm) 
NIR-MSI (700-1050 nm) 
Integrated solution for industrial applications 
Regarding a price analysis, first of all the table above describes the principal available cameras; none of them come close to a complex 
and complete solution such as HYPERA. There are some very simple multispectral VIS-NIR cameras available in the market for as little 
as €7k, right up to cameras at €80k (high end version-640 pixels), which do not offer software or integration in the processing line. Our 
HYPERA combination of 2 cameras (VIS -NIR and SWIR), lighting, so ftware, housing for harsh environment and for in-line integration, 
at €80k is very well priced (this prices will be validated during the Phase 2).  
 MOST RELEVANT MARKET  SEGMENTS FOR INTRODU CTION OF THE NEW SOL UTION  
We are initially targeting food processing applications (and once we have secured traction in this sector, we will commence introduction 
into the pharmaceutical sector). The HYPERA will be fully deploy ed in the ‘first client’ group ( CASA TARRADELLAS, PLATOS 
TRADICIONALES, MARÍN GIMENEZ, DAWN FARM FOODS ) during the Phase 2. These com panies will serve as powerful endorsers 
of the HYPERA® in the pizza, meat, fruit and vegetable processing and RTE foods segments . In the commercialisation phase, we will 
leverage application notes from these  business cases to build sales in Europe and glob ally targeting these and other segments where  
there are clear technological gaps and increasing industry interest in investing in solutions for automatic quality control, and for 
applications in which HSI has already shown considerable achievements in addr essing quality and safety issues in previous studies: 
fish and other seafood39,40, grains, dairy products, and horticultural products41,42,43,44, among others. Once we have gained traction and 
sales in the food industry we will target the pharmaceutical industry (planned for 2021).   
                                                           
39ElMasry G, Iqbal A, Sun D-W, Allen P, Ward P. 2011a. Quality classification of cooked, sliced turkey hams using NIR hyperspectral imaging system. J Food Eng 103:333–44. 
40 ElMasry G, Sun D-W, Allen P. 2011b. Non-destructive determination of water-holding capacity in fresh beef by using NIR hyperspectral imaging. Food Res Int 44:2624–33 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
19 | P a g e  
 
MARKET BARRIERS TO B E OVERCOME  
The major barriers preventing uptake in the food industry are cost, speed and accuracy - HYPERA is ov ercoming each.  Food 
legislation that places food quality and safety responsibility with the producer will be a driver for adoption of  HYPERA and evidence 
based application notes and publications from the project will be powerful documents for demonstrating  the accuracy and reliability of 
the HYPERA system for food quality inspection.  A solid approach is to first build the HYPERA brand with strong industry case studies 
and establish a client base with international names from the food industry, and later pro gress to enter the pharma sector, whereby the 
most significant barriers to market entry will be regulatory and validation requirements (e.g. CFR 21 11).  
TARGET USERS AND HOW  THEY WILL BE REACHED  
The targeted users of the fi nal HYPERA solution are food companies (and pharmaceutical companies in the post -project phase) both 
SMEs and large enterprises . This is a global market. Our initial  effort will focus on targeting  the headquarters of large-size 
companies in the Food and  Pharma industry, which have been defined as the early innovator group, due to a) their high production 
volumes justifying the c ost of an automatic food inspection system ; the probability of follow -up contracts is high for large -size 
companies: once first in -line monitoring units are succe ssfully tested, the probability is high that they ask for further units to roll -out 
automatic food quality inspection in their international production plants . IRIS will contact directly with headquarters because they are 
usually in charge of implementing new technologies and process improvements. Headquarter (HQ) locations of the Top100 companies 
in the food 45, pharma46, are primarily located in the EU (mainly Germany, Switzerland, France, UK and Italy), North America (US and 
Canada) and Asia (main ly Japan a nd India, and China). Selling the HYPERA® product i nvolves selling the equipment, the system 
calibration (acquiring spectra of client samples, conducting laboratory referential analysis and elaboration of predictive mo dels) and 
integration in the production line (engineering). Due to a relative high service proportion, the direct contact with important clients will be 
crucial. For this purpose, IRIS has plans to open regional offices to acquire high -priority clients, establish agreements with distributors, 
manage distributors and deliver the service part during and after the acquisition process (in 2015 we opened an office in New York and 
San Francisco) . D istribution roll -out will take place in two phases as is described below under the heading ‘Strategy plan for 
commercialisation of the business innovation project’. IRIS has an experienced Sales and Marketing Department and the experience to 
effectively reach the decision makers (Plant Managers, Quality Managers, Production Managers, R&D and Innovation Di rectors) in the 
process industries is present. Targeted communication campaigns to companies from IRIS existing client -base and networks (which 
include such large industries as DAIRYGOLD, NESTLE, DAWN MEATS, GSK, SANOFI, ALMIRALL, among others) and beyond will be 
designed (via electronic mailings, paper mailings, personal/face -to-face communication…), and through the channels of our 
distribution/sales agents. Prospective customers will be found using a combination of a website with application examples and  
technical presentations at conferences and exhibitions (listed under ‘Communication’ below).
2.2 MEASURES TO MAXI MISE IMPA CT  
A) DISSEMINATION AND  EXPLOITATION OF RESU LTS  
KEY STAKEHOLDER INVO LVEMENT FOR SUCCESSF UL EXPLOITATION  
The following stakeholders have been identified for their possibility to add value and to facilitate the commercial exploitation of the 
HYPERA®: ■ Additional bet a clients from different food segments , pharmaceutical processing (and chemical industries) who will 
enable us to create additional application studies and Business User Cases;  ■ Reputable and effective distributors and sales 
agents for building our European and global commercial network, along with OEMs that are interested in integrating HYPERA into their 
equipment to create a ‘smart’ or ‘intelligent’ equipment o ffering; ■ Industry Associations and Clusters who can provide a very 
powerful pathway to their members . They also enable active engagement with policy makers and in helping the industry and policy -
makers to work together towards common goals in relation to process efficiency, quality, safety, sustainability, etc. ■ Spectral imager 
providers, whereby HYPERA ® provides them with an inte gration partner to mainstream the adoption of their sensors in in -process 
industry applications. ■Equipment certification consultants to facilitate all the steps involved in obtaining certifications; ■ Renowned 
academics and industry influencers who can independently test the HYPERA system and publish/disseminate the results.  
FURTHER STEPS NEEDED  BEFORE THE RESULTS A RE MARKET READY  
Our approach in relation to planning the steps to wards being market ready is centred on the well -established 4 Ps Marketing Mix - 
Product, Price, Promotion, Place- (Figure 4). Based on past experience we know this is a robust and complete approach to planning 
a pathway from product to market . Central to the methodology is the target market (discussed above), so that we always keep our 
target market (i.e. the food industry - and eventually the pharma market- and more specifically the decision makers within this industry, 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
41 Karimi Y, 2012. Application of hyperspectral technique for color classification avocados subjected to different treatments. Food Bioproc Technol 5:252–64. 
42 Cen H, Lu R, Ariana DP, Mendoza F. 2013. Hyperspectral imaging-based classification and wavebands selection for internal defect detection of pickling cucumbers. Food Bioproc Technol 7:1689–1700. 
43 Wei X, Liu F, Qiu Z, Shao Y, He Y. 2013. Ripeness classification of astringent persimmon using hyperspectral imaging technique. Food Bioproc Technol 7:1371–80. 
44 Yu K, Zhao Y, Li X, Shao Y, Zhu F, He Y. 2014. Identification of crack features in fresh jujube using Vis/NIR hyperspectral imaging combined with image processing. Comput Electron Agric 103:1–10. 
45 http://www.foodengineeringmag.com/global-top-100-food-&-beverage-companies 
46 https://www.google.com/fusiontables/DataSource?docid=1uEZuNGJlP68Imym7zAVT-XHXwhHdvs2lT5L6iNs#rows:id=1  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
20 | P a g e  
 
who will decide to invest or not in our HYPERA solution). Each  of the ´Ps´ is discussed below in the context of HYPERA and our target 
market.     
PRODUCT- As we are dealing with industrial inspection equipment , our  product design, features and functionality are the most 
important factors. During the Phase 2, we will structure the value proposition of our new prod uct (to validate and improve the  value 
propositions and USPs we have already formulated- see Figure 3 above). We will draw up the product datasheets that will outline the 
key information, and we will also crea te product brochur es outlining applications (the application s that have been validated in this 
project and additional applicatio ns that we plan to quickly serve in the commercialisation phase ), highlighting the benefits, etc. The 
services that support the product will also be clearly defined (maintenance servi ce, customisation services, upgrades to the software 
and models), consultancy based on system  use and data understanding. We will also further build the HYPERA  brand identify. We 
expect all Product-related activities will be completed by the end of the Phase 2.  
PRICE- In the Phase 2 we will validate and finalise our pricing  based on an up to date knowledge of costs in line with developments , 
our pricing policy in relation to discounts, credit terms, etc. We have initially set price for an installed unit at € 80k based on our existing 
technology and market experience. During the Project, we will finalise and validate a price list based on our manufacturing and logistics 
costs, our required margin to have a profitable business, the necessary margin for distributors/sales agents, and our necessary pricing 
positioning vis-à-vis market tolerance and competitors.  
PROMOTION- Measures consist of the communication activities we 
will use in the marketplace to increase awareness about the product 
and its benefits to the target segment. Our post project campaign 
(the communication campaign dur ing the action is discussed in 
Section 2c below) will consist o f: ■ Official product launch , along 
with a press conference; ■Exhibiting at shows; ■ Presentations at 
conferences ■ We know from past experience that the strongest 
promotional tool is successful applications. As such, building the 
development round early adopters gives the product the evidence to 
prove capability and  the push to have strong growth from day one. 
Publishing articles in industrial/sectoral channels (technical/sectoral 
magazines, etc.), publishing whitepapers and additional application 
notes on the product page of our website, etc. ■ Advertising via 
digital ad campaigns ; ■ Featuring as sponsors at a number of key 
industry focussed conferences/events. ■ PR campaigns whereby 
we will aim to reach out to industry influencers who could b e a 
powerful source of reviews ■ Authoring feature blogs as guest 
bloggers in on-line sources; ■ O ur sales staff will also play a major 
role in promotion of the product, and in the Phase 2 they will be trained fully on the HYPERA ■ Sales promotion: we will use this tool 
for example for our l aunch campaign, whereby companies that agree to buy during the launch period will benefit from a discount, we 
will also have sales promotions linked to exhibitions, etc.     
Finally and very importantly, PLACE…in other words, how to get to our product to a  global market. A key requirement is to establish a 
manufacturing capability to deliver the product. During the Phase 2 project we will establish our manufacturing and associated logistics 
(Task 4.4), by the end of which we will have produced and quality approved a final product unit. In the post project phase we will build 
additional stocks  and we will also set up our warehousing inventory. In relation to how we plan to serve the global market, as is 
discussed below, we will have our own trained Sales Team (supported by an Application Team)  and we will set up our Distribution 
networks in two stages (as is described under the next heading).  We will also establish agreements with shipping companies for 
transportation and insurance companies. Through WP5-Gear up to market, we will implement, build on and further detail plan this initial 
‘Plan for the Dissemination and Exploitation of the Action's Results’.  
STRATEGY PLAN FOR CO MMERCIALISATION OF T HE BUSINESS INNOVATI ON PROJECT  
In relation to our commercial strategy, the HYPERA will be commercialised by IRIS . In-situ inspection systems have an extended 
sales pipeline, with considerable upfront customer interaction, evaluation and testing, and due to the nature of the process 
manufacturing industries, process analytical systems require some level of customis ation, and they also need to be integrated (and 
especially as we are offering a turnkey solution)  and ongoing support  has to be ensured . As such, t here are two key aspects of the 
business plan; the creation a specialist Application Team and the upfront development of a Network of Agents and Distributors; to 
support the sales and deployment activities.  The process will be driven by the core Sales Team  that will be  led by Mrs. Johanna 
Granda, th e Commercial Dir ector at IRIS. Marketing process  analysers and inspection systems  is a specialist business, our 
Application Team will be made up of dedicated engineers who will provide support  to the sales team, such as testing materials and 
FIGURE 4 - THE ‘ 4 PS ’ MARKETING  MIX  

                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
21 | P a g e  
 
detailed site visits, advice and support during system installation , provide training and to handle both site and remote the customer 
support. 
In order to benefit from local knowledge and experience of selling process systems, as part of the project we will build a network of 
agents an d distributors to provide a point of contact for customers and follow up on the sales process . As such, our 
international commercialization strategy will be to start with an agency/distributor network for prospecting and opportunity validation in 
the key regions not reached by IRIS for marketing and selling the product supported by the in house Application Team. We see these 
relationships being long term partnerships and ultim ately growing these into regional centres of expertise able to deliver complete 
solutions. Hence over time these regional centres will develop local application teams and the local sales support will be co mplimented 
by the establishment regional integration agreements with engineering companies to directly support our commercial and technical 
centres. Agreements will  also be established with global OEMs for delivering built -in HYPERA systems in their equipment  (e.g. 
METALQUIMIA, GLATT, GEA, etc.).  
In relation to our current and planned geographical presence (see figure 6 in the IRIS participant description in Section 4.1 ), IRIS 
currently has production and c ommercial facilities in Ireland (which allows us to serve UK as well) and Spain (which enables us to 
serve Portugal and Italy), and as part of our further internationalisation strategy we have recently opened technical/sales offices in US 
East Coast (New York City) and West Coast (San Francisco) and in 2016/2017 we will open an office in Germany (that wil l also serve 
Switzerland and Austria), France (which will serve Benelux), Japan (for our Asian presence) and Mexico.  
Time to first sales is Jan. 2019, when we will commence the sale of first units to our beta clients in the immediate post -project phase 
and we will build out ours sales effort from there . The end-user involvement in the Phase 2 of this Innovation Project, through our ‘first 
client’ or early adopters from the food industry will provide a quick route to first sales if industry trials at each site are successful. 
B) INTELLECTUAL PROP ERTY, KNOWLEDGE PROT ECTION AND REGULATOR Y ISSUES  
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY RIGHTS ASSETS  
IRIS owns the HYPERA® brand and all the know -how behind the HYPERA® development to date in relation to the TRL6/7 
development of th e novel combination of Shortwave Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging (SWIR -HSI) in reflectance with Near Infrared 
Multispectral Imaging (NIR-MSI) in reflectance/transmittance, along with the copyright of the chemometric software, and the results of 
tests for the detection of foreign bodies in foodstuff whereby the SWIR -HSI/NIR-MSI and chemometrics enables a) penetration (NIR), 
b) composition differentiation (SWIR); and c) minimising the image distortion caused by scattering (chemometrics). IRIS will own all 
the knowledge items that will be generated through this SME Instrument . In relation to our freedom to operate, we have a patent 
reviews (discussed below) that concludes that no existing patent directly competes with the envisaged HYPERA ® system.  
MEASURES FOR  ENSURING COMMERCIAL EXPLOITATION  
A systematic Technology Watch task will be implemented over the course of the work plan (through T6.1) to ensure we keep up to date 
of relevant competing developments. In addition, every 6 months a patent review will be performed to reconfirm our ‘freedom to operate’ 
and to ensure we are not infringing on the IPR of a third party. A SWOT analysis will be prep ared at M6 of the project by the IRIS 
Management Board and it will be reviewed and updated each quarter in relation to the HYPERA ® solution strengths and weaknesses 
and in the context of the market opportunity and any threats to realising commercial explo itation. A major effort we have made in order 
to pave the way forward for commercial exploitation has been lining up a powerful group of “early adopters”, through our 4 first beta 
client companies of different sizes, representing different segments of the food processing industry (pizza, meat, fruit and veg 
processing and RTE foods). These will allow us to gain serious endorsement value from the Phase 2 project and to document impactful 
case studies/business cases in the use of HYPERA® for automatic food inspection applications.    
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT  AND PROTECTION STRAT EGY  
A patent search has been performed to confirm our freedom to operate. The last patent search was performed on January 25th, 2016, 
using the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) PATENTSCOPE database 
(https://patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/search.jsf) using the key words:  ALLTEXT: “hyperspectral” + “foreign bodies”; ALTEXT: 
“chemical imaging” + “foreign bodies”; ALLTXT: “multispectral + “foreign bodies” The results revealed that no patent exists that would 
affect the HYPERA development. In fact, many of them  describe the optical setup of the core device while others  are associated to 
specific targets (for example, fruits or insects)   while HYPERA is based on adapting off -the-shelf core devices and is intended for 
generic applications in detection of foodstuff-borne foreign bodies no matter the specific nature of the product to be monitored.  In this 
set of patents the following  are particularly relevant : "Method and system for contaminant detection during food processing" 
(US6587575B1, Georgia University), which is limited to use a few wavelengths the VIS -NIR range, very basic algorithms and aimed at 
detecting fecal and ingesta on meat and poultry carcasses; "Non -destructive detection method and device for agricultural and animal 
products based on hyperspectral image technology" (CN1995987A, chinese institution), which is limited to the VIS -NIR range, very 
basic algorithms and aimed at characterizing  agricultural and livestock p roducts; "Equipment and method for analyzing image data" 
(EP2343671A2, Sumitomo Electric Industries, Ltd.), which is limited to using a variety of the SVM algorithm for processing 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
22 | P a g e  
 
hyperspectral data; "High spectrum image collector fo r fruit" (CN2874482Y, Chinese institution), which merely describes fruit 
hyperspectral image acquisition device without mentioning spectral range or data processing tools; "System for multi - and 
hyperspectral imaging" (US7835002B2, RP Ventures Tech Office AB), which is focused in the optical setup for acquiring the hypercube 
without any mention to generic or specific application, lighting or data processing; "Imaging spectrometer" (US8994939B2, SPE CIM 
SPECTRAL IMAGING Ltd Oy), which is focused in the optical setup for acquiring the hypercube without any mention to generic or 
specific application, lighting or data processing; and " METHODS, SYSTEMS AND DEVICES FOR DETECTING INSECTS AND 
OTHER PESTS" (WO/2013/017860, UNIVERSITY OF EAST ANGLIA), which is not based on IR spectroscopy but in Raman and 
fluorescence excited at 600 nm. Basically, we  can conclude that there are no  evident IP conflicts between HYPERA and existing 
(patented) similar systems because the most of the related patents are constrained to specific applications  or sp ecific sensing 
technologies such as VIS-NIR hyperspectral imaging.  
In relation to the novelty of our HYPERA development, in line with the design and development work that will be performed in the 
Phase 2 we will analyse all outputs for their novelty and for their protectability through Patents, Trademark, Industrial design, Copyright, 
Trade-secret, or Confidentiality, as appropriate (i.e. the form which offers the most adequate and effective protection for each ty pe of 
result). We envisage that we will gain IPRs through a number of aspects of the development (all of which will be confirmed and pursued 
as the developments unfold). In relation to the patentable results of our development, it is expected that the following elements of our 
developments will be patentable: The specific parameters (settings) for the combination of Shortwave Infrared Hyperspectral Imaging 
(SWIR-HSI) in reflectance with Near Infrared Multispectral Imaging (NIR -MSI) in reflectance/transmittance for industrially reliable 
foreign body detection and chemical monitoring of materials. Moreover, we will study the feasible protection routes for the combination 
of chemometrics (patent possibilities for US, and copyright or other in Europe).  As addressing the ideation of such solutions will be  
tackled according to the TRIZ methodology, it is envisaged that some of the outputs could be novel and specific enough for be ing 
patented. In fact, one of the advantages of using such a methodology is its productivity in terms of novelties. We will also s ubmit a 
trademark application for protecting the HYPERA brand name and its logo.  
REGULATORY AND/OR ST ANDARD REQUIREMENTS TO BE FULFILLED  
All EC and national regulations that could influence on the commercialisation of the project outputs will be studied a nd their influence 
on the develo pment or the future use of HYPERA  product will be taken into account. The requirements in relation to adherence to: 
ASTM E1655 -97; ASTM E1866 -97; ASTM E1790 -04; IUPAC Guidelines for Calibration in Analytical Chemistry; 
EMEA/CHMP/CVMP/QWP/17760/2009 Rev2; 11 CFR Part 35; 21 CFR Part 11, EC Machinery Directive and food -processing 
equipment (EU 98/37/EC Directive), etc.) and standards (e.g. EN45011 or ISO65 quality standards and all manufacturing standards set 
by ISO and to the GMP regulations, as well as to compliance with the CE Mark, will be given particular attention during the design 
stages of the system. ATEX certification requirements will also be fulfilled. Through Task 1.3, the regulatory and standard requirements 
will be studied with the end-users to ensure that all necessary actions that need to be performed during the development work in Phase 
2 are carefully planned. During Task 4.1, certification applications will be made and the appropriate steps will be initiated t owards 
obtaining approvals by the standards bodies and to ensure compliance with guidelines, standards and regulations so that HYPERA® 
can be sold and used in food and pharmaceutical processing in Europe and internationally. It is expected that regulations  in terms of 
food safety will be drivers for adoption, e.g. Regulation (EC) No. 178, for example, establishes the European Food Safety Authority and 
outlines the Global Food Law (GFL), focusing on traceability, product withdrawal, recall, and notification for food and feed related to 
safety requirements, including imports and exports, very similar to the Bioterrorism Act outlined by the U.S.  
MEASURES TO PROVIDE OPEN ACCESS TO PEER -REVIEWED SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATIONS  
It is our intention to publish aspects of the project results in peer-reviewed scientific publications, and these will be made available free 
of charge through Green Open access publishing.  
C) COMMUNICATION   
In line with our 4Ps Marketing Mix, the communication activities that will be performed o ver the course of the project will have the 
principal objective of communicating the benefits and value of our HYPERA product to our future clients . Initial communication 
activities within the food (and pharma ) industries at exhibitions, have highlighted t he need for and interest in our solution and we 
believe that the industry will be highly receptive to this message. Early testing provides material for early promotion. A such, during the 
Phase 2, w e intend to build the brand identity and promote the produ ct actively through standard means such as the project web, 
leaflet, poster, etc., as well as through more vanguard and dynamic tools such as blogs, social media (LinkedIn and twitter),  
Infographics, etc. We will also produce white papers as a very powerful and impactful communication tool. Digital marketing will also be 
employed for reaching users. In Internet marketing, storytelling is a potent method of converting sales prospects to customer s. We will 
use the ‘business stories’ technique, whereby we will  document case studies from our early adopters (no sensitive processing 
information will be disclosed and only relevant non -confidential information will be used) to communicate the business benefits of 
investing in the HYPERA system in an impactful, creat ive and engaging way in order to effectively connect with industry decision 
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
23 | P a g e  
 
makers. We will showcase and exhibit results at 4 exhibitions/tradeshows over the course of the project ( e.g. Alimentaria (Barcelona), 
FoodTech- formerly BTA - (Barcelona), ANUGA (C ologne), ANALYTICA , etc.) and in at least 4 conferences (e.g. Global Food Safety 
Conference, Annual European Food Manufacturing & Safety Summit, Pharma Process (Barcelona), APACT, EuPAT, etc.). We will also 
publish 4 -6 articles in industrial/sectoral chann els (technical/sectoral magazines, etc.). Publications of non -confidential and protect 
results in peer reviewed journals (e.g. J. of Spectroscopy, J. of Food Processing, J. of Process Control, MORE, etc.) are considered as 
very powerful marketing tools to the industries, such as food , pharma and other sectors of interest (such as medical) , as well as to 
policy makers and standards bodies, and we will aim for at least 2-3 papers resulting from the project. We will mobilise our membership 
in networks and cluster memberships to promote the HYPERA solution and to participate in events/workshop, etc. that would enable us 
to present HYPERA and disseminate the successful case studies: SPIE (International Society for Optics and Photonics), A. SPIRE 
(Sustainable Proc ess Industries), SECPHO (Southe rn European Photonics Cluster) , among others. In short, our communication  
activities will ensure we maximise the future dissemination and exploitation of the project results. Finally, as we are benefitting from tax-
payers con tributions, there is scope through social media to make the general public aware of the HYPERA development and the 
associated societal benefits, e.g. contribution to improved industrial competitiveness, job creation, prosperous regions, access to high 
quality and safe foods (and pharmaceuticals); these are all benefits that contribute to our quality of life as EU citizens. We will benefit 
from highly qualified digital marketing professionals that form part of the marketing team in IRIS - whereby they have de signed 
numerous successful digital media campaigns in the past, which is a powerful channel for reaching increasing segments of the 
population (including industry) through Social Media communication.   
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 WORK PLAN – WORK PACKAGES, DELIV ERABLES AND MILESTON ES  
OVERALL STRUCTURE OF  THE WORK PLAN  
We have built up our work plan based on our approach covering 3 project phases of a) application, b) product development and c) 
commercialisation planning. It is 24 months in duration and consists of 7 work packages (WPs) as follows: WP1 will commence by  
gaining a detailed understanding and characterising the selected process applications at CASA TARRADELLAS, PLATOS 
TRADICIONALES, MARÍN GIMENEZ, DAWN FARM FOODS. Using the prototype system, we will undertake an initial demonstration of 
the system on these applications to provide test data for the requirement specification and development project. In WP2, the 
chemometric models will be developed and validated using the prototype systems and client samples from WP1. Optimised models will 
be implemented in the system software in WP3. In WP3, the imaging systems will be optimised for the selected applications and a 
robust industrial hardware design will be performed and the  system software platform will be developed  (and the chemometrics will be 
implemented) and integrated with the suitable enclosure and safety system for the application. In WP4, the integrated system will then 
be alpha te sted on the selected applications at the end user sites by the end users and supported by the development teams to 
validate the design. Having validated the design we will translate  the prototype to a product ( WP5) through the creation of the 
manufacturing documentation package using the engineering information and specifications. This will be passed to purchasing and 
production engineering to enable manufacture. Deployment of these first products will be in our participating end -users and to 
additional selected Beta customers to enable early refinement and troubleshooting support by the Application Team. In parallel with the 
product development work, we will continually build on and upgrade our business development plan ( WP6). As part of this activity the 
marketing plan will review the business opportunities of the technology and devise a sales strategy (building on our initial s trategy 
contained in our business plan). A project management framework  will be implemented through WP7. The Gantt Chart (Below) and 
Pert diagram (at end of this section) show the timings and the interdependencies between the different WPs and tasks and the 1 -page 
Gantt (which also includes the deliverables and milestones) is a very effective tool for high-level project control and helicopter overview 
for effective project management.  
TIMING OF THE DIFFER ENT WORK PACKAGES AN D THEIR COMPONENTS  
                                                                                                                                                                               SMEInst-07-2016-2017                                     
24 | P a g e  
 
 
GRAPHICAL PRESENTATI ON OF THE COMPONENTS  SHOWING HOW THEY INT ER-RELATE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
No WPs and Tasks Del. & 
Milestones 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
1 Target Applications and System Specifications ML1 # #
1.1 Characterisation of the target applications and initial trials D1.1 ■
1.2 Kano Survey and Quality Function deployment (QFD)
1.3 Definition of the system specifications D1.2 ■
2 System Hardware and Software ML2, 4, 5, 8 # # # # #
2.1 Design and building of the system hardware instrumentation D3.1, D3.2 ■ ■
2.2 Development of the system software D3.3, D3.4