4. Starting date 
Unless a specific (fixed) starting date is duly justified and agreed upon during the preparation of the Grant Agreement, the 
project will start on the first day of the month following the entry into force of the Grant Agreement (NB : entry into force  = 
signature by the Agency). Pleas e note that if a fixed starting date is used, you will be required to provide a written 
justification. 5. Duration 
Insert the duration of the project in full months. 
6. Call (part) identifier 
The Call (part) identifier is the reference number given in the call or part of the call you were addressing, as indicated 
in the publication of the call in the Official Journal of the European Union. You have to use the identifier given by the 
Commission in the letter inviting to prepare the grant agreement. 
7. Abstract 
8. Project Entry Month 
The month at which the participant joined the consortium, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all other start 
dates being relative to this start date. 
9. Work Package number 
Work package number: WP1, WP2, WP3, ..., WPn 
10. Lead beneficiary 
This must be one of the beneficiaries in the grant (not a third party) - Number of the beneficiary leading the work in this 
work package 
11. Person-months per work package 
The total number of person-months allocated to each work package. 
12. Start month 
Relative start date for the work in the specific work packages, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all other 
start dates being relative to this start date. 
13. End month 
Relative end date, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all end dates being relative to this start date. 
14. Deliverable number 
Deliverable numbers: D1 - Dn 
15. Type 
Please indicate the type of the deliverable using one of the following codes: 
 R Document, report 
DEM Demonstrator, pilot, prototype DEC
 Websites, patent fillings, videos, etc. 
OTHER 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
 
ETHICS Ethics requirement ORDP 
Open Research Data Pilot DATA 
data sets, microdata, etc. 
16. Dissemination level 
Please indicate the dissemination level using one of the following codes: 
 PU Public 
 CO Confidential, only for members of the consortium (including the Commission Services) 
EU-RES Classified Information: RESTREINT UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) 
EU-CON Classified Information: CONFIDENTIEL UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) EU-
SEC Classified Information: SECRET UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) 
17. Delivery date for Deliverable 
Month in which the deliverables will be available, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all delivery dates 
being relative to this start date. 
18. Milestone number 
Milestone number:MS1, MS2, ..., MSn 
19. Review number 
Review number: RV1, RV2, ..., RVn 
20. Installation Number 
Number progressively the installations of a same infrastructure. An installation is a part of an infrastructure that could be 
used independently from the rest. 
21. Installation country 
Code of the country where the installation is located or IO if the access provider (the beneficiary or linked third party) is 
an international organization, an ERIC or a similar legal entity. 
22. Type of access 
 VA if virtual access, 
TA-uc if trans-national access with access costs declared on the basis of unit cost, 
TA-ac if trans-national access with access costs declared as actual costs, and 
TA-cb if trans-national access with access costs declared as a combination of actual costs and costs on the basis of 
unit cost. 
23. Access costs 
Cost of the access provided under the project. For virtual access fill only the second column. For trans-national access fill 
one of the two columns or both according to the way access costs are declared. Trans-national access costs on the 
basis of unit cost will result from the unit cost by the quantity of access to be provided. 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
 
  
  
An Industrial Symbiosis Incubator for Maximizing 
Waste Heat/Cold Valorization in Industrial Parks 
and Districts  
  
Coordination and Support Action (CSA) - Horizon 2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019– Business case 
for industrial waste heat/cold recovery - Symbiosis in industrial parks and clusters - non-
technological barriers   
  
Name and organisation of the coordinating person: Georgios Chalkias, IRIS 
TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS  
S.L.  
  
Planned duration: 36 months  
  
List of Participants:  
  
No  Short Name  Organisation Name  Country  Type  
1  IRIS  IRIS TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS, SL  ES  SME  
2  SYM  SIMBIOSY SIMBIOSI INDUSTRIAL SL  ES  SME  
3  UHULL  UNIVERSITY OF HULL  UK  RTO  
4  INVEN  CARTAGO VENTURES SL  ES  SME  
5  IZNAB  IZNAB SPOLKA Z OGRANICZONA 
ODPOWIEDZIALNOSCIA  
PL  SME  
6  SOFIES  SOFIES SA   CH  SME  
7  EYDE  EYDE-KLYNGEN  NO  NPO  
8  COVES  COVESTRO DEUTSCHLAND AG  DE  LRG  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
HISTORY OF CHANGES  
#  Date  Change  Justification  Section  
1  28/02/20  Energy Symbiosis definition  To clarify the concept  contents  
2  28/02/20  Energy synergy definition  To clarify the concept  contents  
3  28/02/20  Minor corrections and 
formatting  
Proof-reading