3.3  Consortium as a whole 57
3.4  Resources to be committed 58 
4.  Members of the consortium 59 
4.1.  Participants (applicants) 59 
4.2.  Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources) 85 
5.  Ethics and Security 86 
 
  
  
List of acronyms  
IS: Industrial Symbiosis  PPP: Public-Private Partnership  
ES: Energy Symbiosis  ESCO: Energy Services Company  
IHS/ICS: Industrial Heat/Cold Symbiosis  EEI: Energy Intensive Industries  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 5 of 80  
  
EE: Energy efficiency  IPO: Industrial Park Operator  
DMP: Data Management Plan  DCHO: District Heating & Cooling 
Operator   
Energy symbiosis: The practice of utilizing industrial waste energy for commercial 
purposes  
Energy synergy: A specific commercial transaction/agreement involving industrial 
waste energy  
    
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 6 of 80  
  
1 EXCELLENCE
1.1 Objectives                                 
The challenge: Energy efficiency too slow and fossil fuel reliance too high to achieve 
decarbonization targets   
EU is currently responsible for 11.6% of the world's final energy consumption (9425 Mtoe in 2014) 
and for 10.8% of the world's final CO2 emissions (33.3 GtCO2 in 2014) with Industry accounting 
for 25.9% of the energy consumption and for 47.7% of the final CO2 emissions. Over the period 
of 2000 to 2014 industry managed to decrease its share by 4 percentage points (from 25 to 21%). 
Energy efficiency improvements led to significant energy savings estimated to be 226 Mtoe in 
2014 compared with 2008, with industry being responsible for 27% of these savings. However, in 
industry, the pace of energy efficiency improvements was halved during the economic crisis (1.1 
% per year since 2008, compared with around 2.2 % per year between 2000 and 2008) and 
remains so since then. Despite the great progress that has been achieved in previous years, it is 
estimated that 20 -50% of the energy used in industrial processes is lost  in the form of 
exhaust gaseous and liquid flows, cooling water and heat loss from equipment. Also, despite the 
overall reduction in energy consumption, in the heating sector, for example, fossil fuels still cover 
around 75% of the demand and only 18% is cove red by renewables. For these reasons, the EU 
recently revised its Renewable Energy Directive to set a target of raising the latter by 1.3% each 
year starting in 2021, so that it can meet its ambitious climate and energy 2030 targets: 40% cut 
in greenhouse gas emissions compared to 1990 levels; 27% share of renewables in final energy 
consumption; and 30% energy savings compared with the business-asusual scenario. In addition 
to this, Europe is facing problems as industry is leaving towards developing countri es. An 
indication of this trend is reflected to the vacancy rates of industrial parks and districts. For 
example, about ¾ of industrial parks in Germany have over 10% vacancy rate, ⅓ of which 
has a vacancy rate above 25%.   The opportunity: Large untapped i ndustrial waste heat 
potential can replace fossil fuel-based heating sources  
Energy in industry is mostly used for process heating and cooling, which represents about 
63% of the total industry final energy demand . At the same time, EU’s Long -Term Strategy 
demonstrates that renewables could supply almost 80% of heating and cooling consumption by 
2050 in buildings and industry together and that sector integration will be instrumental  to 
achieve this. In fact, a rather significant theoretical waste heat poten tial, accounting to 370.41 
TWh (Waste heat) or 173.99 TWH (Carnot’s potential) per year, has been estimated in the 
European industry. Energy Intensive Industries (EEIs) are unsurprisingly among the top heat 
emitters: Iron & Steel (27%), (Petro)chemical (22 %), Non -metallic minerals (17%), and 
Paper/Pulp/Print (12%). On the other hand, it is estimated that at least 50-70% of EU households 
could be served more cheaply by thermal infrastructure through district heating networks. District 
heating currently provi des only 8% of the heating demand in Europe. There is therefore an 
opportunity for  increasing energy efficiency growth rates and contributing significantly to 
the decarbonization targets of European Industry by using the large underutilized energy 
resources found throughout European EEIs to substitute conventional heat sources in the 
European industrial and urban sector.   
The solution: Industrial Symbiosis of waste energy - Energy symbiosis   
Industrial symbiosis (IS) involves commercial transactions of underutilized materials, energy and 
services between two or more production sites and has demonstrated its potential in saving 
resources, hence improving carbon, energy and resource efficiencies . Industrial Symbiosis has 
featured explicitly or implicitly in a number of European policies and communications in the past 
10 years and has been identified as “critical to achieve significant breakthrough in energy and 
resource efficiency in the process industry”. In the SET Plan Action 6, Industrial symbiosis 
between industries has been identified as key area with promising potential to valorize  
energy losses streams and better manage energy globally . In an EC communication form 
2012 Industrial Symbiosis is identified as a key element in achieving the vision of future factories: 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 7 of 80  
  
“Tomorrow's factories will… increasingly adopt sustainable business models suc h as 
industrial symbiosis to recover materials and dissipated heat and energy.”   
The benefits: Environmental, Economic, Social and Strategic  
The concept of Industrial Symbiosis has been gaining increasing traction with studies 
showing that its market potential in Europe could be as much as €85.6 Billion. A number of 
drivers for implementing Industrial Symbiosis have been identified, including economic, 
environmental and social be nefits, notably: cost reduction through avoiding landfilling and/or 
substituting expensive primary resources with cheaper ones; new revenue generation through 
trading resources that were previously wasted; CO2 reduction and improvement of overall 
corporate environmental performance; and creation of new jobs and local investments via 
generating new industrial activity; Also, it generates strategic benefits by contributing significantly 
to the reduction of resource and energy intensity of industrial activity thereby decreasing reliance 
on nonrenewable and/or critical and/or imported resources whose price is increasingly volatile 
and supply uncertain.   
The challenge: Lack of uptake and barriers to implementation  
Although some examples of industrial symbiosis with energy resources (from now on referred as 
Energy Symbiosis or ES) have gained attention around Europe, and despite its increased uptake 
in both policy and industry, Energy Symbiosis is still a fringe phenomenon. The most common 
barriers identified are regulatory and legislative barriers, financial obstacles, lack of ‘on the ground 
support’ to IS projects, (lack of) trust, exchange of knowledge and information and geographical 
proximity. In addition, an important and often overlooked barrier to IS implementation is the 
time and the cost of all the activities necessary in order to identify, assess, negotiate, and 
implement a single synergy (i.e. lead time and transaction costs).  Transaction costs for ES 
are: (i) search costs, related to the identification  of opportunities for exchanges; (ii) negotiation 
costs, related to the agreement on the terms of the exchanges; (iii) enforcement costs, related to 
putting in effect the contract. However, there are also additional costs (situated between (i) and 
(ii)) related to the assessment of the identification of opportunities and the acquisition of buy -in 
from all key stakeholders.  
Way Forward: Facilitation, Coordination, Commitment, Capacity Building and Training  
These challenges have often been overcome with the  intervention of a 3rd party, often called 
facilitator or coordinator, who assumes these costs, finds solutions to problems, intermediates in 
negotiations, and conducts all these task that are required to see the (energy) synergy through to 
completion. In fact, the existence of such a 3rd party (and its competence) has been 
systematically rated as the most important factor for the uptake and successful implementation of 
industrial symbiosis. According to Guillaume Massard et al. “ the successful development and 
operation of eco-innovation parks is identified to be principally linked to the availability of 
human power to coordinate operational activities  as well as perform research and 
development. The clear designation of a park as an Eco -Innovation Park and the willingness of 
businesses to substantially improve their economic status are also key success factors.” To this 
direction, capacity building in the industrial symbiosis domain has been identified as the 
main bottleneck to a broader deployment of these concepts in the process industry . The 
lack of appropriate knowledge and technical skills, as well as suitable business profiles, to design 
and implement industrial symbiosis concepts in industry are a significant barrier for its uptake. In 
order to address the lack of uptake of IS on the European level, a recent study ordered by the 
European commission proposed an EU -level IS platform that could take the form of a center of 
excellence for IS, which would actively 1) contribute to enhancing the knowledge bas e for IS in 
Europe ; 2) develop capacity in the area of IS, targeted at IS practitioners and policy-makers, and 
3) be a first point of contact between the EU and key stakeholders in the area of IS. This option 
would include and build on a ‘platform of plat forms’ but also offer additional functions such as 
coaching and education and active dissemination of best practices. At INCUBIS we take on the 
above challenges and recommendations and we propose a concept of Energy Symbiosis 
Incubator that will deliver them.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 8 of 80  
  
The overall objective of INCUBIS is:  To help decarbonise European industry by 2050 by 
unlocking the market potential of energy symbiosis through developing and deploying Energy 
Symbiosis Incubators across Europe thus enabling the utilization of waste energy from EEIs.  
  
This objective has be en subsequently broken down to 8 specific objectives with well -defined 
expected results and performance indicators as follows:  
Objective 1: Define an operational framework that will address the gaps in the energy 
symbiosis ecosystem (linked to WP1)  
Expected Results: This objective will be achieved by conducting three distinct activities. (i) By 
identifying technical, economic, social, organizational and regulatory gaps in the target regions 
and industries. Mapping and analysing existing energy symbio sis implementations to inform 
methods for identifying and assessing opportunities for new ones. (ii) By reviewing and 
consolidating existing knowledge on Industrial Symbiosis, industrial waste heat and cold 
recovery, storage, transfer and conversion, and e nergy systems at large, a database of, and 
guide to, the knowledge, skills and tools required to deliver Energy Symbiosis will be built.  (iii) 
The outcomes of the previous results will be combined to an Operational Framework for the 
project.  
Performance Indicators: Nr of stakeholders consulted, Nr of publications reviewed, Nr of tools 
and methodologies listed, the submission of D1.1 and D1.2   
Objective 2: Establish the necessary tools and services for lifting barriers and supporting 
the delivery of energy symbiosis (linked to WP2)  
Expected Results: The outcomes of the project that will contribute to this objective are the tools, 
guides, methods and best practices that will be developed to enable the delivery of the support 
services to the stakeholders through  
 
the Incubator. Within the framework for the Energy Symbiosis Coordination, a methodology and 
a map presenting the energy symbiosis potential in a region will be developed based on policies, 
social and organizational factors and the possibility to implement  sustainable business cases. 
For this purpose, examples of contractual arrangements for de -risking investment and a 
collection of best practices and examples on attracting support and on -boarding decision -
makers at the level of the business, park and government will be included in a guide for building 
a business case around energy symbiosis projects.  
Performance Indicators:  nr of support best practices identified, nr of funding programmes 
collected, nr of maps created, nr GWh of energy symbiosis potential estimated, and delivery of 
D2.1, D2.2, D2.3, and D2.4.   
Objective 3:  Develop the Cloud Platform that will enable the provision of energy 
symbiosis support services under the “Virtual Incubator” delivery model  (linked to WP3)  
Expected Results: This objective will be addressed through the development and launch of a 
cloud platform that will integrate all the tools and modules necessary to support the provision of 
the Incubator´s services in the target regions and the rest of Eur ope. This will require the 
definition of detailed and clear specifications and architecture for this platform as well as the 
collection of ample feedback regarding its User Interface and functionalities and the production 
of a user manual that will enable users to use the platform. Key in achieving a successful result 
is the seamless integration of all modules within a single interface and the ability of the platform 
to “talk” with existing ICT tools and modules.   
Performance Indicators:  Nr of registered e nd-users, Nr of individual access during a year, 
frequency of consecutive access from end -users, number of feedback requests, nr of 
functionalities implemented, nr of testing sessions  
Objective 4: Deliver impact by rolling out the energy symbiosis incubator to the project’s 
regions and supporting realization of energy synergies across Europe (linked to WP4)  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 9 of 80  
  
Expected Results: The main expected results from achieving this objective relate to the delivery 
of the impact as defined through specific and measurable KPIs (see impact section). This impact 
will be delivered through the actual deployment of local Incubators in the project´s target regions 
that will identify and support Energy Symbiosis to implementation. A prerequisite for this is the 
development of concrete and realistic action plans for each of the regions that will guide 
subsequent activities and the implementation of all 3 phases of Incubator deployment. The aim 
is to create guidelines that describe actions and not concepts to encourage faster development 
of Energy Symbiosis implementation.  
Performance Indicators: nr of initiatives launched, nr of opportunities identified, nr of synergies 
implemented, nr of industries involved, nr of site visits conducted, nr of facilitated workshops 
conducted, nr of impact KPIs achieved.  
Objective 5:  Capacity-building and training for energy symbiosis at individual, 
organizational, and institutional level (linked to WP5)  
Expected Results: This objective will contribute to the addressing of framework, cultural and 
institutional barriers. Specifically an accelerated education and training programme will be 
developed and launched. It will be based on material produced during the first two years of the 
project, reworked for educational purposes. All packaged as an intensive learning course 
targeted at professionals working for institutions that hold coordinating roles in Energy 
Symbiosis projects in the private and public sector. In addition, capacity building will be 
performed at policy-level with specific recommendations for local and nation al and European 
policy makers as well as at investor level with guidelines for valuating energy symbiosis 
investments. Finally, at institutional level, standardization activities and updates to existing 
management and BATs will be provided to include in th ese considerations for Energy 
Symbiosis.  
Performance Indicators: 10 training sessions delivered, 200 of users attending these sessions, 
200 of downloads/views of training material, nr of participants in CWA process, delivery of one 
CWA agreement, delivery of one energy efficiency BREF supplement, 30 of investors engaged.   
Objective 6: Verify the environmental, economic and social impacts of INCUBIS project 
(linked to WP4)  
Expected Results: The expected results for this objective is the development of a dedicated 
methodology including specific KPIs to be monitored in order to systematically assess the 
impact (in environmental, social, economic, and strategic terms) of the Incubators locally a nd 
globally for the duration of the project. In order to document territorial impact and value creation 
linked to the setting up of the Energy Symbiosis Incubators, a range of performance indicators 
will be regularly monitored and updated throughout the length of the project. The baseline data 
(gathered at the beginning of the project) will serve as the starting point for the impact monitoring 
activities. Both the baseline and the updated data (performance indicators) will be provided by 
the key stakeholder s linked to the INCUBIS local case studies, who will be involved in the 
different engagement activities of the five Incubators  
(interviews, workshops, consultations activities, etc.) and thus in touch with the corresponding 
INCUBIS partners. The mentioned data will be systematically gathered from the stakeholders 
at the end of each INCUBIS phase, i.e. three times through the project.  Once the methodology 
is in place, it will be used for (i) monitoring and verifying the impact of the incubators and (ii) 
producing estimation on the future impact after project end.  
Performance Indicators: primary energy consumption avoided in GWh/year, reduction of GHG 
emissions, reduction other pollutants, investments in energy efficiency projects triggered, 
number of enti ties committed to energy symbiosis, nr of regulations adapted/created, jobs 
created, cost savings for industry, benefits incurred in Euro, delivery of D4.1 and D4.4.   
Objective 7: Develop a sustainable business model for the Energy Symbiosis Incubator 
and a business plan for its post-project commercialisation (linked to WP6)  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 10 of 80  
  
Expected Results: This objective contributes to ensuring the continuity of the Energy Symbiosis 
Incubator as a concept and as an entity beyond the project end. The project outputs will be 
evaluated and the IPRs will be defined among the consortium members. In Section 2.2 the 
initial exploitation and business plans agreed by all the partners are presented. To su pport a 
broad diffusion, implementation and exploitation of the project outcomes, it is crucial to develop 
possible scenarios of how INCUBIS can support the business development of Energy 
Symbiosis facilitators (e.g. industry park operators), including the use of the Virtual Platform for 
site marketing strategies and attracting tenants. The business model for the Virtual Platform 
and the Incubator as a whole will consider certain types of industrial parks (e.g. integrated 
parks, “Verbund”-production, heterogeneous industrial areas) and include tailor-made offers for 
the integration of the Energy Symbiosis Incubator into the management processes of targeted 
site operators. The business plans will address how Energy Symbiosis Incubators will achieve 
economic sustainability in order to fund core operational costs post-project, such as staff, travel, 
office space, maintenance of digital platforms, events and external costs. The core objective 
will be to achieve the continuation of the Virtual Platform and the fiv e regional Incubators. 
However, the business model will be designed as a standardised framework which can be 
easily customized for use by other regional Incubators across Europe. This means the business 
plans can have a wider impact beyond the project, con tributing towards the establishment of 
new Incubators and the growth of the INCUBIS network.   
Performance Indicators: size of target market, market share (in % of total market), projected 
turnover 5 years postproject, projected growth rate, candidate clients approached, nr of 
scenarios generated,   
Objective 8: Maximise the impacts of the project through effective commun ication and 
dissemination and by establishing synergies with projects and initiatives across Europe 
(linked to WP6)  
Expected Results: A communication and dissemination campaign will be implemented to raise 
awareness about the project and its activities among the industry and to stimulate future market 
demand, to outreach to and engage with policy makers and the general public, and to sec ure 
‘buy-in’ for the project. Also, an Energy Symbiosis radar will be deployed through which 
activities related to Energy Symbiosis across Europe will be continuously monitored and 
assessed for their relevance with INCUBIS activities. Where relevant, syner gies will be 
established.  Performance Indicators: nr of stakeholders reached (per stakeholder category and 
per type of engagement), nr of followers in social media, nr of posts/views in social media, nr 
of events attended, nr of events organized, nr of pr ojects/initiatives engaged, nr of 
countries/regions reached, nr of publications.
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
 The following sections detail the relation of INCUBIS to the specific challenge and scope of LC-SC3-
EE-6-2019.   
CALL CHALLENGES & How will INCUBIS address them  
  
Challenge 1 : ...industrial waste heat/cold recovery is hindered… by the lack of 
financial/economic justification for the required equipment  
INCUBIS addresses the lack of financial and economic justification in WP2 and WP5  by 
addressing this from both business and investor side. In WP2 a guide is developed to support 
energy symbiosis business case development and financial de -risking, in -line with the 
requirements of different types of investors. In WP5 an investor-oriented taxonomy is delivered 
to help investors assess energy symbiosis projects.  
Challenge 2:  Often, it is forgotten that... the sources of heat/cold losses of a given 
industry can be a valuable resource for other industries...  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 11 of 80  
  
INCUBIS will ensure that energy symbiosis is systematically “reminded” to relevant 
stakeholders through its ambitious communication and dissemination plan ( WP6), its direct 
access to relevant stakeholders in 10 countries through consortium partners (see also support 
letters) and its European -wide reach through associations and networks of which they are 
members (e.g. ASPIRE and Nordic Symbiosis Network).  
Challenge 3: other energy cooperation activities between industries can also contribute 
to increase their energy efficiency.  
INCUBIS takes the approach of energy symbiosis (rather than simply heat/cold symbiosis) and 
includes in its portfolio of “synergies” all types of energy cooperation between industries 
including waste-to-energy projects (WP1)  
  
CALL SCOPE & How INCUBIS addresses it  
  
“improve the energy efficiency of industrial parks districts and clusters by unlocking the 
market potential and supporting the demand and offer of high-quality energy services”  
INCUBIS delivers to key stakeholders around Europe in regions and industrial areas with great 
energy symbiosis potential, a set of tools and services designed to (i) lift the key non-technical 
barriers for the uptake of energy symbiosis and (ii) build capacity for the delivery of energy 
symbiosis in the respective organizations. In  this way, energy symbiosis potential worth 
thousands of GWh is unlocked thereby, improving energy efficiency in those parks and districts 
and creating both demand and offer of high-quality energy services.   
develop and test “instruments facilitating, at customer/ business level, the actual 
implementation of energy cooperation” and “replicable business models and service 
concepts, at service provider level (i.e. relevant 3rd party organisations), for joint energy 
services  
INCUBIS supports industries and 3rd parties in implementing energy symbiosis by providing: 
(i) a step-by-step  method (respective digital tools) for collecting data, identifying and ranking 
energy symbiosis opportunities, (ii) estimations an d maps of energy symbiosis potential (iii) 
methods for including regulatory and organizational factors in this estimation, (iv) examples of 
contractual arrangements for de-risking investments, (v) guides for developing business cases 
customized to specific investors, (vi) a tendering portal for matching projects and investors, (vii) 
an overall framework for coordinating energy symbiosis projects, (viii) an end-to-end integrated 
energy symbiosis project management ICT platform.   
“capacity building activities such as skills development and sharing know-how of senior 
and executive management of companies in industrial parks and service providers or 
other stakeholders.”  
INCUBIS will launch a set of training activities in the contex t of its Accelerated Education 
programme, which will also form an integral part of the Virtual Incubator Platform. This 
programme will consist of a core module, educating stakeholders on all the crucial aspects of 
energy symbiosis, and several elective modules so that it is adaptable to different stakeholder 
roles and profiles. The training programme will be an outgrowth of the Incubator´s services and 
tools delivery thus covering all aspects of energy symbiosis implementation and will be targeted 
to ESCOs, DHCOs, IPOs, symbiosis consultants, industrial cluster managers, anchor tenants, 
etc.   
“address legal issues in order to adapt regulatory and legal frameworks”  
INCUBIS will leverage on the best practices and advanced level of energy symbiosis 
penetration in some of European countries and regions (e.g. Denmark and Finland or 
Barcelona) to produce recommendations for new or adaptation of existing regulations in other 
regions which are lagging behind (e.g. Norway and France).  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 12 of 80  
  
take into account “the sustainability of the proposed symbiosis in case one or more of 
the involved parties are changing activity”  
Termination of industrial activity and substitution by another heat supply are the two major 
explanations for termination of heat/cold symbiosis. However, there is good evidence that the 
risk premium of losing industrial heat recovery for this specific reasons is often overestimated 
in feasibility studies. INCUBIS will address this challenge in the context of the business and 
contractual support services of the incubator by (i) developing a best practice for assessing the 
risk of heat/cold symbiosis investments and (ii) proposing contractual schemes that will help 
decrease the financial risk or distribute it better between cont racted parties (e.g. long -term 
contracts with integrated penalties)   
“ensure applicability of the solutions to other industrial parks/ business sectors”    
INCUBIS transferability and replicability are ensured by the approach and methodology of the 
project which includes application and validation of the Energy Symbiosis Incubator concept 
across a wide range of applications around Europe.  
“strong communication and dissemination components will be needed in order to reach 
many industries, industrial park managers and ESCOs.”  
The project incorporates a comprehensive and intensive programme of communication and 
dissemination, integrated throughout its Work Packages (rather than conducted as an isolated 
activity). This programme includes continuous engagement and training of stakeholders (by 
definition of Incubator concept), dozens of site visits,  
workshops, events and a strong online presence through social media, publications and the 
Virtual Platform, including a stakeholder engagement module.
1.3 Concept & methodology  
1.3.1 CONCEPT: The Energy Symbiosis Incubator  
Business Incubators are broa dly defined as  entities which provide “support to start -ups to 
improve the probability of survival of the portfolio companies and accelerate their development”. 
There are many different types of Incubation services and they are delivered through different 
ways (incubator models). The first generation of incubation models, introduced in the early 
nineties, primarily focused on providing physical and financial resource support (for example office 
space and small financial injections) to early -stage high poten tial ventures. Throughout the 
nineties, new incubation models emerged, which gradually moved away from a mere focus on 
offering basic office space and financial support, towards a broad range of more intangible high 
value added services. This second genera tion of incubation models included, amongst other 
things services such as an aid in evaluating different market opportunities, access to knowledge 
intensive services, product development support, access to knowledge, expertise and networks 
of entrepreneurs and provision of entrepreneurial finance. More recently, we can identify a further 
shift, hinting at a new generation of incubation models, which focuses on knowledge intensive 
business services, moving away almost entirely from the primary services for which the incubation 
models were founded (i.e. rental services) and also establishing a strong digital presence (Virtual 
Incubators).  
The Energy Symbiosis Incubator (ESI)  follows the paradigm of modern Incubators that focus 
on the provision of Knowledge -Intensive Business Services and access to funding rather than 
physical assets and co-working space. Under this model, the Incubator’s services are increasingly 
supported by Cloud Platforms that create a virtual environment to host a range of tools and 
modules that enable the delivery of the incubator’s services. Accordingly, the Energy Symbiosis 
Incubator will consist of both physical and virtual spaces, manned by the INCUBIS consortium 
partners who have been selected specifically for their complementary expe rtise and experience 
in delivering Energy Symbiosis. ESI will deliver such a range of tools, methods, and services to 
key stakeholders of existing or new energy symbiosis initiatives aiming to (a) support them in the 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 13 of 80  
  
identification and delivery of energy s ynergies and (b) train them and build capacity at all levels 
to achieve sustainable growth of energy symbiosis uptake. The virtual space will consist of an 
online Energy Symbiosis platform that will integrate matchmaking functionalities, ranking tools, 
feasibility tools, best practices, guidelines, training materials, etc. and will essentially function as 
a toolbox for delivering the Incubator s services (both remotely and locally). The physical 
structures will be spaces located at the  ́ HQs and offices of consortium partners located 
strategically at each of the project's target areas (e.g. IRIS/SYM in Barcelona Area, EYDE in 
Norway, UHULL at Humber region, SOFIES in France and COVES in Germany) and that will 
function as both meeting point and operation centre for the local activities of the Incubator.  
 
  
Incubator modules, tools and services  
The services and tools of the INCUBATOR are to be delivered both in-person and online and are 
designed to follow and support the main activities at each stage of energy symbiosis projects.  
 
  
Step 1: Energy Symbiosis Identification  
This is a preparatory step that includes scoping and engagement activities as well as pre-scoping 
activities like stakeholder mapping (and other types of “mappings”). In this phase facilitated 
workshops (typically facilitated by a 3rd party) are organized where stakeholders representing 
local waste energy sources and sinks, as well as service p roviders, participate and share data 
and ideas. The “facilitator” then collects all the data and facilitates a discussion. Data about energy 
sources and sinks are not collected only through the workshop but also through one -to-one 
Figure  
1 
. Energy Symbiosis Incubator Concept 
  
Figure  
3 
. Symbiosis project lifecycle stages 
  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 14 of 80  
  
interviews as well as thr ough existing databases and literature. After the data collection is 
completed, opportunities for synergies are identified and a preliminary ranking is applied. The 
ESI, through its local partners, will support local coordinators in conducting these activities across 
its 5 regions. In doing so ESI will use two digital tools for collecting and managing the data.  
Digital tool 1: Industrial symbiosis project management (ISPM) Module:  The industrial 
symbiosis data management software SINER (developed by SYM) w ill be used to facilitate the 
collection and management of industrial data corresponding to industrial operations, locations, 
resources (raw materials, waste, water and energy) and waste (wastewater, residual heat). The 
SÍNER platform (TRL 7) is currently being tested and used in realistic environment (several 
industrial symbiosis projects led by SYM) to manage resources data and identify synergies 
opportunities between the industries in a territory. Within the context of the INCUBIS project, 
SÍNER can be used to identify heat/cold potential givers and takers. Compared to other available 
similar tools, SÍNER allows mapping and working at a company level in order to then zoom out 
and analyse the industrial ecosystem of a given territory as a whole: Who are th e top waste 
generators industries? How many industries share the same waste/resource? What type of waste 
can become a resource? Through which technology?   
  
The software operates on two levels: At the single company level it allows the organization of 
company data like history of synergies, waste produced vs waste reused per category per year, 
audit reports, photos and other documents. At the industrial ecosystem level, it allows users to 
understand the general characteristics of a specific industrial ecos ystem by aggregating 
information from participating companies. SÍNER is designed to help data gathering from different 
sources including (i) directly from company personnel, (ii) expert facilitators of symbiosis 
workshops for opportunity identification, and (iii) existing databases. It then analyzes the data and 
provides basic visualization and analysis functions.  
 
Figure 4.ISPM Module structure and interface  
Digital tool 2: Energy Symbiosis Opportunity Screening 
(ESOS) Module: The Energy Symbiosis Opportunity 
Screening Module  (ESOS), developed as part of the 
H2020 project SHAREBOX, identifies energy symbiosis 
opportunities on the basis of companies’ waste energy 
sources and energy needs. An important feature of the 
ESOS is the recognition that realising an energy synergy is 
likely to r equire additional infrastructure/equipment to 
enable energy recovery, transport, storage or conversion. 
ESOS therefore includes a comprehensive database of 
technologies each characterised by multiple criteria that 
include technical performance/capability, OPEX and 
CAPEX, maturity, risk etc. This database provides the users 
with recommended technology solutions tailored to the type 
of waste stream they have and reflective of their business 
or environmental aspirations, ambition, appetite for risk etc. 
ESOS a llows potential Energy Symbiosis partners to 
identify one another and provides them with an outline of 
  
  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 15 of 80  
  
what would be required, in terms of additional equipment/infrastructure (ie investment), for them 
to collaborate thereby forming the basis for the feasibility study and for initial negotiations. ESOS 
can deliver its outputs  
on the basis of the data already collected by ISPM, but it also offers to Figure 5. ESOS module 
questionnaire the users the option to provide additional data in order to further tailor  
ESOS´ outputs to their needs. This tool is ideal to organize information regarding waste energy 
producers and consumers and support Energy Symbiosis screening activities.  
Step 2: Energy symbiosis assessment  
To assess the potential and the feasibility o f an opportunity the stakeholders need to combine 
technical, economic, regulatory and other information (like commitment and willingness of 
involved stakeholders to proceed with such a project). In cases of Energy Symbiosis with multiple 
participating organizations from different sectors and with different business needs, this stage can 
become cumbersome, time consuming and push  projects to a stall due to loss of 
interest/momentum or lack of funding. INCUBIS will address this challenge by providing a 
methodology for assessing opportunities and estimating the potential of identified energy 
synergies, and respective digital tools to explore different application scenarios. In this context 
INCUBIS will also use collected information and combine in with regulatory and social information 
to map the energy synergy potential in more detail.  
Digital tool 3: Energy Symbiosis Assessment (ESA) module: To support this step, we will use 
a second modulke derived from SHAREBOX project to provide the facility for a regiona l 
assessment and optimisation of waste energy symbiotic potential. ESA considers all waste energy 
sources and sinks geographically and temporally i.e. recognising that there is a limit on the 
distance over which energy can be effectively transported and th at production scheduling may 
mean that wastes are not available at all times. The ESOS database is then used to generate a 
list of all the potential energy sources i.e. the raw energy source, the form it would take if 
transported (so accounting for losses)  and all the forms it could be transformed into. This list 
comprises groups of energy sources that can be regarded as logical ‘ors’ so that, for example, 
hot flu gas could be used as a supply of heat or converted to electricity using an Organic Rankine 
Cycle machine but it cannot do both. Next, all the energy sinks within the region are compiled into 
a list where entries are connected by logical ‘ands’ so that for example a factory might require a 
source of process heat and electricity to power the lighting  and heating in the company offices. 
Once these lists are formed the ESA performs a combinatorial optimisation by considering sinks 
and sources permutations and provides a list of network configurations prioritised based on user 
defined objectives, e.g. reducing emissions or minimising costs.  
Step 3: Energy symbiosis barrier removal  
Once the opportunities for symbiosis have been identified and assessed, INCUBIS will support 
the design and planning of the projects by facilitating the key activities and enabling the removal 
of key barriers corresponding to the specific stage of the energy symbiosis lifecycle.    
Access to (seed) funding and De-risking investments  
By creating a live inventory of funding mechanisms at European, national, regional and local level 
(both private and public), INCUBIS will help stakeholders in (i) identifying sources of seed funding 
that would help them fund the initial stages of the project and (ii) actually drafting and submitting 
an application to secure this funding. This work will culminate in a guide for creating business 
cases and drafting applications for tenders and calls for early stage projects. In the context of this 
service, INCUBIS partner INVEN will also conduct financial risk analysis of the proposed 
investments and propose ways to reduce risk through specific contractual arrangements that 
distribute risk through time and between the contracted parties.  
Digital tool 4: Energy Symbiosis Tendering (EST) Module:  This module will consist of two 
interfaces: 1. A funding portal that will collect information on all available funding programmes at 
regional, national and European level for funding energy symbiosis and recommend the most 
suitable ones to users on the basis of their needs. 2. A tendering interface where public or private 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 16 of 80  
  
investors will be able to post tenders for energy symbiosis projects, and interested parties will be 
able to submit applications  
Gaining organizational and policy support  
The support of energy symbiosis at all organizational levels has been proven to be critical for the 
successful implementation of energy symbiosis projects. This is often achieved through the 
drafting and signing of common roadmaps, visions, statements, and action plans at company, 
park or regional level. These documents are oft en legally non-binding but immensely helpful in 
providing orientation and focus to activities. INCUBIS will capitalize on the important experience 
of some of its members (notably EYDE who is drafting an Energy Roadmap for its members and 
SYM through the respective initiative at the level of Barcelona) and consolidate these and other 
experiences therefore generating an inventory of best practices. Through conducting interviews 
and workshops with involved stakeholders, the partners will record their experienc es on how to 
generate agreements of this kind that will have maximum impact and share this in the form of 
guide and in-person advice with the Incubator’s members.    
Energy Symbiosis Training & Mentoring (ESTM) module - This module will be an adaptation 
of similar software developed by IRIS for other applications and will consist of a set of integrated 
micro-services (including web conferencing, webinar delivery, file sharing, and online forum) that 
will enable the delivery of training activities (e.g. in the form of webinars) and remote mentoring 
(e.g. through remote consultation sessions).  
Step 4 & 5: Energy symbiosis implementation and follow-up  
In these steps INCUBIS will support ongoing energy symbiosis projects wit h impact 
monitoring/assessment, for enabling the dissemination and replication of their results and impact 
in other similar case studies. This will be accomplished by the development of a dedicated impact 
validation methodology (also supported from specific questionnaires and forms provided through 
the Virtual Platform) that local INCUBIS partners will use to follow up and collect information on 
the progress of the synergies (through site visits and contact with stakeholders). This methodology 
will also be provided in the context of the Accelerated Education Programme to enable local 
coordinators to track and evaluate project progress and impact autonomously.   
1.3.2 Relation to other research and innovation activities  
Table 1. Research and Innovation activities linked to the project  
Project title and Acronym   End  Opportunity for carryover to INCUBIS  
Secure Management Platform for 
Shared Process Resources  
(SHAREBOX)  
Aug 
2019  
The Energy Module of the industrial symbiosis cloud 
platform developed by IRIS in this H2020 project will be 
used in WP3.  
Energy and resource management 
systems for improved efficiency in 
the process industries (MAESTRI)  
Aug 
2019  
INCUBIS will build on this H2020 project, particularly 
through IZNAB’s role in measuring the impact of energy 
efficiency through industrial symbiosis (WP4).  
CiRcular Economy: SusTainability 
Implications and guidING progress  
(CRESTING)  
Dec 
2021  
This MSCA Network develops impact measurement 
methodologies and indicators for the Circular Economy. 
INCUBIS, through UHULL, will create a research line 
focused on energy symbiosis (WP4).  
Scaling  European  Resources  with  
Industrial Symbiosis (SCALER)  
May 
2020  
INCUBIS will use SCALER’ s (H2020) generic best 
practices, tools and guidelines as a reference for its own 
activities (WP1, WP2).  
Improved energy and resource 
efficiency by better coordination of 
production in the process industries 
(CoPro)  
May 
2020  
This H2020 project developed technical systems for 
coordination of production across industrial sites. 
COVES will use INCUBIS to addre ss non/technical 
barriers associated to this work (WP4).  
Transition  Regions 
 towards  Industrial 
Symbiosis (TRIS)  
Mar 
2021  
INCUBIS will seek synergies with TRIS (Interreg) to 
exchange knowledge and extend its impact to Italy and 
Hungary (WP6)   
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 17 of 80  
  
Industrial Symbiosis for Regional 
Sustainable Growth and a Resource  
Efficient Circular Economy (SYMBI)  
Mar 
2021  
INCUBIS will seek synergies with SYMBI (Interreg) to 
exchange knowledge and extend its impact in regions of 
Italy, Hungary, Poland, Finland and Greece. (WP6)  
Supporting new Opportunities for 
Waste Heat And cold valorisation 
Towards EU decarbonization  (SO 
WHAT)  
May 
2022  
INCUBIS will seek synergies with this H2020 project to 
exchange knowledge and extend its impact in regions of 
Portugal, Belgium, Sweden, and Romania (WP6).  
Fostering industrial symbiosis for a 
sustainable resource intensive 
industry across the extended 
construction value  
Feb 
2020  
SYM will bring in INCUBIS their experience and 
methodology for facilitating and monitoring the impacts 
of symbiosis among the res ource intensive industries 
involved in this H2020 project, such as  
chain (FISSAC)   steel, aluminium, ceramics, glass and plastic (WP2, 
WP4)  
Envisioning and Testing New 
Models of  
Sustainable Energy Cooperation 
and Services in Industrial Parks (S-
PARCS)  
Feb 
2021  
INCUBIS will actively seek synergies with S -PARCS 
(H2020) from day one including exchange of know -how 
and collaboration in activities like service provision to 
parks and joint event organization.  
Comprehensive model of waste 
heat  
utilization in CE regions (CE-HEAT)  
May 
2019  
INCUBIS will use the project’s (Interreg) methodology for 
estimating regional waste heat potential and developing 
regional cadastres as a reference for its own energy 
synergy mapping activities (WP2)  
Heat Roadmap Europe (HRE4)  2019  INCUBIS will update the Pan-European Thermal Atlas 
(WP2)  
Industrial and Infrastructure Investor 
Confidence Project (I3CP)  
Oct 
2019  
INCUBIS will adapt the methodology for certifying energy 
symbiosis projects as “Investor Ready Energy Efficiency” 
in WP5.  
Innovative and efficient solution, 
based on modular, ver satile, smart 
process units for energy and 
resource flexibility in highly energy 
intensive processes (CIRMET)  
Mar 
2022  
IZNAB will capitalize on their experience with monitoring 
energy efficiency in EEIs participating in this H2020 
project and adapt the m ethodology used in this project 
to the needs of cross -site optimization, supporting 
SYM’s tasks in WP4.  
Heating and Cooling: Open Source 
Tool for Mapping and Planning of 
Energy Systems (HOTMAPS)  
Sep 
2020  
INCUBIS will update and use the information on regional 
heat demand from this H2020 project, coupling it with 
information on waste heat supply and framewo rk 
conditions.  
  
The project is also aligned with the Erasmus+ Sector Skills Alliances and specifically the Blueprint 
project for the sectors of Energy -intensive industries & Industrial Symbiosis (to be launched in 
2019). We will therefore actively seek synergies in the co ntext of INCUBIS training and 
educational/vocational activities, together with other H2020 projects (e.g. SPIRE, LC, CE, SC5 
calls).    
1.3.3  INCUBIS Methodology  
Energy symbiosis projects are among the most time -consuming symbiosis projects with 
opportunity identification, assessment and planning stages that often last >1 year. If one adds to 
this the relative long implementation times due to technical and legal requirements (ie permits and 
infrastructure development), a typical project may take 2 -3 years before inauguration and 
delivery of (environmental and social) impact while the economic impact will take even longer 
(with payback times up to 5 years). In addition, when we take into consideration the high risk of 
failure of such projects at the first p hases of development (ie before the implementation stage), 
their increased sensitivity to contextual factors and framework conditions, and therefore their 
particularly demanding and resource -intensive assessment and planning stages, we come to 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 18 of 80  
  
some conclusions regarding the methodology that we need (not) follow and the choice of case 
studies.  
First, it becomes clear that the project needs to be long (3 years) and engage with real case 
studies on the outset in order to allow the time required for impact. Further, the method of choosing 
case studies is crucial: we cannot choose as case studies single predetermined energy synergies 
because by the time the project is approved and ready to intervene (a) if they were at early stages 
of development it would be very possible that many of them would have failed and (b) if they were 
already in more advanced planning stages they might have already overcome all the barriers and 
be implemented. Similarly, we cannot choose to provide full support on all aspects of energy 
symbiosis to each case study because then we would be limited to a small number of projects 
(due to resource constraints) that are risky by nature. Finally, we cannot choose to focus on a 
single region (e.g. a specific country) or on a single type of indus trial clustering (e.g. industrial 
park) since we need to allow case studies with diversity that will help us develop an Energy 
Symbiosis Incubator that is replicable across many contexts around Europe.   
We therefore propose a methodology whereby five regions around Europe, each with different 
regulatory context, governance structure, and climate are being chosen to set up a local 
Incubator. At each region we have a consortium partner with experience and skills in facilitating 
energy symbiosis. This partner  has pre -identified a range of cases, at different stages of 
development, facing different non -technical challenges and involving a diverse set of 
industries, types of energy symbiosis and stakeholders . These cases consist our starting 
pool of energy symbi osis projects and their key stakeholders are already informed of INCUBIS 
project and have committed to participate through support letters and close ties to the local 
INCUBIS partners. However, this starting pool of projects will be expanded through consec utive 
engagement and opportunity identification activities in the respective regions by INCUBIS 
consortium. Eventually, our goal is the creation and maintenance of a pipeline of energy 
symbiosis projects that will feed in a sustainable way our network of E nergy Symbiosis 
Incubators far beyond the duration of this project. The aim will be to achieve robust  business 
models (without reliance on grant support) for the Incubator network and Virtual Platform that 
enable them to operate sustainably and support the growth of the Incubator network to cover more 
geographic regions, through dissemination and other outreach activities.  
As such, five (5) local Energy Symbiosis Incubators will be launched, covering wider industrial 
areas (Barcelona, Dunkirk, South Norway, Humber, ChemCoast) and supporting existing or novel 
symbiotic networks along the 3 stages of their evolution (conversation, connectio n, co-creation). 
In each symbiotic network, local incubators will identify multiple synergies and select the most 
promising to see them through to implementation. A global Virtual Incubator will (i) integrate all 
the tools and services provided by the local incubators, (ii) connect local initiatives between them 
and with the support community for knowledge transfer and sharing best practices and (iii) enable 
the replication of the incubator model across Europe. Incubator services and tools will be delivered 
at a European scale by capitalizing on the Virtual Incubator and a support community created 
based on an ambitious dissemination and communication plan focused on collaboration across 
European projects and initiatives. This way, the project will create a community of symbiosis 
mentors and experts, to support the mentoring and incubation activities of the project. Finally, 
Institutional barriers for energy symbiosis will be lifted at European level through targeted 
interventions in policies, standards, procedures and guidelines.  
  
Table 2. The 3 stages of Industrial Symbiosis initiatives. INCUBIS will follow the same model.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 19 of 80  
  
  
  
In order to achieve the above the project will unfold its activities in 3 -phases, each representing 
different levels of development of the Incubator and different types of case study selection and 
execution.  
  
Phase 1 – Learning and preparation phase (M1-M12, WP1, T2.1, T3.1, and T4.1):  
✓ Identify, link with and learn from successful or near-completed energy symbiosis projects 
in all regions ✓ Enrich the project´s knowledge-base and start mapping the status quo in 
selected regions.  
✓ Launch awareness raising campaign and forge synergies with ongoing projects/initiatives.  
✓ Conduct symbiosis identification activities to increase the initial “pool” of energy symbiosis 
projects  
✓ Start engagement with selected projects from the “pool” to define needs and requirements  
Phase 2 – Local Incubator deployment phase (M13-M24, WP2, WP3, and WP4):  
✓ Launch Incubators gradually in all regions including ICT tools and face-to-face services  
✓ Finalize initial versions of INCUBIS methods and tools and  apply them to selected ES 
projects    
✓ Gradually add elements and refine Incubator as case studies progress through their 
lifecycle  
✓ Continue engagement to further increase the “pool” and to create a network of champions 
and mentors  
✓ Apply performance and impact monitoring methodologies and implement improvements 
accordingly   
Phase 3 – Cloud Incubator deployment phase (M25-M36, T3.3, T4.3, T4.4, and WP5):  
✓ Finalize Incubator services, tools and methods. Deliver the cloud version of the virtual 
platform  
✓ Expand communication campaign across Europe to promote project outcomes through 
the Cloud Platform.  
✓ Develop training materials and deliver it through the training module to stakeholders 
across Europe  
✓ Execute capacity-building activities to lift regulatory, financial, and political barriers  
✓ Define the business plan under which the Incubator will remain operational after project -
end  
In every phase of delivery, additional opportunity identification activities will take place and new 
promising ES projects will be selected in the target regions but also, where possible, beyond. The 
3 phases of delivery are designed and scheduled so as to enable the 3 rounds of case studies 
outlined under T4.3. Below we present a schematic representation of INCUBIS project approach, 
positioning the project within the context of pre and postproject activities and showing how the 
lifecycle of each ES project will unfold in relation to the project as a whole.  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 20 of 80  
  
 
Figure 6. INCUBIS Project approach and regional case-studies selection in the project phases.  
  
INCUBIS Spain - Barcelona - SYM - Wider metropolitan area  
Industrial mix: Cross sectorial, all EEIs included  
Barcelona is a wider administrative area in the autonomous community of Catalonia, Spain. It 
consists of multiple municipalities with closely located industrial zones. All the industrial activities 
in this area fall under the regional administrative powers  of Catalonia which operates within the 
wider national context of Spain. The potential for energy synergies in the area has been identified 
as very high (more than ie 2778GWh/year, of both excess heat and heat demand, see map1). In 
addition, Barcelona has  an ambitious Energy Plan, established in 2002, with the objective of 
creating an efficient energy supply model integrating a high share of local renewable energy 
sources (including waste heat from industry).  Figure 7.  Maps of energy synergy potential in Spanish regions.  
The Catalan Energy Symbiosis Incubator will focus on a Black color represents highest potential. Source: 
HeatRoadMap number of different industrial parks and zones of project  
Catalonia where specific case studies have been pre-identified (see table below) and onboarded 
(see support letters). The Catalan Energy Symbiosis Incubator will be run by SYM, a leading 
symbiosis consultancy in Catalonia with 12 ongoing industrial symbiosis projects, and deep 
connections with local stakeholders. IR IS will contribute to the local efforts by providing its 
premises as physical headquarters where meetings, infodays, workshops and seminars can take 
place.   
Table 3. Pre-defined energy symbiosis projects in Barcelona Area, Catalonia, Spain. Key stakeholders that have provide support 
letters (or are consortium partners) are marked in bold.  
Key stakeholders  Description  Challenges/opportunities  
1. Manresa (Stage: Planning, Industries: Manufacturing, Chemicals, Plastics, Metal)  
 
1 The map is produced by the HeatRoadMap project and quantifies heat synergy potential based on excess heat and 
heat demand per region ( https://heatroadmap.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/D2.2.pdf ).  
  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 21 of 80  
  
Bages Waste Management  
Consortium; The Business  
Association of Bufalvent  
Industrial Park; the City  
Council of Manresa; the Bages  
County Council; the Manresa 
Water Consortium; Símbiosy, 
SL; Aiguasol, SA.  
DHN is being designed to recover waste 
heat from a waste-water treatment plant 
in the controlled waste disposal site in 
Bufalvent. The system will distribute 
heat and cold to buildings in Manresa 
(hospital, schools) and companies at 
the 
Bufalvent Industrial Park  
 Find leading entities (champions) for the 
project; secure funding (estimated at €5 
Million); onboard public authorities; engage 
additional companies from the 600 
companies in Bufalvent to join the project.  
  
2. Olot (Stage: Implementation, Industries: None)  
City Council of Olot; Wattia  
Innova SL; Naturgy SL;  
Aiguasol, SA  
Tri-generation plant will supply heating, 
cooling and power to Olot city centre via 
DHN.  
Attract investors; gain the support of local 
community (due to extensive civil works); 
identify industries for supplying waste heat  
3. Molins de Rei (Stage: Implementation, Industries: None)  
City Council of Molins de Rei,  
Metropolitan Area of  
Barcelona, Catalan Energy  
Institute (ICAEN), Veolia SL  
Since 1997, 4.7Km of DHCN powered 
by biomass supplies 625 public 
housings and 2.200 residents.  
Identify and engage industries to provide 
waste heat as additional heat source for 
addressing uncertain biomass supply and 
fluctuating biomass prices  
4. Mataró (Stage: Expansion, Industries: None)  
Mataró Energia Sostenible,  
SA, City Council of Mataró,    
Waste water treatment plant of 
Mataro, Solid waste treatment 
plant of Mataro  
DHN harnesses surplus energy from the 
city’s waste-water treatment and solid 
waste treatment plants and supplies 15 
GWh of heating and 2.3 GWh of cooling 
to 100 buildings.  
  
Engage local industries to join the network 
(as clients or waste heat providers); attract 
investors for expansion; business model 
innovation to address price stability.   
5. Barcelona (Stage: Expansion, Industries: Metal, Pharma, Construction, Plastics, Textile)  
Engie SL, Agbar SA, Tersa  
SA, Catalan Energy Institute,  
Spanish Institute for  
Diversification and Energy  
Savings  
DHN with production capacity (2015) of  
70MW heat (waste incinerator) and 40 
MW cold (seawater refrigeration) 
supplies >100 large buildings of all 
types through 15.6km network.   
Expand DHN to involve companies from 
industrial parks of Badalona and St. Adrià; 
Awareness raising to increase users; 
opportunity identification for adding industrial 
excess heat to network  
6. Barcelona (Stage: Expansion, Industries: Chemicals, Automotive, Food supply, Glass)  
Ecoenergies Barcelona,   
City of Barcelona,  City of 
L’Hospitalet, Catalan Energy  
Institute, Spanish Institute for   
Energy Savings, Metropolitan  
Entity for Hydraulic Services &  
Waste Treatment, Tersa SA  
DHCN combining waste heat and waste 
cold from industries located at the Zona 
Franca Industrial State with biomass  
CHP and delivering to municipalities of 
Barcelona and L’Hospitalet as well as to 
industrial customers.  
Demand below expectations due to recent 
financial crisis and warm winters. Need to 
engage new (industrial) clients and 
substitute biomass with waste heat to align 
with Barcelona ś Energy Plan.  
7. Granollers (Stage: Planning, Industries: Food supply, Plastics, Chemicals, Metal)  
City Council of Granollers, the  
Vallès Oriental Waste  
Management Consortium, the 
Water utility Consortium of the 
region Besòs Tordera, Jordi 
Camp and Congost industrial 
parks, Aiguasol SA  
Improve energy efficiency in Jordi Camp 
and Congost industrial parks through 
surplus heat synergies among 200 
industries and two local biogas plants. 
Some technoeconomic studies have 
been concluded.  
42% of Granollers energy consumption  
comes from 7 industrial parks; Large number 
of stakeholders need coordination; multiply 
waste heat sources for guaranteed supply 
and lower price; lack of information on 
energy demand; need of best practices and 
guidelines; need of business case.   
8. Bergadá (Stage: Expanding, Industries: Food supply, Textile, Tertiary sector)  
The Berga Biomass Municipal 
Association (MMBB):  
Comprises the town halls of  
Bagà, Berga, Cercs, Gislareny, 
Gósol, Pobla de Lillet and 
Saldes.  
MMBB to create a forest biomass 
consumption centre on the industrial 
estate in Valldan de Berga for a heating 
network to supply heat to current and 
future industries located in the Valldan 
industrial state.  
Multiply waste heat sources for guaranteed 
supply and lower price; need to engage new 
industrial clients.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 22 of 80  
  
INCUBIS UK - Humber Region- UHULL - Wider Industrial Region  
Industrial mix: Cross sectorial, all EEIs included  
 
The Humber region has a long-standing reputation as one of the UK’s top chemicals clusters and 
as a leader of other industries facilitated by its east coast deep-water ports. The Humber hosts a 
number of energy intensive industries, including: petrochemicals, refineries and alternative fuels 
production; chemical manufacture and storage; steel making; cement and lime manufacture; 
glass manufacture; food processing and manufacture; and onshore and offshore gas production 
and storage. Humber’s industries are significant users of energy, a nd the Humber and 
neighbouring authorities are major contributors to the UK’s generation capacity. Total annual 
energy use in the Humber is around 37,000 GWh , of which nearly two thirds is accounted by 
the Industrial and Commercial sectors. The energy inte nsive industries in the area are 
estimated to consume over 8,000GWh/yr at a cost of around £330million/yr2.   
As a consequence of this activity the Humber EEI Cluster is the largest emitter of CO 2 in the UK 
at 12.4Mt pa, equivalent to 13.9 tonnes per Humb er resident – twice the UKs national average. 
The region is responding to this challenge, minded by the UK governments commitment to net 
zero carbon emissions by 2050, through a comprehensive strategy outlined in the Humber Clean 
Growth White Paper (November 2019) published by the Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP). The 
University of Hull is a board member of the LEP and also of CATCH an industry lead not-for-profit 
organisation which represents the bulk of the EIIs in the region.   
The region provides a geographical concentration of EIIs ideal for exploring energy symbiosis and 
the opportunity is clearly recognised in the LEP Clean Growth Strategy. In particular there are two 
major chemicals clusters: the Saltend Chemicals Park and  on the South Humber Bank. 
Companies present therein are members of CATCH and represented in the LEP (who are our key 
stakeholders) and so are potential collaborators in the project. These include but are not limited 
to: BP, Phillips 66, Ineos, Centrica Storage, Total, Singleton Birch, Air Products etc.  
The Humber has a history in industrial symbiosis as it was one of the test -regions for National 
Industrial Symbiosis Programme (NISP), before it became a national organisation. Also, the £4 
Million programme “Evolution and Resilience of Industrial Ecosystems” conducted activities in the 
area, mapping socioeconomics behind Industrial Symbiosis implementation in the region. 
However, since the end of these programmes, symbiotic activity in the area has been stagnant.  
 
2 Huggins, P., & Mckinney, P. (2018). Study of the Humber Energy Intensive Industries Cluster.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 23 of 80  
  
 
Figure 8. An indication of the energy symbiosis potential in the Humber region via the close proximity between total energy 
consumption of EEIs (top) and heat demand densities (bottom). The maps show an area of approx. 80x30Km.  
A recent study3 concluded that one of the main strengths of the region is to be found in the “unused 
waste heat streams from multiple local businesses, including high grade” waste heat, which in 
combination with the “increased interest in carbon saving at corporate level” , the “good energy 
supply infrastructure”, the “existing track record of symbiosis projects among Humber EIIs” and 
the high concentration of waste heat production and demand render the area a very good 
candidate for energy symbiosis. There is therefore a big opportunity for the Humber region to set 
“an energy intensive industries decarbonisation vision to overcome key barriers holding back 
widespread decarbonisation and industrial symbiosis across energy intensive industries”. To this 
end the aforementioned study concludes to a number of recommendations presented in the table 
below. INCUBIS UK will be run by UHULL, a recognized key stakeholder of the Humber region 
symbiotic network with active participation in past symbiosis projects and ongoing initiatives.  
INCUBIS UK will focus their activities initially in the North Humber Bank around the city of Hull 
(including the Saltend Chemicals Cluster) (phase 1) and later expand to the greater Humber 
Region (phases 2 & 3).   
Table 4. List of recommendations for decarbonisation of Humber and INCUBIS contributions.  
Recommendation  Priority  Time- 
scale  
Diffi- 
culty  
Invest- 
ment  INCUBIS contribution  
Create local industrial/energy 
strategy  
top  now  low  <€100k  Regional roadmaps under WP1 and 
WP4  
Carry out deep dive technology 
reviews  
top  short  low  <€100k  Conducted under (WP1)  
Maintain a pipeline of 
decarbonisation projects and 
mechanism to coordinate 
support provision to industries  
high  short  low  <€100k  This recommendation is perfectly in 
line with the scope of INCUBIS and 
the concept of the Energy Symbiosis 
Incubator (WP4)  
 
3 Huggins P. et al (2018) Study of the Humber Energy Intensive Industries Cluster, Carbon Trust  
  
  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 24 of 80  
  
Undertake heat network master 
planning study focussed on the 
use of industrial waste heat.   
high  med  low  <€1M  INCUBIS regional mapping and  
recommendations will contribute 
towards such a master plan (WP2 and 
WP4)  
Assist with project business 
case development, and technical 
advice to de-risk projects  
high  med  low  <€1M  INCUBIS provides support for building 
business cases and advice on de-
risking investments (WP2)  
Implement Symbiosis Incubator  med  med  med  <€1M  Exactly the concept of INCUBIS  
  
Table 5. Pre-defined energy symbiosis opportunities in the Humber region, UK.  
Partner 
Organisation  
Profile  Primary interest in Energy 
Symbiosis  
Associated British 
Ports (Humber)  
UK’s leading and best -connected port 
owner and operator. Their network 
includes 21 ports around Britain. The 
Humber Port complex is the busiest in 
the UK.  
A £7m solar investment will soon power 
30% of port operations. Developing a 
master plan for making Grimsby the 
greenest po rt in Europe; Energy 
Symbiosis as core strategy.  
Bio-D  SME manufacturer of biodegradable 
cleaning products, including washing up 
liquids and many other household 
cleaning products. They are currently 
experiencing rapid growth and are in the 
process of moving to a significantly 
larger new purpose built manufact uring 
plant.   
They utilise a plant based approach and 
focus on green sustainable production. 
They have a large energy and water 
requirement and they are seeking to 
build a ‘circular energy economy’ 
around their new manufacturing facility 
by sharing resour ces with others (i.e. 
Energy Symbiosis).  
BP  BP operate in 78 countries, employ 
75,000 people with an annual turnover of 
£290 billion and produce 11.5billion 
tonnes of petrochemicals. Within the 
Humber, they lead the chemicals cluster 
at Saltend Chemicals park, the 2 nd 
largest in the UK.  
Due to new UK legislation (net zero 
emissions by 2050) BP are embarking 
on significant R&D investments to 
improve their sites efficiency and 
increase waste stream (e.g. Heat, 
Ammonia, H2) integration within the 
Saltends chemicals park.  
British Steel  British Steel are one of the largest steel 
manufactures in the UK supplying 
products to the construction industry 
globally and a significant supplier to the 
UK rail networks and beyond. Turning 
over £1.2billion the business produces 
around a quarter of all UK steel.   
British Steel´s new ownership indicated 
a significant investment into their 
Humber site. The site is a huge heat 
emitter which is currently not utilized 
consisting therefore a great Energy 
Symbiosis opportunity for neighboring 
industries and DHNs.   
Centrica Storage   Centrica are an international energy, 
services  
The Easington facility´s storage assets 
could be  
 
 and solutions company with annual 
turnovers of £29billion. Within the 
Humber Centrica Storage Limited (CSL) 
store gas in the Rough gas field, located 
29km (18 miles) from the region, 
operating the Easington Gas terminal 
facility.  
used for H2 and carbon ca pture and 
Centrica has a prime interest in working 
with other partners on sharing energy 
resources. They are currently working 
with the UHULL on Waste water 
treatment and H2 generation and 
storage.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 25 of 80  
  
City  Health  Care  
Partnership & 
University of Hull 
Teaching Hospital  
Trust  
CHCP are the largest employer in the 
Humber region, providing health 
services across the Humber in a variety 
of diverse community settings, from 
health visiting to palliative care, school 
nursing to stroke services and much 
more.  
Hospitals are a large ene rgy user, heat 
emitter and have waste streams that 
could contain high value energy. They 
are currently undertaking an energy 
review and wish to understand more 
about the potential opportunities energy 
symbiosis could bring.  
Croda   A British speciality c hemicals company 
based within the Humber and is listed on 
the London Stock Exchange. With 
revenues of £1.4billion, they are one of 
the largest head office located 
businesses in the region and provide a 
diverse range of chemicals that are 
found in many of t he largest household 
brands in the world.  
Croda’s operational processes require 
large amounts of energy and water 
treatments and refinement processes. 
They are soon to move to a new site in 
Goole, which is the perfect opportunity 
to look at energy sharing  opportunities 
and waste stream utilisation to add to 
existing investments in renewables.  
Drax Power PLC  Drax power station is a large biomass 
and coalfired power station in the 
Humber capable of co firing petcoke. It 
has a 2.6 GW capacity for biomass and 
1.29 GW capacity for coal and has made 
recent investments in Gas Turbine 
technology and Carbon Capture pilots.  
Drax is currently developing the largest 
CCS project in Europe, building 
infrastructure to supply H2 to large 
industry across the Humber while 
removing their carbon and storing it in 
the North Sea. This technology can be 
an anchor for an energy sharing 
infrastructure in the Humber.  
Humber LEP 
(including 4 Local 
Authorities)  
The Humber LEP, Chaired by Lord 
Haskins, administers the Industrial 
Strategy for the Humber and supports 
the 4 LA’s in delivering economic 
regeneration. The Local Industrial  
Strategy focuses on ‘Whole place 
decarbonisation’ and the transition from 
a high carbon economy with many 
employed In those sectors to creating 
new economic opportunity in low carbon 
setors.  
The LEP recently commissioned 
Siemen’s to develop a Humber Energy 
Strategy which has identified major  
opportunities for LA’s in delivering 
district heat and private wire business 
developments. Understanding the 
range of ‘energy opportunities’ across 
the region will inform business case 
development of decentralised power 
systems.  
Engie  Engie, a French o wned global energy 
services company, employ 17,000 
people within the UK and provide energy 
services to a host of private and public 
sector organisations. They operate as 
regeneration partner for many LA’s 
including North East Lincs council within 
the Humbe r, where their engineering 
business ‘Engie Fabricom’ are also 
based.  
Engie are focusing heavily on 
decentralised energy systems. They are 
the leading the creation of a unique 
‘Energy Park’ that will power a number 
of business parks and industries at 
Stallingborough Interchange. They want 
to map energy production across the 
region and integrate different energy 
sources into a new power system.  
Groupe Atlantic  Group Atlantic has become a major 
international company in domestic 
heating, operating in 10 countries with 
an annual turnover of £1.8billion.Within 
the UK, the IDEAL boilers brand, is the 
largest boiler manufacturer producing 
thousands of boilers every day from their 
facility in Hull.   
Group Atlantic have specific interest in 
the development of local heat networks 
and in particular heat pump technology 
that could support a new type of energy 
system. They also have a key interest In 
the Hydrogen economy, o f which the 
Humber is at the forefront of.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 26 of 80  
  
GWE Biogas  GWE takes food waste from across the 
UK and converts it into green energy in 
the form of biogas and electricity. They 
currently produce enough electricity to 
power 4,000 homes. Located in Driffield 
within the Humber, they operate one of 
the largest and most technically 
advanced Anaerobic Digester (AD) sites 
in the UK.  
As part of their industrial process, GWE 
are left with significant amounts of 
plastic food packaging a lot of which is 
not recyclable. They are in discussions 
with the University about how to 
chemically engineer more energy from 
these waste streams and are looking for 
other industrial partners to work with on 
sharing this resource.   
KCOM   KCOM are a large Telecommunications 
provider providing broadband and 
telephony services to the Humber 
region. They operate exclusively in  
Within the Humber  the Telecoms 
network requires significant energy to 
power the internet exchanges and data 
centres, also emitting a lot  
 
 the area without BT or Virgin. They 
provide bespoke data services to large 
blue chip clients, turning over £350m, 
offering the fastest broadband speeds in 
Europe  
of heat. The 20 exchanges are 
distributed across the region and they 
are interested in energy  sharing 
opportunities for becoming a low carbon 
operator.  
Northern Powergrid  Northern Powergrid are one of the 
District Network Operators that cover the 
Humber region. They manage the 
infrastructure ensuring electricity is 
safely distributed to homes and 
businesses always available when 
needed.   
Due to the predicted increase in Pe ak 
Energy demand over the next 30 years, 
they are looking at Energy Symbiosis for 
storing/generating additional power 
around the sub stations that feed the 
‘last leg’ of the grid to residential and 
business areas.  
Orsted  Orsted is a global energy supplier who 
specialise in offshore wind. With annual 
turnover of £59 billion, they have 
invested significantly in the UK within the 
last 7 years, with £6billion of investment 
into the Humber, culminating in the 
development of the  World’s largest 
offshore wind farm. Globally Orsted 
have a third of the entire offshore wind 
market.  
Orsted are now looking at new ways to 
improve the efficiency of offshore wind. 
This includes solving the ‘intermittency’ 
problem of what to do with power  when 
its windy but the grid doesn’t require it. 
This involves energy storage 
technology and new ways of integrating 
wind into wider energy systems. Energy 
symbiosis could play a key role in how 
to improve offshore wind’s capacity.  
Phillips 66  A US owne d Oil refinery with annual 
revenues of over £100 billion, its main 
UK site is located in the Humber and is 
one of the largest refineries in the UK. 
Locally they employ close to 1,000 
people. Throughout the UK, Phillips 66 
markets fuels under the JET brand. Their 
network of branded distributors supply 
directly to the domestic, farming and light 
industry markets.  
The refinery located in the Humber is a 
highly efficient operation but is still 
looking for new ways to diversify. This 
includes the energy it can produce, 
sharing of waste streams, carbon 
capture and utilisation and or other key 
gases. Philips are willing to trial and pilot 
new projects on site and offer up their 
facility as a potential demonstrator for 
new energy systems.    
PX Group  PX provides innovative operations 
management, engineering services and 
energy management solutions to 
partners in high hazard, highly regulated 
industries. They recently featured in the 
Sunday Times Grant Thornton Top 
Track 250 league table due to significant 
growth in sales topping £136m. They are 
PX interest is around how to develop a 
more efficient energy solution for the 
entire Saltend site. With over 60 acres 
of development land remaining, the 
private wire gas powered power station 
that feeds the site as now at capacity. 
They are interested in h ow a wider 
energy network through shared energy 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 27 of 80  
  
the land owner and operator of the 
Saltend Chemicals Park In the Humber.  
resources could help them unlock 
further land for development.  
Sewell Group 
(Shared Agenda)  
The Sewell group is a Yorkshire based 
multi disciplined groups of companies 
that includes engineering and 
construction, property maintenance, 
energy developments and fuel retail 
outlets. Turning over in excess of 
£100m, they are an important local 
employer and local business leader. 
Sewell have recently been granted 
planning permission to develop a large 
500 acre site directly opposite the 
Saltend Chemical Park.  
 ‘Yorkshire Energy Park’ will bring 
together £400m investment and create 
4,000 jobs, by develop ing a multi 
sourced energy network supplying the 
wider business park. They have a 
primary interest in energy symbiosis as 
a possible opportunity to further 
development the energy park. The site 
is very well connected from a power 
perspective and also has O rsted’s 
offshore wind connection running 
through it.  
Siemens  Siemens is a German multinational 
conglomerate company headquartered 
in  
Munich and the largest industrial 
manufacturing company in Europe. They 
are a significant investor in the Humber 
having recently built the offshore wind 
manufacturing facility in Hull and soon to 
invest heavily again in a Train building 
facility in Goole.  
Siemens Energy, were commissioned 
to develop the Humber Energy Strategy 
of which suggests numerous 
opportunities for e nergy sharing, heat 
networks and utilisation of various 
industrial waste streams. Siemens 
Energy division have a primary interest 
in the manufacture of new energy 
integration technologies  
Singleton Birch  Singleton Birch are the largest 
independently owned Lime producer in 
the UK, operating a large facility within 
the Humber supplying aggregates and 
chemicals to the construction industry. 
Turning over £50m they specialise in  
Lime production, energy from waste and  
Singleton Birch have a diverse site 
which is the 5th largest energy consumer 
in the entire Humber region. Having 
invested in Anaerobic Digestion and a 
range of other technologies, they have 
a prime interest in sharing waste 
streams, heat, energy and carbon.  
 chemicals.   
Yorkshire Water  Yorkshire water are the regions water 
infrastructure provider, and responsible 
agency for water resilience. Owned by 
parent company Kelda group they turn 
over £950m and employ 2,500 people 
across the wider region. They are also 
the regions largest land owner operating 
a significant network of water treatment 
plants and water distribution 
infrastructure  
Yorkshire Water have been investing 
heavily in renewable energy technology 
and utilise a lot of waste that can be 
converted to energy. Given the scale of 
their distribution network they have a 
keen interest in water treatment 
technologies with the chemical s 
industry and also how more renewable 
energy could be distributed via their 
network to others.  
  
INCUBIS Norway - South Norway- EYDE - Process Industry Cluster  
Industrial mix: Non-ferrous metals and other process industries  
 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 28 of 80  
  
Overview: EYDE is an indu stry cluster in the South of Norway consisting of process industries, 
primarily non -ferrous metals. In 2011 the cluster’s core members used 5110GWh of energy, 
2060GWh/year of which was lost as waste heat, ie approx. 50% of total energy consumption4. An 
estimation of the percentage of this heat that is actually exploitable has not been conducted yet. 
Although some energy efficiency improvements have taken place since 2011, these were 
predominantly at the level of process and facility (no energy symbiosis) while the number of cluster 
members has doubled since then. Preliminary estimations from a new, ongoing, mapping exercise 
conducted by the energy group of EYDE shows that both total energy consumption and total 
waste heat produced by the cluster today is almost double compared to 2011 (approx. 5000GWh 
of waste heat per year). Challenge & Opportunity: INCUBIS Norway will focus their activities on 
pre-identified regions where EYDE’s industrial members play a key role due to their sheer size in 
terms of waste heat potential (see table below). In the duration of the project, opportunities with 
other cluster members will also be explored. Beyond Norway, INCUBIS Norway will capitalize on 
EYDE´s participation in the Nordic Symbiosis Network as well as SPIRE, to reach and engage 
stakeholders across Scandinavia and Europe.  
Table 6. Table: Pre-defined energy symbiosis projects in South Norway.  
Key stakeholders  Description  Challenges/opportunities  
DHC Kristiansand (Stage: Expansion, Industries: Nickel producer)  
Glencore Nickewerk 
Agder Energi Varme  
Until 2011, waste heat from Nickel 
production (40GWh/year) supplied to 3000 
households and 300 businesses through 
50km pipelines (€60 Million investment).  
As of 2011, an incinerator took over as main 
heat supplier; large untapped waste heat 
potential (approx 40GWh/year); security of 
supply; long-term contracts   
Lyngdal (Stage: Expansion, Industries: Flooring producer)  
Berry Alloc  
Sør Energi  
Lister Nyskaping  
Traatec Teknikken  
Waste heat (6GWh) from flooring production 
is fed through 5km of pipelines to a nursing 
home, two schools and a sports complex.   
untapped waste heat potential (6GWh); high 
infrastructure investments; guarantees for initial 
phase of investment required due to long RoI.  
Kvinesdal (Stage: Expansion, Industries: Ferro-manganese producer)  
Eramet Kvinesdal  
Lista Nyskaping  
Stolt Fishfarms  
Kvinesdal Kommune  
Waste heat from ferro-manganese 
production (1GWh) is fed through 1km grid 
to adjacent industrial sites and a fish farm.  
untapped waste heat potential (16GWh); lack 
of local heat demand; Greenfield opportunity 
due to waste heat and existing infrastructure;  
Arendal (Stage: Opportunity, Industries: None)  
Arendal Kommune  
Agder Renovasjon  
Agder Energi Varme  
Local landfill gas emissions are used to 
provide (via CHP) heat for offices, 
households and businesses in the city of  
Arendal.  
Gradually declining gas reserves require new 
heat sources to complement the CHP; 
Integration of waste heat from nearby 
industries is being considered.  
Arendal (Stage: Planning, Industries: Process Industries)  
Arendal Kommune 
Agder renovasjon  
The municipality of Agder is preparing a new 
industrial park, adjacent to the existing 
landfill and renovation center.   
Supporting the municipality in their plans to 
design and develop from scratch (Greenfield) a 
symbiosis park.   
  
INCUBIS France - Dunkirk - SOFIES - Industrial Zone  
Industrial mix: Iron, steel and metallurgy  
 
Overview: INCUBIS France will be run by SOFIES, an established consultancy with dozens of 
projects on Industrial  
Symbiosis and Eco-Industrial Park management, established 20 years ago by leading Industrial 
Ecologist Prof. Suren Erkman. INCUBIS France will focus the ir activities in Dunkirk where they 
are already involved in the planning for energy symbiosis. Other French territories and Switzerland 
 
4 http://eydenettverket.sitegen.no/customers/eyde/files/PROSIN%202013%20v6%20MIR%20TJS-del.pdf  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 29 of 80  
  
will also be covered by training, capacity building and dissemination activities targeted to policy -
makers taking advantage of their strategically located offices in Paris and Geneva.  
 
 Figure 9. Map of energy synergy potential in French regions. Black color represents  experience  in  implementing  
 highest potential. Source:HeatRoadMap project11  industrial ecology through public- 
private collaborations, including the creation of an association dedicated to industrial synergies 
(Ecopal) and an energy competence center (EuraEnergie). Despite this, the waste heat potential 
in Dunkirk still remains la rgely untapped with total industrial waste heat in the territory 
estimated at 28000 GWh/year 5. However, there is an increasing build -up of efforts in this 
direction. For example, an innovative device is currently under study to convert waste heat from 
local industries into electricity and, in a second step, transform this electricity into heat or cold 
through heat pumps. This device will generate an electricity volume of 158 GWh/year. A pre -
study has been done to define scenarios for the innovative device to be implemented, but legal 
and financial feasibility has yet to be more indepth and detailed to get the different stakeholders 
onboard.  
Challenge: The INCUBIS project will support the Dunkirk Urban Community (CUD) in the 
implementation of energy networks and technologies to recover and utilize industrial waste heat 
in the region. Specifically, the following challenges have been identified: (i) “Heat to power to heat” 
systems involve multiple actors (in particular heat production, electricity transmission , electricity 
conversion into heat), thus the legal and financial arrangements to implement them are a real 
challenge. (ii) To date, opportunities in and around EEIs have been insufficient to absorb all of 
the waste heat, new opportunities must be found an d new systems must be developed at the 
territory level.  
Table 7. Table: Pre-defined energy symbiosis projects in Dunkirk.  
Key stakeholders  Description  Challenges/opportunities  
District Heating (Stage: Expansion, Industries: Metallurgy, Agro)  
Arcelor Mittal, Centre 
de Valorisation 
Energétique, Daudruy, 
Communauté Urbaine 
de Dunkerque  
Waste heat from ArcelorMittal process is fed 
into a district heating network (40km) to heat  
 16000 households since 1986 and covers 
60% of the network requirements. The 
network was expanded in 2019 to include 
Daudruy (+11km). A second extension is 
planned on Grande-Synthe (15 km) to heat 
3,000 additional households.   
Untapped potential, security of supply; 
longterm contracts, infrastructure investment.  
Heating Network Gravelines (Stage: Planning, Industries: TBD)  
 
5 Estimation provided by the CUD  
Opportunity: 
  
 The  
 Dunkirk  
agglomeration consists of 17  
communes with an area of  
about 25000 hectares and a  
population  
 of  
 200.000 
  
inhabita 
nts. Its industrial and  
port platform is a major energy  
hub and has a large number of  
EEIs 
,  
 particularly  
in  
 the  
iron/steel and metallurgical  
sectors 
.  
 Dunkirk  
 Urban  
Community (CUD) has a long  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 30 of 80  
  
Dunkirk Port,  
Communaute urbaine 
de Dunkerque  
Industries and Dunkirk port would like to 
study the possibility to install a heating 
network between Gravelines and Dunkirk 
and increase the potential of recovery of 
waste heat for new industries.   
high infrastructure investments; guarantees for 
initial phase of investment required due to long 
RoI, security of supply(e.g. in case of a 
closure), uncertainty in depending on future  
implantations  
Instrumentation and modelling of existing district heating network project (Stage: Planning,  
Industries: Several)  
CEA Tech, CUD,  
Dalkia, Engie Cofely  
Equip the heating network with an industrial 
supervision system, to optimize operation 
and resources consumption in real time and 
feed a predictive model.  
Financing on energy savings might not allow 
the profitability of the system, negociation time 
to connect new waste heat sources, financing 
time of new infrastructures for transport and 
distribution of waste heat.  
LNG terminal (Stage: Opportunity, Industries: Energy)  
EDF, warehouses  Dunkirk LNG terminal has an annual 
regasification capacity of 13 billion m3 and 
has 3 GNL tanks with storage capacity of 
200 000 m3 de GNL à -163 °C. A tunnel 
between the terminal and Gravelines nuclear 
plant, 5 km away, enables the transfer of 
heated cooling water to heat GNL. Use of 
the cold from GNL to be used for 
neighbouring warehouses have been studied 
but a few aspects act as a showstopper  
Infrastructure cost and profit margin  
Low cost of energy and CO2.  
  
INCUBIS Germany - ChemCoast - COVES - Industrial park symbiosis  
Industrial mix: Chemicals  
INCUBIS Germany will be run by COVES, a world-leading supplier of high-tech polymer materials 
but also the operator of Covestro Industrial Park (CIP), a chemical industry park which is part of 
a greater agglomeration of chemical industries, the ChemCoast Park Brunsbüttel (CCPB), near 
the Port of Hamburg. COVES has already been examining the possibility of putting in place energy 
synergies between the park’s residents through CoPro, among other projects. The close proximity 
to the city of Brunsbüttel provides further opportunities for heat network integration.   
To the extent allowed by CIP and CoPro, COVES will disseminate information on current 
activities in the area of energy synergy and provide the consortium with feedback on the 
methods developed within the consortium 
based on operational experience. At a later 
stage, COVES will engage other 
stakeholders, both in CIP and in 
ChemCoast6,  to  promote 
 the  tools  and methodologies 
developed by the consortium, and to explore 
synergy opportunities between companies in 
the whole of CCPB.   
Background: Located on the banks of th e 
Kiel Canal and the Lower Elbe, CIP has 
been operated since 1995 by COVES, which 
maintains its own worldscale production 
facilities there. The park occupies 420 -
hectares of land, employees some 1000 people and consumes 35GWh/year of energy (electricity 
 
6 ChemCoast is a cross-state initiative to strengthen the chemical locations Brunsbüttel, Seelze, Stade, Walsrode and 
Wilhelmshaven in Northern Germany.  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 31 of 80  
  
and gas) 7. The CCPB as a whole occupies an area of 2000 hectares (out of which 450 are 
currently  
 Figure 10.  Aerial photo of the Brunsbuttel Industrial Park.  available) and employees approx 4000 people8.  
Based on that we estimate its annual energy  
production to be 4 times the energy consumption of CIP, ie 135GWh per year. COVES’s utility 
portfolio in the park includes interconnected utilities of electricity, steam, compressed air, chilled 
water, nitrogen, cooling tower water, operating water, and the treatment of waste-water.   
Current state, challenges and opportunities: Despite the existing infrastructure, and common utility 
provision,  energy symbiosis in Brusbüttel still offers room for improvement and also potential for 
further rollout in other COV ES sites globally. The major bottlenecks for realizing symbiosis are 
related to complex legislative and contractual arrangements to (i) protect data confidentiality and 
(ii) de-risk investment. For COVES the confidentiality of data and observing compliance are most 
important hindering factors. CoPro project, in which COVES is partner, addresses exactly this 
challenge by developing mathematical methods for software able to manage optimisation of 
processes across company limits. The software will allow collaborating companies to feed process 
data into the system in a dynamic environment and obtain an optimisation result in real time while 
maintaining the secrecy of the data inserted by the partner company in the system.  COVES is 
very keen to materialize this initiative because improving resource and energy efficiency will 
increase the value of land in their park, with 250 out of the 450 hectares of available land located 
in CIP.  Also, the lack of experience and skills at COVES in coordinating energy symbiosis  and 
the lack of systematic engagement with CIP and CCPB residents to identify all symbiosis 
opportunities. INCUBIS will help to overcome these barriers.   
Sex and/or gender issues  
This project will consider the gender dimension and cater for the needs, motivations and 
differences of females where applicable, inspired by how taking gender into account has yielded 
new research results and sparked creativity, opening new avenues for fu ture research for those 
who give it serious attention9. As a software platform will be developed and integrated in the virtual 
energy incubator, aspects such as the Graphical User Interface will consider gender aspects, 
whereby graphic designs of the interface will be consulted with both men and women during the 
design phase, and posterior trials will be performed by both men and women. Moreover, in relation 
to business behaviour, gender analysis will also be important, especially in view of growing 
trends and commitments to see more women occupancy in high level and decision -making 
positions in industry. According to the European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE), women are 
often employed in low -qualified jobs in the energy sector. Women’s participation  in the energy 
labour market is also discouraged by gender stereotypes, which portray the energy sector as a 
working environment that is unsuitable for women10. Women are also less likely to hold decision-
making positions in the energy sector. The absence of women in energy policy and strategy 
planning decreases the likelihood that women’s interests and needs will be taken into account. 
However, women tend to be more sustainable consumers than men: they pay more attention to 
green procurement and they are more willing to change their behaviour to achieve sustainability 
goals, including energy efficiency 11. Increasing women’s involvement in the field of energy has 
the potential to stimulate sustainable economic growth. This aspect will inform the design and 
promotion of INCUBIS training and engagement activities.  
 
7 COVES, internal communication  
8 https://www.chemcoastpark.de/en/location/  
9 Londa Schiebinger (2008). Gendered Innovations in Science and Engineering. ISBN: 978080475814  
10 http://www.skillsforemployment.org/KSP/en/Details/?dn=WCMSTEST4_038427  
11 https://eige.europa.eu/gender-mainstreaming/policy-areas/energy  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 32 of 80  
  
2 IMPACT
2.1 Expected impacts  
2.1.1 Contribution to work programme expected impact  
INCUBIS activities will deliver impact through directly supporting (i) existing energy symbiosis 
initiatives and (ii) newly identified opportunities all the way through to implementation thereby 
delivering the desired savings in primary energy consumption,  GHG reduction, sustainable 
investments, etc. Estimating the specific impacts as outlined in the EE-6-2019 call is not an easy 
task. Many of the energy symbiosis projects that will be supported through the incubators have 
not yet produced estimations on their potential impact or they have not been as of yet identified. 
Further than that, even for the projects that we do have estimations, the methodologies followed 
to produce these estimations are not disclosed. In this section we will attempt to combine all  
available information per project region and, taking into consideration the extent of the project’s 
planned activities and actions, estimate some reasonable ranges for the expected impact across 
all impact categories.  
Catalonia is one of Spain’s most industrialized areas with a total energy consumption in 2017 of 
236TWh, almost 25% of the country’s total consumption. Assuming that Catalonia represents the 
Spanish average in terms of energy efficiency, then about 6% of its total energy consumption 
should correspond to its total industrial waste heat, i.e. 14,16TWh/year according to the below 
table. This is of course a very conservative estimation since Catalonia has a much higher industry 
density than the average of Spain. Nevertheless, if combined with a t otal heat demand of 
25,84TWh/yr12 it supports the estimation produced in HeatRoadMap project that Catalonia has a 
total energy synergy potential (when both waste heat supply and demand are taken into account) 
of 2778GWh/year13, i.e. about 20% of its indust rial waste heat.  Of course, the economic and 
commercial potentials are much lower than that. Taking as a proxy a recent study14 that found the 
industrial waste heat commercial potential in the UK to be 10% of the theoretical potential, we 
estimate that 27 8GWh/year in Catalonia are commercially exploitable . The same study is 
used in the estimations of GHG savings per GWh, total investment per GWh, and benefit 
generated per GWh, made below.  
Table 8. Estimations of industrial waste heat (IWH) potential in EU and the countries in which INCUBIS is launching case studies. 
Data acquired from (Miro et al 2015)1516171819 unless otherwise stated.  
Country  Year  
Total industrial 
waste heat 
(IWH)  
IWH per Energy 
Consumed by the 
Industry (%)  
IWH per Energy 
Consumed by the 
Country (%)  
Total Energy 
Consumed in 
201716  
UK  2013  10–20 TWh/y  5.5% - 21.3%  1.1% - 4.2%  1500.6 TWh  
 
12 https://www.hotmaps.hevs.ch/map  
13 The map is produced by the HeatRoadMap project and quantifies heat synergy potential based on excess heat and 
heat demand per region ( https://heatroadmap.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/D2.2.pdf ).  
14 ECOFYS, 2014, The potential for recovering and using surplus heat from industry  
15 Miró, L., Brückner, S., & Cabeza, L. F. (2015). Mapping and discussing Industrial Waste Heat (IWH) 
potentials for different countries. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 51, 847–855.  
16 Eurostat, Energy Statistical Country Datasheets, 04/09/2019,  
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/energy_statistical_countrydatasheets.xlsx  
17 Huggins, P., & Mckinney, P. (2018). Study of the Humber Energy Intensive Industries Cluster.  
18 Energy Facts, Norway https://energifaktanorge.no/en/norsk-energibruk/energibruken-i-ulike-sektorer/ 
(04/09/2019)  
19 Government of Catalonia (2017), Figures of Catalonia,  
https://www.idescat.cat/serveis/biblioteca/docs/cat/xifresct/xifres2017en.pdf , (04/09/2019)  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 33 of 80  
  
Humber   2018  -  -  -  37 TWh17  
Norway  2009  19.4TWh/y  15.4%  5.7%  213 TWh18  
France  2013  83.9-110TWh/y  19.8% - 26%  5% - 6-5%  1829 TWh  
Spain  2013  62.8TWh/y  23.1%  6%  991.5 TWh  
Catalonia  2015  -  -  -  236 TWh19  
Germany  2013  132 - 146TWh/y  18.8 %– 20.7%  5.2% – 5.8%  2660 TWh  
EU28  2013  752.2TWh/y  9.1% - 22%  2.3% - 5.6%  13558.8 TWh  
  
INCUBIS Spain will initially target 10 large industrial parks/districts within 7 distinct areas of 
Catalonia, among which the largest industrial zone in Catalonia (Zona Franca), with the number 
of companies per park ranging from 200 to 600 (from all sectors, including EEIs). INCUBIS aims 
throughout the lifetime of the project to trigger primary energy savings corresponding to 5% (i.e. 
14GWh/year) of the commercially exploitable potential and 5% more in the following three years 
after project end. In total INCUBIS Spain will trigger the following impacts by 2026: total primary 
energy savings of 28GWh/year, GHG savings of 7560tCO2-eq/year (assuming GHG savings 
of 0.27MtCO2-eq/year per TWh/year) and a total investment of €820k (assuming an investment 
of €29300 per GWh) that will generate a benefit of €580k per year (assuming a benefit of 
€20714/GWh/year). In addition to this, and based on the support raised at proposal stage as 
discussed above, INCUBIS will generate commitment statements from 1000 companies in 2 0 
industrial parks and reach 1000 stakeholders.  
All industry in the Humber region consumes 23000GWh per year of energy 20. Using the 
figures of the above table we can estimate that IWH in the Humber is between 1265 and 4900GWh 
per year while heat demand is estimated by HotMaps at 6655GWh per year. Applying the 20% 
rule that was derived from Catalonia we can estimate that energy synergy potential in the region 
is between 253 and 980GWh of which 10% is commercially exploitable, ie 62GWh (if we take the 
avg for simplification). Similarly to Catalonia, INCUBIS aspires to trigger primary energy savings 
of 5% during the project and  5% during the 3 years after the project resulting to the following 
impacts by 2026: total energy savings of 6.2GWh/year, GHG savings of 1674tCO2-eq/year, 
and a total investment of €181,7k that will generate a benefit of €128,4k per year. In addition to 
this, and based on the support raised at proposal stage as discussed above, INCUBIS will 
generate commitment statements from 200 companies in 5 industrial parks and reach 500 
stakeholders.   
The industries of the EYDE cluster emit 5000GWh of waste heat per year. The corresponding 
heat demand in these areas is 8218GWh according to HotMaps. As shown in the case study 
analysis in section 1.3, the majority of the cases are in close proximity with urban settlements and 
other industry where there is heat demand. A lso, infrastructure in the form of DHNs is typically 
present and the total waste heat potential of the case studies is approx. 62GWh per year. Applying 
the 20% rule that was derived from Catalonia we can estimate that energy synergy potential in 
the cluster is around 1000GWh of which 10% is commercially exploitable, ie 100GWh. Similarly 
to Catalonia, INCUBIS aspires to trigger primary energy savings of 5% during the project and 5% 
during the 3 years after the project resulting to the following impacts by 20 26: total energy 
savings of 10GWh/year, GHG savings of 2700tCO2-eq/year, and a total investment of €293k 
that will generate a benefit of €207k per year. In addition to this, and based on the network of 
companies in EYDE cluster (approx. 50) and the multipl e stakeholders and companies involved 
in the cases already identified, INCUBIS will generate commitment statements from 200 
companies in 10 industrial parks and reach 400 stakeholders.   
 
20 Huggins, P., & Mckinney, P. (2018). Study of the Humber Energy Intensive Industries Cluster.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 34 of 80  
  
At Dunkirk the total industrial waste heat in the territory estimate d at 28000 GWh/year 21. 
Applying the 20% rule that was derived from Catalonia we can estimate that energy synergy 
potential in the cluster is around 5600GWh  of which 10% is commercially exploitable, ie 
560GWh. In Dunkirk, helping the local cluster to overcome barriers and move forward with the 
waste heat-to-electricity-to-heat project will result in the following impacts by 2026:  total energy 
savings of 158GWh /year, GHG savings of  42660tCO2-eq/year, and a total investment of 
€4627k that will generate a benefit of €3272k per year. In addition to this, and based on the 
support raised at proposal stage from CUD and other key stakeholders, INCUBIS will generate 
commitment statements from 10 companies in 1 industrial park and reach 50 stakeholders.  
At the ChemCoast park in Brunsbuttel  the total energy consumption was estimated to be 
135GWh per year (see section 1.3). The coefficient for waste heat potential as frac tion of total 
energy consumption in chemical sector 2223 (the vast majority of the industries in the park are 
chemicals) is 11%, we therefore estimate industrial waste heat at Brunsbuttel at 14.8GWh per 
year. As opposed to Catalonia and Humber, the ChemCoast case study is focused on a specific 
park, with very close proximity of facilities, existing infrastructure and already identified energy 
demand. We therefore increase the “20% rule” of Catalonia to 50% and assume energy synergy 
potential in the cluster is around 7,4GWh. For the same reasons we also raise our estimation 
of commercially exploitable potential from 10 to 20%, ie 1,5GWh. Similarly, to Dunkirk, INCUBIS 
aspires to utilize all of this potential resulting to the following impacts by 2026:  total en ergy 
savings of 1,5GWh/year, GHG savings of 405tCO2-eq/year, and a total investment of €44k 
that will generate a benefit of €31k per year. In addition to this, and based on the number of 
companies in ChemCoast park and the direct access to it through partn er COVES, we aim to 
generate commitment statements from 40 companies in 5 industrial parks (which comprise 
the larger ChemCoast park) and reach 120 stakeholders.   
Table 9. List of performance indicators for INCUBIS and estimation of impact ranges  
Project Performance Indicator  Quantification  Measurement unit  
   during 
project  
3 years after     
Primary energy savings triggered by the project  > 100   200  GWh/year  
Investments in sustainable energy triggered by 
the project  
> 3   6  million EUR  
Benefits generated from investments23  >2  4  million EUR  
Number of plant sites that commit to energy 
cooperation (EC)  
 >1450   3000  Number of sites  
Number of ind. parks where businesses commit to 
EC  
> 40   80  number of parks  
Number of stakeholders aware of joint energy 
services  
>10000  20000  Nr of stakeholders  
Number of policies and legal frameworks created 
and/ or adapted to facilitate energy cooperation 
among businesses  
  >10  >20  Number of policies 
and frameworks  
Reduction of GHG emissions triggered by the 
project  
>22500  >55000  tCO2-eq/year  
 
21 Estimation provided by the CUD  
22 Panayiotou, G. P., Bianchi, G., Georgiou, G., Aresti, L., Argyrou, M., Agathokleous, R., … Christodoulides , P.  
(2017). Preliminary assessment of waste heat potential in major European industries. Energy Procedia, 123, 335– 345.  
23 This indicator is in addition to the ones set out by the call  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 35 of 80  
  
Reduction of air pollutants triggered by the 
project  
unknown  unknown  kg/year  
In addition to the impact generated by the regional activities of the project, we estimate additional 
impact from its European activities. These will be driven by the project s ambitious communication 
and dissemination plan, ́ capitalizing on the partners  ́ participation in extended industrial networks 
directly related to EEIs and energy symbiosis. For example, COVES is part of ChemCoast, a 
cross-state association of industrial sites across Northern Germany. EYDE is a founding member 
of the Nordic Symbiosis Network, a network of organizations across all Nordic countries actively 
involved with and promoting industrial symbiosis. IRIS, EYDE and COVES are members of 
ASPIRE, the association of sustainable process industries of Europe. SPIRE is very interested in 
measures leading to Industrial -Urban Symbiosis, which is among their main strategic goals. So 
we expect a high interest on the part of SPIRE members and stakeholders. Based on its online 
presence through the Virtual Incubator, the participation of its partners on relevant networks and 
the pan European reach of its dissemination and communication plan, INCUBIS aims to reach at 
least 10.000 stakeholders across Europe.  
Table 10. INCUBIS Stakeholders Letters of support.  
Name  Organization  Cou ntry  Relevance to the project  
Alessandro 
Provaggi  
Euroheat & Power  BE  European network for sustainable district energy  
Eduardo Ferrer   Veolia Spain  ES  Global ESCO with many projects in Catalonia and 
Dunkirk   
Monika 
Duzinska 
Miroslaw 
Bobrynski  
Industrial Park 
EuroCentrum   
PL  Industrial park of SMEs from the energy 
technologies sector  
Roman 
Trzaskalik  
Association of the  
National Forum of  
Industrial Parks and  
Technology Parks  
PL  Association of all industrial parks in Poland  
Monserrat 
Ambros   
Business 
Association of the 
Bufalvent Industrial 
site   
ES  Manager of the Bulfavent industrial park in Catalonia 
and coordinator of local symbiosis initiatives.  
Mario Serrano  Zona Franca 
Industrial Estate   
ES  Operator of the Zona Franca industrial zone in 
Catalonia and coordinator of local symbiosis 
initiatives.  
Oriol Gavalda  Aiguasol, SA   ES  Local ESCO with many projects in Catalonia  
Antonio 
Mendoza  
APLIR  ES  Leading industrial ESCO in Spain, very active in 
Catalonia  
Xavier Gil  Ecoenergies 
Barcelona,   
ES  Owner of waste biomass CHPs in Catalonia   
Lisbeth Randers  Kalundborg 
Symbiosis Center  
DK  Coordinator of industrial symbiosis in Kalundborg 
industrial park and municipality  
Francesc Torné  Reactivació 
Badalona SA  
ES  Coordinator of the Industrial Symbiosis project at the 
municipal districts of Badalona and Sant Adrià del 
Besòs  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 36 of 80  
  
Carles Sales  Consortium from 
Municipal solid 
waste treatment of 
Maresme  
ES  Key stakeholder of the heating and cooling 
distribution network in Mataró (Barcelona).  
Andreas Förster  DECHEMA  DE  Expert network for chemical engineering with a 
working group on energy efficiency under the 
Energy & Climate topic.   
Kari Andersen  Arendal Municipality  NO  Local authority promoting and coordinating energy 
symbiosis  
Rizlane Bibaoui  Dunkerque 
Communaute 
Urbaine  
FR  Dunkirk regional authority and coordinator of 
symbiosis initiative  
Martin Budd  City of Hull  UK  Municipality leading symbiosis initiatives in the 
Humber  
Miguel Angel 
Sobrino Abuja  
Biomass Association 
of Berguedà 
Municipalities  
ES  Key stakeholder of the Valldan heating network  
John G. Bergh  Aust Agder  
Fylkeskommune  
NO  Aust-Agder county authority leading local symbiosis 
initiatives.  
2.1.2 Barriers, obstacles and framework conditions  
Despite significant increase of Industrial Symbiosis uptake in recent years, widespread adoption 
is still far from being a reality. On one hand, Symbiosis projects experience market failures due to 
the companies’ perceived risk and uncertainties regarding the benefits of the proposed synergies. 
On the other hand, the initiation of symbiosis projects is in many cases accompanied by 
(transaction) costs that companies are not always prepared to bear while lack of related skills 
among the workforce imply long learning curves and additional “learning costs” make the situation 
even worse. In addition, such projects may take a long time from inception to realisation which 
may also impact the way in which benefits are distributed temporally and may also create a 
disincentive for companies that need short-term solutions. Managers are reluctant to invest their 
limited cash in long -payback-period projects and they prefer to invest in more safe options, like 
increasing production capacity. All of the above are particularly true for Energy Symbiosis projects 
which are among the most complex cases of Industrial Symbiosis. In addition to that, waste energy 
like heat, which is delivered as a continuous stream may entail a special contractual problem. 
Apart from the above, a r ange of other problems can arise throughout the energy symbiosis 
lifecycle:   
At the opportunity identification stage  the potential buyer may face difficulties in substitution 
of traditional suppliers (e.g. long term contracts), lead time (and cost) for testing/approval of new 
supplier/input (sometimes >12 months), requirement to update certifications when these involve 
input resources, security of supply issues, increased supply chain management burden. The 
seller, on the other hand, is challenged with fin ding demand that meets their supply, analysing 
and characterise their waste streams, figuring out which could be the potential uses of their waste 
materials, de-characterisation of wastes to introduce to by -products catalogue (which can take 
years) and terminological barriers (different sectors using different languages).  
At the design and planning stages  the challenges include: Lack of convincing business 
opportunity and respective business case to get top management support and/or investor interest, 
distribution/allocation of infrastructure costs (partnering with a 3rd party like ESCO is often the 
solution to this problem), size mismatch (it has been observed that small companies find it difficult 
to collaborate with large companies due to different worki ng practices), where regulations are 
important, regulatory changes present a risk factor for investments  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 37 of 80  
  
The implementation and progress stages are the ones with the list barriers for symbiosis and 
usually once all barriers in the previous stages are over come, the project continuous as BAU. 
However, one important element here relates to the interruption of the symbiotic relation due to 
(i) one of the parties stopping/changing relevant industrial activity that produces/requires the 
waste, (ii) one of the involved facilities shutting down, (iii) symbiosis rendered unprofitable due to 
regulatory or pricing changes (e.g. primary resource price drops significantly).The partners have 
identified in the table below certain potential barriers and obstacles to achiev ing the expected 
impacts and how they will be addressed during and after the project.  
INCUBIS has developed its activities, concept and services in accordance to the 
aforementioned barriers, focusing specifically on addressing barriers related to the comp lexity 
and resource-intensity of energy symbiosis coordination (T2.1), the identification and mapping of 
opportunities (T2.2), the de-risking and justification of investments (T2.3), and the generation of 
commitment at top management level and regulatory screening (T2.4). Further, all these tools will 
be delivered through an integrated Virtual Platform, as well as expert support, directly to key 
stakeholders in existing and newly identified energy symbiosis opportunities and will be combined 
with training and capacity building activities that will embed the local symbiosis ecosystems with 
the skills and knowledge required for continuing the successful delivery of such projects. Finally, 
the issue of initial investment will be addressed through a dedicated tendering mechanism.
2.2 Measures to maximise impact  
2.2.1 Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of the project results  
Paving the way towards the widespread adoption, stakeholder engagement and effectiveness of 
the incubator outcomes, beyond the duration of the grant and thus maximizing its impact, is the 
strategic target of all INCUBIS dissemination, exploitation and communication activities. The plan 
will be developed in order to assist European Industries, Associations, Parks and Clusters towards 
their transition to Industrial Energy Symbiosis by deploying the services offered by the incubator 
and increase the largely untapped potential of energy symbiosis successful implementations.   
The development and implementation of a strategic roadmap for the exploitation and valorisation 
of the project results as well as the replication of the INCUBIS paradigm will safeguard the project 
sustainability.  Work includes the development of an Innovation Strategy that will guide all 
respective activities as well as of concrete action plans on how each project partner and the 
consortium as a whole will make use of the project results an d how they will be sustained after 
the duration of the grant.   
  
Dissemination strategy    
An “Awareness Raising Plan” will be developed by WP6 leader IZNAB - Communication Manager- 
from the very early stages of the project (D6.1, M3), outlining the appro ach to effectively share 
the results of INCUBIS and engage with our stakeholders, guide consortium partners in planning 
and implementing their respective activities and ultimately, nurture the ground for their successful 
up-take. The plan will also elaborate mechanisms for monitoring and seizing opportunities for ad-
hoc activities. An Interim report on communication and dissemination activities (D6.3, M18) will 
be developed and will integrate all the dissemination activities performed during the first part of 
the project, and will list all the activities planned for the second period. All the activities will be 
reported in the final report version (D6.5), jointly with the planned post -project dissemination 
activities. INCUBIS Dissemination plan will include:  
● INCUBIS Infodays: Activities to inform local industry and stakeholders about the existence of 
INCUBIS, the concept of energy symbiosis, and the planned activities and services over the 
coming years of project implementation with the goal to achieve buy-in and awareness raising at 
local level. These activities may take the form of dedicated workshops, organized by regional 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 38 of 80  
  
partners in collaboration with local associations and authorities to maximize their impact or may 
be conducted as dedicated sessions/booths in existing regional conferences/events.   
● Consultation activities: Activities conducted in the context of WP1 and early stage of WP4 to 
map the regional contexts, understand the needs of stakeholders and elaborate on the 
particularities of identified  case studies. These activities may take the form of dedicated 
workshops with the participation of multiple stakeholders, bilateral discussions/interviews and/or 
questionnaires to be filled online and/or via phone calls.  
● INCUBIS Facilitated Symbiosis Workshops: The organization of thematic workshops is part of 
the implementation phase of any industrial symbiosis project, 15 different workshop events will 
be organised during project implementation (WP4), 3 per region, and will be a key engagement 
and dissemination vector for INCUBIS outcomes.   
● INCUBIS international activities: Besides the local activities, INCUBIS will organize a series of 
activities to reach partners and generate traction for the project and its outputs in regions around 
Europe. These activities will prepare the ground for the 3rd phase of the project whereby INCUBIS 
services will be deployed online and ready to be delivered beyond the selected regions.  will aim 
to attract/reach interested stakeholders from neighbouring countries and suppo rt the 
establishment of similar initiatives (regional energy symbiosis incubators) by providing services to 
selected cases. They will take the form of dedicated workshops organized by the consortium 
partners or in the context of existing events  
● Links to several other projects: During INCUBIS lifetime and in relation with task 6.3, synergies 
with other European, national and regional funded projects and initiatives will be identified for 
enhancing collaboration and knowledge transfer. The communication with  other similar EU 
projects and regional initiatives will be established from the very early stages of the project 
implementation, aiming to not only implementing potential synergies, but also benefiting from their 
pre-existing experience and knowledge. These projects will include those listed under section 1.2 
of this proposal as well as the other projects launched under the EE-6-2019 call.   
● ‘Industrial Energy Symbiosis in Europe’ event: Following the ‘Industrial Symbiosis in Europe’ 
event held in Antwerp in February 2019 during the World Resources Forum (joining 9 Symbiosis-
related H2020 projects and organized by IRIS), a follow -up event will be organized focused on 
Industrial Energy Symbiosis, in which INCUBIS outputs will be disseminated together with other 
topic-related projects results (see above bullet) that will be identified through the Energy 
Symbiosis radar.  
● Participation in external events: The INCUBIS team will participate in several external events 
including industry, academic, business (e.g. trade fairs and exhibitions, etc.) and policy -oriented 
ones that revolve around Industrial Symbiosis, Energy Efficiency and Energy Intensive Industries. 
The goals of attending these events will be to keep in touch with the latest advances in national 
and international activities, share knowledge, present the project results and establish contact 
and interactions with key stakeholders/ policy and decis ion makers, while at the same time 
communicating INCUBIS results. A thorough investigation and a systematic maintenance of an 
event calendar are planned very early on in the project.    
● Collaboration with the key Associations/Platforms: SPIRE2030 (and thei r successor PPP 
under Horizon Europe); Manufuture ETP, European Cluster Collaboration Platform – ECCP, 
EFFRA, EuroHEAT & Power, EREK, and the consortium of industrial association forming the 
Alliance of Energy Intensive Industries (CEFIC, CEMBUREAU,CEPI, EUROFER, Cerame-Unie, 
Eurometaux, Euroalliages, IFIEC and others) and other relevant waste heat/cold management -
related Associations/Platforms on EU/national/regional field.  
● Final INCUBIS International workshop: during the Final Review Meeting of the proje ct (M36), 
an International workshop will be performed with attendees from the expert network (TX) and 
relevant stakeholders, in order to present the final results from INCUBIS project: showcase in 
detail all the case-studies that were selected in each phas e, the methodologies applied and the 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 39 of 80  
  
results obtained, present the final facilitation methodologies created, the guidelines and best 
practices developed and where to find them, perform a Virtual Incubator Demo, and finally,  
present the final Business Mode l for the Energy Symbiosis Incubators, which will allow them to 
run after the project lifetime.   
  
Education, training and capacity building  
The project will deliver a comprehensive set of training activities supported by training materials 
(in the form of handbooks, webinars/tutorials, courses, etc.), which will constitute the ‘Accelerated 
Education and Training programme’ (T5.1) of the Incubator, directed to the different professional 
profiles from the energy symbiosis key stakeholders network as identi fied by the stakeholder 
mapping activities conducted in WP1 (T1.2), including med and top management profiles from 
ESCOs, DHCOs, IPOs, EEIs (large and SMEs),  and public authorities, to help them overcome 
the barriers encountered in the path towards implementation of energy symbiosis projects. These 
activities and respective material will be developed by synthesizing existing material (e.g. from 
past and ongoing projects highlighted in section 1.2) with the outputs of WP2 and the knowledge 
generated (and material used) during WP4. The ‘Accelerated Education and Training programme’ 
will be freely accessible through the Virtual Incubator Platform and will include:   
● Online mentoring roundtables: A series of webinars will be organized to will deliver specialized 
mentorship on policy, technical, technological, business, financial and other challenging aspects 
of energy symbiosis through regular online mentoring roundtables focused on specific topics but 
also through dedicated consultations when required (online o r physical when possible). These 
events will also serve as powerful communication tools that will spread the word for the benefits 
that can be derived from implementing energy symbiosis in different case studies.  
● One-on-One mentoring sessions: One-on-one mentoring of mid and top management of key 
organizations will take place throughout the project´s duration to train them on different skills and 
methods required at different stages of energy symbiosis implementation. These sessions will be 
organized in pa rallel to planned activities in the context of supporting energy symbiosis case 
studies during WP4 and will be delivered on-site as well as remotely as required.    
● Guidelines, Best practices and Tutorials: With respect to training and skills INCUBIS took into 
consideration the call requirements for the Sectorial Blueprint projects on Energy Intensive 
Industries sector with a focus on skills to enable and accelerate take -up of Industrial Symbiosis 
and Energy Efficiency (Erasmus +). Specifically, the project  will deliver a comprehensive set of 
training activities supported by training materials (in the form of handbooks, webinars, courses, 
etc.) developed by synthesizing existing material (e.g. from past and ongoing projects) with 
knowledge generated from the project s activities. ́  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 40 of 80  
  
  
Figure 11. Communication, Dissemination and Training activities.  
  
Stakeholder identification and engagement  
INCUBIS is designed for IS facilitating actors. This term encompasses a broad variety of 
organizations (and individuals acting on behalf of these organizations) that have been shown to 
be agents of change in efforts for establishing Industrial Symbiosis. R eviews and surveys of IS 
initiatives worldwide (e.g. SCALER project) have revealed that facilitating actors can be a rather 
broad variety of organizations, ranging from national governments to local authorities (e.g. 
municipalities), industrial chambers, business associations, industrial park operators and cluster 
managers, Regional Development Agencies, intermediaries (e.g. consultancies specialised in 
facilitating IS) and sometimes one  of the 
companies that has a key role in the symbiotic 
network (ie major provider or consumer of by -
products). The challenge is that this renders 
INCUBIS a service directed to a very diverse 
audience with different interests, goals, 
powers, knowledge and reasons for wanting to 
promote/establish Industrial Symbiosis. This 
suggests that the needs of different actors in 
different regions will differ and INCUBIS must 
therefore provide a powerful yet flexible 
service that will provide to the local (to be) 
facilitating actors all the knowledge (including 
access to experts and training), tools (including 
analytical and communication tools) and 
support (including access to funding and to key 
stakeholders beyond their reach) to maximize 
their local impact. A  
 Dissemination plan targeting these groups for  Figure 12. Stakeholder identification and engagement.  
diffusing the strategic impacts of the project has been designed and will identify information about 
events that are relevant and important for the project and are in line with the proposed 

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 41 of 80  
  
dissemination strategy in each case. All partners will participate in order to meet the target KPIs 
for dissemination (Table 11).   
  
Table 11 Target audience breakdown and link to specific dissemination tools and KPIs  
TARGET  SUB-TARGET  TOOLS & KPI’s   
Private  
SME Consultants  
• Showcases / Best practices – number of attendees;  
• Networking / Clustering events – number of attendees, number 
of follow up communications;  
• Trade-Fairs / Seminars – number of attendees, number of 
dissemination materials (brochure/leaflet), number of follow up 
communications  
• Technical Papers: number of downloading, number of citations;  
• Game-Based learning / VR tools – number of download of 
Apps, number of  
user’s registration;  
• Internet / Social Media: number of visits/re-visits (retention), 
site location, position in Private sector; number of citations;   
Anchor Tenants  
ESCO’s & DHCO’s  
Park Operators and 
Owners  
Public  
Regional Authorities  
• Showcases / Best practices – number of attendees;  
• Networking / Clustering events – number of attendees, number 
of follow up communications;  
• Seminars – number of attendees, number of dissemination 
materials  
(brochure/leaflet), number of follow up communications  
• Technical Papers: number of downloading, number of citations;  
 
 Chambers of Industry  • Game-Based learning / VR tools – number of download of 
Apps, number of  
user’s registration;  
• Internet / Social Media: number of visits/re-visits (retention), 
site location, position in Public sector; number of citations  
• TV/Radio – Gross Rating Point – GRP;  
Local Government  
PPP’s  
Cluster Managers  
• Showcases / Best practices – number of attendees;  
• Networking / Clustering events – number of attendees, number 
of follow up communications;  
• Trade-Fairs / Conferences / Seminars – number of attendees, 
number of dissemination materials (brochure/leaflet), number 
of follow up communications  
• White Papers / Technical Papers: number of downloading, 
number of  
 
 Industry Associations  citations;  
• Game-Based learning / VR tools – number of download of 
Apps, number of  
user’s registration;  
• Internet / Social Media: number of visits/re-visits (retention), 
site location, position in Public sector; number of citations;   
• TV/Radio – Gross Rating Point – GRP;  
NGO’s  
Academia  
Universities  
• Showcases / Best practices – number of attendees;  
• Networking / Clustering events – number of attendees, number 
of follow up communications;  
• Conferences / Seminars – number of attendees, number of 
dissemination materials (brochure/leaflet), number of follow up 
communications  
• White Papers / Scientific Papers / Technical Papers: number of 
downloading, number of citations;  
 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 42 of 80  
  
 Research Centres  • Game-Based learning / VR tools – number of download of 
Apps, number of  
user’s registration;  
• Internet / Social Media: number of visits/re-visits (retention), 
site location, position in Public sector; number of citations;   
• TV/Radio – Gross Rating Point – GRP;  
RTO’s  
  
Table 12. Target group and expected impact  
Target Groups  Expected impact  
Industry: Park Operators or Owners, Cluster 
Managers, Industry associations, Anchor 
companies,   
  
Generate industry awareness and commitment 
about strategic benefits of waste heat/cold 
valorization as additional revenue or costs cut.   
KET service providers: ESCOs & DHCOs 
operators  
Expand and growth their business  
IS and energy engineering companies, IS 
Facilitation  
Extend  their  offering  to  include  IS 
 facilitation  
Consultancies  /intermediation services  
Policy Makers: Local government, Chambers of 
industry, Regional authorities  
Boost the economic and environmental 
performance of their industrial base  
Scientific community and Academia 
stakeholders: Universities and Research 
Centres  
Contribute to strengthening the European 
research Area (ERA) in Energy Symbiosis.   
General Public  Inform public who are aware of industry 
sustainability efforts, energy efficiency and their 
benefits  
H2020 Project, international/national initiatives  Identification of synergies among projects for 
strengthening further collaboration  
  
A draft of the Dissemination roadmap is presented in table 12 and will be updated frequently 
during the implementation of the project. Based on this roadmap, adequate KPIs for measuring 
the impact of the dissemination carried out.  
Table 13. Dissemination roadmap  
Where project results will be presented Performance Indicators (KPIs)  
Participation in external events (trade-
fairs, exhibitions, Europe IS workshops, 
own workshops, ‘IES in Europe’ event, 
Final INCUBIS workshop, Brokerage 
events...etc.)  
Participation in >8 events reaching >1000 industries   
  
 15 INCUBIS Consultation Workshops (3/region)  
Case-studies site visits  50 case-study site-visits (10/region) coinciding with 
incubators meetings  
Policy events, Policy round tables  CWA on Energy Symbiosis, policy roundtables  
Presentation of project results at IS and 
EE network events and through their 
channels   
> 5 Guidelines/ Best practices reports publication  
>12 presentations of project results in conferences  
Social media channels, Newsletter  > 6 digital press releases (each 6 months) and 2 
issues per year in printed publications  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 43 of 80  
  
>600 connections and 6 post per month in social 
media accounts  
Project website, Social media channels  2 videos presenting the overall objective of the project 
and a series of interviews performed to key experts  
‘Industrial Energy Symbiosis in Europe’ 
event  
Collaboration between >8 projects and >500 attendees  
  
A number of targeted events and tradeshows, to disseminate the project results have been 
identified and presented in the Dissemination Plan (table 13)  
Table 14. Dissemination Plan  
Events for dissemination   Target Groups  
ACHEMA Fair: One of the largest global flagship forums for the chemical 
process industry.   
I, SC, PM, PI  
EU Industry Days: The main EU platform to discuss on the future of EU 
industry in key challenges such as sustainability, digitalisation, investment 
and globalisation.  
I, SC, PM, PI, GP  
Industry conferences    
ISIE (International Society for Industrial Ecology) biannual conference. 
ISIE promotes industrial ecology and facilitates communication among 
symbiosis stakeholder ecosystem.   
I, SC, PM, C, GP  
WSED (World Sustainable Energy Days). Europe’s largest annual 
conferences in the energy field, with a special focus on sustainable energy 
and industrial efficiency.   
I, SP, PM, SC  
SDEWES (Conference on Sustainable Development of Energy, Water 
and Environment Systems). Disseminate results in the field of smart 
energy systems (district heating, waste heat, demand response; power to 
heat, heating/cooling, heat maps, digitalisation)  
I, SP, SC, PM  
Associations, Clusters, Platforms:    
A. SPIRE (IRIS, EYDE, COVES): A.SPIRE is the European Association that 
represents innovative process industries with more than 130 members  
 I, SP,C,PM  
EREK. European Resource Efficiency Knowledge Center. An EC initiative 
to to help 
European companies, especially SMEs, save energy, material and water 
costs  
 I, SP,C,SC, PM  
EuroHEAT & Power: The international network for district energy, promoting 
sustainable 
 I, SP,C,PM  
heating and cooling in Europe and beyond (see support letter)   
Alliance of Energy Intensive Industries  (CEFIC, CEMBUREAU,CEPI, 
EUROFER, CerameUnie, Eurometaux, Euroalliages, IFIEC and others).  
I, SP,C,PM  
Dissemination with other research projects    
Energy Symbiosis in Europe event, the follow-up event  of ‘IS in Europe’, a 
joint initiative to be organized in 2020 for cross fertilization of results with 
other projects.   
I, SC, PM, GP, PI  
I: Industry, SP: KET service providers, C: IS Consultancies, PM:Policy Makers, SC:Scientific 
community GP:General public, PI:Project and initiatives  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 44 of 80  
  
  
2.2.2 Business & Exploitation for INCUBIS  
2.2.2.1 Strategy for knowledge management and protection   
Data management plan  
Partners have given due consideration to issues related to the management of research and data 
with a view to ensuring data security, accessibility and validation of results. In addition, we aim to 
ensure that the funding and regulatory body requirements are met, and the data remains accurate, 
authentic, reliable and complete. Due to its nature and activities, INCUBIS is expected to generate 
significant data, so INCUBIS will participate in the H2020 Open Data Pilot. A “Data Management 
Plan” (DMP will be developed from the early stages (M3) of the project, in WP6, that will be 
updated constantly as the project evolves (if necessary) describing what kind of data will be 
generated and pote ntially which policies applied to the data. The DMP will describe plans for 
creating, organizing, documenting, storing and sharing data. It will take into account issues such 
as data protection and confidentiality, data preservation and curation and will provide a framework 
that will cover the entire data management life cycle (even beyond the end of the project), and 
will be in line with the “Guidelines on Data Management in Horizon 2020”.   
  
Knowledge management and IPR protection  
Consortium Agreement:  Before the signature of the Grant Agreement with the EC and the 
beginning of the project, all partners will agree upon a Consortium Agreement (CA). All 
procedures related to intellectual property will be described in this CA, which will be based on the 
DESCA 2020 model. All dissemination/ communication activities will be in line with the protection 
of intellectual property rights as well as confidentiality obligations. During the project and for a 
period after its completion (that will be established in the  CA), the partners will preserve the 
confidentiality of any data, documents or other material identified as confidential in relation to the 
project execution. As one of the keys for project success, the background knowledge of each of 
the partners that may be used to achieve the project objectives will be updated if necessary, from 
Table xxx, along with the measures for dealing with the use of Intellectual Property according to 
H2020 rules and measures already established at proposal preparation stage. Moreover, the CA 
will build on the key steps that need to be taken for the optimal management and exploitation of 
the project.   
Management of knowledge and foreground IPR: The consortium agreement will ensure the 
protection of the Intellectual Property of all  existing partners and products. The IPR arising from 
the results of the project will be property of the partner(s) that has(have) developed it. However, 
knowledge needed for the completion of the project will be made accessible among partners. 
Procedures and tools that will be produced will remain with their respective owners of exploitation. 
In cases of joint outputs, the ownership will be shared in accordance with a notified agreement. 
All project participants will cooperate in order to reach the most ef ficient process of knowledge 
management. The know -how exchanged between the partners may include, in certain cases, 
background knowledge. Finally, the partners agree on the principles for the management of 
intellectual property. The list of specific assets  brought by each partner to INCUBIS project is 
presented in table 14.   
Table 15. Background table  
Partner  Background  
IRIS  Energy Symbiosis Assessment (ESA) module; SaaS infrastructure and pre -
developed modules in the context of proprietary (commercially available) project 
management software: Pre-developed stakeholder platforms for circular economy.  
SYM  Síner software Platform; Industrial Symbiosis Methodology, IS facilitation 
stakeholders’ network  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 45 of 80  
  
UHULL  ESOS and ESA tools, know-how and logic of the SHAREBOX energy tool 
functionality,   
INVEN  Project structuring and financing services  
IZNAB  User guide to engaging in Industrial Symbiosis, Know-how on communication and 
dissemination, as well as exploitation strategy, replication strategies and business 
development plan creation, and also sustainability actions for Industrial Symbiosis 
initiatives within Manufacturing sector.  
SOFIES  Industrial Energy Symbiosis Projects management and assessment methodology, 
own Energy Technical and Economic Experts network, Dunkirk case study (own 
projects and clients), implementation guide of Eco-Industrial parks.  
EYDE  A regional triple-helix facilitation platform for industrial/Industrial-Urban symbiosis 
in the Agder region, Studies of waste heat potential among EYDE industries  
COVES  Brunsbüttel case study (own projects and network)  
2.2.2.2 Identification of Business Plans for INCUBIS Key Exploitable Results  
Exploitable assets are what we want stakeholders to use in order to contribute to the project’s 
impact. The following table highlights the provisional project results, the main INCUBIS outputs.   
Table 16. Expected Results  
N  Description of the Expect Results  
1  Virtual Incubator: The virtual platform will bring together and make available all the services 
and instruments developed during the project. It will also be the main commercialisation 
vehicle for the projects´ outpu ts. IRIS´ intentions is to commercialise the platform as the 
consortium´s SaaS solution provider. A freemium model under which some aspects of the 
platform will be free and others on a license basis will be considered. For a detailed  
business model and plan see Section 2.2. Partners potentially involved: IRIS, UHULL, 
SYM  
2  Industrial symbiosis project management (ISPM) Module. This module of the Virtual 
Incubator will include all the basic functions like user creation, user profile management, 
company and resource data collection, synergy management/tracking, resource & synergy 
inventory creation and management. It will allow en tering, concentrating, updating and 
visualising all project data, crossing it for different analysis and facilitating connections among 
involved stakeholders. Partners potentially involved: IRIS, SYM  
3  Energy Symbiosis Opportunity Screening (ESOS) Module. This module will process the 
information from the ISPM Module to generate supply/demand matchmaking and opportunity 
ranking. The module is based on the Energy module of the SHAREBOX platform which is 
freely available. Partners potentially involved: IRIS, 
UHULL  
4  Energy Symbiosis Assessment (ESA) Module. This module will support energy synergy 
technoeconomic evaluation and assessment. This module is based on MERIT tool which is 
developed as open source software. Partners potentially involved: IRIS, UHULL  
5  Energy Symbiosis Tendering (EST) Module. This module will consist of a funding portal 
which will collect information on available funding programmes and will act as  a tendering 
interface for investors. The module will be based on a web portal of funding programmes and 
project tenders related to Energy Symbiosis that tenderers (e.g. DHW engineers, developers) 
can use to identify and bid for projects. It will be an open resource for tenderers and funded 
by a fee paid by the programmes/projects that appear on the funding portal.  Partners 
potentially involved: IRIS, INVEN  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 46 of 80  
  
6  Energy Symbiosis Training & Mentoring (ESTM) module. This module will include a set 
of integrated microservices that will enable the delivery of the training activities and remote 
mentoring. It will be provided free of charge for the duration of the projec t. Post-project, the 
training programmes established during the project will remain free of charge but new 
programmes (added post -project) will be commercialized.  Partners potentially involved: 
IRIS, IZNAB  
7  Framework for facilitation of energy symbiosis. The tools and the methodology to 
facilitate Energy Symbiosis initiatives developed throughout the project will be summarised 
in a report that will include guidelines and best practices. This document will be available for 
download via the Virtual Incubator Platform. Based on the feedback from the different 
incubators, guidelines documents and check lists will be developed and shared onto the 
platform. Partners potentially involved: SOFIES, SYM  
8  Methodology for estimating energy symbiosis potential. Methodology to estimate energy 
symbiosis potential considering technical and economic information and create maps for 
supporting scoping and preassessment activities. This will be published in open access 
journals and thus made publicly available. Partners potentially involved: UHULL  
9  Validated Service Portfolio & Enhance Competence, in the Energy Sector and especially 
in IS community energy projects. Partners potentially involved: All  
10  Advisory and coordination capacities: strengthening of capabilities for identifying and co-
developing specific energy efficiency and industrial sy mbiosis initiatives.  Partners 
potentially involved: All  
11  Guide for building business case. This guide will support local stakeholders in the 5 
regions, providing guidance based on the type of project and type of investors.  Partners 
potentially involved: INVEN  
12  ‘Handbook of Energy Symbiosis Incubator’ will be a practical aid, at pan European level, 
for all parties interested in implementing the INCUBIS method in their area/region. This 
document will be fully open source and available for download via the Virtual Incubator 
Platform. Partners potentially involved: All  
13  Monitoring and impact assessment methodology and tool . The impact reporting tool 
integrated in the virtual platform will allow users to report impact and verify the KPIs defined, 
via online, as part of the usage of the platform. Partners potentially involved: IRIS, UHULL, 
SYM, IZNAB  
14  BAT supplement. Supplement of the Energy Efficiency Best Available Techniques (BAT) 
guidelines that will address cross-site optimization (i.e. Energy Symbiosis). Publicly available. 
Partners potentially involved:  
UHULL  
15  Training material. All the training material developed during the INCUBIS training activities 
will be available for download via the Virtual Incubator Platform: presentations, webinars, 
tutorials, guidelines, best practices, etc. 
Partners potentially involved: IZNAB and partners that produce it  
  
2.2.2.3 Post-project Exploitation  
The main objective of the post -project exploitation period is to keep the Energy Symbiosis 
Incubator model running (without the need of public funds or further investments) and replicate 
them to other potential regions that show interest. Based on the above mentioned expected 
Exploitable Results (Table 15), which are basically included in the Incubator concept, a draft 
business plan has been drawn up by the INCUBIS consortium. This business plan will be further 
developed, actualized and customized based on the needs and expectations of e ach of the 
partners, with the aim of delivering the maximum benefit for each of the participants, as well as 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 47 of 80  
  
for the wider European Energy Intensive Industries (WP6). At least 3 different business models 
will be drafted by the consortium, led by the Innovation, Exploitation & IPR Manager (Eric Suñol, 
INVEN), analyzing the post -project business intentions of all the partners and the agreements 
reached. To simplify the process, a Business Model Canvas (BMC) has been designed and is 
presented below including all the aspects from the Energy Symbiosis Incubator.  
During the project, each partner will continue with the upgrading of individualized and collective 
business plans, under the activities of WP6. Thus, in order to analyze the offer  (in terms of number 
of service providers) and the demand for each of the partners providing services through the 
incubator, it will be necessary to identify the total number of potential customers based on the 
services that were requested through the project lifetime depending on the case-study stage and 
its environment conditions, as the region and the facilitator, for which the Virtual Incubator 
monitoring system (T3.3) will provide the data, as well as study and analyze the services 
relevance, based on the demand that would b e required for each of the case -studies from the 
pool of INCUBIS project and in the other external case -studies selected in phase 3 (replication 
phase). Furthermore, the business model under which similar real incubators (EIT Digital 
(Europe), LVMH (Paris) , HighTechXL (Eindhoven), Hub:Raum (Berlin), Kickstart accelerator 
(Zurich), ), STING (Stockholm), Smart Agri Hubs (Europe)...etc.), with public, private or mixed 
funding models as PPP, are and will be running around Europe, will be studied during the 
development of the Energy Symbiosis Incubator Business Plan.   
Overall, post-project exploitation will enable Energy Symbiosis Incubators to achieve economic 
sustainability in order to fund core operational costs, such as staffing, travel, office space, 
maintenance of digital platforms, events and external costs. For example, revenue could be 
generated by regional incubators through a mix of membership fees, which give access to a suit 
of resource and support, along with the sale of tailored consultancy services, such as facilitation, 
brokerage and market analysis. In turn, the regional incubators could contribute through fixed 
annual feeds to the upkeep of European-wide INCUBIS resources, such as the Virtual Platform. 
Together, this will enable the sustainable continuation of the Virtual Platform and the five regional 
Incubators.   
Further, the post -project exploitation will help establish working business models and best 
practices for Energy  
Symbiosis Incubators that can be adapted and replicated for other regions in Europe. Through 
outreach and dissemination activities, both during and beyond the project, regional Incubators 
will support the establishment of new regional Incubators to grow the INCUBIS network.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 48 of 80  
  
  
Figure 13. Incubator preliminary Business Model Canvas.
2.3  Communication activities  
The communication activities planned in the frame of INCUBIS will be realized via an awareness 
creation campaign. By communicating well -tailored messages through the most effective 
channels to reach targeted audiences, INCUBIS partners will be able to succ essfully raise 
awareness, spark measurable actions, enhance stakeholders’ engagement and motivate their 
participation, and lay the foundations for the successful adoption and sustainability of the project 
outcomes. To this end, a blend of communication measures is foreseen:  
● Project Identity: The early design of the graphical identity of INCUBIS in terms of templates will 
ensure consistency throughout the project duration.  
● Media information and other publications: Leaflets, Posters, Infographics, Info Factsheets (to 
be prepared early in the project), Press releases (on ad-hoc basis), Newsletters (every 2 months), 
podcasts (16, two per partner) will communicate the outcomes of INCUBIS, the energy symbiosis 
potential implementation and guidelines and best pra ctices. They will be produced in regions’ 
local languages (i.e. English, Catalan, French, German and Norwegian) – the English version to 
be utilized also for the general communication of the project outside the targeted countries.  
● Social Media: Mainstream social networks (i.e., Twitter, YouTube and LinkedIn) will be a main 
pillar of INCUBIS awareness creation strategy. INCUBIS social media accounts/pages will not 
only serve as one -way, passive “promotional” channels but will enhance the interactive 
communication and engagement of the regional energy symbiosis facilitators as Industrial Parks, 
Associations and Clusters,  and, of course, the general public and will be the “entry point” for the 
other on-line INCUBIS tools (i.e. Virtual Incubator and web-page). In order to preserve the interest 
of their followers and attract new ones, interactive visual storyboards as well as inspiring video 
testimonials from INCUBIS partners and relevant stakeholders will be produced. INCUBIS social 
media accounts/ pages will be created as soon as the project begins and will be regularly updated.  
● Virtual Incubator and web -site: INCUBIS Virtual platform it is considered one of the main 
outputs of the project, and will be the main linking point for partners, stakeholders and expe rts, 
and INCUBIS services during the project implementation (with restricted access) and the post -
project period (open-access). The platform landing page will consist in the project website, which 
will be made available to the general public, and all publi shable project outcomes, including 
promotional material, documents, public deliverables and links to all INCUBIS social media 

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 49 of 80  
  
accounts/ pages will be included. The Virtual Incubator will facilitate the internal communication 
and collaboration with external interested parties via forum modules.    
3 IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Work plan – work packages and deliverables  
Brief presentation of the overall structure of the work plan  
A competitive work plan has been created in order to deliver on the objectives of the INCUBIS 
project, which is divided into 7 WPs, subsequently divided further into working tasks. This project 
is coordinated by IRIS; however, each WP and task has a leader that is responsible for progress 
and communication of results. The innovation development work is encased in a comprehensive 
management strategy, robust communication and training strategy to heighten the impact of the 
support innovation services generated through the project, as well as their management to pave 
the way for planning and im plementing the project exploitation and dissemination pathways, 
including Symbiosis Coordination (leader: SYM) , and robust Project Coordination and 
project management procedures (leader: IRIS) . The work to be carried out in INCUBIS is 
structured considerin g three different types of activities: Landscape Analysis, Tools 
development and Implementation and replicability.   
Interconnectivity of the work packages is displayed in the Pert diagram followed by the Gantt 
chart. Subsequently, each working package and working task is described in detail.  
  
Pert diagram of WPs and tasks  
 
  
  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 50 of 80  
  
  
 
 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Gantt chart  
  
        YEAR 1     YEAR 2  YEAR 3  
WP  WP  & Task  LEAD  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  
WP1  INCUBIS framework and regional requirements  UHULL                *                                                          
T1.1  Review methods and tools for delivering Energy Symbiosis  UHULL                                                                          
T1.2  Map the regional landscapes of energy symbiosis  UHULL          ■                                                                
T1.3  Match methods, tools, and landscapes to define INCUBIS 
framework  
SYM                ■                                                          
WP2  INCUBIS knowledge-intensive business services  INVEN                        *            *                                      
T2.1  Facilitating complex energy synergies in a European 
context  
SOFIES                        ■                                                  
T2.2  Analyzing the technoeconomic potential for energy 
symbiosis  
UHULL                                    ■                                      
T2.3  Derisking and attracting investments for energy synergies  INVEN                              ■                                            
T2.4  Raising regulatory barriers and building local support  EYDE                              ■      ■                                      
WP3  Virtual Energy-Symbiosis Incubator Platform  IRIS                                    *                        *              
T3.1  Definition of the Virtual Platform architecture and core 
functionalities  
IRIS                  ■                                                        
T3.2  Development of the Virtual platform and integration of 
symbiosis modules  
IRIS                                    ■            ■                          
T3.3  Virtual incubator performance testing, monitoring and 
assessment  
IRIS                                                            ■              
WP4  Rolling out Energy Symbiosis Incubator across European 
Regions  
SYM                              *            *                                
T4.1  Preparing the local energy symbiosis incubators  SYM                        ■                                                  
T4.2  Opportunity identification, assessment and selection  UHULL                                                      ■                    
T4.3  Implementation of energy symbiosis projects across 
European territories  
SYM                                                            ■              
T4.4  Performance and impact monitoring and reporting  SYM                                                                        ■  
WP5  Addressing systemic barriers for energy symbiosis  EYDE                                                            *            *  
T5.1  INCUBIS accelerated education and mentoring programme  IZNAB                                                                        ■  
T5.2  Updating European standards and BATs on energy 
efficiency  
UHULL                                                            ■      ■        

 
 
T5.3  Regulatory and legislative actions and recommendations  EYDE                                                                        ■  
T5.4  Building investor capacity  INVEN                                                            ■              
WP6  Awareness creation, dissemination, and exploitation  IZNAB      *                                                                  * *  
T6.1  Dissemination, communication and stakeholder 
engagement  
IZNAB      ■                              ■                                    ■  
T6.2  Exploitation of projet outputs (IPR management and 
Business Plan)  
INVEN                                    ■                                    ■  
T6.3  Energy symbiosis radar and European collaboration  IRIS                                                                          
WP7  Project Management and Coordination  IRIS                                                                          
T7.1  Management of project resources  IRIS  ▲          ▲            ▲            ▲            ▲            ▲            ▲  
T7.2  Implementation of the management procedures  IRIS  ■                                                                        
T7.3  Coordination with and Reporting to the EC  IRIS            ■            ■                        ■            ■              
T7.4  Ethics, data management, and confidentiality  IZNAB    ■                                                                      
■Deliverable * Milestone ▲PSC meeting           
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
 
Table 3.
3.2  Management structure, Milestones and Procedures  
Organisational structure and decision-making  
The project will be managed by the 
experienced Project Coordinator (PC) , 
IRIS. They follow proven project 
management procedures, which adhere to  
ISO 9001:2008 certified processes and 
UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management 
Systems for R&D&I. The project’s 
organisational structure (Fig. 13) consists 
of the Project Coordinator  (the interface 
with the EC) and the  Project Steering 
Committee (PCS)  At executive 
management level, the PCS is supported in 
the implementation of the work by different 
roles and decision -making capacity, which 
are discussed below. As opposed to a 
monopoly role of the PC, this structure 
distributes the governance between various 
partners according to their background to allow a good balance in decision and management of 
different aspects.   
Project coordinator  
 Georgios Chalkias (IRIS) will act as Project  Figure 14.  INCUBIS project organisational structure.  
Coordinator. He has coordinated 3 H2020 projects  
with total budget of 24 Million euro (AGRIMAX, PROPAT, SHAREBOX) and has a background in 
Industrial Ecology with research experience on Industrial Symbiosis from Universities of Delft and 
Surrey (see section 4 for CV). He will be responsible for putting in place and supervising the 
execution of processes and procedures for ensuring that the work programme adh eres to its 
schedule, fulfils its objectives, and that the project meets the needs and expectations of all the 
partners. He will be active in steering the evolution of the project by ensuring that the work 
performed by each partner is closely monitored. He  will assume responsibility for ensuring that 
the project management procedures are correctly implemented so that all deadlines and 
obligations are met. He will also act as the communication and administrative interface with the 
EC, to carry out the report ing and overall administrative management of the project. In many 
instances he will act as the public face for the project e.g. in networking events between EU 
projects or when the project receives enquiries by external agents like press or policy makers. 
For details on the competence of IRIS and Mr Chalkias to execute this role, see partner profile 
and CV in section 4.  
  
Table 3.2.a: List of milestones  
List of milestones    
Milestone 
number  
Milestone 
name  
Related 
WP  
Lead 
partner  
Date 
(month)  
Means of 
verification  
MS1  INCUBIS regional needs and operational 
framework defined  WP1  UHULL  M8  submission of D1.1 and 
D1.2  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 54 of 80  
  
MS2  
The European framework for Energy 
Symbiosis  
Coordination is delivered  
WP2  SOFIES  M12  submission of D2.1  
MS3  
INCUBIS Knowledge intensive business 
services are fully deployed  WP2  INVEN  M18  
submission of D2.2, 
D2.3 and  
D2.4  
MS4  
INCUBIS Virtual Platform ready for use  
WP3  IRIS  M18  
Submission of D3.2, 
virtual platform first 
version released  
MS5  
INCUBIS Platform is fully deployed and 
tested  WP3  IRIS  M30  
Submission of D3.4, 
virtual platform online & 
fully operational  
MS6  
All local Incubators launched  
WP4  SYM  M15  
Submission of D4.1, at 
least one project per 
incubator is active  
MS7  
All local Incubators fully operational  
WP4  SYM  M21  
WP2 concluded, D3.2 
submitted, local 
incubators at 2nd round  
MS8  
INCUBIS training and capacity-building 
programme is launched  
  
WP5  IZNAB  M30  
Submission D4.3, D5.1, 
D5.2 and achievement 
of MS5  
MS9  
All recommendations for addressing 
systemic barriers to Energy Symbiosis are 
published  
  
WP5  EYDE  M36  Submission of D5.4 and 
D5.5  
MS10  
Communication, dissemination  and  data 
management plan established  
  
WP6  IZNAB  M3  
submission of D6.1, 
D7.2, launch of website 
and social media  
MS11  Effective Communication and Awareness 
activities performed  WP6  IZNAB  M36  Submission of D6.3 and 
D6.5  
MS12  Exploitation strategy is implemented and 
Business model is in place  WP6  INVEN  M36  Submission of D6.2 and 
D6.4  
  
Project Steering Committee and Management Support Team  
The “Project Steering Committee” (PSC) is established to take care of the technical, economic, 
financial, legal and organizational symbiosis related issues and for supporting the Project 
Coordinator in ensuring that the objectives and activities of the project are successfully 
accomplished in a timely manner, taking into account the interdisciplinary approach and the 
interdependence between the tasks of the work plan. The PSC is composed of a representative 
from each beneficiary, allowing the required interactions across the WPs developing  the key 
individual results. The PSC is chaired by the project coordinator and meets on a regular basis (at 
least every 6 months) to track and report project progress and resolve outstanding issues. The 
below additional management roles are defined within the PSC to form the “Management Support 
Team” which facilitates the oversight and management of the respective work and directly 
supports the project coordinator.  
Verónica Kuchinow (SYM)  will act as the project’s Industrial Symbiosis Manager. She is a 
specialist in industrial symbiosis, founder of SYM, with more than 20 years of experience and a 
track record of successful symbiosis implementations, including energy symbiosis. Her role as IS 
manager will be complementary to her role as WP4 leader and she will use her experience in the 
field to advise and guide the implementation of energy symbiosis in all five regions of the project.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 55 of 80  
  
Eric Suñol (INVEN) will act as the project’s Innovation, Exploitation & IPR Manager,  leading 
the partners in effective management of the innovation cycle of the project. He will also act as a 
driver for INCUBIS partners in defining the post-project concerted business strategy. He has, for 
this role, the perfect balance between experience as strategy advisor in the energy sector and 
setting-up and co-managing technological incubators in the energy field. He is also WP2 leader 
and therefore will coordinate the development the Incubator’s services.   
Emil Lezak (IZNAB) will act as Communications, Dissemination & Data Manager – His strong 
track record in process improvement, training, facilitation and leading dissemination and 
deployment programmes in collaborative environments will strengthen his capacity for accurate 
communication fundamental for the role. Emil will be responsible for leading the consortium in 
further planning and implementing the project Communication and Dissemination activities, as 
well as ensuring the project reaches out to different audiences in the most effective way. He will  
also supervise data management, ensuring systematic curation and adherence to the DMP.   
Anrdew Heyes (UHULL) will act as the projects Energy Technology Manager - Capitalizing on 
his expertise and experience of more than 30 years on energy systems (specializing on energy 
storage, conversion and transfer), both as an academic and entrepreneur, he will use his technical 
knowledge to advise and guide the implementation  of energy symbiosis by offering insights on 
the specifics and technicalities of energy efficiency projects, policies and stakeholders.   
Critical risks and mitigation measures  
Table 3.2b shows the main risks identified to date, their probability of occurrence, the severity of 
the problem (impact), the actions to mitigate the risk and foreseen contingency actions.   
  
Table 3.2.b: Critical risks for implementation  
General technical and operational risks  
Description of risk (indicate 
level of likelihood and 
impact: Low/Medium/High)  
WP(s)  
  
Proposed risk-mitigation 
measures  
Lack of interest from key stakeholders 
in the targeted regions to participate 
in projects´ activities Likelihood: Low 
Impact: High  
WP1, 
WP4  
This will be avoided by systematic engagement 
and awareness activities and by capitalizing on 
the large numbers of support letters received 
already at proposal stage  
Negative feedback from workshop 
participants, as indicated through 
feedback questionnaires Likelihood: 
Low Impact:  
Medium  
WP4  All workshop materials and delivery methods will 
be validated by the consortium and internal 
training will be delivered by experts (SYM, 
SOFIES) to other partners. Negative feedback will 
be carefully analyzed and all the needs 
addressed.  
Less than satisfactory generation of 
opportunities in workshops 
Likelihood: Low Impact: High  
WP4  This risk will be avoided by the meticulous 
preparatory work resulting in the selection of right 
mix of participants and careful organization of all 
phases (before, during and after) of each event.  
Involved companies’ reluctance to 
collaboratively participate on the basis 
of fairplay rules as well as sharing 
sensitive information Likelihood: Low 
Impact: High  
WP4  During the “engagement” stage, the reluctant 
companies should be convinced on the basis of 
exposing to them the success cases that partners 
SYM and SOFIES have already implemented. 
Flexibility and empathy in negotiations.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 56 of 80  
  
Overload of queries and coaching 
requests, too many opportunities 
identified and  
requested to be supported Likelihood: 
Medium Impact: Low  
WP4, 
WP5  
The consortium will prioritize the cases and needs 
and apply a set of comprehensive criteria to 
choose those activities that will generate 
maximum impact while also Clustering cases with 
transferable value.  
Lack of interest (low numbers of 
participants in training events, low 
number of coaching requests, low 
registration on the online  
WP4,  
WP5,  
WP6  
We will engage the extended networks and 
associations of which our partners are members 
as well as build on the initial pool of key 
stakeholders that have supported INCUBIS  
platform) Likelihood: Medium Impact: 
Medium  
 through support letters  
Delay in the release of Training 
modules - Likelihood: Low Impact: 
Medium  
WP5  Training modules are planned for last year of 
project and will be based on material generated 
on year 1 and 2.  
Educational and mentoring 
programme weak awareness and lack 
of interest from the side of relevant 
users / Likelihood: Medium Impact:  
Medium  
WP5/ 
WP6  
Call for participation for the Training sessions will 
be prepared already during WP4 activities and at 
least 6 months in advance, for any of INCUBIS 
dissemination event. Users with granted “Energy 
Symbiosis” certificate will be invited to participate 
in Consortium Meetings (except Steering 
Committee sessions).  
Performed communication and 
dissemination  
activities ineffective. / Likelihood: 
Medium  
Impact: Medium  
WP6  Extend to wider audience, different form of events, 
“faster” publications in Technical Magazines which 
are free available on Trade -Fairs/Technical 
Conferences, in order to improve the action. Invite 
external Experts to give the speech on the 
dissemination events organized by INCUBIS 
Project.  
General dissemination and managerial risks   
Partners do not agree on the IPR of 
the incubator and its services. Conflict 
of interest indicated in written form 
Likelihood: Medium Impact: High  
WP6  A CA will be signed by all partners before the 
project starts, establishing the basic rules for the 
management of IPR, identifying expected results 
as well as who will be the owner. After the 
beginning of the project an exploitation plan will 
be prepared and shared among the partners to 
identify potential and optimal way to protect 
background, sideground and foreground for each 
partner  
Partners do not agree on the initial 
business plan (D6.2) of the incubator 
and its services /Medium Likelihood: 
Medium Impact: High  
WP6  After identifying the conflict of interest, a workshop 
between the partners will be performed in order to 
discuss the possibility of mutual agreement on the 
commercialization of the INCUBIS solutions. The 
Agreement will be included in the next PEDR.  
Another EU Consortium/Initiative 
comes up with a similar competitive 
solution. Exploitation plan is 
jeopardised. Likelihood: Medium 
Impact: Medium  
WP6  INCUBIS will continuously “watch” related 
Projects to finetune INCUBIS results and keeping 
up our competitive advance. Establish liaisons 
with other EU Projects/Initiatives to create win-win 
situations.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 57 of 80  
  
Partner cannot participate unexpected 
reasons Likelihood: Low Impact: 
Medium  
 WP7  We already have other potential partners ready to 
step in, should a partner not be able to participate 
in the project.   
Consequences of Brexit approval. 
Likelihood: High Impact: Medium  
WP7  The rest of the consortium will try to assume the 
partner’s tasks responsibilities and resources. In 
case that is not possible, the consortium will look 
for a partner substitute with same profile.  
Failure of partner to deliver work on 
time and to quality required 
Likelihood: Low Impact:  
High  
WP7  Strict monitoring from WP7, anticipating 
deliverables and setting up a quality control 
procedure with intermediary deadlines  
Discrepancies in implementation 
approaches Likelihood: Low Impact: 
Medium  
WP7  Regular communication among WP leaders to 
solve all implementation issues.   
Progress starting too late resulting in 
poor delivery outcomes Likelihood: 
Low Impact:  
High  
WP7  Create a project with stepwise progress, realistic 
timeline and resource estimates based on 
industrial experience and best practices  
Problems in respecting the planned 
activities and resources allocation 
Likelihood: Low Impact: Medium  
WP7  This risk will be mitigated by the implementation of 
the Technical Workplan Review and Update 
Procedures.
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
  
Figure 15. INCUBIS Consortium  
  
As illustrated in the above figure, and shown with more detail in the table below, the consortium 
brings together comprehensive interdisciplinary pockets of knowledge. Bringing together public 
and private organisations across Europe to perform collaborative innovation development is key 
for the interdisciplinary approach needed for Industrial  
Symbiosis based innovation linked to highly diverse sectors. The INCUBIS consortium is made 
up of 8 partners from 6 EU countries: Spain, Norway, UK, Poland, Switzerla nd and Germany 

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 58 of 80  
  
(Figure 13). It is a consortium driven by commercial interest and intentions with 6 out of 8 partners 
being For-Profit and 5 out of 6 SMEs. INCUBIS partners combine vast commercial knowledge 
and experience in delivering Energy Symbiosis projects by facilitating stakeholders, coordinating 
activities and addressing the key barriers to implementation (SOFIES, SYM). These partners are 
supported by experts in key domains for delivering energy symbiosis such as finance and 
business (INVEN), Technoe conomic assessment of energy systems (UHULL), ICT and digital 
tool development (IRIS), impact assessment and dissemination/training among the industrial 
stakeholders (IZNAB) and representation of the viewpoint and interests of EEIs (EYDE, COVES). 
Also, INC UBIS consortium covers a broad geography as seen in the map below. INCUBIS 
consortium has been created in order to cover all the activities and services to be delivered 
through the incubator. Our team constitutes a pan -European eco -system that unites the 
necessary infrastructure, knowledge, expertise and services to succeed in delivering on the 
project’s objectives.   
Table 17 INCUBIS partners expertise and services.  
Skills, expertise and assets  IRIS  UHULL  INVEN  IZNAB  EYDE  SYM  SOFIES  COVES 
Facilitation/coordination of 
symbiosis/EIP  
  X      X  X  X  X  
Technical and economic aspects of 
energy symbiosis  
  X            X  
Social aspects of energy symbiosis    X              
Policy and regulatory aspects of energy 
symbiosis  
        X  X  X    
Implementation of energy symbiosis 
projects  
    X    X  X  X  X  
ICT for symbiosis, energy, and project 
management   
X  X        X      
Business and contractual arrangements      X            
Provision/Access to funding and 
investment  
    X    X    X    
Provision of management/strategic 
consultancy  
    X        X    
Development/Delivery of training 
programmes  
  X      X  X  X    
Dissemination and communication 
campaigns  
X      X        X  
Impact and performance monitoring of 
symbiosis  
      X  X  X  X    
Extended professional network in 
industry and energy   
X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Finally, in relation to the gender dimension of our consortium , a number of the key 
management and decisionmaking positions have been assigned to highly qualified women, not 
least the role of Industrial Symbiosis Manager (Verónica Kuchinow) as well as number of WP and 
task leadership roles. Interestingly, females are among the key drivers of this proposal (Verónica 
Kuchinow, Adriana Sanz, Anna Lluís, Edurne Suárez, Anne Verniquet, Pauline Deutz, Marianne 
Furuholt). Recommendations regarding recruitment for securing future development profiles for 
the project will be overseen by the Project Coordinator in WP8 to ensure a reasonable level of 
balance between the sexes (gender balances will be considered as a selection criterion between 
equally qualified candidates).
3.4 Resources to be committed  
  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 59 of 80  
  
 
 4.  Members of the consortium  
 4.1.  Participants (applicants)  
Participant no.  1  Name (short 
name)/Country  
IRIS Technology Solutions (IRIS) / 
Spain  
Description of the legal entity   
 
IRIS is an advanced engineering company specialized in process monitoring, control, and 
optimization. Our ambition is to be the first choice for industries who want to transition their 
production models to the Industry4.0 and circular paradigms. The company was established in 
2007 and currently employs 50+ staff with a turnover of approx. €4M. IRIS is based in Barcelona 
and is fully equipped with engineering, optical and electronics workshops, food chemistry lab, 
Innovation Hub and several meeting rooms and  auditorium with cumulative capacity of 150 
persons.  
Our Commercial Division develops and integrates turnkey process monitoring and control 
solutions for analysis of chemical composition and foreign body or defect detection based on:  
● Near-InfraRed (NIR) monitoring (handheld device and in-line solutions);  
● HyperSpectral Imaging (HSI)  (at-line and off-line);  
● Artificial Intelligence modelling for (big) data analysis, decision support, and 
automation.  
● Under the Sapenta brand we commercialize cloud-based software 
solutions enabling the smartworking paradigm in enterprise environments, project 
management and online B2B marketplaces Our Innovation Division has three core 
research lines that we are actively pursuing:  
1. Optical and spectroscopic technologies for in/on-line process monitoring in a wide 
range of industries  
2. Data Processing & Information Systems ranging from AI-based modeling and 
decision support systems to online marketplaces.  
3. Novel and sustainable processing technologies (e.g. ultrasound) for extraction of bio-
compounds and development of bio-packaging and new bio-based materials.  
IRIS is certified under ISO 9001:2008 and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&I, 
and is an industry member of the following business/industrial associations: SPIRE (The 
European Association of Sustainable Process Industries), SPIE (Society of Photo -Optical 
Instrumentation Engineers), SECPHO (Southern European Cluster in Photonics and Optics), 
AEBALL (the industry association of Baix Llobregat region in Spain), Smart Space  
(Association of companies and organisations that specialize in ‘smart -working’), EEN 
(European Enter prise Network), CrowdHelix (an Open Innovation platform connecting an 
international network of universities, research organisations & companies)  
Main tasks  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 60 of 80  
  
IRIS will lead WP3, the setting up and delivery of the virtual incubator services and instruments 
as a single online offering under the model of SaaS. Furthermore, IRIS will coordinate the 
project and therefore lead WP7 activities on project coordination and management. Howev er, 
as the Virtula Incubator will be used in the deployment of the project activities in the target 
regions IRIS will also be involved in WP4 and as coordinator and leader of T6.3 IRIS will also 
participate in WP6 where it will lead the Energy Symbiosis Ra dar activities and European 
collaboration.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
As an organization, IRIS has demonstrable experience in managing innovation projects and 
having coordinated over 10 EU funded projects up to €15 Million budget. Their Project 
Management Office has more than 30 years of project management experience and IRI S 
administration / financial department counts 6 staff members.   
As a highly qualified engineering company, with experience in the development of ICT solutions 
for Industrial Symbiosis and Cloud Solutions to support community building and stakeholder’s 
platform, IRIS will support the full deployment of the main project output, the Energy Symbiosis 
Incubator.   
IRIS will offer its facilities including Innovation Hub Area, meeting rooms and Auditorium to 
function as the physical representation of the Incubator for the Catalan case studies, delivering 
in these premises facilitation workshops, meetings, and training activities.  
IRIS will use its wide network of industrial partners and contribute significantly towards 
dissemination and industry outreach activities through its deep involvement with the process 
industries as a founding member of ASPIRE, coordinator and  participant in >10 projects 
involving SPIRE industries and active participation in the Symbiosis working group of ASPIRE.   
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 61 of 80  
  
GEORGIOS CHALKIAS (Male). Innovation Program Manager.  BSc in Environmental and 
Natural Resource Management from University of Ioannina (Greece). MSc in Industrial Ecology 
from Universities of Leiden and Delft (NL). Georgios has over 10 years of experience working 
at the nexus of innovation and sustainability as a researcher, consultant and project manager. 
He has worked extensively on Industrial Symbiosis, both as a researcher of industrial 
ecosystems at the Universities of Delft (NL) and Surrey (UK) and as  project coordinator of 
H2020 project SHAREBOX developing a secure ICT platform for supporting industrial symbiosis 
project management with intelligent decision support tools. Further to this he has gained 
significant project management and project coordin ation experience by participating in a total 
of 10 H2020 projects (7 as WP leader and 3 as coordinator). He is therefore very familiar with 
all the modalities and administrative procedures involved in the management of EC research 
projects, from the grant preparation process, preparing and maintaining the Consortium 
Agreement, monitoring work, reporting requirements, the use of tools for communication with 
the EC, etc. He is also a member of the Industrial Symbiosis Working Group of ASPIRE and 
has represented both IRIS and ASPIRE in international fora (e.g. SME Envoy General Meeting, 
Cyprus, 2018).  
MANEL SANCHEZ VELANDO  (Male) Software developer at IRIS . Degree in Informatics 
Engineering and Diploma in Computer Systems from "Universitat Politècnica de Catal unya". 
English conversation level (B2). Having worked over 20 years in the field of information 
technology in different companies he has reported both organizational and management 
experience. He has great experience in analysis of customer needs and project management. 
Unix and Windows system administrator for 10 years. As a software engineer, he has done 
many projects using several languages: C, C++, C#, ASP, ASP.NET, PHP, Java, Javascript, 
SQL. Starting MEAN stack. He uses design patterns like: MVC, subj ect-observer, status, 
representative, factory, facade, etc. GUI design experience in both desktop and web 
(responsive) and in conformance to web content accessibility levels. UML design. Great 
experience in MS SQL Server and Mysql databases. He has experie nce in CAD/CAM and 
artificial vision control quality systems too. He enjoys analyzing projects with both customers 
and team members in order to get the best solution. He likes to listen and learn from everyone 
around him and share his knowledge with them. Team results are the most important for him.  
MARTA JURADO VILAR. (Female) Software developer at IRIS. BSc in Telecommunications 
Engineering (2011) from Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC). Prior to joining the Sapenta 
group at IRIS, she gained 5 yea rs’ experience in web applications development. She has 
experience with a wide range of technologies, including Maven, JSP, Ajax, jQuery, JSON and 
Axis2. She has also experience with non-relational databases and systems, which she gained 
using MongoDB and NodeJS. Furthermore, she acquired experience in the linux environment 
while performing the system administration for one of her last projects. She is currently working 
as a developer in IRIS, where she collaborates in the development and improvement of the  
SaaS Sapenta.  
OONAGH MC NERNEY . (Female) Director and Co -founder of IRIS.  Hons. Degree in 
International Business (1992), Uni. of Stirling, Scotland. She set up IRIS in 2007, with co -
founder Colm Digby, with a vision to accelerate the transitioning of new technologies out of the 
lab and into industry. She is passionate about converting research and development into 
business. Over the years she has been a fundamental driver in the evolution of IRIS towards 
the development of spectroscopy based advanced monitoring solutions and in harnessing the 
power of process data to provide industry with knowledge and intelligence. With a background 
in Business, she is a marketing enthusiast and a believer in the power of digital marketing and 
branding to help companies t o reach new global levels. Prior to IRIS, Oonagh spent 15 years 
working with industry, technology institutes and Business Development Agencies in the areas 
of technology transfer, innovation, business development and industry foreign direct 
investment. Exp ertise in new product development, leadership of applied R&D, 
commercialization, branding and marketing. She is also co -founder and CEO of Sapenta 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 62 of 80  
  
(sapenta.com). She is a visionary and an out of the box thinker and she supports a fearless and 
confident investment culture.   
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 63 of 80  
  
● Sapenta (Commercial activity) - Software-As-A-Service product. A cloud platform for 
smart management of work places: developed and commercialized by IRIS  
www.sapenta.com.  
● WorkDeck (Commercial activity) – WorkDeck is the descendant of Sapenta, migrating 
to a paradigm of modular software where SaaS functionalities are clustered in modules 
that can be delivered as independent services or work together seamlessly as a whole.  
● Rosales, A. and Mc Nerney, O. (2018). Sensing Technology. In Resource Efficiency 
of Processing  
Plants (eds S. K. Krämer and S. E. Engell). doi: 10.1002/9783527804153.ch6. Today, 
industry faces major challenges including globalization, environmental regulation, rising 
energy and resource costs and shortening product life cycle, among others. This chapter 
provides the reader with the authors' insights and experience in relation to a number of 
key metrological concepts, which are fundamental in the context of resource efficiency 
by rationalizing production processes.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
● SHAREBOX (Secure Management Platform for Shared Process Resources, GA nº 
680843, Funding programme: H2020 - SPIRE) – IRIS developed an ICT tools for 
Industrial Symbiosis including an Energy Module specialized on energy -based 
symbiosis (including heat and electricity).  
● HOUSEFUL (Innovative Circular Solutions and Services for new business opportunities 
in the EU housing sector, GA nº 776708, Funding programme: H2020) – IRIS is 
developing a SaaS integrating a circularity tool and stakeholder collaboration 
functionalities for energy (including heat), materials, waste and water 
valorization/sharing in the building sector  
● AGROCYCLE (Sustainable Techno-economic Solutions for the Agricultural value chain, 
GA nº 690142, Funding programme: H2020) – IRIS developed a Stakeholder platform 
to support awareness raising, community building and training in relation to waste 
valorization opportunities (including Symbiosis) in the agricultural and bio-based sector.  
● SCALIBUR (Scalable Technologies for Bio -urban Waste Recovery, GA nº817788, 
Funding programme: H2020) – IRIS developed a Stakeholder platform to promote social 
innovation, create and demonstrate new business models for high -value biobased 
products derived from urban biowaste, promote new technologies, increase awareness 
and show the project technical and social impacts by  providing best practices and policy 
recommendations for project replicability.  
● AGRIMAX (Agri & food waste valorisation co -ops based on flexible multi -feedstocks 
biorefinery processing technologies f or new high added value applications, GA nº 
720719, Funding programme: H2020 -BBI) – IRIS developed a Joint Stakeholder 
Platform for stakeholders who generate AFPW (crop producers, food processors, 
agricultural cooperative, etc.) for a cooperative use as a link between two biorefineries 
and their customers, so their operation is occupied all year round for multi -feedstock 
processing, thereby maximising profitability.   
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 64 of 80  
  
● Servers and cloud infrastructure for setting up and hosting virtual platform.  
● Innovation Hub Area  fully equipped with projector, w ifi, whiteboard, blackboards, 
kitchen, etc. able to accommodate meetings and innovation group activities for up to 20 
people.  
● Five meeting rooms  for 4 -15-person capacity equipped with whiteboards, wifi, 
monitors, projectors to support Innovation Hub activities.  
● One auditorium with capacity up to 100 persons for seminars, training events, and local 
dissemination and networking events.    
  
Participant no.  2  Name (short 
name)/Country  
SIMBIOSY SIMBIOSI INDUSTRIAL SL 
(SYM) / Spain  
Description of the legal entity  
Símbiosy is a consultancy company that acts as a facilitator in industrial symbiosis projects, 
providing territorial entities with the tools and the methodology  to implement circular 
economy strategies  and identify synergies among key stakeholders  within a network 
(companies, public authorities, research institutions, etc.). The overall goal is to improve the 
resource efficiency and the competitiveness of the industry sector.  
As a result of years of experience facilitating industrial symbiosis projects , the team at 
Símbiosy has developed a methodology to launch and promote circular, collaborative projects, 
which serves as a facilitation/implementation guide addressed to any coordinating entity of 
industrial symbiosis projects.  
Facilitating and managing industrial symbiosis projects involves analyzing the industrial 
ecosystem, identifying  
 
potential network synergies , engaging and building capacity of key stakeholders , 
facilitating collaboration among them, and creating a common action plan, which is always 
followed by a monitoring process for each of the industrial symbiosis projects. This ensures a 
proper comparison and quantification of the network performance.  
Finally, in order to perfor m the first steps of every industrial symbiosis project (the analyse of 
the industrial ecosystem and the identification of potential network synergies), Símbiosy has 
created and developed the SÍNER platform . SÍNER is an  industrial symbiosis project 
management software that concentrates and manages data related to the resources (raw 
materials, water, heat/cold) and waste streams (by-products, waste water, waste heat) of 
the industries within a territory. The platform allows identifying  potential network synergies 
within a territory and integrates a special module for the detection of potential heat/cold 
symbiosis networks.  
Main tasks  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 65 of 80  
  
Símbiosy will lead the WP4, whose main tasks are assessing existing and new opportunities 
of energy symbiosis initiatives and selecting the corresponding case studies, launching the 
energy symbiosis incubator and case studies implementation, develop a methodology for 
assessing monitoring and reporting impacts throughout the project lifetime.   
On the other hand, Símbiosy will be involved in additional tasks included in different WPs. 
Some of them are:  
Intermediation to reach and engage multiple stakeholders needed to establish the symbiotic 
relationship. Engagement activities include site visits, interviews, meetings, workshops, training 
seminars, roundtables, etc.  
Delivery of training to key staff/stakeholders to ensure that key actors in the local symbiosis 
initiatives have the required skills and knowledge to take these initiatives forward. (WP5)  
Integration of region -specific regulatory and legal considerations , actions and 
recommendations for policymakers. (WP2 & 5)  
Support the development of the core module of the energy symbiosis ICT tools integrated in the 
INCUBIS virtual platform. (WP3)  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
SYM´s core business involves the facilitation, coordination and delivery of industrial symbiosis 
projects in the Catalonia region, involving all types of industrial symbiosis (including energy 
symbiosis). In this context, SYM has its proprietary digital to ol and methodology for facilitating 
the stakeholders and the organizations involved in the symbiosis projects and has an extended 
network of experts to support them on various tasks. In addition, SYM, through its long 
engagement with local stakeholders at business and governance level, has an established 
reputation in the local ecosystem of industrial symbiosis actors and experience in delivering 
training and capacity building activities as well as following up and reporting progress of 
symbiosis projects.   
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
VERÓNICA KUCHINOW, CO-FUNDER AND CEO AT SÍMBIOSY (female): Eco-entrepreneur, 
with more than 20 years’ experience in industrial symbiosis, recycled products and waste 
management. Before working at Símbiosy, she founded ZICLA and worked as Technical 
Director at ACYCSA. She holds an Agricultural Engineering Degree from the University of Lleida 
and has a rich academic and professional background in business management and design,  
innovation and communication skills carried out in Spain and China. She is also President of 
the Energy and Waste Commission of the Official College of Agricultural Engineers of Catalonia, 
member of the Circular Economy Bureau of the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona, industrial 
sustainability Professor at IQS, Congress Curator at the Circular Economy European Summit, 
and member of various business associations and working groups in circular economy, such 
as the 22@Network and the PEIC (Promotion of Regional Smart Energy).  
ANNA LLUÍS, CO -FUNDER AND CEO AT SÍMBIOSY (female): Specialist in energy -waste-
water synergies for sustainable grid solutions, Anna has been involved in different 
environmental public projects during the last 23 years. From project manager to company 
director, Anna has had different technical and managing positions and has developed an open 
and systemic view to find solutions for waste, energy and water management problems. Waste-
to-energy approaches, biomass-biogas energy grids, and agro-industrial synergies are some of 
the latest projects she has been working on. Anna is Agricultural Engineer and holds a Master 
Degree in Energy Management. She is also Technical Director of the Energy and Waste 
Commission of the Official College of  
Agricultural Engineers of Catalonia, Circular Economy Commission Coordinator of the Reus 
Chamber of  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 66 of 80  
  
Commerce and Board Member of CMES (the collective for the new transition energy model).  
ADRIANA SANZ MIRABAL, PROJECT MANAGER AT SÍMBIOSY (female): Adriana is 
Mechanical Engineer and holds a European Double Master's Degree in Advanced Materials 
Science and Engineering. Her curiosity has encouraged her to develop her academic education 
and professional experience in three different countries: Spain, France, and Germany. Before 
joining Símbiosy, Adriana worked at the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, the largest applied research 
organisation in Europe. Her efforts were dedicated to researching and developing new recycling 
and substitution technologies for valuable secondary and critical raw materials. At Símbiosy, 
she is responsible for the management of industrial sym biosis projects, the design of new 
business models and the professional networking for stakeholders of the circular economy.  
JOSEP ROSELL, SENIOR CONSULTANT, SENIOR CONSULTANT (male): Graduate in 
Environmental  
Sciences, Master’s degree in Industrial Ecology studies and Postgraduate in Management and 
Business Administration, Josep has participated in different projects to promote ecology and 
competitiveness in industry, public entities and buildings, improving its sustainability and 
promoting cost savings and its positioning in the market. During his professional development, 
he has gained significant experience in the energy sector, acting as a technician and project 
manager in technical feasibility studies and executive projects for the design and installation of 
heat networks in industrial estates, as well as public district heating and biomass -based 
systems. He has performed more than 15 energy audits, more than 100 energy certifications in 
buildings, and earned a special mention with the “Illa Eficient”  award of the Barcelona City 
Council for the best integration project of renewable energies.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
● The SÍNER platform: SÍNER is an Industrial Symbiosis project management 
software, designed and developed by Símbiosy, that concentrates and manages data 
related to the resources (raw materials, water, heat/cold) and waste streams (by-
products, waste water, waste heat) of the industries within a territory.  
● “Industrial Pact of the Barcelona Metropolitan Region”: guide on local initiatives 
towards energy transition in industrial parks, 2014.  
● “Study and Diagnosis of the energy transition in the Barcelona Metropolitan 
Area”, 2014.  
● “Circular Economy in the Barcelona Metropolitan Area”, DREAM Collection 
(diagnosis, reflection, strategy and metropolitan actions), 2019.  
● “Guide for a Circular and Green Economy in the local environment: methodology 
and tools for local entities”, 2016-2019.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
● FISSAC (Fostering industrial symbiosis for a sustainable resource intensive industry 
across the extended construction value chain, GA nº642154, Funding programme: 
H2020)  
● Design and implementation of a district heating and cooling network from waste 
streams of the controlled waste disposal site in Bufalvent (province of Barcelona), 
2019.  
● Design of a strategic plan for the renewable energy transition within the Girona 
counties, 2019.  
● Design of a local strategy for the renewable energy transition within the 
municipalities of Spain's nuclear areas, 2019.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 67 of 80  
  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
Not applicable  
  
Participant no.  3  Name (short name)/Country  University of Hull (UHULL) / United 
Kingdom   
 
Description of the legal entity  
The University of Hull has a proud history of achievement and a long-established international 
reputation as a research -engaged and innovative institution. The University was founded in 
1927 with a Royal Charter being granted in 1954 to award its own degrees, becoming the 14 th 
independent university in England. Research excellence has developed alongside teaching 
from the U niversity's earliest days. In the 2014 Research Excellence Framework (REF) Hull 
ranked among the top 50 institutions in the UK by research power. With 62% of the submitted 
research being world-leading or internationally excellent in terms of originality, significance and 
rigor. Hull provides a cutting-edge educational experience for over 16,000 students and awards 
nearly 195 PhDs a year across four faculties. The University actively collaborates in 
multidisciplinary research through its engagement with a multitude of funders and has an annual 
research income of £10.3m, with 12% being EU funded. The University has engaged with the 
EU framework programme for many years and participated in 32 FP7 projects valued at £7.5m, 
with three as the Coordinator. For H202 0 the University currently has 11 projects valued at 
£3.3m, at present the University is in the process of contract negotiations for a further three 
H2020 awards with a total grant income of £2.13m.  The University is participating in nine 
Erasmus funded projects, of these live projects eight are being led by the University of Hull.  
Main tasks  
UHULL will lead WP1, whose main tasks are consolidating existing knowledge in industrial 
Symbiosis, EIPs, Energy Cooperation and Business Incubators; launch a fir st set of 
engagement activities and elicit the need of key stakeholders in the energy symbiosis 
ecosystem. UHULL will lead T1.1, in which a review of frameworks, analytical tools, business 
models and regulation will be performed to set the foundations of the later work. They will also 
lead T1.2, in which they will be in charge of developing a series of initial engagement activities, 
as well as an initial analysis in the Humber region and collect all the information from the other 
partners in each region. UH ULL will lead T2.2, analyzing the techno -economic potential of 
energy symbiosis opportunities, and will participate in other tasks in WP2 by helping to develop 
a methodology for Energy Symbiosis projects facilitation and a holistic estimation method to 
calculate energy symbiosis potential in each region. In WP3, UHULL will participate in the 
development of the Energy Symbiosis Opportunity Screening (ESOS) Module. In WP4, UHULL 
will lead T4.2, in which the case-studies from each region will be selected from the pool of cases 
based on regional, technological and sectorial analysis; they will prepare their respective 
incubator launch (Humber region incubator) and they will monitor and measure the impact 
through INCUBIS project lifetime. In WP5, UHULL will devel op the Energy Efficiency Best 
Available Techniques (BAT) guidelines and finally, in WP6 they will contribute to perform 
dissemination activities and expand the benefits of the project outputs through their stakeholder 
network, as well as participate in the  creation of the training material included in the Training 
program.   
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 68 of 80  
  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
Environmental and energy related research is a strong theme at the University, with 
contributions and collaborations including Politics, Law, Business and Engineering. Industrial 
symbiosis/circular economy -related research has been funded by the EU, UK -research 
councils, the Dept for Environment Food & Rural Affairs, and the British Council (in collaboration 
with the University Malaysia Sabah). In the 2014 national Research Excellence Framework 
(REF), 97.8 % of the Geography and Environmental Studies submitted research was judged to 
be of an international standard in terms of originality, significance and rigor. The University 
ranked third nationally amongst Geography and Environmental Studies submissions for impact, 
defined for the REF as “an effect on, change or benefit to the economy, society, culture, public 
policy or services, health, the environment or quality of life, beyond academia”.  
The PDRA hired for this project would be part of a large research community engaged in a wide 
range of environment/ci rcular economy/industrial symbiosis research stretching across the 
Dept of Engineering, Dept of Geography, Geology and Environment, Energy and Environment 
Institute, Depts of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Politics, Law, Hull University Business 
School, and others. Importantly, the University has along track record of promoting collaboration 
between departments and faculties, exemplified at the moment by our UKRI funded project 
Evolving a Circular Plastics Economy, which includes all the elements listed above.   
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
 
PROFESSOR ANDREW LAWRENCE HEYES (Male)  Professor of Mechanical Engineering, 
Dean of Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Hull, UK. Has taught a wide range of 
energy-related subjects including  
Energy Systems Technology, Energy Futures, Energy in Buildings, Heat Transfer, Fluid 
Mechanics, Thermodynamics, Engineering Dynamics, steam & gas turbines. Since 2003 he 
has been a member of the UK National Committee for Heat Transfer and a recipient of 
numerous prizes and awards. He has been a supervisor of twenty-two PhD/Eng. students and 
twenty-eight MSc students and Principal or co-investigator on research contracts valuing over 
£3M. He is the author of over ninety archival journal and international conference publications, 
one text book and two further book chapters and seven international  patents. He is also the 
Founder and Director of spin -out company Southside Thermal Sciences/ Sensor Coating 
Systems. The company has been in existence since 2002 and develops sensor coatings for 
temperature and heat flux measurement and condition monitori ng in extreme environments 
such as in the hot sections of gas turbines.  
Dr PAULINE DEUTZ (Female) Reader in Human Geography, Department of Geography, 
Geology and  
Environment, University of Hull, UK.  Following on from a multi -disciplinary training, with 
degrees in Geography and Geology, her research takes an interdisciplinary social science 
approach to the coordination of environmental issues with other social -economic priorities. 
Presently she coordinates and the H2020 PhD training network ‘Cresting’ and has been Co-PI 
or Co-I on several other recent projects of £1M funded by UK research councils, investigating. 
These comprise multidisciplinary projects including science physical science and engineering, 
with Deutz coordinating social science contributions.  She has devised and led multidisciplinary 
environmental masters degrees, contributing teaching related to waste, environmental policy, 
environmental management.   A board member of the International Sustainable Development 
Research Society since 2008, Deutz is the current president.  She is the author of more than 
30 peer reviewed journal articles and book chapters; and is lead-editor of a book ‘International 
perspectives on industrial ecology’ for Edward Elgar.    
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 69 of 80  
  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
● MERIT - Dynamic demand/supply matching-design tool for renewable energy systems, 
Andrew Heyes  
● Building institutional capacity for industrial symbiosis development: A case study of an 
industrial symbiosis coordination network in China (2017) Q Wang, P Deutz, Y Chen 
Journal of cleaner production 142, 1571-1582  
● Industrial ecology and regional development: Eco-industrial development as cluster 
policy (2008) P Deutz and D Gibbs  Regional Studies. 42 (10) 1313-1328.  
● Reflections on implementing industrial ecology through eco-industrial park development 
(2007) D Gibbs, P Deutz Journal of Cleaner Production 15 (17), 1683-1695  
● (Industrial symbiosis–an environmental perspective on regional development (2008) P 
Deutz, DI Lyons Regional Studies 42 (10), 1295-1298)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
● Co-PI 2019-2020 Evolving a Circular Plastics Economy. £1.1M UK Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council EP/S025537/1, institutional grant to the University 
of Hull (>20 academics and >20 non -academic partners). The project brings together 
expertise from chemists , chemical engineers, geography, logistics, supply chain, 
politics, socio-linguistics, drama and more. https://circularplastics.hull.ac.uk/   
● P-I 2018-2021 Circular Economy: Sustainability implications and guiding progress: EU 
Marie Skłodowska Curie Educat ional Training Network Grant agreement 765198 
approx. 3.8 M euro, of which M0.8 euro to Hull. The grant funds 15 PhD students, of 
whom three are based in Hull.  There are nine academic partners and 13 industry, 
government, NGO between them representing ten  different countries.  
http://cresting.hull.ac.uk/    
● Co-I 2014 -2018: PI: Mayes, W. with Deutz P., and others Resource Recovery and 
Remediation for Alkaline Wastes NERC/ESRC NE/L014211/1. £797,222.  Follow on 
from Catalyst Grant (NE/K015648/1) (PI: Mayes), Value £97,000 (FEC); £76,530 to Hull. 
April 2013-September 2013.  https://alkalineremediation.wordpress.com/  
● Aura https://www.hull.ac.uk/work-with-us/research/case-studies/aura.aspx, focused on 
offshore wind,  
Aura is a significant example of university-industry collaboration within the context of the 
Energy Estuary.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
University of Hull has a wealth of facilities situated in its ca mpus in the city of Hull, including 
meeting rooms, study rooms, aula, meeting rooms of various sizes and shapes to conduct 
seminars and other activities.  
  
Participant no.  4  Name (short name)/Country  Cartago Ventures, S.L. (INVEN) / 
Spain  
Description of the legal entity  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 70 of 80  
  
CARTAGO VENTURES S.L. is a Spanish company operating under the “INVENIAM” brand. 
Inveniam is a strategy and financial advisory firm with a strong focus in technology -based 
innovation in Life Sciences and Resource Sustainability. Inveniam’s founding partner s Eric 
Suñol and Albert Cot have a joint 40 -year experience in project development and engineering 
in energy-related fields: Eric Suñol participated in the development of 4 Combined Heat Power 
plants, wind and solar assets, and has advised both industries and Energy Services companies 
in large industrial energy efficiency, renewables and bioenergy projects. Albert Cot has worked 
on engineering, research and project development in energy efficiency, solar, biomass and 
pyrolysis projects. He is founding partner and former president of the energy efficiency cluster 
of Catalonia.  
Main tasks  
WP1: Leverage our experience in energy infrastructure and services to advise during the 
definition of the operational framework and implementation strategy for the energy symbiosis 
incubator. WP2: Participate in the mentoring services with symbiosis stakeh olders. WP3: 
Advise during the implementation on the software in real field cases. WP4: Participate in the 
support services to key stakeholders. WP5: Stakeholder training and bestpractices manuals. 
WP6: Participate in the communication and dissemination efforts through our own network and 
in events and forums. WP7: Support joint coordinator in the management of the project.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
As an experienced strategy and financial advisory company specialized in energy-related fields, 
INVEN tasks will include activities related with their core business, as offering Project structuring 
and Financing services to project developers and Energy Service Companies across Europe.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
ERIC SUÑOL (male). Co-funder and partner at INVENIAM.   Eric is an experienced strategy 
and transaction advisor in different industries, with especial focus in the energy sector.  Prior to 
co-founding Inveniam, he worked as consultant setting up and co -managing Repsol’s 
Foundation energy efficiency technology incubator, served in several positions at global power 
and gas utility Naturgy, and developed energy assets at the investment division of Bank 
Sabadell. Eric holds a PhD in Economics from the New School for Social Research in New 
York, with a dissertation on technological change.  
ALBERT COT (male) . Co-funder and partner at INVENIAM . Albert is an experienced 
professional in Industrial R&D, Bioengineering R&D and industry-academia partnerships.  Head 
of R&D unit for Energy and Systems at an infrastructure company.  Founding partner and former 
president of the energy efficiency cluster of Catalonia. Albert is an Industrial engineer and holds 
a PhD on Bioengineering from UPC.  
NICHOLAS BENJAMIN CHAPMAN (male). Nick is an expert in energy engineering and 
economics, with experience in research, technology development, project management, 
fundraising and business planning. Prior to joining Inveniam, Nick supported and lead several 
energy innovation projects in the UK and Spain. He is the author of three IEEE publishes and 
has presented his research on demand flexibility at a number of major European conferences. 
MSc in Sustainable Energy Systems from the University of Edinburgh, and MPhil in Smart Grids 
from the University of Manchester.    
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 71 of 80  
  
● Inveniam provides services to technology startups and corporations in the energy 
and environment sectors. Services include financial advisory to structure project or 
company’s financing, which is key to the development of complex energy symbiosis 
and efficiency projects.   
● Inveniam also provides technology scouting services to corporations and it has a 
proprietary technology map in the energy sector.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
● Identification, commercialization and structuring of Veolia Aplir S.L., a joint 
venture between global leader in environmental services Veolia, and Spanish leading 
industrial energy efficiency developer and EPC company Aplir.  
● Identification and commercialization of energy efficiency projects for Gas 
Natural Servicios (Naturgy Group).  
● Design and co-management of Repsol’s Foundation energy efficiency technology 
incubator.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
Not applicable  
  
Participant no.  5  Name  (short  
name)/Country  
IZNAB SPOLKA Z OGRANICZONA 
ODPOWIEDZIALNOSCIA  
(IZNAB) / Poland  
Description of the legal entity  
IZNAB Sp. z o.o. – dynamic SME providing services in fields of Engineering and Consultancy. 
In interest of the company are subjects regarding Energy -efficient Buildings, Smart & Green 
Transport, Clean & Green Energy, Nano -Bio-Technology.  IZNAB objective is to provide 
innovative solutions in a highly competitive market. The company has the most specialized 
engineers with experience to provide an adapted service which fulfils all of our client's 
requirements. Our services, a mongst others, include: expertise in design, optimization and 
integration of new compatible eco -innovative cost - and energy -efficient manufacturing 
technologies and processes, by using the latest tools for Life-Cycle Analysis (LCA/LCCA) and 
applying it to understand the behavior of innovative materials/complex structure, characterizing 
them, as well as application of Simulation Software for design modern systems of industrial 
processes and equipment, as well as in buildings. We achieve this using simulation programs, 
such as SimaPro, and AUDYTOR / TRNSYS. The company headquarters are located in 
Warsaw, Poland.  
Main tasks  
IZNAB is going to take a main role in WP6 Awareness creation, dissemination, and exploitation, 
by leading dissemination and communication activities and stakeholder engagement activities 
(site visits, interviews, meetings, workshops, training seminars, rou ndtables, etc.). IZNAB will 
also contribute to impact monitoring and assessment on the basis of its previous experience in 
energy efficiency projects and relevant know-how of LCA.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 72 of 80  
  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
The main core competencies and expertise of IZNAB, relevant to the INCUBIS Project are 
Communication & Dissemination strategies, as well as Exploitation & Business Model/Plan 
creation. Furthermore, IZNAB has also expertise in Life Cycle Assessment (LCA, LCCA, and 
S-LCA).  IZNAB takes experience in the above-mentioned Assets, taking the role of WP leader 
or Task leader/partners in InDeal, Heat4Cool, and MAESTRI Project.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
Dr. Emil LEZAK (Male) got his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry, focused in Complex/Polymer 
Materials, from the  
 
CBMiM, PAN (Centre of Molecular and Macromolecular Studies, Polish Academy of Sciences) 
of Lodz, Poland. He possesses also Engineer degree in Protection of Environment from 
Technical University of Lodz, Poland, where he had focused on Sustainable use of Renewable 
Energy of Source (RES). He has a good knowledge of the R&D processes and products (over 
8 years in R&D departments) in the field of novel multifunctional complex nanomaterials, related 
to the energy and environmental sector. His interdisciplinary e xperience, combining 
experimental and theoretical efforts allow to him to integrate potential of energy sources. His 
professional experience in relationship between structure and dynamics at different conditions 
of the various materials and knowledge of th e RES allow to him to use the software for 
simulation and optimization of various source of energy system. During his intensive 
professional career, he has obtained multidisciplinary expertise and skills related to project 
management, business modelling an d market analysis, IPR management. Furthermore, his 
strong characteristic is able to effectively take decisions and to interact with different partner 
profiles, including small enterprises, large industrial players, academic institutions and public 
bodies.  
Jakub PLUTA (Male) graduate of University of Life Science in Lublin (Poland) in Environmental 
Engineering. Holds a title of Engineer and is completing Master of Science at Lublin University 
of Technology with the area of new materials for Sustainable app lications. He has experience 
in installations and design of energy systems, based on different sources of energy. His 
involvement and motivation are very helpful in successful partnership in the projects. He is 
highly motivated with a positive attitude. He r communicative and decisive skills are useful in 
cooperation and bring about successful results and presents Technical (incl. AUDYTOR / 
TRNSYS simulation software) and Non -Technical (Procurement Management) experience in 
such contexts as: Environmental/En ergy Engineering, Sustainable Development, Systems 
Management.  
Anna BORTKIEWICZ (Female)  graduated of Poznan University of Technology in 
Environmental Engineering. Holds title of Engineer and is completing Master of Science in 
Thermal Energy Systems at Un iversity of Seville . Specializes in energetic audits and 
technological solutions for industrial and residential purposes. She participated in EU projects 
under FP7, with a successful publication about methodology that finds potential markets for 
smallscale solar systems.   
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 73 of 80  
  
Moustakidis Serafeim, Meintanis Ioannis, Karkanias Nicos, Halikias George, Saoutieff Elise, 
Gasnier Pierre, OjerAranguren Javier, Anagnostis Athanasios, Marciniak Bartosz, Rodot 
Isabelle, Lezak Emil, Pluta Jakub, Penev  
Mladen, Jäppinen Hilkka, Petit Samuel, Krajnc Marko, Kouvaris Kostas, Eleftheriou Anastasia 
Innovative Technologies for District Heating and Cooling: InDeal Project (2019), Volume 
5, Issue 1, DOI 10.3390/proceedings2019005001 Available online[1]  
Emil Lezak, Enrico Ferrera, Rosaria Rossini, Zofia Masluszczak, Malgorzata Fialkowska-
Filipek, Gunnar Große  
Hovest, Alexander Schneider, Emanuel Lourenço, António Baptista, Gonçalo Cardeal, Marco 
Estrela, Ricardo  
Rato, Maria Holgado, Steve Evans. Chapter (No. 9) Towards Industry 4.0. Efficient and 
Sustainable Manufacturing leveraging MTEF: MTEF - MAESTRI Total Efficiency 
Framework in Book: “Technological Developments in Industry 4.0 for Business Applications” 
Available online[2]  
E. Ferrera, R. Rossini, A. J. Baptista, S. Evans, G. Große Hovest, M. Holgado, E. Lezak, E.J. 
Lourenço, Z.  
Masluszczak, A. Schneider, E.J. Silva, O. Werner -Kytölä, M.A. Estrela Toward Industry 4.0: 
Efficient and Sustainable Manufacturing leveraging MAESTRI Total Efficiency 
Framework (2017), Book: Smart Innovation, System and technologies, Volume: “Sustainable 
Design and Manufacturing 2017” DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-57078- 
5_59 Available online[3]  
 
[1] https://www.mdpi.com/2504-3900/5/1/1  
[2]https://www.igi-global.com/book/technological-developments-industry-business-
applications/185730  
[3]http://sdm-17.kesinternational.org/(https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-319-
57078-5_59)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
Heat4Cool (Smart building retrofitting complemented by solar assisted heat pumps integrated 
within a selfcorrecting intelligent building energy management system, EeB-03-2016, End Year 
2020) http://www.heat4cool.eu/ InDeal (Innovative Technology for District Heating and Cooling, 
EE-13-2015, End Year 2019) http://www.indeal- 
project.eu/  
MAESTRI (Energy and resource management systems for improved efficiency in the process 
industries, SPIRE06-2015, End Year 2019)http://maestri-spire.eu/  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
SimaPro 8.2.0 – software and database which effectively apply LCA expertise, to empower 
solid decision-making, change your products’ life cycles for the better, and improve company’s 
positive impact. SimaPro is the leading LCA software package, with a 25 -year reputation in 
industry and academia.  
  
Participant no.  6  Name (short name)/Country  SOFIES SA (SOFIES) / Switzerland  
Description of the legal entity  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 74 of 80  
  
Sofies is an international sustainability consulting and private management firm.  
Created in 2008 as a result of the combination of the experience, technical skills and networks 
of its founding partners, SOFIES provides innovative solutions to improve the environmental, 
social and economic performance of its customers’ activities.  
We aim at creating a positive impac t by delivering professional services based on industrial 
ecology and circular economy for a better use of natural resources.  
Key figures:  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
SOFIES counts on the experience of  highly  
qualified consultants, who have been active in various fields of technical cooperation in 
Europa, South and Central America, Africa and Asia. Our objective is to offer tailor-made 
solutions to ensure an efficient use of resources and a higher environmental performance in 
order to create value and allow for sustainable economic development. Our services are 
based on scientifically acknowledged tools and methodologies related to environmental 
management, and various socio-economic approaches.   
Such internati onal experiences have brought us to develop a rigorous project management 
methodology adapted to the constraints of local contexts.    
Our intervention domains include:  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 75 of 80  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
We provide our services to companies ranging from small and medium size to multinational companies, as well as 
to public communities and  
international organizations.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Sofies has carried out a vast range of projects related to Industrial symbiosis including those focused on waste 
heat/energy 
- 
related symbiosis. The range of projects carried out by Sofies in the overall field of sustai 
nability, as  
mentioned above, as well as detailed specifically through relevant projects (in the Sections below) highlight the 
competencies and expertise present at Sofies to fulfil to a high degree of professionalism the main tasks  
undertaken in this proj 
ect. The main tasks include; stakeholder mapping, initial policy/regulatory analysis,  
elaboration of initial case studies, conducting a gap and needs analysis to take energy symbiosis forward, fleshing 
out specifications and operational framework for the I 
NCUBIS Energy Symbiosis Incubator through bilateral and  
consortium 
- 
wide discussions, facilitating complex energy synergies in a European context and enabling  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 76 of 80  
  
 
contractual schemes and business models for energy synergies. In addition, carrying out 
regulatory screening and policy intervention as required by the specific case studies 
implemented, and the formation of a European framework for the coordination of energy 
symbiosis.  
Main tasks  
WP1 – Sofies will contribute with the help of all other partners, to conduct a gap and needs 
analysis and flesh out a preliminary design of an operational framework for the INCUBIS Energy 
Symbiosis Incubator, through several bilateral and consortium-wide discussions. WP2 – Sofies 
is the lead beneficiary on T2.1, and will play a role in; facilitating complex energy synergies in 
a European context, provide consultancy services to stakeholders for development of 
contractual schemes and business models for energy syn ergies, and conducting regulatory 
screening as required by specific case studies - towards ensuring INCUBIS Knowledge 
intensive business services are fully deployed. During this task the project s local 
facilitators/coordinators, will adapt and apply  ́ industrial symbiosis facilitation and EIP 
coordination frameworks to the specificities of the regional energy symbiosis projects. WP 2: 
Task 4: (T2.4)  Contractual schemes and business models for energy synergies Roundtable 
mentoring sessions or tailored consu ltancy supporting stakeholders with development of (i) 
business models and contractual arrangements to make energy symbiosis work, or 
development of business cases for justifying investments in energy symbiosis projects. On a 
global level the task will use these case-specific experiences to draft a guide. In addition, and 
towards carrying out the tasks mentioned in the work packages above, Sofies will use its wide 
professional network of industrial partners and expertise from heat/energy network projects to  
contribute significantly to various aspects of the project. WP4 – SOFIES will lead the 
preparation, identification, assessment, implementation and monitoring tasks of the Incubator 
in Durnkirk and the delivery of the local case studies by providing to local stakeholders support 
throughout the symbiosis lifecycle. WP5 – SOFIES will participate in the accelerated education 
programme by providing training material based on the outputs of its tasks in the project.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
SOFIES is a strategy consultancy with decades of accumulated experience in industrial 
symbiosis and industrial ecology implementation in the context of industrial parks across the 
world. They have participated in the seminal initiatives for mapping eco -industrial activities 
across the world (project ECO -INNOVERA) and to other ecoindustrial initiatives alongside 
organizations like UNIDO and the World Bank. Their portfolio of services includes:  
• Implementation of energy cooperation projects  
• Provision of management/strategic consultancy  
• Development/Delivery of training programmes  
• Impact and performance monitoring of symbiosis  
• Facilitation/coordination of symbiosis/EIP  
• Policy and regulatory aspects of energy symbiosis  
• Dissemination and communication campaigns  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 77 of 80  
  
Luc Jaquet (Male), Senior Consultant at Sofies. Luc has over eleven years of experience in 
the sustainability field with a strong foundation in the eco -industrial park approach. Luc’s core 
competencies include: Industrial ecology and resource optimization - designing and 
implementing eco-industrial park strategies  (stakeholder mobilization, opportunity detection, 
feasibility studies, investment promotion, long -term governance); Regional development - 
analyzing value chains and developing innovative business models at the regional scale (eco-
industrial development, urban logistics, territorial marketing, sharing economy); Project 
management - working with and managing interdisciplinary teams in the fields of industrial 
ecology, regional development and sustainability, managing international projects with 
acknowledged PM methods and tools; Facilitation and participative processes - understanding 
the needs and enabling collaboration in multi -stakeholder and interdisciplinary projects, 
workshop/event facilitation using par ticipative methods and tools; and Communication - 
developing attractive communication materials for different target audiences and for both 
awareness raising and marketing purposes.  
Anne Verniquet (Female), Senior consultant at Sofies SA. Anne studied gene ral agronomy, 
oenology and more recently an executive MBA in Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
management at EPFL and UNIL. Anne has worked 13 years in the development of companies 
and services to SMEs of many sectors. Specialties: economics of  
 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 78 of 80  
  
project, business Modelling, financing options, sustainable finance, eco-innovation at all scales, 
designing for sustainability, Inclusive agro value chains, Resource Efficiency, Bio Economy, 
Adapting framework conditions in relation with project implementation, Int ernational project 
management, Corporate strategy and business development. Anne is working on the H2020 
No Agro Waste (noAW) project focused on ‘innovative approaches to turn agricultural waste 
into ecological and economic assets. Anne’s focus is on work packages related to business 
concepts development to support the transfer of technologies to the market. Anne contributes 
to the harmonious development of SOFIES by bringing complementary and transversal skills, 
mainly upstream and downstream to the projec ts through sales support, business cases 
development and design of fundable solutions for the benefit of the clients. With a background 
at the crossroads of economics, ecology and innovation, Anne brings the tools, methodologies 
and triple bottom line mind set necessary to carry out economic feasibility and design models 
for long term sustainability at various scales: organizations, industrial parks, territories.  
Ankit Kapasi  (Male), Senior Consultant at Sofies. Ankit is an Environmental Sustainability 
Practitioner with over eighteen years of experience in Waste Management & Resource 
Efficiency for Industries, Cleaner Production (CP), Industrial Symbiosis (IS), Eco Industrial Park 
(EIP) development, Product Process and Premise (PPP)  
Audits, GHG Mitigation, Carbon footprint and management, Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA), Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), undertaking Cost Benefit Analyses, Industrial Park 
development, complex Environmental Management Systems (EMS), Environmental Permits 
(EP) & Reporting, Sus tainability (Environmental, Social, Ethical), Pollution Control, Managing 
Ethical and Social Standards. Ankit has significant experience of developing and delivering 
international projects as well as proven experience and knowledge of managing and delivering 
outputs on large and complex environmental projects funded by local, national and international 
organizations such as UNIDO, European Commission’s (EC) European Regional Development 
Fund (ERDF) and European Social Fund (ESF). Ankit also has significant experience in 
developing and developing bespoke workshops and training programs to raise awareness, 
undertake consultations, and rolling out policy and framework. Ankit is the author of several 
workbooks on waste management and integrating management systems.  
Dr. Nicolas Tétreault (Male), Senior consultant at Sofies SA. International expert in solar PV, 
alternative fuels and renewable energies, policies, industrial symbiosis and project 
management. World leading expert in solar PV, CO2 reduction and clean hydrogen production 
technologies. He studied and did R&D on solar energy in Canada, Great Britain and Switzerland 
for more than 15 years. He is the author of more than 50 international publications with more 
than 7000 citations. He served as an external expert for the French CNRS and  CEA helping 
policymakers and other stakeholders in the French and European governments and has 
managed countless international consortium on solar energy. Core competencies include; 
Project management of national, European and international consortia (pro ject proposals, 
funding, HR, reporting), Industrial symbiosis and ecology, energy efficiency and clean 
production, Environmental and Social impact of large projects, Stakeholder and policy 
framework process management, Capacity building and institutional s trengthening, 
Development of solar photovoltaic and thermal, CO2 reduction and clean hydrogen renewable 
energy projects internationally, among others.  
Suren Erkman (Male), Strategic advisor on Industrial symbiosis, Co-founder and chairman of 
Sofies SA. Wi th nearly 40 years of experience in the sustainability domain, Suren is an 
internationally recognized pioneer in the field of industrial ecology, who has contributed to 
develop the conceptual basis of modern Eco -Industrial Parks, Suren is currently also an  
Associate Professor, Head of the Industrial Ecology Group, at the Faculty of Geosciences and 
Environment, University of Lausanne (UNIL), Switzerland. Core competencies: Eco -industrial 
parks assessments, National and international guideline and strategy fo r industrial ecology, 
Industrial symbiosis and eco -systemic approaches, Carbon management, Capacity building 
and teaching.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 79 of 80  
  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
Geneva’s New Resources  – 15 years of Progress in Industrial Ecology: Findings and 
Prospects for the Future. Co-written by Sofies and the University of Lausanne (UNIL), on behalf 
of the State of Geneva. This publication reviews 15 years of concrete industrial ecology projects 
in Geneva, partly undertaken with Sofies, and suggests further actions for a broader application 
of the concept in the future. It also introduces Geneva’s main economic and institutional 
challenges related to industrial ecology.  
https://sofiesgroup.com/en/news/the-new-resources-of-geneva-15-years-of-work-in-industrial-
ecology-results-andperspectives/  
 
Challenges of the energy transition in 100 questions and answers. Suren Erkman (Sofies), 
François Vuille et Daniel Favrat. This book has been written for the information platform on 
energy transition Swiss-Energyscope, that results from collaboration with SuisseEnergie, the 
Canton of Vaud and the city of Lausanne.  
It provides a list of 100 questions/answer s on the energy transition. They address aspects of 
energy production and consumption as well as energy policy, storage and efficiency.  
https://sofiesgroup.com/en/news/challenges-ofthe-energy-transition-in-100-questions-and-
answers/  
International survey on eco-innovation parks. Sofies SA. This study, written by Sofies SA, 
is the latest one available on this topic and a good way to identify eco -industrial parks and 
industrial symbiosis worldwide. The Swiss Federal Office for the Environement (BAFU) has 
published this study on Eco-innovation in industrial areas, listing 168 cases from 27 countries.  
https://sofiesgroup.com/en/news/international-survey-on-eco-innovation/  
Implementation Handbook for Eco -industrial Parks. UNIDO, reviewed by Suren Erkman 
(Sofies SA). The handbook gives a practical tool for the development of eco -industrial parks 
(EIP)  worldwide. Scoping EIP interventions, awareness raising, policy support, park 
management models, upscaling resource efficiency and industrial symbioses, performance  
monitoring and benchmarking, capacity building, etc.  The UNIDO implementation approach is 
described in detail and helps to support the development of EIP internationally.  
https://sofiesgroup.com/en/news/implementation-handbook-for-eco-industrial-parks/  
Territorial energy concept for the industrial zone Bois-de-bay (Geneva, Switzerland), 
including the evaluation of thermal energy needs and resources (geothermal, water bodies, 
industrial waste heat and existing network). https://www.fti.geneva.ch/wp-
content/uploads/2017/10/CET-Zibay-rapport-technique-v2.pdf:   
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 80 of 80  
  
Multiple (more than 10)  Resource efficiency and Cleaner Production and Eco -Industrial 
Park (RECP/EIP) - related projects carried out for clients such as UNIDO, World Bank, CTCN, 
SDC, UNEP, etc., from 2012 -2019. The projects all focused on different aspects of resource 
efficiency and industrial symbiosis, where  waste heat/energy symbiosis was an integral 
component in all projects along with training and capacity building in its implementation.  Main 
countries of intervention: Vietnam, Myanmar, Tunisia, Cambodia, Peru, Colombia, Ethiopia, 
China, Senegal, Switzerland.  
Four industrial ecology projects in river and seaport industrial areas  (Le H avre, 
Strasbourg, HAROPA, Guadeloupe): capacity building, governance strategies, support for the 
creation of dedicated EIP management structures, support for implementation of multi-
stakeholders symbioses (waste to energy, waste management and recovery, facility sharing, 
logistics, bio-sourced chemistry), Port authorities and municipalities, 2013- ongoing.  
 Geneva heating network analysis, typology and framework conditions,  OCEN – Office 
Cantonal de l’Energie – Geneva Canton Energy Office, Switzerland, 201 4. Guidance and 
recommendations to facilitate the development of new heating network projects  through; 
establishing a typology of heating networks, realizing a project’s diagram and analyzing the 
framework conditions, bottlenecks and success factors, and p roviding recommendations to 
facilitate the development of new heating network projects in the Geneva canton.  
Planning the energy transition – Master plan - Geneva Canton - Phase 1, OCEN – Office 
Cantonal de l’Energie – Geneva Canton Energy Office, Switzer land, Geneva Canton 2015 . 
Strategic and operational planning tool for structuring energy infrastructure , particularly 
energy networks throughout the Canton; technically but also in terms of the economic, legal 
and organizational framework conditions to imp lement the proposed energy strategy. 
Identification of the master plan issues, needs, challenges and identification of possible 
strategic approaches.  
EcoVate Project, co-financed by European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) - Achieving 
>30% energy efficiency through industrial heat symbiosis.   Detailed process audits of 37 
businesses (including 26 manufacturing units and 11 warehouses) to map and design routes 
for achievin g energy savings through practical, cost efficient practices of heat symbiosis. 
Benefactors include  
o    condiments manufacturing firm Himenz that saved 11% in energy savings through 
process re-design and re -use of heat within one of its other operations and some for 
heating adjacent warehouses; o    flour millers G R Wright and Sons using heat from 
neighbouring business units to maintain its warehouse at a set temperature, and many 
others.   
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
N/A  
  
Participant no.  7  Name (short name)/Country  EYDE CLUSTER (EYDE) / Norway  
Description of the legal entity  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 81 of 80  
  
Eyde-Klyngen, Eydecluster, (EYDE) is the Norwegian Centre of Expertise (NCE) for a 
Sustainable Process Industry, working for the transition towards a sustainable future. It 
operates under an Association status with its members mainly located in the South of Norway, 
a region with a strong tradition of producing tailor made materials made from renewable energy 
and with the lowest environmental footprint.  
Tasked with the sustainability transition, the cluster is an identifier of areas of interest and a 
facilitator for knowledge exchange, knowledge generation and its dissemination. The EYDE 
Innovation Centre (EIC) is the research and project hub of the clust er coordinating ongoing 
research and innovation activities within the cluster. Through its members, the EIC manages 
extensive research and innovation infrastructures, such as piloting centres ranging from lab to 
industrial scale. The accumulated know how i n this field provides the platform for the efficient 
development of new material solutions in the cluster.  
The members of the cluster range from multinational companies delivering high quality 
materials to a global market, to regional suppliers, research organisations and education 
institutes. At the moment, the cluster comprises more than 60 members, mainly (but not limited 
to) from the Non -Ferrous Metals, Chemicals and Ceramics industries, with more than 8000 
employees in total in Southern Norway.  
A mapping exercise from 2012 has shown waste energy in excess of 2000Gw/hrs amongst the 
cluster’s industrial members. The cluster has since almost doubled in size and a new mapping 
is underway, expected to be finished late 2019/earl 2020.  
The cluster has also a fast-growing membership amongst enabling SME companies in the field 
of plant operations, plant engineering and design, recycling technologies and logistics. This 
provides us with complementary business insights to the large industrial players.  
Main tasks  
The participatory and open innovation methods used by the cluster can be shared and applied 
in facilitation and networking activities. In particular for stakeholder engagement on the 
identification of barriers and recommendations as in WP5 T5.3. This entre preneurial 
competence will provide a good bridge between existing industry and new ventures with the 
collaboration of the financial sector. WP5 T5.4. The experience from how to engage – mediation 
and facilitation approach will be useful in the facilitation WP2. In particular Tasks 2.2,2.3,2.4.  
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
The cluster has established itself as a trusted collaboration platform over the last 10 years, by 
facilitating collaboration processes between industries, industry and research as well as 
between industry and public authorities at regional, national and Scandinavian level. The Eyde 
cluster has facilitated workshops on barriers identification and policy recommendations on 
numerous cases for national authorities with the last work being a recommendation on behalf 
of Nordic Innovation. The cluster is the initi ator and main driving force behind the regions 
circularity transformation through the implementation of industrial-urban symbiosis as a strategy 
to achieve this.  
As such we are facilitating the collaboration processes between regional and municipal 
authorities, the university and business community. The clusters focus is on implementation and 
business development.    
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
Christophe Pinck (Male). Christophe is project leader for International relations and EU affairs. 
His background is in “Design for Sustainability” from Falmouth University (UK) which has taken 
him to many different fields in the sustainability transition over the last 15 years. Bo th as 
consultant and entrepreneur. Since 2014 he has been at  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 82 of 80  
  
Eyde, working on policy issues, strategy, competence and business development in relation to 
the CE transformation. He is also project manager for the Eyde clusters own Think Tank where 
we are developing the clusters regenerative “Mission approach”. Christophe has been 
responsible for the development of both the Nordic collaboration as well as the regional Agder 
Symbiosis platform.   
Marianne Furuholt (Female)  works as a Project Manager for the Eydecluster (EYDE), 
managing several competence forums, including the Energy forum . She is an experienced 
Project Manager with a demonstrated history of working in the mining & metals industry. 
Marianne is skilled in R&D, Patent Law, Materials, Project Man agement, and Product 
Development. She is a strong program and project management professional with a degree 
focused in Chemical Engineering from Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet (NTNU). 
She also assisted the Eyde symbiosis project.  
Gunnar Kulia (Male). Gunnar has a life-long experience from business development. Both as 
CEO in global companies, self-employed and as business angel in start-ups. He is in charge of 
the business development activities for the cluster including the engage ment of the financial 
sector, business model generation and methodologies to generate new ventures for the 
sustainable paradigm shift.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
National  Roadmap  for  the  Norwegian  Process  industry  
(https://www.norskindustri.no/siteassets/dokumenter/rapporter-og-brosjyrer/the-norwegian-
process-industriesroadmap-summary.pdf ) Eyde was secretariat for the process together with 
the Federation of Norwegian Industries.  
Recommendations for the Nordic CE transitions, Eyde facilitated multi stakeholder process 
and coordinated final recommendations.  
Report to the governmental Process21  on entrepreneurial developments in the Norwegian 
process industry. Eyde is part of the governmental Process 21 group and leads the topic of 
entrepreneurship.  
PROSIN Network. Eyde facilitates the Norwegian Process industry platform PROSIN, where 
several clusters and industrial parcs are members. Here we organize several workshops per 
year as well as larger national conferences. Therefore, this is a good platform for a wider 
engagement of Norwegian Process Industry.  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
Spin Outs: A business development program to develop business opportunities that fall outside 
a company’s core business interest. F.eks applied in sidestream valorization  
Nordic recommendations for CE: A workshop-based project to formulate opportunities to the 
Nordic collaboration in the CE transformation.  
Eyde Symbiose: A project to generate awareness in the region, engage a wider stakeholder 
foundation and uncover existing barriers for the implementation of industrial symbiosis in the 
region. Agder Symbiosis platform is a direct response to the uncovered challenges.  
Waste to Value: Mapping of raw material side streams of several Non-ferrous industry 
companies. Combination of several streams was developed into a feasible product through 
material testing in following R&D project.  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 83 of 80  
  
The Eydecluster itself has workshop facilities available in Arendal and Kristiansand, the two 
largest cities in Southern Norway. These are located in the business centres where the cluster 
has its office and in the adjacent University. These provide space for 4 to 150 people.  
  
Participant 
no.  
8  Name (short 
name)/Country  
Covestro Deutschland AG (COVES) / 
Germany  
Description of the legal entity  
Covestro (Former Bayer MaterialScience (Bayer AG)) is an independent company since 
September 2015 and  
 
among the world’s leading manufacturers of polymers and high -performance plastics. Our 
innovative developments in polycarbonates, polyurethanes, coatings, adhesives and specialty 
raw materials enhance the design and functionality of products in a wide variety of markets. 
Covestro is organized into three large business units and augmented by an industrial operations 
unit. Innovation at Covestro is driven by sustainability and it creates positive sustainable impact 
in our own production. Our target is to reduce carbon emissions in our own production and 
along the value chain , reduce dependency on fossil fuels, and increase overall resource 
efficiency, in the overall context of circular economy.  
Covestro operates and produces globally, including at four sites in Germany: in Brunsbüttel in 
Schleswig-Holstein (use case in this proposal) and in the plants of the North-Rhine Westphalia 
(NRW) site network – Leverkusen, Dormagen and Krefeld-Uerdingen. In addition to maintaining 
its own production site in Brunsbüttel, Covestro operates an industrial park hosting other partner 
companies and numerous service providers. Located at the confluence of the Kiel Canal and 
the Elbe River, the Covestro Industrial Park Brunsbüttel features excellent access to 
transportation, outstanding infrastructure, and a wide range of available services.  
The Global Process Technology Control group is accountable for all process automation 
systems, instrumentation and electrical power supply that run the operating units globally. The 
group has expert experience in Advanced Process Control, Process Data Analyt ics and 
advanced applications used for improved production efficiency.  
Covestro is committed to innovation. The Innovation and Commercial Services Department 
counts around 100 people and is actively pushing boundaries, among others in the areas of 
digital business models along value chains, collaboration and support of start -ups, supporting 
building of research and innovation infrastructures. The Alliance Management group, also 
belonging to this department, is specialized in setting up strategic collaborations.   
  
Main tasks  
Covestro providing the Brunsbüttel case on energy symbiosis and will test and implement the 
INCUBIS methodology for symbiosis with the customers in the same industrial park. Covestro 
participates mainly T1.2, in WP1, in which the review of frameworks, analytical tools, business 
models and regulation will be performed to set the foundations of the later work. They also 
contribute in the definition of the Incubator Virtual platform (WP3). They will be involved in WP4 
tasks, in which the North- Germany Incubator will be launched, the INCUBIS methodology for 
opportunity identification, assessment and selection will be applied to the Brunsbüttel case -
study, and the impact will be monitored and measured.  In WP6, Covestro will contribute to 
perform dissemination activities and expand th e benefits of the project outputs through their 
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 84 of 80  
  
stakeholder network, as well as participate in the creation of the training material included in 
the Training program.   
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the project  
Covestro is a large industrial company with 30 sites globally. Their production plants are 
situated in industrial parks, where industrial symbiosis is potentially best applicable. In 
Brunsbüttel, which is the use case in INCUBIS, the energy management for all companies in 
the park is provided by Covestro. On the one hand, Covestro is potential partner in the 
symbiosis, on the other hand, Covestro is the infrastructure manager overlooking all companies 
in terms of energy efficiency. This understanding of both sides places us in a favorable position 
for the necessary change management. Having many sites in different parks also promises a 
good transfer of results to further implementations.  
CV of the persons who will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
Jane Arnold (female)  is Head of Global Process Control Technology at Covestro. Her 
responsibilities include all systems, instrumentation and electrical power that run Covestro 
production facilities at over 30 sites globally. Her major focus is to improve digitalization in 
manufacturing with a goal of developing a cognitive digital plant. Jane has a degree in 
mathematics and has 30 years of experience in process control technolog y. She started with 
Bayer MaterialScience in 2005 in the location of Baytown, Texas. There she moved to various 
levels of technical and management positions. Bayer MaterialScience became Covestro in 
2015. Jane relocated to the Covestro Headquarters in Leverkusen Germany in 2017.  
Dr. Pietro Valsecchi (male)  is responsible for Process Control Technology Operational 
Excellence at Covestro. He has a PhD in Aerospace Engineering and more than ten years of 
experience in industrial and manufacturing engineering. He spent the first part of his career at 
ExxonMobil, first as a research engineer and then gradually  
expanding to project management for large laboratories and research installations. He then 
opened a consulting firm in San Francisco to support Start -Up companies with production 
upscaling and the setup of industrial processes. His professional experience covers a wide 
range of industrial applications. He joined Covestro in 2018.  
Dorota Pawlucka, MBA, (female)  is senior alliance manager. She graduated in the 
management and business administration with focus on change management and a thesis on 
the barriers to innovation in research -driven networks. She has 20 years of experience in the 
management of national and European research projects and networks (FP5 - Horizon2020) 
and in innovation management  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or products, services (including widely -used 
datasets or software), or other achievements relevant to the call content  
● Online interview on Women in Manufacturing, video interview by Jane Arnold with 
Aveva  
https://sw.aveva.com/blog/pushing-a-data-driven-future-with-predictive-asset-analytics  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 85 of 80  
  
● Publicaton in Intech magazine by Jane Arnold  https://www.isa.org/standards-and-
publications/isapublications/intech-magazine/2005/may/fuel-efficiency-savings-boil-
over/  
● Webinar with Aveva on Predictive Maintenance (about to be released for publication)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this 
project  
● CoPro H2020 SPIRE, 723575, 2016-2020 “Improved energy and resource efficiency by 
better coordination of production in the process industries” – Optimisation of the 
production by means of advanced modelling, monitoring and optimisation methods.  
● SIDAP collaboration project “Scalable integration concept for data aggregation, analysis, 
and processing of Big Data in the process industry” – German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research  
● R4R Regions for Resource Efficiency CSA FP7 319938  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical 
equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
The use case from Covestro addresses the 
current infrastructures at its Industry Park in 
Brunsbüttel. Covestro provides services t o its 
own production facilities as well as to other 
companies hosted on the site. The energy 
supplies from the public grid are managed by 
Covestro Brunsbüttel Energie GmbH, a wholly 
owned subsidiary of Covestro. Steam, 
refrigeration and cooling, compressed air and 
nitrogen are supplied by the company’s own power plant on  
site. Feeds to the plants are handled by a complex system of pipelines. Rounding out the range 
of utilities supplied is water for cooling, processes and drinking purposes, which is availab le in 
large quantities at all times. State-ofthe-art disposal and sustainable recycling management are 
further key service features of the Brunsbüttel chemical site. Covestro operates the distribution 
network for electrical power, steam at different pressure, and industrial gases. It also operates 
waste water treatment using biochemical processes and incineration facilities.  
  
  
 4.2. Third parties involved in the project (including use of third-party resources)  
There are no subcontractors, linked third parties, third parties with in -kind contributions or 
international partners involved, except for:  
Partner 
Number   
6  Name (short name) / 
Country  
SOFIES SA (SOFIES) / 
Switzerland  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of 
the project should not be sub-contracted)  NO  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  YES  

H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 86 of 80  
  
SOFIES UK CONSULTING LIMITED (SOFIES UK)  will participate in this project as a 
linked third party of SOFIES SA (SOFIES). SOFIES UK (based in the UK) is a subsidiary of 
SOFIES which is based in Geneva and is the holding company with majority shares.  
SOFIES UK will focus on the activities related to the development of the French case study in 
Dunkirk, taking over most of SOFIES´ work under WP4. SOFIES, on the other hand, will focus 
their activities on the development of the European Energy Symbiosis framework (leading 
T2.1 and participating in T2.3 under WP2). SOFIES and SOFIES UK will both participate in 
WP1, WP3, WP5, WP6 and WP7, their contributions deriving fro m their main tasks in WP2 
and WP4 respectively.  
While SOFIES has been working as a group with Dunkirk for a long time, in the past couple 
of years SOFIES UK has been the main branch involved in Symbiosis projects taking place in 
Dunkirk. The reason for th is, apart from geographical proximity, is the presence in the UK 
branch of Salam Kaddouh, a French native speaker who has been working with Dunkirk 
projects for the past 3 years and knows most of the stakeholders that would be involved in the 
Dunkirk case study. Moreover, SOFIES UK has recently started a new project with some 
actors from Dunkirk to develop a tool for industrial symbiosis (ToileMaker) which could benefit 
the INCUBIS project. As Salam is the one leading the ToileMaker project within SOFIES, i t 
would make sense for her to be directly involved in INCUBIS in order to ensure synergies 
between the 2 projects. Lastly, SOFIES UK has recently strengthened their Industrial 
Symbiosis team by adding a new consultant, Marco Meloni, who has a strong background in 
Industrial Ecology therefore increasing the capacity of the local office to deliver the expected 
work in the context of INCUBIS.  
The budget and efforts allocated to SOFIES UK is as follows: Direct personnel costs: €88,000 
(10PMs) – Other direct co sts: €9,000 (€4.500 for travel and subsistence, €4.500 for 
organization and attendance of site visits, consultations, training and dissemination events) – 
Indirect costs: €24,250. Total costs: €121,250.00  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  NO  
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)?  NO  
 5.  Ethics and Security  
 5.1.  Ethics  
All the coordination and support actions carried out during the project will comply with ethical 
principles and relevant national, Union and international legislation, including the Charter of 
Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention on Human Rights and 
its Supplementary Protocols.  
INCUBIS foresees a set of activities which involve processing of personal data through different 
methods as interviews, questionnaires and direct online retrieval. This includes semi -structured 
interviews, consultation workshops and questionnaires completion by selected stakeholders and 
experts to analyse the perceptions of key stakeholder on energy symbiosis (Task1.3), 
questionnaires and interviews performed to collect information to assess and monitor the project 
s  impact  (Task 4.4) and data gathering and use through INCUBIS Virtual Platform and its ́ module 
on Energy Symbiosis Project Management and on Energy Symbiosis Assessment, and the 
monitoring and assessment of the Incubator platform (Task 3.1, Task 3.2, Task 3.3 and Task 3.5). 
Attention will be paid on the following aspects: privacy; data protection and management.  
During data collection, the following rules will be applied:  
● These surveys will comply with the ethical principles and we will ensure data quality and 
confidentiality.  
H2020 - LC-SC3-EE-6-2019  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2020)2065724 - 15/04/2020 
Page 87 of 80  
  
● We will NOT collect sensitive data such as health, sexual lifestyle, ethnicity, political 
opinion, religious or philosophical conviction.  
● The information collected will be kept within the Consortium without making it available to 
any third party or external body.  
● Prior to any data collection we will obtain the necessary notifications/authorizations for 
collecting and processing the data and the free and fully informed consent of the persons 
concerned (‘data subjects’).  
● Data will remain in Europe and it will not be transferred to any other country.  
● Collected data will be stored electronically in servers located within the European territory.  
INCUBIS will ensure that the project s activities conform to all data protection, confidentiality and 
anonymity ́ requirements, be the regulatory (e.g. GDPR), organizational (ie confidentiality 
concerns of organizations engaged/participating in the project) or personal (ie privacy 
requirements of stakeholders engaged/participating in the project). A detailed Data Management 
Plan and corresponding processes and procedures (including templates of NDAs and GDPR 
statements to be included in the respective sections of the website and platform or signed by 
participants during interviews and workshops) will be accomplished and submitted in month 3 as 
a deliverable.  
Data protection and management  
All collected information will be strictly confidential and related to professional privacy, in 
compliance with the EU GDPR 2016/679.  
 5.2.  Security  
Please indicate if your project will involve:  
● activities or results raising security issues: NO  
● 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO  
NO SECURITY ISSUES  
 
 
Grant Agreement number: 894800 — INCUBIS — H2020-LC-SC3-2018-2019-2020 / H2020-LC-SC3-EE-2019