2.3 HW and SW integration and optimisation D2.4, D2.5 ■■ 
3 Integration and trials in industry ML6, ML7 # #
3.1 Integration in industy D3.1 ■
3.2 Processing trials and comparative testing D3.2, D3.3 ■ ■
3.3 Demonstration to industry D3.4 ■
4 Production ML8, ML10 # #
4.1 Certification and Testing D4.4 ■
4.2 Design documentation package D4.1 ■
4.3 Production Engineering D4.2 ■
4.4 Production D4.3 ■
5 Gear up to commercialisation ML9 #
5.1 Technology Watch and Knowledge Management D5.2 ■
5.2 Business plan D5.3 ■
5.3 The 4Ps Marketing Mix D5.1, D5.4 ■ ■
6 Project Management
6.1 Monitoring and reporting
6.2 Quality and Risk Management
6.3 Innovation Management
6.4 Fulfilment of Contractual Requirements 
●
■
●
■
●
■
D6.1, D6.2 
●
■
 
●
■ 
●
■
●
■
■ Deliverable / # Milestone / ◊ Project Kick Off Me eting● Meetings of the Visum Ltd. Management Board 
■
■ 
◊
●
■
FIGURE 5- MANAGEMENT/ORGANISATIONAL 
STRUCTURE  

SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
27 | P a g e  
 
The VISUM Management Board, Chaired by General Manager, Mr. Colm Digby, will be responsible for the strategic management of 
the project in line with the business and commercia l strategy of the company. The VISUM Management Boa rd will take all strategic 
decisions in relation to the project (e.g. decision s with regard to any major technical decisions, bud getary decisions, knowledge 
management/IP protection. Decisions will be taken f ollowing the normal decision-making procedures and voting rights of the VISUM 
Management Board. The PM will formally report the p rogress of the project to the Management Board ever y month and every quarter 
the budget spend will be reported to the board. Extraordinary meetings with the Management Board will be called as required to address, 
discuss and arrive at a swift resolution should any  extraordinary problems or issues arise. Dr. Tim Ke hoe, who is the Product Manager 
for the VISUM development, will lead the Product De velopment Team that will implement the work accordi ng to the project work plan. 
He will meet with the Project Manager and the devel opment team on a weekly basis for steering technica l discussions, monitoring the 
evolution of the work, measuring progress against t he work plan, analysing potential risks and bottlen ecks, contingency planning, etc. 
Issues that could have a strategic or critical impact on the project will be reported immediately to the General Manager, who will convoke 
an extraordinary meeting of the Management Board as  appropriate. Oonagh Mc Nerney, the CEO, will lead the Commercialisation 
team , and she will be responsible for building the sale s agent/distribution network internationally as wel l as further developing the 
business plan (with the inputs and approval of the Management Board). She will also coordinate with the marketing team to ensure the 
project dissemination and communication campaigns are aligned with the commercial strategy and she will lead the project’s engagement 
with our group of ‘beta clients’/early adopters. To gether the Product Manager and the CEO will establi sh the Application Team that will 
provide technical support to the sales team.  
■APPROPRIATENESS TO THE COMPLEXITY AND SCALE OF THE PROJECT: The VISUM® project will be managed 
following the same structure and decision-making me chanisms as an internal product development project  within VISUM, and this is 
considered as a highly appropriate approach.  
■INNOVATION MANAGEMENT: Innovation Management is a function that exists within the VISUM organisation structure and is 
part of our ‘UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems for R&D&I’ certification. The structure consists of  an Innovation Committee  
(comprised of the General Manager, Director, Deputy  Director and the Commercial Director), and an Innovation Unit  (which is led by 
the Innovation Unit Head- a role that is occupied b y the Science and Technology Manager in VISUM, alon g with senior scientists, 
researchers and engineers from the company). The Innovation Committee (which is an advisory body to the Management Board) meets 
with the Innovation Unit on a monthly basis in orde r to track the innovation potential of all active p rojects, to analyse IP, to discuss 
technology watch, state-of-the-art, competition, and market considerations around the R&D lines that t he company is actively investing 
in. The Innovation Unit also assist the Innovation Committee in the development, maintenance and updating of the R&D Roadmap and 
the technology portfolio. The innovation management of VISUM will be performed by these Innovation Bodies within VISUM and will be 
managed through Task 6.3.  
■CRITICAL RISKS: The critical risks (technology-, commercial-, and organisation-related) that could jeopardise this Innovation Project 
and appropriate risk-mitigation measures are provid ed in Table 3.2b. Through Task 6.2, a continual pro cess of risk assessment and 
monitoring will ensure that the status of all risks is effectively managed and that action plans for all mitigation measures and contingency 
plans are implemented, monitored and reported. The process of risk identification and management will be based upon the principles 
and guidelines of the FERMA (ISO 31000 related) Standard 27.
3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE (IF APPLICABLE)  
Not applicable as this is a single entity project.
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED  
TABLE 3.4A: SUMMARY OF STAFF EFFORT 
   
TABLE 3.4 B: ‘OTHER DIRECT COST’ ITEMS (TRAVEL, EQU IPMENT, INFRASTRUCTURE, GOODS AND SERVICES)  
                                                        
27  Federation of European Risk Management Associations ( www.ferma.eu )  
1 IRIS 18.0 96.0 29.0 29.0 22.0 14.0 208.0 
18.0 96.0 29.0 29.0 22.0 14.0 208.0 Total 
WP6 Participant Short 
Name Participant No. 
Total Person/Months per 
participant WP1 WP4 WP5 WP2 WP3 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
28 | P a g e  
 
   
 
4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 PARTICIPANTS  
 
Participant no.  1 Name (short name)/Country  VISUM Ltd. ( VISUM )/Ireland  
Description of the legal entity  
Visum Ltd.- www.visum.ie (previously known as IRIS Advanced Engineering Limited) is a Dublin-based technology company 
located in the campus of University College Dublin. The company was initially spun out as a branch facility of IRIS, S.L. from Spain 
(established in 2007 and with 53 staff) as part of a strategy to internationalize the company and establish an optical engineering 
division in Ireland. In 2013 this branch was converted into an indigenous Irish company.  
VISUM is as an advanced engineering and R&D company, specializing in the field of process engineering. The facility in Dublin has 
its own team of optical, electronics and software e ngineers and has a fully equipped optics laboratory , mechanical and electronics 
workshop, and has solid expertise in developing spe ctroscopic and hyperspectral imaging solutions for industry (food, pharma and 
chemical advanced monitoring applications), as well as developing rigs for universities and research labs. We also have expertise in 
the development of cloud-enabled data management solutions for smart manufacturing and smart agriculture applications. 
VISUM is ISO 9001:2008 certified  and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i . Since 2011, 
VISUM has a Commercial Department with its own sales and marketing team.  
VISUM is a member of the following networks: SPIE (International Society for Optics and Photonics), SECPHO (Southern European 
Cluster of Photonics), SPIRE (Sustainable Process Industries).  
Main tasks  
VISUM Ltd. will fully implement the Phase 2 of the innovation project as the sole a pplicants. We have the technical and operational 
capacity and staff, as well as the research, engineering and product development capability, market knowledge and B2B commercial 
expertise that can be dedic ated to this development. We will also expand our team in Dublin through new dedicated hires.   
How the legal entity profile matches the tasks in the proposal  
VISUM offers advanced monitoring and control turnkey solutions based on: 
- Chemical monitoring (NIR)- handheld device and in-line solutions 
- Hyperspectral imaging (foreign body detection and chemical composition analysis)  
- Industrial cloud solutions and data management solutions for data processing, decision support, automation and data analysis (big 
production data) 
We are engaged in R&D activities in the fields of optical and spectroscopy technologies (e.g. MEMs spectrophotometers, fluorescence 
and Raman) for process monitoring for on-line and PAT applications in food, pharmaceuticals and the process industries, as well as 
for controlling intensified processes.   
IRIS has successfully developed pre-competitive IR spectroscopy prototypes in several FP7 projects (wh ereby, we have been 
responsible for integrating the sensors within the equipment and developing the optomechanics, in addi tion to the chemometric 
models for data processing, and the ad hoc software  for supervision and control): VITISPEC –FTIR-ATR f or monitoring wine 
composition-, OPTIMALT –NIR for real-time determina tion of barley protein and moisture in a harvester- , OPTIJECT –FT-NIR for 
monitoring plastic injection-, SPECTRAFISH –hypersp ectral imager for fish QC-, OPTICLEAN –hyperspectra l imager for CIP 
validation-, THIME –ellipsometer and hyperspectral imager for monitoring thin-film optoelectronic devices production lines.  
We have successfully completed the Phase 1 SME Instrument VISUM (Grant Agreement- 684767), where we: 
• Applied for a registered trademark for the VISUM brand 
• Defined our brand positioning 
• Secured the commitment of 4 first beta testing clients from the dairy, meat, olive oil and pharmaceutical sectors 
• Defined the system specifications based on a Kano survey of the beta testers and the implementation of the Quality Function 
Deployment process 
• Performed a technical feasibility study on fouling remediation technologies and defined the approach f or going forward 
based on the results (i.e. a polymer coating option for in -line solutions and a sampling design for on -line solutions)  
1 IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
33000 
Travel to test sites to define integration strategi es and requirements in WP1 (3K); Travel and subsist ence for engineers for industry integration and dem o work in WP3 (6k); 
Travel to meet suppliers, agents, distributors (12k ); Travel to trade exhibitions and conferences (12k ). 
20000 Software licenses 
482000 
Materials (sensors, optomechanics, casing, etc.) fo r building 5 VISUM prototypes in WP2 (100K); Labora tory consumables (32k); IPR fees and patent costs ( 35K); Exhibition 
space and subscription to 4 tradeshows (50K); audit  certificate (3K); Certification services (17K); Co mmunication materials- video, leaflets, banners, po sters, brochures (18K);  
Shipping and insurance (10K); Materials for constru cting the manufacturing and assembly unit (90k); Co nstruction of a demo rig (12k), Organisation of dem o workshops (6k); 
Production of 5 VISUM product units (50K); Market r eports (26K); Subscription to 4 conferences (8k); C loud hosting fees (25k) 
535000 
Travel 
Equipment 
Other goods and 
services 
Total 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
29 | P a g e  
 
• Further developed our business plan and defined our IPR protection route 
• Planned and costed the development work to get to product 
• Participated in an Innovation diagnostic at Enterprise Ireland.  
Thanks to the Phase 1 we have strengthened our knowledge of the market and the business opportunity, and we have a defined our 
product specs with a clear market positioning. As a company we are fully committed and invested in completing the VISUM platform 
and our intention is to be market ready for a product launch at ACHEMA 2018 in Germany. 
CV of the persons w ho will be primarily responsible for carrying out the work  
MARIE CALLANAN  (FEMALE) Project Manager at Visum has an Electronic Engineering Degree from Trinity College, Dublin, and a 
Masters in Business Administration from the Europea n University Barcelona. Marie comes from an enginee ring background with 
more than 15 years’ experience in monitoring and control. She specialised in modelling system dynamics of engineering processes 
with particular expertise in wind, fuel cell, space and environmental applications. Marie has led and participated in many R&D projects 
in the fields of energy, environment, materials development and process monitoring. She has managed projects funded under national 
and international programmers and has expertise in best practices in the European Framework Programme project management 
going back to FP5. As a project manager Marie is ad ept at interpreting and communicating requirements,  team building and risk 
management. 
DR. TIMOTHY KEHOE (MALE)  PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Irelan d- developed an IR photometric measurement 
system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic mater ials. Masters in Optoelectronics, Queens University  Belfast. Designed an Echelle 
spectrometer while based at Andor Technology Ltd. W orked at Tyndall National Institute, Cork, and Cata lan Institute of 
Nanotechnology, Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and acousto-optical metrology techniques for nanotechnology applications, 
in particular for characterision of nanoscale struc tures fabricated by nanoimprint lithography and dir ected self-assembly. Other 
research activities: quantification of ordering in self-assembled structures by image analysis techniq ues and optical sensors using 
hydrogel materials. Tim is the VISUM Product Manager and he brings vast optical integration and device instrumentation expertise. 
DR. SEVERINE PHILIPPE (FEMALE) graduated with a 1st class Hons. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences (Physics and Physics Technology) 
from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland, in 20 02 and received her PhD in Physics from Trinity Col lege Dublin in 2007, for the 
study of polarisation effects in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA). She went on to work on the development and characterization 
of low noise SOAs, as well as THz generation by mul timode lasers and their detection using four wave m ixing in SOA, both in the 
Semiconductor Photonics Group, Trinity College Dubl in, and the School of Electronic Engineering, Dubli n City University. She 
previously worked as a R&D technician for the plastics industry and in quality control for electronic appliances. She joined VISUM in 
2014 as an optical engineer and is currently involv ed in projects including various microscopy techniq ues, planar waveguide 
technologies and MIR spectroscopy. Serevine will be involved in the optical design work for the project.  
NIKOLINA MIKULCIC  (FEMALE) User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design and development background with more 
than 15 years of experience in this field and she is an expert on UI/UX design strategy and front-end development (CSS/HTML). She 
studied graphic design and, because of her passion for the digital world, she studied web design. Since joining VISUM in 2016, she 
has been creating new User Interfaces for the VISUM  product lines. Prior to VISUM, she has extensive e xperience in the online 
world, having worked in companies such as EuroArt93 – digital agency, BlueBOX IT, Biroval. She also was a founder of design studio 
In Love With Blue and she worked as Project Manager, UI/UX designer and front-end developer. She was leader on numerous digital 
projects for different clients such as Erste Bank, Unicredit Bank, Telenor Bank, Komb Bank and ZAMP. 
MÉABH GARRICK  (FEMALE) is an Optical Engineer with an M.Sc. Phot onic from Friedrich Schiller Universität, Jena, Ger many. 
Méabh has a B.Sc. in Physics with Medical Physics for the, National University of Ireland, Galway. She was awarded a scholarship 
to study at the Abbe School of Photonics, Friedrich  Schiller Universität, Jena where she spent almost four years. She worked as a 
research scientist at the Fraunhofer IOF in Jena, Germany after completing her Master Thesis there. She specialised in the area of 
spectrally resolved laser-induced damage testing using a high-power tuneable OPO laser system as well as angle resolved scattering 
(ARS) from surfaces and the unique combination of b oth techniques. Her work was presented at the OSA I nterference Coatings 
conference (June 2016). Méabh is the Technical Lead for two of VISUM’s projects funded under H2020. 
NEIL SHERIDAN  (MALE) graduated from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland. in 2013 with a 2.1. B.Eng. (Mech). Neil has over 3 
years engineering experience in various roles inclu ding Military Engineer, R&D Engineer, Automotive Pr oduction/Machine Design 
Engineer and Mechanical Engineer. He has strong abilities in CAD and creating innovative solutions which he has demonstrate in a 
number of projects. Neil was the sole mechanical engineer working on the mechanical design, testing, installation and validation for 
a major research project. He has also capabilities in electronics as shown in the optimisation of the PureFormula project which 
required significant rework to return it to working order. Neil is one of the main contributors on the mechanical design and build of the 
H2020 funded Visum Inline project. He has provided mechanical solutions in all aspects of the developm ent from opto-mechanical 
systems to thermal control and integration into end users. 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
30 | P a g e  
 
MARCELO SILVA  (MALE) is a Front-end developer for Visum in Dublin. Completed his third level education in 2013 he was awarded 
a BA in Computer Science and Business from the Nati onal University of Ireland. Maynooth. In 2015 he wa s awarded an M.SC. in 
Cloud Computing by the National College of Ireland. Since 2014 he has worked as a software developer for Simteractive and Avaya. 
CHRIS DERMODY  (MALE) Software Developer. Bachelor’s degree in Pr oduct Design from Dublin Institute of Technology. C hris 
excels in creative problem-solving, using the lates t technologies to transform ideas into real opportu nities that provide exponential 
value to business operations. With a keen eye for user experience, Chris builds robust, responsive applications that stand the test of 
time. Since joining VISUM, Chris has been hard at w ork developing both front and backend features that  push the VISUM product 
lines forward. Prior to VISUM, Chris enjoyed working across the full spectrum of business, founding start-ups and overseeing product 
development throughout the lifecycle of many successful businesses. 
EKAITZ HERNANDEZ TROYAS  (MALE) Fullstack Developer at Visum. Bachelor Degr ee in Computing Science in the Public 
University of Navarra (5 years). Ekaitz comes from start-up background focusing in web developing. He has 4 years of experience in 
the web industry. He started to work in Dublin for a small start-up related with geolocation industry. He had the opportunity to create 
his own start-up related with the cosmetic industry. This experience has given him the opportunity to learn cutting edge technologies 
as well to learn other facets of a company like bus iness development or marketing. Also, he worked as a freelancer implementing 
solutions with the Squarespace CMS. Ekaitz is always keen to face new challenges and learn new things out his core competency. 
He is currently developing several software development projects, including data management. 
COLM DIGBY (MALE)  General Manager and Co-Founder of VISUM. B.Sc. Hons. in Applied Computing and a Diploma in Industrial 
Studies from the University of Ulster, Magee College, N. Ireland. Colm is passionate about the Industry 4.0 paradigm with a connected 
and data driven everything. He is a strong leader a nd is driving the product development portfolio in IRIS. Prior to IRIS, Colm held 
positions at IBM Europe in Paris, the European Spac e Agency in Rome and Picis SA (and healthcare softw are provider). He has 
been instrumental in the digital transformation of the company in order to improve internal operations and efficiencies.  
OONAGH MC NERNEY (FEMALE).  Director and Co-founder of IRIS. She set up IRIS in  2007, with co-founder Colm Digby, with a 
vision to accelerate the transitioning of new technologies out of the lab and into industry. She is passionate about converting research 
and development into business. Over the years she has been a fundamental driver in the evolution of IRIS towards the development 
of spectroscopy based advanced monitoring solutions and in harnessing the power of process data to provide industry with knowledge 
and intelligence. With a background in Business, she is a marketing enthusiast and a believer in the p ower of digital marketing and 
branding to help companies to reach new global leve ls. Prior to IRIS, Oonagh spent 15 years working wi th industry, technology 
institutes and Business Development Agencies in the  areas of technology transfer, innovation, business  development and industry 
foreign direct investment. Expertise in new product  development, leadership of applied R&D, commercial isation, branding and 
marketing.  
List of up to 5 relevant publications, and/or produ cts, services (including widely-used datasets or so ftware), or other 
achievements relevant to the call content  
1.  Technical article “Injection moulding process optimization by online material monitoring”. E. Bugnicourt et al., October 2012. 
2.  Guía para la evaluación sensorial de calidad de vin os tintos de Rioja Alavesa: vinos jóvenes y vinos c on crianza en barrica (A 
guide to quality sensory evaluation of young red wines from Rioja Alavesa and barrel aged wines). I. Etaio, F.J. Perez-Elortondo, 
M. Albisu, J. Salmerón, M. Ojeda and E.Gaston. Central de Publicaciones del Gobierno Vasco. ISBN 978-84-457-2563-4 
3.  Technical paper, “Optimización del proceso de inyec ción mediante la monitorizacion en línea del materi al”, E. Bugnicourt, V. 
Ruiz, O. Ghita, R. Ventura. Revista de plásticos mo dernos, Vol. 102. Número 660, 117-120, Septiembre 2 011. Development 
and commercialisation of the VISUM instruments- NIR spectroscopy devices- in-pipe, handheld and Hyperspectral imaging- for 
real-time monitoring and quality control of raw materials, production lines, and final products. 
4.  Publication in relation to Innovation Management: O. Mc Nerney , A. Stachowicz, P. Czuprynski, E. Philpott, D. Kol man, D. 
Martin, E. Herrmann (2010). Strategic Guide to Successful Use and Dissemination of the Results of Research and Development 
Projects. 1st edition, Steinbeis-Edition Stuttgart 2010. ISBN 978-3-941417-27-4 
5.  On 08/02/2016, VISUM was awarded the Seal of Excellence form the European Commission (See Annex 3)  
A list of up to 5 relevant previous projects or activities, connected to the subject of this proposal  
IRIS Advanced Engineering is participating in the following projects in H2020: 
1.  PREVIEW - PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection mold sEt up in Wireless sensor networks. (Grant Agreement nu mber: 
636892). IRIS is responsible for the development of  the Data Acquisition System and in in developing t he Signal Conditioning, 
its integration with the ARM main board, as well as implementing a prototype. 
2.  VISUM -An IR-spectroscopy-based platform for the rapid in tegration and customisation of affordable, real-tim e monitoring 
solutions for the food and pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement number: 684767). IRIS is the sole applicant of this SME 
Instrument project for accelerating the VISUM in -line NIR platform development and taking it to market.   
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
31 | P a g e  
 
3.  Delivery of courses to industry in Process Analytic al Technologies (PAT), e.g.: “Chemometric tools for  process analytical 
technologies. ChemoPAT” University of Tarragona 16- 18 July 2014; PAT: Innovando en tecnología de contr ol de procesos 
farmacéuticos (Asociación de Químicos e Ingenieros del IQS)- May 28th 2015. 
4.  In a B2B capacity IRIS Advanced Engineering Ltd has implemented the following private development contracts, among others, 
based on photonics e.g.: Development of an online p olyphenols analyzer for real-time process control i n presses for the wine 
industry; Development of a handheld NIR device for the at-line measurement of quality of oil in indust rial frying equipment for 
bakery products (total acidity, polar compounds and degradation); Development of an ad hoc online end-point sensor for a novel 
blender for the pharma ceutical industry  
Description of any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed work  
- Spectroscopic Laboratory equipped with several inst ruments: FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), 2 UV -VIS (PerkinElmer and O cean 
Optics), 1 Extended-SWIR (StellarNet) and 1 NIR (Mi ghtex) spectrophotometers as well as 1 SWIR Hypersp ectral imager 
(Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are trained a nd skilled in chemometrics modelling by using a com mercial suite 
(SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non-commercial chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes).  
- Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops and laboratories equipped with up-to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and bu ilding tools, development kits for programming micr ocontrollers, CNC-
milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], among others. ZEEMAX software 
for the design of optical systems and design setup by means of advanced optical components and facilit ies (optical tables, 
windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”). 
- Wet chemistry and analytics lab 
- INNOVATION HUB with an accelerator room (for sprint  work) demo and presentation area. Auditorium for m ore formal 
presentations and training.
4.2 THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT (INCLUDIN G USE OF THIRD PARTY RESOURCES) 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the project should not be sub-
contracted)  
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  NO  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the 
General Model Grant Agre ement)  
NO
4.3 SUBCONTRACTING- BEST VALUE FOR MONEY 
The best value for money principle of the subcontra cts has been assessed during the evaluation. The Re sponsible Authorising Officer 
confirms that all the subcontracts of the proposal comply with the best value for money principle. For  these subcontracts, beneficiaries 
have assurance that compliance with best value-for-money will not be challenged in audits — unless it turns out that the beneficiary did 
not follow the procedure described or concealed information for the purpose of the approval. 
 
5. ETHICS AND SECURITY
5.1 ETHICS 
During the preparation of this proposal, in keeping  with the required Ethics Appraisal Procedure, an E thics Self-assessment was 
performed with the completion of the Ethical Issues Table. It can be concluded that this project does not involve any ethics issues.
5.2 SECURITY 
 
Does your project involve activities or results raising security issues  NO  
Does your project involve 'EU -classified information' as background or results  NO  
 
  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
32 | P a g e  
 
ANNEX 1- LETTERS OF INTENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
33 | P a g e  
 
 
ANNEX 2- BUSINESS MODEL CANVAS 
 
 
  

SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
34 | P a g e  
 
ANNEX 3- SEAL OF EXCELLENCE