4. Members of the consortium ......................................................................... ................................................... ......................... 28
4.1 Participants .................................. ................................................... ................................................... .................................... 28
4.2 Third parties involved in the project (including use of third party resources) ...................................................................... ........ 31
4.3 Subcontracting- Best value for money ............................................................. ................................................... ..................... 31  
5. Ethics and Security ............................ ................................................... ................................................... ............................... 31
5.1 Ethics ........................................ ................................................... ................................................... ....................................... 31
5.2 Security ...................................... ................................................... ................................................... ...................................... 31  
ANNEX 1- LETTERS OF INTENT  .................................................. ................................................... ............................... 32  
Annex 2- Business Model Canvas ....................................................................... ................................................... ..................... 33  
ANNEX 3- SEAL OF EXCELLENCE  .................................................. ................................................... ........................... 34  
 
  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
3 | P a g e  
 
1.  EXCELLENCE
1.1 OBJECTIVES 
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUSINESS NEED 
Over the past 5 to 10 years we have seen important advances in Infrared (IR) spectroscopy technology, with the arrival on the market of 
low-cost, miniature, fit-for-purpose sensors that can replace bulky systems in R&D, in the field, and in manufacturing environments. While 
such sensor advancements are undoubtedly helping to increase industry use of NIR-based systems for in process monitoring, the key 
to unlocking the floodgates for mainstream adoption lies in facilitating the successful integration of IR sensors into processing 
lines  and seamlessly providing the acquired process data to industry in the form of knowledge or intelligence.  
Let’s consider first of all the hardware integration. This is not just general engineering; this is specialised optical engineering and proper 
sampling . Sampling is key to the ability to take accurate readings from the material being processed and basically means optimising the 
interaction between light and sample in order to dr aw relevant information free of interferences and a rtefacts. If the sampling fails, you 
have fallen at the first hurdle irrespective of the performance of the spectrophotometer. There are no general solutions for sampling; cost-
effective trade-offs cannot reliably tackle all the practical cases unless the sampling devices are being prepared by-design to be adapted 
to a board variety of practical cases.  
And then there’s the whole data side of things. Robust mathematical tools (i.e. chemometric modelling) are absolutely vital for converting 
readings into accurate measurements . While a major advantage of NIR spectroscopy techn ology is its sensitivity to the sample 
matrix , this same advantage makes NIR difficult to work with in that measurements are affected by changes in the sample matrix related 
to particle size, density, humidity, and temperature. Moreover, if we consider the context of food matrices and pharmaceutical excipients, 
these can be affected by seasonal, geographical, an d other sources of change that can result in differ ences in the physicochemical 
compositions of the material, which can have a direct impact in the NIR spectral features. Critically, the development of algorithms based 
on an understanding of the absorption and scatterin g behaviours of diffuse reflectance and transmittan ce can enable the removal of 
matrix effects and improved model robustness.  
The market reality is that today there are not so m any players who are specialising in the development  and customisation of fully 
integrated and customised in-process monitoring solutions and that can deal with the installation challenges that the technology is facing, 
such calibration of the optical device, addressing fouling, the influence of external factors affecting the system such as temperature, etc.; 
we tend to have instrument providers on the one side and manufacturers and processors on the other. So there is a clear ‘integration 
gap’ . Industries willing to take the step to shift thei r laboratory analysis to the line (and this step in volves an almost philosophical and 
cultural shift in the company, as opposed to merely a technological investment), cannot reasonably do so without a reliable integration, 
customisation and maintenance service that. A typical food or pharmaceutical manufacturer (irrespective of their size) will not be equipped 
with the in-house engineering and programming team to get NIR spectroscopy sensors reliably integrated  and deployed in their 
processing lines. In fact, there is a general lack of availability of engineers and scientists with su fficient expertise working with 
spectroscopy. Consequently, companies that want to use NIR cannot find qualified people to help them do it.  
Our vision through the VISUM® platform is to bridge this integration gap . Our game changing flexible hardware and software (figure 
1 below, and the architecture is described in Table 4 in Section 1.3) equips engineers that do not require a specialization in spectroscopy 
in the food, pharmaceutical and process industries to perform the rapid, easy, and cost-effective integration of robust, bespoke solutions 
that are reliable and stable in manufacturing and processing environments. The VISUM® platform is based on an ‘integrated-by-design’ 
approach that has been born out of a mission to unblock the bottlenecks of the cost and complexity of integration of IR-based ‘mini-PAT’ 
solutions in processing lines.  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
4 | P a g e  
 
FIGURE 1- THE VISUM PLATFORM 
We are on the edge of a wave that is about to take the industry by storm; that will see many applications that were formerly reserved for 
research-grade instruments being transferred to rea l-time, in-line monitoring and intelligent process control. The VISUM® platform will 
enable industries (large and small) from the food, pharmaceutical and other process sectors, to successfully ride this wave and benefit 
from greater process efficiencies (and cost savings), higher quality products, reduce waste and environmental impact.  
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES OF THE PROJECT  
Building on the successful outcome of our Phase 1 p roject, we are now moving on to the Phase 2 SME Ins trument, with the aim of 
accelerating the final stages of development and ge aring up for the commercialisation of an  affordable IR-spectroscopy-based 
platform for enabling the rapid, easy integration a nd customisation of in-process chemical monitoring solutions in the food 
and pharmaceutical industries, resulting in improved process control, product quality, and safety .  
As such, the specific objectives that will be fulfilled over the course of a 27-month work plan are as follows:  
1.  To build 5 application cases for the VISUM product in the dairy, snack food, meat and pharmaceutical industries.  
The cooperation of test customers allows us to have an application-oriented product development as follows:  
a) ALMIRALL: Pharmaceutical sector (secondary produ ction). An inline installation on a blender to moni tor the mixing process 
for of the APIs and predict when the process end point is reached. The expected (required) precision is as low as 2% of nominal 
value. 
b) DAIRYGOLD: Dairy products. An inline installation in a pipe will continuously monitor specific composition of dairy products. 
c) METALQUIMIA: Snack products. Installation in a d ry oven monitoring the moisture content of produce on a feed through 
conveyor belt. 
d) SALGOT: Meat based products. An inline system in stalled at the output of the stuffer line. Target p arameters: Moisture, fat 
content and protein content 
e) DEC Pharma/ food processing equipment provider. End point of blending process defined by this end user’s clients. 
Performance indicator:  By M3, the 4 application cases in dairy, olive oil , meat and pharmaceuticals are defined, along with the 
respective integration strategies for the VISUM in each of the 4 industry facilities. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) for validating 
the success of the industry trials are agreed with each test site. 
2.  To develop the chemometric predictive models for each application.   
Using the feasibility prototype system in VISUM, in itial tests with product samples sets from our four  beta testing clients will be 
performed for obtaining test data for the developme nt project and for model development. An initial se t of lab-scale ready-to-use 
predictive chemometric models will be developed, va lidated, and pre-installed in the respective VISUM units to be validated. 
Promising not widely already adopted chemometric me thods (MCR -multivariate curve resolution- and MLR –multivariate linear 
regression- improved with wavelengths selection pre-treatment –genetic algorithms- as well as robust c lassification methods like 
SVM –support vector machines-) will be implemented for improving accuracy in relation to standard meth ods like Partial Least 
Squares (PLS) or PLS-DA, for example. Performance indicator:  By M7, digital files for the first versions of each model are ready 
for laboratory validation and by M9, optimised versions are delivered for coding into the system software. 

SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
5 | P a g e  
 
3.  To design and build the platform hardware layers  
In keeping with the VISUM architecture (figure 1 and Table 4) and the system specifications that were defined in the Phase 1 SME 
Instrument project, the following hardware (HW) layers will be designed and built: a) Tailor-made probe-sample interfaces improved 
with “anti-fouling” windows; b) Standard customisab le plug-in sampling unit for on-line version of VIS UM for cases whereby the 
antifouling window is not suitable; c) Core instrum ent: IR spectrophotometer (whereby VISUM will be de signed for versatility to 
enable compatibility with a variety of commercially  available SWIR OEMs); d) System casing suited for ‘click-in’ integration of 
different IR spectrophotometers (depending on the measurement requirements of the application) as well as built-in computer that 
is capable of communicating with a selected variety  of spectrophotometers firmware; e) Built-in data m anagement HW. 
Performance indicator:  By M4, an up to date portfolio of OEM SWIR spectrophotometers is complete so that we can ensure the 
VISUM designs are compatible with each; By M6 a dossier with the designs of the Standard probe-sample interfaces, the on-line 
sampler, housing and built in data management hardw are is ready. By M10, HW units are built and ready for integration with 
system software. 
4.  To design and develop the platform software layers and to build the cloud infrastructure  
Again, in keeping with the VISUM architecture and t he system specifications that have been defined in the Phase 1 project, the 
following software (SW) layers will be designed and  developed: a) Built-in data management software; b ) Ad-hoc chemometric 
models development environment; c) Flexible multiplatform data interface; d) User programmable decision rules, offering mini-PAT 
(Process Analytical Technology) capability. In keep ing with the Industry 4.0 paradigm, the VISUM will be cloud enabled to allow 
the option of connecting sensor data to the cloud (as required) so that historical data can be analysed (Big Data), along with a web 
application (that will be accessible over all mobil e platforms) to allow remote monitoring of networks  of installed VISUMs. 
Performance indicator:  By M10, the beta SW including the modelling code has been validated in the lab and debugging confirms 
readiness for integration with the system HW. By M11, the cloud database and Application Programming Interfaces are built. 
5.  To integrate the system hardware and software and t o perform in-house testing to ensure proper functio ning of the 
integrated VISUM and effective communication with t he cloud. Performance indicator:  By M12, tests with the integrated 
system confirm readiness for industry installation work to commence- Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) according to ISO 2001:9008 
is approved. 
6.  To install and test the VISUM system in the processing facilities of our participating test customers . 
The VISUM system will be installed at the following end user sites: a) SALGOT- meat processing (to monitor salamis and sausages 
filling mixtures at the output of the stuffer line) ; b) DAIRYGOLD-dairy processing (to monitor milk qu ality parameters as flows 
through the pipes); c) METALQUIMIA-snack food produ ction (to determine moisture content in a drying pr ocess) and, d) 
ALMIRALL- pharmaceutical manufacturing (in a blende r), e) DEC- pharmaceutical manufacturing (in a blen ding line in order to 
validate/optimise the pre-defined integration strategies and confirm the ease of rapid integration (which is a key selling proposition 
of the VISUM) Production trials will be performed i n order to validate the transferability of the cali bration models and the 
performance and reliability of the VISUM technology vs. conventional monitoring methods. The VISUM will be interfaced with the 
existing process control system for the implementation of closed loop control either by means of the VISUM built-in control routines 
or using the existing control routines in the machi nery (PLCs). Performance indicator: By M22, the systems are successfully 
installed at SALGOT, DAIRYGOLD, METALQUIMIA, ALMIRALL and DEC. By M22, correct operational performance is confirmed 
according to the pre-established KPIs and Site Acce ptance Test (SAT) approval is obtained from each of  the sites. By M27, the 
impacts of monitoring and controlling the process with the VISUM in-line system are quantified.    
7.  To translate the validated prototype designs to pro duct  through the creation of the manufacturing document ation package 
using the engineering information and specification s and to establish the manufacturing. Performance indicator: By M19, the 
product manufacturing documentation packages are passed to purchasing and production engineering to enable manufacture. By 
M23, the first 5 product units pass the quality assurance tests. 
8.  To further develop the VISUM Business Plan and Business Models  for the commercialisation of the instrumentation (hardware) 
and data services. Performance indicator: By M22, our Business Plan is investor ready and we have fully detailed and verified 
our business models for realising the full potentia l of our VISUM platform in the European and global food, pharmaceutical and 
other markets.   
9.  To gear up to market- This will involve establishing and training the  VISUM Sales Team and Application Team (for supporting the 
Sales Team), the finalization of the pricing structure and policy, and establishing the commercial/distribution networks for delivering 
on the sales targets in the key European and international markets. Performance Indicators:  By M22 the Application Team is in 
place and trained, the first tier of our distributi on network is in place and our pricing has been val idated for timely progression to 
the Commercialisation Phase.   
PROBLEM OR BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY AND HOW THE SOLUTIO N SOLVES THE PROBLEM OR AVAILS OF 
THE BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 
In line with the Industry 4.0 paradigm, there is in creasing industry interest in shifting from laborat ory-based or post-production quality 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
6 | P a g e  
 
control to in-line monitoring of product and proces s parameters during processing. The main drivers fo r this interest are the need to 
improve product quality (or to obtain standardised quality) and safety, to increase process efficienci es, to reduce waste and 
off spec product discard , as well as increasing awareness of the imperative of ICT adoption to remain competitive in  our new 
Digital data-driven era . There is an enormous business opportunity for pro viding even small and mid-tier enterprises with acc ess to 
rapid and reliable in-process detection techniques that can keep pace with modern processing speeds an d throughputs and which are 
suitable for: (i) assembly in the production line a nd operating under a realistic environment; (ii) en abling early detection of possible 
failures; (iii) performing permanent monitoring of the conditions; (iv) providing an assessment of con ditions at any desired time 1. The 
introduction of spectroscopic sensors for real-time process monitoring is enabling industry to gradually move from inferential monitoring 
and control toward continuous measurement of core quality parameters 2.  
VISUM, in line with the objectives of H2020’s Leade rship in Enabling Technologies (LEIT) work programm e, leverages photonics and 
ICT KETs (Key Enabling Technologies) to drive forwa rd the PAT  (Process Analytical Technologies) paradigm within the wider Industry 
4.0 framework for improved industrial competitiveness.  
Over the past 30 years, on/in-line near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)  (based on the absorption of electromagnetic radiat ion at 
wavelengths in the range 780–2500 nm) has proven to  be one of the most efficient and advanced tools fo r continuous monitoring and 
control of process and product quality in the food processing industry. 3 NIR spectra of foods and pharmaceuticals comprise broad bands 
arising from overlapping absorptions corresponding mainly to overtones and combinations of vibrational modes involving C–H, O–H, and 
N–H chemical bonds 4, making it very feasible for measurements to be ma de in organic and biological systems such as meat, fish, fruit 
and vegetables, grain and grain products, dairy pro ducts, oils, beverages, Active Pharmaceutical Ingre dients (APIs) and excipients, 
among others. However, despite the operating cost of NIRS being low, to date the instruments themselves have been costly , which 
has limited practical application 3. Moreover, calibration models based on NIR spectroscopy, and especially for on-line applications, 
tend to require a significant economical effort and are not reliable and stable enough when used practically 3.  
Our VISUM platform breaks down the cost and complex ity barriers of NIR technology adoption for real-ti me process monitoring 
applications, by providing food and pharmaceutical processors (irrespective of their size or technolog ical capability) with access to the 
necessary flexible hardware and software to allow f or rapid, easy, and cost-effective integration of r obust, customised IR solutions that 
are reliable and stable in manufacturing and proces sing environments. The aim is to ensure that integr ation can be performed even by 
non-specialised engineers. This is a timely develop ment in view of the emergence of new compact, highl y affordable IR spectroscopy 
sensors, such as those that are offered by Finnish technology company, Spectral Engines OY, which can be purchased for <€1k. Their 
business models are centred selling high volumes of  sensors. The key now to mass adoption lies in faci litating the integration of these 
sensors in industry. (It is important to highlight that since we have commenced the VISUM development we have witnessed dramatic 
price drops for IR sensors from €5/6 to just under €1k- for orders of 10 units)   
The VISUM platform will capitalise on this business  opportunity by bringing to market the first  IR spectroscopy integration platform  
that offers the following Unique Selling Propositions (USPs):  
 Affordability- the use of the new wave of extremely affordable MEMS-NIR sensors to enable disruptive cost reductions (~up to 4-
5 times cheaper) for fully customised in-process monitoring systems.  
 Ease of integration and reliability- In relation to the reliability of the calibration m odels, the VISUM platform will incorporate a 
robust multivariate-models development environment and a clever ‘calibration transfer program’, thus eliminating the need for a full 
recalibration. This will be a fundamental feature i n making the VISUM platform readily customisable fo r reliable use in many 
analytical measurement scenarios in industry.  
 Low maintenance- A major practical problem that continues to pose great challenges in relation to in-line spectroscopy is biofouling 
and contamination of the optical window, caused by the environment in which the device is operating. V ISUM offers two solutions 
(depending on the requirements of the application) for ensuring resistance to fouling- and thereby inc reasing the robustness and 
reliability of the device and dramatically reducing the maintenance of the hardware and extending its useful life-: a) a layer of specific 
polymers (non-polar compounds) coated on the surface of the optical window (tests during our Phase 1 Feasibility Study revealed 
positive results 5) for preventing fouling. Thin PTFE layers were suf ficiently transparent in the SWIR wavelengths and r educed the 
probability of fouling as PTFE is a chemical compound with very low polarity; b) an online sampler concept (validated in the Phase 
1 Feasibility Study for grape juice, which is a very difficult liquid product/sample) as an alternative solution to the inline approach for 
use with difficult aqueous samples prone to foul optical windows: a 2-stages tangential filter -which provides continuous operation-, 
a CIP (cleaning-in-place) circuit and an ad hoc the rmostatic photometer that operates at a challenging  wavelength (280 nm) was 
developed and will be replaced by a NIR spectrophot ometer during this Phase 2 project (note: the short er wavelength, the more 
difficult to deal with turbidity, fouling and other artefacts, as such if the system is capable of work at 280 nm, it will at work at NIR).  
                                                        
1 Pemen, A.J.M. et. al. 1998. On-line detection of partial discharges in stator windings of large turbine generators. IEE colloquium on discharges in larg e machines, 3/1–3/4. 
2 van den Berg, F., et al., Process Analytical Techn ology in the food industry, Trends in Food Science & Technology (2012), doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2012.04.007  
3 Haibo Huang et. al. (2008). Near infrared spectroscopy for on/in-line monitoring of quality in foods and beverages: A review. Journal of Food Engineerin g 01/2008; DOI: 10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2007.12.022 
4 Osborne, B.G., 2000. Near infrared spectroscopy in  food analysis. BRI Australia Ltd, North Ryde, Aust ralia. Copyright 2000 Wiley, New York, pp. 1–14 (Ch apter 1). 
5 As reported in the Technical Feasibility Report th at was submitted at the end of the VISUM SME Instru ment Phase 1 project (Grant Agreement number: 68476 7).  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
7 | P a g e  
 
Our VISUM platform will mainstream the industry adoption of IR-based reliable and robust on/inline monitoring systems that are readily 
tailored to the specific measurement requirements and environments and suited to the real-time measurement of physical and chemical 
parameters in a multitude of food and pharmaceutical applications. The affordability and easy of set up of the VISUM in-line monitoring 
systems will also open up the power of IR technology to the SME sector.  
OBJECTIVES AND EXPECTED OUTCOME OF THE INNOVATION B USINESS PROJECT  
From a business perspective, VISUM Ltd., through VISUM®, is gearing up for a high growth business opportunity. VISUM® will be a key 
product under the IRIS brand. Over the last 4 years  IRIS has positioned itself as an emerging player i n the advanced monitoring and 
control space, whereby we have been making progress in offering the customization of real-time monitoring solutions and the associated 
integration services on an ad hoc basis to clients in the food, and more recently the pharmaceutical, industry. The expected outcome 
from this project is to have the VISUM® hardware, s oftware and cloud infrastructure developed to product level by the end of Phase 2, 
to have the manufacturing set up with the first pro duct units manufactured and quality approved, to ha ve finalized our pricing structure 
and product positioning. The Phase 2 project enables us to accelerate this work so that we can be ready for market launch in 2019; this 
acceleration allows us to seize the market opportunity as early as possible and to be first to market with the world’s first IR spectroscopy 
integration platform . In parallel to the product development itself, we will gear up and prepare for the commercialization phase, whereby 
we will build and train our Sales team and we will also establish an Application Team (a technical tea m that will support sales and 
deployment activities: testing materials, performing detailed site visits, installing the systems, provide training and handling both site and 
remote customer support, etc.). We establish our first-tier international distribution network to cover the following geographical markers: 
Ireland & UK, Spain, Germany and Central Europe, the US and China. We will verify and plan for the realization of our sales objectives-
1300 units being sold (in Europe and worldwide) during the first 5 years of commercialization (rational provided in Section 2.2), which will 
translate into a cumulative turnover of over €42 M (generated from 2019 to 2023) and will enable 39 ne w jobs to be created in VISUM 
Ltd. over that same period.
1.2 RELATION TO THE WORK PROGRAMME  
Phase 2 VISUM project relates to the agri-food and bio-based sectors of the SMEInst-07-2016-2017 work programme topic  ‘Stimulating 
the innovation potential of SMEs for sustainable and competitive agriculture, forestry, agri-food and bio-based sectors’ .
1.3 CONCEPT AND APPROACH  
CURRENT STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE BUSINESS INNOVA TION PROJECT 
A VISUM hardware feasibility prototype device was b uilt consisting of a diffuse 
transreflectance arrangement associated to a SWIR MEMS-based spectrophotometer. This 
feasibility prototype has been successfully used in a pilot study with a local company for the 
determination of moisture (dispersed water) in oliv e oil and oil concentration in olive marc 
(alperujo), whereby chemometric models for fine tun ing the spectroscopic readings have 
been developed on the basis of the popular PLS meth od. The metrological capabilities of 
the prototype were validated in terms of precision of the predictions: Prediction errors below 
0.2% w/w demonstrated that the system offers perfor mance comparable with equivalent 
more expensive commercial systems. These tests were carried out in order to confirm the 
applicability of the VISUM concept for online real-time monitoring of an industrial centrifuge 
(decanter) for yield optimization (PAT).  In  the Phase 1 SME Instrument additional trials 
were performed with two providers of spectrophotometers, RADIANTIS  (900-1700 nm) 
and Spectral Engines (1550-1950 nm), spectrophotometers in terms of generic performance 
as well as the adequacy of the prototype for measuring key parameters in palm oil for pastry 
manufacturing, as well as in meat, olive oil, milk and grape must. Key features such as 
signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) at relevant wavelengths, spectral resolution, short-term and mid-
term spectra stability –in both signal and waveleng th-, mechanical and optomechanical stability, and a ccuracy of the predicted results 
with representative samples were determined for bot h spectrophotometers. In terms of key features both  devices behaved in a similar 
way even though the one from Spectral Engines showe d slightly better both S/N ratio and spectral resol ution, while its spectral range 
was definitively shorter. In the case of oil for example, the transreflectance geometry was confirmed as the most suitable for measuring 
semi-transparent liquids, whereby the spectra of 10 0 different samples from a real process were acquir ed with VISUM (based on the 
RADIANTIS SWIR device) and the respective reference  analysis were carried out to build quantitative an d qualitative (classificatory) 
models. Predictive models were successfully validated for the following parameters: Total Acidity, Polar-compounds Concentration and 
identification of degraded (overheated) oil. The Radiantis device results to be more suitable for generic applications –that require wider 
spectral range- while Spectral Engines spectrophotometer is more suitable for specific applications –that allow narrower spectral ranges 
and perhaps better S/N- once the respective ideal spectral region has been identified.  
FIGURE 2- IMAGE OF VISUM 
PROTOTYPE HARDWARE AND 
USER INTERFACE  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
8 | P a g e  
 
In relation to solutions towards addressing the challenge of the biofouling or contamination of the optical window , which is a major 
challenge for in-line monitoring in food and pharma ceutical applications, during the Phase 1 SME Instr ument project we performed a 
technical feasibility study into the suitability of three approaches:  
1.  Nanotexturisation coating:  A structure of nanometric “pillars” keep the fluid s and the solid bodies (microscopic and macroscopic  
particles) far enough from the surface to avoid stable Van de Waals bonds. In this way, the chance of persistent adherence (fouling) 
would significantly decrease. Nanotexturisation tre atment is under development in the Dr. Pruneri’s Gr oup at the Institute of 
Photonics Science (ICFO) (Dow Corning Cathedra) and  they provided treated and control samples for a fe asibility study. Results 
with the current nanotexturised windows performed on water, milk and powder (flour), revealed positive results for reducing fouling 
in the case of certain powders such as flour, but c urrently would not be suitable for use for reducing  fouling in the case of water-
based solutions or lipid-based emulsions (such as m ilk). ICFO is still working with the technology and  we will work together in the 
future in order to find a robust solution for the industry. However, due to insufficient TRLs this work will not form part of the Phase 2 
SME Instrument. The results are summarised in Table 1.  
2.  Antifouling polymer layer coating:  A layer of specific polymers (non-polar compounds)  is coated on the surface to reduce the 
probability of fouling. In particular, a thin PTFE layer would be transparent enough in the SWIR wavelengths and would reduce the 
probability of fouling because PTFE is a chemical c ompound with very low polarity. The results of feas ibility tests performed in the 
Phase 1 project, a Dupont AF Teflon disk (approx. 200 microns thick) was placed on a 1 inch diameter 2-mm thick sapphire optical 
window and held on it by means of a mechanical hold er. The transmittance along a wide spectrum (400 to 2000 nm) resulted over 
93% -which is perfectly suitable for optical applic ations such as VISUM inline windows. PTFE is an alm ost perfect non-polar 
substance with excellent antifouling properties and chemically is very inert in relation to the most of the chemicals. Likewise, PTFE 
is very stable in a wide range of temperatures (<25 0 C). The sapphire substrate is needed for providin g mechanical robustness to 
the PTFE film; the Teflon layer is a barrier between the analysed product and the sapphire window. As in the nanotexturised window 
feasibility study, the PTFE-AF-coated window was tested against water, milk and powder (flour). The tests were carried out according 
to the same scheme that was used with the nanotexturised widows, i.e., pouring the tests substance on the PTFE layer and flipping 
the set up vertically after 5 min. The results were  significantly better because no persistent fouling  took place even without any 
cleaning process (refer to Table 1). In conclusion the PTFE film on a sapphire glass presents a suitable solution for addressing the 
majority of the cases of VISUM Inline applications) . During the Phase 2, we will develop a coupling so lution for holding the thin 
polymer layer in touch with the glass (sapphire) window if required. 
TABLE 1- SUMMARY TABLE OF THE RESULTS OF ANTIFOULIN G COATING FEASIBILITY STUDIES 
Sample  Test  Nanostructured layer s PTFE -AF coated sapphire  Control (bare sapphire)  
Water  Discrete drops  + + - 
20 ml water flow  + + - 
Immersed in water during 3 h  + + - 
Pouring water drops after 2 days (immersed during 3  h 
and then dried)  
- + - 
Milk   Discrete drops  - + - 
Corn flou r  Powder layer  - + - 
3.  Online sampler:  The option of on-line sampling has 
been also considered. In many cases, inline real-time 
measurements are not absolutely necessary; on the 
contrary, in such cases, a sample can be 
automatically taken from the pipe in order to analy se 
it by means of an external online setup, properly 
attached to the pipe. It allows using ad hoc cleani ng 
systems (CIP) that remove any fouling from the 
windows without interacting with the product within  
the pipe. To study the feasibility of such an approach, 
an automated online sampler for liquid samples was 
designed, built and successfully tested by means of  
an especially challenging or difficult liquid 
product/sample: grape must. In fact, grape juice ca n 
be considered an extreme case due to its high sugar 
content (>200 g/L), very high turbidity (>4000 NTU) , 
protein-based colloids content- which easily causes  
clogging in almost any filtering system- and last b ut 
not least, its proclivity to be easily transformed by microorganisms such as yeast -which implies high  CO2 concentration (bubbles 
occurrence) and biofouling too. Such a kind of samp le represent a worst case scenario for food industr y applications because 

SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
9 | P a g e  
 
combines several drawbacks associated to the samples that are typical in such a sector. The sampler was provided with a 2-stages 
tangential filter -which provides continuous operation-, a CIP (cleaning-in-place) circuit and an ad hoc thermostatic photometer which 
operates at a difficult wavelength: 280 nm. Such a short wavelength is particularly sensitive to turbidity and any kind of fouling hence 
it resembles the worst case scenario. The photos above (left) show the online sampler lab system and ( right) the sampler installed 
in the lab in an ad hoc test rig for simulating real conditions: the grape must be continuously pumped through a closed-loop pipe and 
samples are continuously taken out by means of the sampler to be properly conditioned (filtered) and characterized by means an ad 
hoc photometer. A summary of the parameters that have been obtained are shown in Table 2. We conclude that the online sampler 
concept implemented in the test rig is suitable as an alternative solution to the inline approach for difficult aqueous samples prone 
to foul optical windows and will be implemented in Phase 2.  
TABLE 2- SUMMARY OF THE PARAMETERS OBTAINED WITH TH E SAMPLER UNIT 
Turbidity after the filtration procedure (starting > 2000 NTU)  < 10 NTU  
Repeatability of optical absorbance @ 280 (2σ)  < 1%  
Warm -up time of the system  80 min  
Delay of the measurement  1 min.  
Equilibrium temperature of the photometer housing  24.5 ± 0.5 ºC  
From a market feasibility perspective , we performed significant industry engagement prior to and during the VISUM Phase 1 project, 
whereby we participated in the following trade exhibitions: Murcia Food Brokerage 2015 (14-15 May), BTA Barcelona Food Technologies 
(May 21-24 2015), Global Food Safety 2015 in Amster dam (September 8-9, 2015), Anuga Food Congress in C ologne (October 10-14 
2015), and PharmaProcess in Barcelona (October 27-29, 2015), III International Food Safety Congress, Murcia (25- 27 Nov 2015), IFPAC 
(Conference on Process Analytical Technology (PAT), QbD, Process Understanding & Control, and Real-Time Analytics) US (Jan 24-27 
2016). Extensive industry engagement has confirmed very strong industry interest in the VISUM platform and its value proposition. We 
have generated 106 new leads in our CRM (79 from th e food industry and 27 from pharma) and from them w e have recruited four 
companies to collaborate with us in the Phase 2 as ‘first beta clients’: SALGOT (meat processing); DAI RYGOLDPASCUAL (dairy 
processing); METALQUIMIA (olive oil production); and d) ALMIRALL (pharmaceuticals).  
During the Phase 1, face-to-face meetings were held with the R&D+I, Production and Quality Managers at each site in order to a) become 
familiar with their facilities and processes to be monitored, b) define the user requirements (using a  Kano Survey), c) implement the 
Quality Function Deployment (QFD) method to determine how and where priorities identified through the Kano Survey are to be assigned 
in product development, d) define the derived syste m specifications for the VISUM system, which is the  starting point of this Phase 2 
project for designing and manufacturing a mainstream VISUM platform that will be flexible enough to ensure rapid customization for tailor-
made VISUM solutions. These user requirements, which have fed into the system specifications (outputs from Phase 1) are summarised 
in Table 6 in Section 2.1. 
POSITIONING OF THE BUSINESS INNOVATION PROJECT 
In the Phase 2 we will advance the TRLs from the cu rrent TRL6/7, whereby the VISUM prototype has alrea dy been successfully 
demonstrated in a relevant environment, to hardening up the hardware and building the software to perform validation and demonstration 
work in the industry (TRL7) and arriving at a compl ete and qualified system, which will be CE marked ( TRL8), and through continued 
case studies in the industry, the fully industriali sed systems will be proven in an operational enviro nment (TRL9). We will also get to 
Manufacturing Readiness Level 10 in order to be in a position to serve market demand when we launch in January 2019.  
TABLE 3- SUMMARY OF THE TRL ADVANCEMENTS THROUGH TH E PHASE 2 
Key element  Current 
TRL 
Final 
TRL 
Comments  
NIR Spectrophotometer  8/9  9 VISUM is based on of -the -shelf spectrophotometers  that may involve some minor OEM adaptations  
Antifouling window  6 8/9  Optimized and tested for the most typical types of compatible samples  
Lighting  6 9 Amelioration in terms of geometry  (variable beam diameter), filtered spectra –to reduce sample heating - as well as 
pre-heating the lamps to reduce warm up time and improving stability 
Software  6 8/9  Improvements in terms of usability and robustness as well as regulatory compliance (11 CFR 21)  
Casing  7 9 Optimization of size, thermal stability and regulatory compliance (ATEX, CE, etc.)  
Data exchange interface  7 9 Comp atibility with the most common standards (Modbus, Profibus, Fieldbus, etc.)  
“miniPAT” control 6 9 Completing a set of basic con trol routines and methods (PID, MSPC, etc.) 
Online sampler  6 9 Optimized and tested for the most typical types of compatible sa mples  
Cloud database  8 9 Communication between the VISUM devices and cloud will be verified.  
THE VISUM CONCEPT  
NIR is a non-destructive, reliable and accurate tec hnique for monitoring chemical and physical paramet ers during food and 
pharmaceutical processing. At present, NIR is widel y accepted as one of the most promising on/in-line process control techniques. 
Moreover, the appearance of fibre optic probes sign ificantly improves the ability of NIR techniques to  monitor and control processes 
especially using remote on/in line detection. However, as was seen, there are currently gaps preventing the mainstreaming of NIR in the 
industry: 1) typical NIR lab analysers are expensiv e (~40-80K€) and they require specialised staff to operate them, along with costly 
maintenance; 2) they often require time-consuming, costly and complex predictive models development an d their further recalibration 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
10 | P a g e  
 
(model maintenance); 3) Generic systems do not properly fit to each particular product line or monitoring challenge and these mismatches 
are the source of major errors; 4) on-line NIR optical interfaces are prone to biofouling and contamination which is a major limitation for 
accurate measurements and leads to high maintenance requirements.  
The VISUM platform (the architecture layers are outlined in Table 4 below) is designed to overcome each of these limitations and thereby 
contribute to the mainstreaming of NIR-based technology in the European and global food and pharmaceutical industries as an enabler 
for improved product quality and safety, as well as  improved process understanding and control for a f irst tier Process Analytical 
Technology (PAT) tool. By ensuring that the VISUM platform can be customised to real-time industrial solutions at a cost to the client of 
on average ~€10-35k depending on the final applicat ion, we will enable a totally disruptive costing structure that will ma instream 
the adoption of NIR-based technology in the Europea n and global food and pharma industries, making it fully accessible to 
SMEs. Moreover, as was discussed we will ensure VISUM is enabled by cloud computing in line with the Interne t-of-Things and the 
Industry 4.0 paradigm.   
TABLE 4- ARCHITECTURE OF THE CLOUD-ENABLED VISUM PL ATFORM  
VISUM HARDWARE LAYERS  
VH.1  Tailor -made probe -sample int erface (‘design for operation’)  
A set of basic arrangements aimed at the seamless ad aptation (integration) to the most common/standard user situations, as we ll as to specific needs in 
terms of sampling (probe-sample interaction). Gener ic systems do not properly fit to each particular p roduct line or monitoring challenge and these 
mismatches are the source of major errors. To overc ome problems associated with biofouling and contami nation of the optical window from powders or 
viscous liquids, an antifouling polymer layer coati ng technology feature suited for most inline applic ations, and an online sampler unit with CIP feature s for 
other applications, will provide practical and affordable solutions  for preventing fouling and increasing the reliability of in-line solutions, as well as dramatically 
reducing system maintenance and extending performance life.  
VH.2  Core instrument: IR spectrophotometer with antifouling nanotexturised coating  
The standard VISUM core device is a MEMS -based spectrophotometer that wo rks i n the SWIR range (0.9 -1.7 µm). MEMS technology guarantees not only 
affordability [unit price can now be as low as 1 k€  depending on requirements] but also robustness –in  terms of being suitable for applications in harsh 
environments- as well as reduced both size [volume < 100 mL] and power consumption [<10 W]. This core device shows good signal/noise ratio [better than 
2500:1], which is sufficient for the majority of th e typical applications. In addition, the platform i s also highly scalable and offers the possibility f or a “by-
design” option enabling the use of additional devic es depending in the specialised requirements of the  end-user and also for ensuring the VISUM platform 
can be seamlessly updated and upgraded in line with the evolution of MEMSNIR technology.  
VH.3  Built -in data management hardware  
Miniaturized embedded computer  
VISUM SOFTWARE LAYERS  
VS.0  Cloud  database  and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)  
The secure cloud infrastructure will allow the data from the VISUM devices to be sent to the cloud (op tional service) and acc essible over a web application 
(for PC and mobile interfacing)  to enable r emote access , and whereby the historical data can be mine d using data analytics tools .   
VS.1  Built -in data management software  
For driving the core instrument, data processing [c hemometrics modelling and prediction] communication  and the built -in interf ace, when necessary. The 
proprietary software will be compatible with popular chemometric packages –e.g. SOLO [Eigenvector] and Unscrambler [CAMO]- in terms of easy integration 
of predictive models generated by them if necessary. It allows users to independently build and maintain the chemometric models. For pharma applications 
the system is pre -validated according to the regulations ( e.g. 11 CFR 21).    
VS.2  Ad -hoc chemometrics modelling  
While the models can be developed by the Client by using high -end th ird -party  software, the platform is intended for working on t he basis of automated 
tailor-made robust multivariate calibration models in order to guarantee the maximum reliability and a ccuracy as well as reducing the cost for the end us er. 
Automated assisted modelling solves the main drawbac k of applying chemometrics to process control: the intrinsic significant cost related to the predictiv e 
models development. The system includes the latest model transfer procedures.  
VS.3  Flexible multiplatform data inte rface  
The result outputs (analytical data) can be sent to the Client’s data management system through a variety of methods (wifi, s tandard databuses, etc.)  
VS.4  User programmable decision rules  
This offers “mini -PAT” built -in capability, whereby the use r (client) is allowed to code (“scripting”/macro) its own decision rules in order to provide the decision 
system with “action-type” data. Close-loop control can be easily implemented by the industry end users  without incurring extra costs and according their 
production criteria through standard protocols like MODBUS or TCP/IP which easily interface with the facilities’ control syst em (SCADA).  
APPROACH/ACTIVITIES THAT WILL BE IMPLEMENTED DURING  THE PROJECT  
Our VISUM project follows an application-oriented product development approach , which will involve  a tight co-creation between the 
development team and our target client base. A number of first clients have agreed to participate in the project as early adopters to permit 
the project to either, on the one hand, use real product samples as a basis for the development, and/or provide access to their facilities 
for industrial trials (a summary of the target applications is provided in Table 5).  
TABLE 5- TARGET APPLICATIONS FOR THE PHASE 2 
Company  Sector  Target  Products  Participation 
Level 
Parameters to be measured  Installation  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
11 | P a g e  
 
ALMIRALL  Pharmaceuticals  SEKISAN (liquid)  Provide 
samples for 
model 
building 
Target compounds: Cloperastine fendizoate [3.5 mg/m L]; Nipagin [1.22 mg/mL]; 
Nipasol [0.18 mg/mL] 
Blender  
Dosage 
filling 
machine 
ACECLOFENAC 
(solid form) 
Provide 
samples for 
model 
building 
- Dissolution test  
- Moisture 
- Hardness and degradation by-products 
- Target compounds: Aceclofenac [488 mg/g] 
ALGIDOL (solid 
form 
Access to 
facilities for 
industry trials 
- Blending end-point 
- Moisture 
- APIs content 
- Target compounds: paracetamol [300 mg/g], codeine [4.5 mg/g], ascorbic acid 
[227 mg/g]  
CALIDAD 
PASCUAL 
Dairy Smoothies (liquid) Provide 
samples for 
model 
building 
- Mixing end-point In-pipe 
Fruit juices (liquid)  Pro vide 
samples for 
model 
building 
- pH, glucose, fructose and total acidity  
Milk (liquid)  Provide 
samples for 
model 
building 
- Water content [expressed as cryoscopic point from 0.510 to 0.530 mK, 
precision at 0.002 mK] 
- Fat [0 to 7.4 %w/w] 
- Proteins [2 to 4 %w/w] 
ACESUR  Olive oil (and 
olive-oil-based 
products) 
Sauces (liquid)  Provide 
samples for 
model 
building 
- Brix and end -point of CIP process  In -pipe (in 
the bottling 
line) 
Mayonnaise (semi-
liquid) 
Provide 
samples for 
model 
building 
- Fat content [65% w/w] 
Olive oil 
(liquid) 
Provide 
samples for 
model 
building 
- Fat content 
- Moisture [0.04 to 0.08 %w/w, precision at 0.01% w/w] 
SALGOT  Meat  Salamis and 
sausages filling 
mixture 
Access to 
facilities for 
industry trials  
- Moisture  
- Fat content 
- Protein content 
At t he output 
of the stuffer 
line 
DAIRYGOLD  Dairy  Milk  Access to 
facilities for 
industry trials  
- Fat [0 to 7.4 %w/w]  
- Proteins [2 to 4 %w/w] 
In= -pipe  
METALQUIMIA  Food 
Processing 
Snack Food  Access to 
facilities for 
industry trials  
-  Conveyor 
oven 
DEC  Pharmace uticals  APIs (Confidential)  Access to 
facilities for 
industry trials   
- Blending end -point  
- Moisture 
- APIs content  
Blender in -
pipe 
Using the feasibility prototype system that is avai lable in VISUM we will undertake an initial demonst ration of the system on the 
applications to provide test data for the development project. An iterative product development cycle will be implemented to design and 
produce beta prototype systems that will be installed at each of our end-user sites as test cases for performance verification, the success 
of which will confirm the acceptance of the prototy pe designs. Having validated these designs, we will  translate the prototypes to 
product  through the creation of the manufacturing documentation package using the engineering information and specifications and we 
will set up our manufacturing facilities and produce and quality approve the first units. In relation to methodologies that will be used during 
the development work, our teams operate under agile frameworks, whereby Kanban is employed for hardware developments, and Scrum 
and Test Driven Development (TDD) for software developments. Whenever creative thinking is needed, particularly for ideating specific 
solutions that cannot be addressed by finding a simple trade-off among several technical constraints, the development will be based on 
TRIZ (Theory of the resolution of invention-related tasks), which is a widely recognized methodology for accelerating and simplifying the 
search for inventive and innovative solutions and a  scientifically founded approach to the forecasting  of the evolution of technological 
systems, products and processes 6. The VISUM TRIZ Team has been properly trained by recognized members of ETRIA (European TRIZ 
Association 7) for undertaking creative challenges associated to R&D tasks. The TRIZ approach will be particularly convenient for finding 
flexible (versatile) designs compatible with the most of the applications to be addressed by VISUM.  
                                                        
6 TRIZ. Innovation and Inventive Problem Solving Han dbook", Pavel Livotov and Vladimir Petrov ©TriS Eur ope, Berlin 2014. www.tris-europe.com 
7 http://etria.eu/portal/  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
12 | P a g e  
 
In parallel, we will implement market development activities, whereby we will further develop our business plan ( building from a 
Business Model Canvas) and, based on planning within the framework of the classical and proven 4 Ps (Product, Pricing, Promotion and 
Place) Marketing Mix, we will perform comprehensive activities to gear up for the Commercialisation phase.  
HOW THE PROJECT CONCEPT AND OBJECTIVES FIT INTO THE  OVERALL PLAN TO REACH THE MARKET  
This SME Instrument project is fundamental for real ising our overall plan for reaching the market by 2 019. VISUM® is a development 
that requires acceleration. To date, through own internal R&D funds, we have invested ~30 months and ~€220K of our internal resources 
in getting to TRL6/7. The ability to leverage public funds to complement our private investment will provide the acceleration platform that 
is needed to complete the development and bridge the valley of death in going from TRL6/7-TRL9 and into the market. Through the SME 
Phase 1 Instrument we have had the opportunity to perform a feasibility study in relation to tackling the biofouling problem and we have 
defined the most appropriate solution to be develop ed, we have also gained greater market insights, fo rmulated a clear business 
proposition and identified our market positioning. We have also recruited 4 beta testing end-user companies and together with them we 
have researched their requirements and defined the system specifications. The design, engineering, model development, validation and 
demonstration work that will be performed in the Phase 2 Project in order to test and verify the reliability, repeatability, and robustness of 
the system hardware, software and models, as well as the operational and industrial-level performance of the VISUM® development, in 
addition to the certification, manufacturing and co mmercialisation planning/market development work th at will be performed, are all 
important steps of a product development on its way towards commercialisation. With an injection of funds, and by gearing up right from 
system specifications, through design, prototyping, industry trials in compliance with all industry standards and regulatory requirements, 
we will ensure that there are no user-, technical-, market- or regulatory- obstacles to the uptake of the technology in the marketplace. 
HOW THE PROJECT DEVELOPS SOMETHING NEW TO EUROPE AN D ADDRESSES EU-WIDE CHALLENGES  
VISUM® is the first flexible IR integration platfor m of its kind that will enable the affordable custo misation of PAT-oriented NIR-based 
real-time monitoring and quality control solutions targeted at the European and global food and pharmaceutical industries (and sufficiently 
affordable and easy to use and maintain to open up the SME sector). The ability to leverage the SME In strument to accelerate the 
transformation of new knowledge for industry to conceive and develop new products, industrial processes and services, is an important 
tool for creating a true Innovation Union: a Europe an Union that thanks to its research and innovation  performance can support 
sustainable growth. 
From the technology side , photonics is regarded as a driver of innovation and plays an important “enabler” role for many industrial and 
customer markets. With a worldwide market value pro jected to hit €615 billion in 2020 and to remain st ronger than the gross domestic 
product (GDP), photonics has moved from a niche application to a key enabling technology, according to Photonics Industry Report 2013. 
The European photonics industry holds about 55 % of the world market in production technology. VISUM ® is an enabling platform that 
will significantly increase spectroscopy adoption in industry, and in doing so it will leverage and st rengthen existing European expertise 
in MEMs-IR spectroscopy (from European sensor providers, such as Spectral Engines from Finland and Radiantis from Spain) which will 
help Europe to retain its leading position at the front of the field, whereby we are currently ahead of Asia or North America in sensing and 
spectroscopy. VISUM will contribute to European lea dership in the sensing revolution by bringing a ‘Ma de-in-Europe’ solution that 
combines all the existing technology platforms (suc h as affordable MEMs sensors, chemometrics, IoT and  cloud computing) to further 
increase EU leadership in the photonics field.  
From the perspective of the end-user industries , increasing emphasis on product quality and safety, and on production processes and 
process efficiency- and on the relationship between  the two- has fuelled research and industry interes t in the development of on-line 
detection techniques that enable detection of quali ty changes of raw materials and final product under  steady process conditions 
3, as 
well as fraud and counterfeit early detection. Indeed, Process Analytical Technologies are increasingly being used in the Pharmaceutical 
industry, along with an increasing number of proces s industries, such as Food and Chemical Processing,  as enablers for in-process 
monitoring and control, providing real time informa tion to the engineer and reducing the need for off- line laboratory Quality Assurance 
(QA) facilities. They also provide invaluable proce ss data for increasing process understanding and kn owledge, and are an enabler for 
the transition from batch to continuous processing,  whereby real-time monitoring is required. The pote ntial for VISUM to advance the 
European process industries towards continuous, more flexible processing to respond to market trends for customized products as well 
as bringing process industries into the smart manuf acturing Industry 4.0 revolution would have high im pacts for European industrial 
competitiveness. This is in line with H2020 goals for an Innovation Union, whereby the EC is working hard to stimulate job creation and 
prosperity as an exit from a severe economic and financial crisis. VISUM® will serve as a flagship project for contributing to these goals 
and for the generation of much needed wealth, growth and jobs, which is Horizon 2020’s ambitions8.  
HOW GENDER ANALYSIS IS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT IN THE PR OJECT’S CONTENT  
VISUM® product development will consider gender related design features to ensure the needs of female engineers and line operators 
are analysed and any gender singularities are embedded in the design. During the co-creation process that was implemented in Phase 
                                                        
8 Brussels, 30.11.2011. COM(2011) 808 final. Horizon 2020 - The Framework Programme for Research and Innovation  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
13 | P a g e  
 
1, female engineers/developers and female business professionals from the technology, food and pharma industry were involved and 
their opinions and contributions gathered. Moreover, in relation to  business behaviour and decision making, gender analysis will also be 
important, especially in view of growing trends and  commitments to see more women occupy high level an d decision-making positions 
in industry. The Project Manager for the project is  a female Marie Callanan) as are numerous other mem bers of the team (see section 
4.1). With regard to the employment opportunities that will be generated in VISUM for the implementation of the innovation project, and 
subsequent jobs through the commercialisation of th e project outputs, a recruitment policy will be in place designed to ensure a 
reasonable level of balance between the sexes.
1.4 AMBITION 
NOVELTY OF THE INNOVATION BUSINESS PROJECT 
Optical techniques using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS)  have received considerable attention as a means fo r non-destructive 
sensing of food and pharmaceutical quality and safety. Compared to other non-destructive techniques, NIRS spectroscopy does not need 
any sample preparation, allowing for simple and rap id analysis, which is a requirement for on-line app lication 3. It can simultaneously 
measure several constituents or multiple quality at tributes . Moreover, the relatively weak absorption due to w ater enables high-
moisture products to be analyzed 4. All these properties make the NIRS technique wide ly accepted as one of most promising on/in line 
detection methods in food, pharmaceuticals and other areas. By plugging the ‘integration gap’, whereby we shift the emphasis from NIR 
device to fully integrated NIR-based in-online proc ess monitoring solution tailored to the process, ou r ambition is to mainstream the 
uptake of NIR in process industries of all sizes (including SMEs, and one of our first beta clients is a meat producing SME, SALGOT), in 
order to enable the implementation of real-time pro cess monitoring and control for bringing the proces s industries into the Industry 4.0 
revolution and knowledge based process manufacturing.  
An underlying uniqueness in the VISUM platform for the European and global food and pharmaceutical ind ustries is that it is based on 
“solution” vs. “device/instrument”, which will resonate well with production and quality managers. This is a fundamental shift in business 
approach, whereby having a platform in place that i s readily adaptable and customisable to the process ing realities of each particular 
industry user scenario will break the mould in terms of monitoring systems, in that the current market offering requires the user to adapt 
their internal scenario to the constraints of the device. Some of the ‘out of the box’ solutions that are coming on the scene in recent years 
pose problems when the samples to be predicted are measured on a different instrument or under differi ng environmental factors from 
those used to build the prediction models, whereby the changes in spectral variations between the two conditions can make the model 
invalid for prediction in the new system 9, requiring a complete recalibration, which is time-consuming and costly. Oftentimes this service 
is not provided by the device provider, who special ises in the commercialisation of instruments as opp osed to solutions, providing an 
additional barrier for end-user industries. VISUM o vercomes one of the greatest challenges/risks preve nting the adoption of in-line 
monitoring systems in the industry, and in particul ar in the SME community- that of affordable integration . In doing so we open up a 
major opportunity to tap into a SME market that has currently been left unattended by the larger device manufacturers.  
EXPECTED MARKET APPLICATION THAT DIFFERENTIATES THE  PROJECT AND PROVIDES THE HIGHEST 
ADDED VALUE 
In relation to the key market applications, we are targeting the food and pharmaceutical process industries initially (and Table 4 
summarises the first applications that the VISUM wi ll be validated for), and our intention is to targe t other process industry (chemical 
processing, ceramics, minerals…) and agriculture ap plications in the post-project phase. To open up th ese applications, VISUM will 
remove the high doorstep that traditionally prevents the adoption of NIR technology:  
- high equipment costs  (which will be overcome by the implementation of very low-cost MEMS-NIR core sensor);  
- complex, time-consuming and costly re-calibrations  (overcome by the VISUM calibration transfer models);  
- challenges posed by differing and oftentimes hostile or tricky operating environments  (overcome by our tailor-made probe-
sample interface for optimal probe-sample interaction, to avoid mismatches that can lead to major errors) 
- fouling and device maintenance  (overcome by our novel antifouling polymer layer coating technology or online sampler unit with 
CIP features depending on the application) 
- integration (which requires specialised knowledge in spectroscopy and chemometrics for ensuring reliable operation in/on-line and 
overcome by our ‘integrated-by-design’ approach to the platform that will ensure integration can be performed by engineers that do 
not require a specialisation in spectroscopy)  
In order to open up the tremendous benefits of NIR- based in/on-line monitoring technology to mainstrea m applications in the food and 
pharmaceutical industry, and especially for the SME sector, VISUM is hinged on a number of key advancements:  
1.  The integration of the latest developments in affordabl e (e.g. Spectral Engines now offers a price point of just under €1k for 
orders of 10 sensors) , compact and reliable MEMSNIR sensors  with no macroscopic moving parts, signal/noise ratio better than 
                                                        
9 Robert N. Feudale, Nathaniel A. Woody, Huwei Tan, Anthony J. Myles, Steven D. Brown, Joan Ferre (2002). Transfer of multivariate calibration models: a review. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 
64 (2002) 181 – 192  
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
14 | P a g e  
 
5000:1 in the most significant spectral region, spe ctral range which covers SWIR (from 0.9 to 1.7 µm),  minimum size (a few 
centimetres) and low power consumption (<4 W).  
2.  The tools for easily achieving better multivariate calibration models will comprise the latest advances readily implement ed in a 
software suite that will maximize the model quality in a totally automated environment. Chemometrics will play a major role in giving 
accurate results, by acting as a "noise rejection" filter, where the "noise" here is the sum total of all the extraneous effects that act 
on the instrument, and through it, on the data. The  implementation of the newest chemometric algorithm s and tools in the VISUM 
software -like efficient variable selection by Recu rsive Weighted Partial Least Squares (rPLS), the Ti khonov Regularization for ill-
conditioned data as well as model transfer (standardization) by Stacked Partial Least Squares (SPLS) regression- will address more 
robust predictive capabilities without increasing t ime, efforts and related cost. It is widely known t hat providing the right training 
dataset is the most relevant cost source in IR spectroscopic-based monitoring. More powerful and efficient chemometric techniques 
would dramatically simplify the need of collecting a huge number of spectra and their related reference values by traditional methods. 
The end user will be capable  of automatically building excellent predictive models without requiring any expertise in Chemometrics. 
Particularly, the Platform will comprise: a) Automa ted routines for selecting the most suitable method  among the best ones (PCR, 
PLS, SVM, ANN, etc.) for each “training” dataset; b) Intuitive “wizards” for guiding the user along the modelling and standardization 
(model transfer) processes; c) Automated routines for outlier detection and rejection; d) User access to define the automation settings 
and criteria –other than the default ones 
3.  Anti-fouling solutions based on: a) a novel layer of Thin PTFE specific polymers (non-polar compounds) coated on the surface of 
the optical window; b) an online sampler concept fo r difficult aqueous samples. These solutions would represent a step change in 
overcoming the fouling and contamination of the optical window, resulting in dramatically lower (~<80%) maintenance requirements 
and replacements, as required with traditional optical windows.   
4.  Ready-to-install capabilities : The VISUM Platform is provided with the adaptations for the most frequent sampling cases –readily 
implemented in both hardware and software. This will result in a dramatically reduced cost (~up to 4-5  times cheaper than existing 
commercial systems) for a fully integrated solution, which could be performed by non-spectroscopy specialized engineers.  
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE/IMPACT ON DEFINED NEEDS  
Companies are under increasing pressure to ensure product quality and safety and increase efficiencies. There is a big market opportunity 
for affordable, robust and reliable real-time monit oring technology to assist EU and global food, phar ma and other manufacturers to 
respond. When VISUM is deployed in industry and in use, it will enable reliable real-time process control based on on/inline monitoring 
of the Critical Control Parameters (CCPs) and the Critical Quality Attributes (CQAs). The impacts for end-users against which a Return 
on Investment will be measured include (depending on the application): ■ability to control the process and reliably determine end-point 
(which will avoid extending processing time and red ucing or eliminating traditional QC laboratory anal ysis which stop and delay the 
production cycle); ■ reduced dependence on laboratory off-line and post-p roduction analysis that are time consuming and requ ire 
specialized staff; ■ standardized (or increased) product quality; ■ increased batch yields; ■ reduced process down-time (due to 
processing problems); ■ reduced incidences of process deviations and off-spec product (leading to reduced discard and minimized risk 
of supply of off-spec to the market); ■ greater assurance for regulatory bodies/market; ■ increased process understanding and the ability 
to implement Quality-by-Design to increased process efficiencies.  
As is discussed in Section 2 (and summarized in Table 7), the current commercial offering of leading NIR providers such as Foss, Thermo 
and others, centres on the sale of devices suited t o solving universal monitoring needs that respond t o a wide market and cannot be 
easily tailored to specific challenges faced by ind ividual processors, as they lack the necessary robu stness in relation to the calibration 
models. Moreover, their business models are centred as instrument providers, and not as tailored solutions providers- the vast majority 
of the instrument providers in the market do not offer integrated solutions, i.e. they do not perform integration work, nor do they develop 
or validate the chemometric models, as their core business the sale of instrumentation. This places an important and costly challenge on 
the end-user industry to get the device operating reliably in their line; posing a prohibitive barrier for many SMEs. Their integration services 
in a PAT context are aimed at large projects related to huge facilities or extreme added value production lines. Consequently, an important 
market segment –industrial SMEs needing affordable turnkey solutions- cannot access such technologies.  Furthermore, the biggest 
players have been slow to upgrade their technologie s and adapt their pricing structure to the new cont ext; most probably given that a 
‘business as usual’ scenario serving the higher end, more costly applications is very profitable. That said, they are beginning to take note, 
and FOSS, for example, has recently launched the Pr oFoss in-line NIR system for dairy applications. However, end-users need an off-
line FOSS device to calibrate the in-line system on sampling, which means that it is more than likely existing FOSS customers who will 
upgrade to the new in-line system.  
In conclusion, the main advantages of our VISUM® so lution with respect to competing solutions is that it provides ‘by-design’ a unique 
solution that combines a complete set of PAT functionalities in a “plug & play” probe with an affordable price. However, as every product 
is subject to a lifecycle including a growth phase followed by an eventual period of decline as the product approaches market saturation, 
in order to retain the competitiveness of VISUM in the market, we will plan continuous product extensions though innovation. For example, 
the flexible VISUM platform will be able to evolve in tune with the latest developments in terms of MEMS spectroscopy and advancements 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
15 | P a g e  
 
in chemometric knowledge to continually improve. Mo reover, our initial product is based on SWIR (1000- 1700 nm), which offers an 
optimum trade-off between price, maturity, penetrab ility and chemical sensitivity. We will also develo p a NIR (800-1000 nm) VISUM 
product, which will bring advantages for extended applications, whereby for example, due to the relatively weak absorption due to water, 
NIR enables high-moisture products to be analyzed 4 as well as E-SWIR (1000-2500 nm) for extending the applications to more complex 
matrixes. Moreover, by ensuring VISUM is cloud enabled, we have the ability to offer data services in relation to the mining and analysis 
of historically stored data- the adoption the Big D ata paradigm in the context of process data- and as  a central enabler for Quality-by-
Design, greater process understanding and more efficient processes.  
2. IMPACT
2.1 EXPECTED IMPACTS  
A) USERS / MARKET 
USER NEEDS THAT ARE BEING MET  
VISUM® is the world’s first IR technology integration platform  for enabling the cost-effective and ready customisation of robust and 
reliable in-process monitoring solutions in food an d pharmaceutical processing applications, among oth ers. It responds to an industry 
need for improved process and quality control that requires a move away from time consuming and costly  laboratory-based 
quality measurements and post-production quality control (QC) that do not provide processors with acce ss to information in 
real-time, thereby delaying action that can lead to product discard, with cost and environmental implications. 
VISUM is a timely and relevant product development,  as industry leaders and decision makers- in respon se to market, regulatory, 
sustainability and competitive pressures- are starting to take note of the importance of real-time monitoring technology as an enabler for: 
■process efficiencies; ■process flexibility; ■ product quality standardisation (the ability to arrive at consistent product quality that meets 
with market expectations every time); ■reduced dependency on time consuming and off-line analytical measurements; and ■ accurate 
determination of process end-point to avoid over-processing (which not only leads to higher production costs and increased energy use, 
but can also result in spoiled or down-valued end-p roduct or even incidences of e.g. lumber (solid mat erials in pipes and reactor)). All 
these benefits can have multibillion euro annual im pacts for industries. David Scott from DuPont Resea rch 10  sums it up well: “ As 
manufacturing processes become increasingly complex , industry must rely on advanced sensor technology and process control to 
improve efficiency and product quality. Processes now need a variety of on-line measurements ”. Given the need to achieve better control, 
measurement of process parameters in real time is s een as vital to process understanding, industry nee ds access to fast, reliable and 
accurate tools and methods for providing in-situ measurements 10 . 
Beyond the holistic needs, and in order to look deeper at the specific application-centred requirements of industry in relation to in/online 
analytical technology, during the Phase 1 SME Instr ument VISUM project, an analysis of the industry re quirements was carried out by 
means of a Kano Survey (which was reported in the T echnical Feasibility Report at the end of the Phase  1 and was used to define the 
system specifications) among the 4 beta clients/early adopters who cooperated with us in the Phase 1 (ACESUR, CALIDAD PASCUAL, 
SALGOT, ALMIRALL). These and the addition early ado pters that we are now engaging with cover a represe ntative variety of liquid, 
semi-liquid and solid foods and drugs, measurement parameters and integration scenarios (blender, in-pipe, etc.)- refer back to Table 5- 
and they are also presentative of large, medium and  small companies. Kano is part of the Quality Funct ion Deployment (QFD) 
methodology that we have used to collect and priori tise client expectations and needs without missing any important details. The main 
benefit of using this methodology is the direct cor relation from customer’s language to a “black and w hite” language for developers. A 
universal requirement- that was confirmed through t he Kano Surveys- is the need to have NIR probes tha t are suitably matched to the 
particular circumstances of each facility. However, we also identified numerous similarities that can be exploited in terms of adapting a 
generic solution, which is in line with the spirit of the VISUM, and that will enable us to design, fo r example, a universal sampling 
approach  (based on similar requirements or constraints in t erms of speeds and sampling geometry (diffuse refle ctance) and common 
challenges in relation to bubbles, foam, lumps, etc.), universal chemometrics (as the nature of the samples- powders, semi-solid and 
turbid liquids- is similar), data exchange through an Ethernet cable is compatible with each client  and, likewise, all of them require the 
same ingress protection (IP) grade, standard coupli ng formats can be used for the mechanical integrati on in the production lines 
(“Triclamp” is mainly used in pharma while NW or DIN is commonly found in the food sector), among others. All these conclusions confirm 
that there is a very real opportunity to standardize to a significant extent and consequently achieve the main goals of the VISUM platform. 
In relation to the user needs or requirements that will be met upon completion of the project, the 20 most significant requirements from 
the KANO Survey are provided in Table 6- each of wh ich will be fulfilled by the VISUM platform and hav e been contemplated in the 
system specifications.   
TABLE 6- REQUIREMENTS FOR FULFILLING CUSTOMER EXPEC TATIONS 
                                                        
10  Scott, D., M., 2008, Industrial process sensors. CRC Press 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
16 | P a g e  
 
No.  Requirement 
Type of customer 
factor Type of requirement Value 
Importance 
rating (0-5) 
1 Success in classification  Basic  Non -functional performance requirement  > 90 %  3 
2 Confidence interval in classification  Basic  Non -functional performance requirement  95%  5 
3 Spectral range  Basic  Non -functional performance requirement  900 -1700nm  3 
4 Measurement period will be minimized Linear Non-f unctional performance requirement <20 s for on -line 
sampler; 1 s for inline 4 
5 Weight lower than 3 kg (in -pipe attachment) and not 
relevant for fixing at architectural structures  Linear Non-functional system requirement Yes (<3kg)  3 
6 Minimum IP (ingress protection)  Linear  Non -fu nctional system requirement  IP65  3 
7 Food grade materials in the interface with produc ts Basic Non-functional performance requirement Yes  5 
8 Environment temperature  Basic  Non -functional system requirement  -5 to 60 ºC  5 
9 System withstands process pressure Basic Non-func tional system requirement 6 Bar 5 
10 System withstands process pH  Basic  Non -functional system requirement  2-12  5 
11 Sampling port for aliquots (reference samples for 
modelling, validation or calibration) Basic Non-functional system requirement Yes 4 
12  HMI via software installed in PC  Basic  Non -functional implementation requirement  Yes  4 
13 Control software will show instant measurements in 
graphs together with acceptance limits Basic Non-functional performance requirement Yes 3 
14  Sy stem will include data log  Basic  Non -functional performance requirement  5 Years  3 
15  Embedded –PC wired communication s (Ethernet)  Basic  Non -functional implementation requirement  Yes  4 
16 Models and prediction machine operate in the built -in 
computer (probe) Excitement Functional requirement Yes 2 
17  Software 21CFR part 11 compliance  Basic  Functional requirement  Yes  5 
18 Software designed to allow the user to include more  
models in the future  Basic Non-functional performance requirement Yes 4 
19 At least prepared to measure in diffuse reflectance  
geometry  Basic Non-functional implementation requirement Yes  3 
20  Wireless data link for blenders  Linear  Non -functional implementation requirement  Yes  4 
VISUM, by enabling the deployment of cost-effective and easy to install NIR-based in/on/at line monitoring solutions that through the new 
chemometric and calibration models offered by the system, will represent a step-change in terms of reduced set-up costs and complexity 
and will allow for true ‘out-of-the-box’ NIR soluti ons that can be installed by engineers with no need  for specialized spectroscopic 
knowledge. This will respond to the needs of small, mid-tier and large manufacturers alike. Closing the gap between need and solution 
should see significant uptake in on-line analysis 11 and it is in closing this gap that VISUM® will seize a very important market foothold.  
MAIN ECONOMIC BENEFITS FOR THE USERS AND UNIQUE SEL LING POINTS 
The main economic benefits for users, and which would drive them to invest in the VISUM® solution, are derived from: 
• VISUM will be compatible with the most standard production machines, devices and structures. SMEs will not need to change their 
existing equipment, devices or structures due to incompatibilities. 
• Cost reductions due to reduced time, labour and cost intensive laboratory-based testing and manual quality inspection (which will 
also lead to higher throughput) 
• High improvements in production performance; VISUM provides on-line information to the operators or au tomated machines to 
work continuously at the maximum efficiency 
• Cost and space reductions by being able to remove/reduce stocks; companies will reduce (and in some cases completely remove) 
the need for lab analysis of raw materials and will be able to introduce the raw material in the production chain as soon as VISUM® 
verifies the pre-defined quality parameters are met. 
• Savings through the effective elimination of end-of-line defects and faulty or contaminated products 
• Savings through automated final inspection processe s to increase production efficiency, preventing the  costs associated with 
common or repeat mistakes caused by human error  
• Economic returns through brand idealisation and increased market share by continually ensuring the high quality of the products 
and consequently protecting the brand.  
If we consider the quantification of these financia l savings through analytical headcount reduction, e limination of analysis time / 
instrumentation and reduced manufacturing cycle tim e, in the pharmaceutical industry as an example the se could be greater than 
€400,000 for a typical pharmaceutical manufacturing facility with circa 30 batches manufactured per annum. Moreover, VISUM could go 
a long way towards reducing rejections in the pharm aceutical industry, the impact of which is in the o rder of billions of euro, especially 
as waste or rejection rate of 10%, unacceptable in most other industries, is considered good in the ph armaceutical industry (according 
to Centre for Drug Evaluation and Research or CDER)12 . Batch rejects that result from process problems can be higher than 20% , the 
root cause being a lack of process understanding and control . Batch rejects can be a major issue as some APIs c an be worth as 
much as $1million / kg.  
                                                        
11  Robert N. Feudale, Nathaniel A. Woody, Huwei Tan, Anthony J. Myles, Steven D. Brown, Joan Ferre (2002). Transfer of multivariate calibration models: a review. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 
64 (2002) 181 – 192 
12  Contamination in the Pharmaceutical Industry. Risk News. Issue 18, February 2006 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
17 | P a g e  
 
The Unique Selling Points (USPs) of the VISUM platform vs. the current commercial offering , that will spur users (SME decision 
makers, and Quality Manager and Production Managers  from large corporations) to invest in a real-time monitoring solution are: 
■Affordability  (~ €10-35k for a standard unit, which is highly co st competitive for bringing the power of a lab-NIR into the production 
line); ■ Tailor-made solution (whereby ‘solution’ means completely customised to the clients requirements and verified as ‘fit for 
purpose’); ■Robust and reliable (the offering of a tailor-made ‘probe-sample’ interface to overcome the limitations of generic systems  
that do not adequately fit/match each particular product line or monitoring challenge leading to mismatches that are the source of major 
errors); ■ No biofouling (via a novel layer of Thin PTFE specific polymers ( non-polar compounds) coated on the surface of the optical 
window or an online sampler concept for difficult aqueous samples). 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MARKET 
Our VISUM IR-in/on-line monitoring solution is targ eted at the European and global food and pharmaceutical (initially), as well  as 
chemical and other process industries . These are high growth industries that are being i nfluenced by global drivers such as the 
population increase, raw material demands coupled with the commercial need to deliver year on year growth and efficiency savings, and 
the increasing realisation that while emerging econ omies strive for growth through low cost manufactur ing, western or established 
economies must compete through productivity and new  technology 13 . In addition to competing, global economies must b ecome more 
sustainable and less wasteful of natural resources in order to be sustainable 13 .  
Looking specifically at the Food and Drink industry , in the Europe alone, there are an estimated 310,0 00 companies generating an 
annual turnover in excess of €965 billion and provi ding employment to >4 million people. 14  Globally the industry is expanding rapidly to 
keep up with growing demand. Key to the competitiveness of the industry is the ability to maintain a high level of food safety and quality 
standards 15  in line with consumer, market and regulatory requi rements. In order to improve the performance of foo d manufacturing 
processes and the quality of food products, there i s growing industry interest in process sensors and in model-based monitoring and 
control methodologies 16 . This highlights the enormous market opportunity t hat is open for the adoption of the VISUM inline so lution, 
especially as it will deliver an affordable, easy to use and reliable system to this highly price sensitive market. Improvements in process 
efficiency, reduced product variability, enhanced t raceability, process understanding, and decreased r isk of contamination are some of 
the benefits that will arise from the introduction of the VISUM in food processing. During the industry case studies that will be performed 
in 3 food processing companies through our Phase 2 Project, Return-on-Investment cases will be made.  
Similarly, in the context of the pharmaceutical industry , which is one of the fastest growing industry sect ors in the world today 17 , EU 
and International 18  regulatory bodies are encouraging the drug lifecycle concept that links product and process development, qualification 
of the commercial manufacturing process, and mainte nance of the process in a state of control during r outine commercial production, 
whereby access to real-time on-line measurements is  fundamental. The “Process Analytical Technology” ( PAT) paradigm that is being 
promoted by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration in the US) and the EMA (European Medicines Authority) is based on improving final 
product quality by process design through knowledge of the fundamental scientific principles behind it, and continuous online control of 
a process. The worldwide market is very lucrative for pharmaceutic al producers and also for equipment suppliers, serv ice 
providers and consultants 19 . VISUM will play a major role as a PAT technology for pharmaceutical applications. The advent of generic 
drugs has changed the paradigm of high margins asso ciated to IP rights; therefore, drug manufacturers have to base their profits on 
savings such as the ones enabled by PAT. Moreover, the drive towards continuous manufacturing in the p harma sector (which lags 
behind other industries, with significant emphasis on batch processing) lends itself to increased adop tion of in-process monitoring and 
control systems, such as VISUM. The VISUM system co uld also have benefits for R&D in the pharma sector , whereby online analytics 
in pilot facilities could accelerate developments. Given that the cost of researching and developing a  new chemical or biological entity 
was estimated at € 1,172 million in 2012 20 , the drivers to invest in robust technology to reduce R&D costs are certainly there.  
Finally, if we look at the chemical industry (which  will be a post-project target market for the VISUM ), in Europe the industry has a 
production value of €527 billion, within a worldwid e total estimated by CEFIC as €3.1 trillion (2012).  These industries contribute to 
European economy through an export share of 43%. Since the Process Analytical market supports this market growth, VISUM will have 
a knock on effect. While European sales values have  doubled, its global market share has halved due to  competition from developing 
low cost economies, hence there is a specific EU ma rket need to become more competitive through techno logy. In conclusion, we are 
targeting lucrative and global markets through our initial (and post project) applications 21  and the drivers to invest in the VISUM open up 
an attractive business opportunity.  
                                                        
13  Richard, J. Tweedie. Process Analytical Instrument ation, the challenges for in-situ characterization of Complex Particulate Materials. Procedia Engineer ing 102 ( 2015 ) 1714 – 1725. The 7th World Congres s on 
Particle Technology (WCPT7) Process 
14  Nurturing the competitiveness of the European food  industry (07.10.10) Enterprise & Industry magazine  (http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/e_i/index_en.htm), © EU, 2008 - 2010 
15  Commission Decision No 2008/359/EC of 28 April 200 8. 
16  Process Analytical Technology for the Food Industr y (2014). Editors: O'Donnell, Colm P., Fagan, Colette, Cullen, P.J. (Eds.). Springer (2014) 
17  http://www.efpia.eu/uploads/Figures_2014_Final.pdf  
18  FDA, Guidance for Industry, Process Validation: Ge neral Principles and Practices 
19  Pharma Plant Engineering: Trend To Disposables in Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing. Pharma Times-Vol 4 1- No.11- Nov. 2009 
20  Mestre-ferrandiz et al, Office of Health Economics , December 2012 
21  http://www.companiesandmarkets.com/r.ashx?id=55F9K2 034700353   
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
18 | P a g e  
 
MAIN COMPETITORS AND THEIR COMPETITIVE SOLUTIONS 
In the field of ‘all-purpose’ NIR lab-analysers, there are numerous big players such as Thermo, Foss, ABB, Sartorius, Bruker, PerkinElmer 
and Buchi, each with years of experience and a larg e customer base. Very recently, a number of manufac turers are offering NIR 
spectrometers sold as “out of the box” solutions (T able 7), which are marketed as solutions whereby th e user only has to switch the 
equipment on, select an application, present the sample and press the run button and out comes the predictions.  However, these solutions 
have been designed for solving common monitoring ne eds for wide markets and cannot be painlessly adapt ed to new more specific 
challenges, as they lack the necessary robustness i n relation to the calibration models. Even in cases  offering more flexible and non-
specific configurations, the economical effort associated with the integration can be barriers for SMEs.  For example, FOSS has recently 
launched the ProFoss in-line NIR system for dairy a pplications. However, it requires an off-line FOSS device to calibrate the in-pipe 
device.  VISUM overcomes this through the automated/assisted , but high quality, model builder , which is a must in terms of providing 
affordable integration capabilities within non-specialised work.  
TABLE 7- VISUM PLATFORM- COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF MA IN COMPETITORS 
Manufactu 
rer  
Model  Target 
Applications  
Built -in 
computing  
Integrated 
chemometric  tools  
Built -in process 
control interface  
Wireless 
comm.  
Power 
autonomy  
Antifouling 
solution  
Price  
Büchi  NIR -Online  All  No  No  No  No  No  Blower  50 k € 
NDC  On -Line NIR  All  No  No  No  No  No  No  45 k € 
Bühler  Multi Online 
Analyzer 
MYRG  
Food -for Bühler 
machinery only  
No  No  Yes  No  No  No  40 -50 k € 
Foss  ProFoss  Pharma and 
food (dairy)  
No  Yes  Yes (OPC)  No  No  No  55 k € 
Thermo  Antaris 
Target  
Pharma 
(blendin g)  
Yes  No  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  45 k€ 
Sentronic  SentroPAT 
FO 
 
All  Yes  No  No  No  Yes  No  50 k€ 
Perten  
PerkinElmer  
In -line DA 
7300  
Food (grains, 
flours)  
Yes  No  No  No  No  No  45 k € 
Bruker  Matrix -F All  No  Yes  No  No  No  No  50 -80 k € 
Kemtrak  DCP007 -NIR  All  Yes  No  Yes  No  No No  30 -40 k € 
VISUM  Online  All  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  10 -35 k € 
From Table 7, we can see that VISUM is the most complete and flexible offering (the green cells highlight positive features) compared to 
competing solutions and aims to offer an excellent price-functionality/feature ratio: ■it is not close d in terms of applications; ■the 
instrument housing comprises the spectrometer and a  standalone computer for generating the ultimate ou tputs to the production-line 
control system; ■a complete, updated and easy-to-us e chemometric package is integrated into the built- in computer for allowing the 
users to develop their own models; ■ no prior background in chemometrics is needed as the user is guided step-by-step; ■ the computer 
can automatically generate actions –according to the predictions- in order to drive the process in a c losed-loop; ■ the system can two-
directionally communicate with external devices through a wireless channel; ■ the system is powered by  batteries whenever needed –
especially for standalone use on moving machinery; ■ the window is protected against fouling; ■ the system comprises a customizable 
online sampler if sample conditioning is needed (we  will aim to develop a “template” suitable for some  common cases to be defined in 
WP1. Such a template would be case-wise upgraded according to the client needs (in the commercialization stage). 
MOST RELEVANT MARKET SEGMENTS FOR INTRODUCTION OF T HE NEW SOLUTION 
The VISUM will be fully deployed in our ‘beta clien t’ group (METALQUIMIA, DAIRYGOLDPASCUAL, SALGOT, ALMIRALL) during the 
Phase 2. These companies will serve as powerful end orsers of the VISUM® in the meat, dairy, olive oil and pharmaceuticals industry. 
Thanks to our ability to leveraging these application case studies (and to have lighthouse clients in each of these food segments and in 
the pharma industry), in Phase 3 Commercialisation phase (from Jan 2019 onwards) we will commence the active targeting of additional 
food segments and pharmaceutical applications in Sp ain, Ireland, and other selected markets as discuss ed below, and progressively 
from 2020 onwards we will enter other EU and global markets.  
MARKET BARRIERS TO BE OVERCOME 
The main barriers preventing uptake of NIR in the industry for in-process monitoring are  complexity and cost of integration, and calibration 
and model maintenance. Evidence-based application notes (including ROI quantifications), whitepapers and publications from the project 
will be powerful documents for demonstrating how VI SUM® overcomes these technical barriers. From a reg ulatory context, the most 
significant market barriers to entry will be standards and validation requirements and in particular in pharma applications. In Phase 1 we 
analysed all regulatory requirements with our first  beta clients and as such we will ensure pre-valida tion according to regulations (e.g. 
CFR 21, Part 11…) as discussed in Section 2.2).  
TARGET USERS AND HOW THEY WILL BE REACHED 
The targeted users of the final VISUM solution are food, pharmaceutical (and chemical companies in the post-project phase), including 
from SMEs to large enterprises. This is a global an d growing market. Our first effort will focus on ac tively targeting the headquarters 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
19 | P a g e  
 
(HQs) of large-size companies in the Food, Pharma and Chemical industry , which have been defined as the early innovator group , 
due to a) their high production volume justifying an investment in an in-line monitoring solution; b) the probability of follow-on contracts is 
high for large-size companies: once first in-line m onitoring units are successfully tested, the probab ility is high that they ask for further 
units to roll-out inline monitoring in their international production plants. VISUM will establish direct contact with HQs as they are usually 
in charge of implementing new technologies and proc ess improvements. The HQ locations of the Top100 co mpanies in the food 22 , 
pharma 23 , and chemical 24  (3)  industry are presented in Table 8. The majority of  HQs for all three sectors are located in the EU (m ainly 
Germany, Switzerland, France, UK and Italy), North America (US and Canada) and Asia (mainly Japan and India, and China). 
TABLE 8- HQ LOCATIONS OF TOP100 FROM FOOD, PHARMA A ND CHEMICAL PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
Selling VISUM INLINE involves selling the hardware equipment, the device calibration (acquiring spectra of client samples, conducting 
laboratory referential analysis and elaboration of predictive models) and integration in the production line (engineering). Due to a relatively 
high service proportion, direct contact with important clients will be crucial.  For this purpose, IRIS has plans to open regional offices (and 
we already have offices in Dublin, Barcelona, New Y ork and San Francisco) to acquire high-priority cli ents, establish agreements with 
distributors, manage distributors and deliver the service part during and after the acquisition process. Distribution roll-out will take place 
in two phases as is described below under the heading ‘Strategy plan for commercialisation of the business innovation project’ . IRIS has 
an experienced Sales and Marketing Department and the experience to effectively reach the decision makers (Plant Managers, Quality 
Managers, Production Managers, R&D and Innovation D irectors) in the process industries is present. Tar geted communication 
campaigns to companies from VISUM existing client-b ase and networks (which include such large industri es as GSK, SANOFI, 
ALMIRALL, DSM, P&G, MEGARA RESINS, DAIRYGOLD, NESTLE, DAWN MEATS, among others) and new prospective customers will 
be designed (via electronic mailings, paper mailing s, personal/face-to-face communication…), and throu gh the channels of our 
distribution/sales agents (discussed below). Prospe ctive customers will be found using a combination o f technical presentations at 
conferences and exhibitions and our website with application note/examples, among others (listed in the Communication section below).  
B) COMPANY  
RELEVANCE, RATIONAL AND ALIGNMENT OF THE INNOVATION  BUSINESS PROJECT WITH OUR BUSINESS 
STRATEGY  
The VISUM innovation project is at the core of our strategy to becoming a world leading provider of ad vanced monitoring solutions for 
the food, pharma and other process industries. Sinc e its beginnings, VISUM has been active in the tran sitioning of spectroscopic lab 
analysers to on-line applications for real-time mon itoring within the framework of European R&D projec ts, and as part of B2B bespoke 
solutions for food and pharmaceutical companies in Spain and Ireland. Based on extensive engagement with industry over the years, we 
have identified a clear market opportunity for customised monitoring technology that shifts the emphasis from “device” to “fully 
integrated solution”  based on tailoring the device to the line and to the specific operating environment of the client. Central to the ability 
to mainstream customised and affordable monitoring solutions for industry, is a flexible and reliable technology platform based on state-
of-the-art low-cost MEMS spectroscopic probes, combined with built-in data management software and the latest in chemometric model 
advancements for facilitating rapid calibration of the VISUM hardware for easy set-up and customisatio n to the client monitoring needs 
and industrial environment. The VISUM solutions are a major opportunity for us to grow our company, which specialises in spectroscopy 
solutions. The project has the full backing of our Management Board and is considered as a strategic project for advancing our technology 
development roadmap, the implementation of which is intrinsic to ensuring the future growth of our com pany. The Board has approved 
further internal funds for VISUM ® for investing the necessary 30% co-funding required to supplement the SME Phase 2 Instrument and 
ensuring we have funds to cover the commercialisati on phase. A Business Model Canvas has been provided  in Annex 2 (which 
summarises our current business plan, which will be built on through Task 5.2).  
GROWTH POTENTIAL OF THE SOLUTION 
During the Phase 1, we dedicated considerable effor t to developing our business plan for the VISUM® pr oduct. During this period, we 
engaged in extensive field research, whereby we attended exhibitions and conferences (BTA Barcelona Food Technologies, Global Food 
Safety 2015, ACHEMA 2015, Anuga Food Congress, PharmaProcess, IFPAC), made individual company visits and conducted face-to- 
face meetings with future clients. We also attended the Photonics West Exhibition in San Francisco earlier in the year in order to review 
                                                        
22  http://www.foodengineeringmag.com/global-top-100-food-&-beverage-companies 
23  https://www.google.com/fusiontables/DataSource?docid=1uEZuNGJlP68Imym7zAVT-XHXwhHdvs2lT5L6iNs#rows:id=1   
24  ICIS Chemical Business 
Area % Area Main countries % Area Main countries % Area M ain countries % Area Main countries 
EU 31% FR(7), DE(5), UK(5) 36% DE(6),CH(6), FR(4), IE(4 ), IT(4) 30% DE(11),CH(7) 32% DE(7),CH(5), FR(5), UK(3) , IT(3) 
North America 41% US(37), CA(4) 23% US(22) 32% US(29) 32% U S(29), CA(3) 
Asia 21% JP(16), China(3) 38% JP(26), India(7) 34% JP(15) , SKorea(5) 31% JP(19), India(3) 
South/CentralAmerica 6% BR(3), MX(3) 1% 3% 3% 
Other 1% 2% 1% 2% 
TOTAL 100% 100% 100% 100% 
FOOD + PHARMA + CHEMICAL FOOD PHARMA CHEMICAL 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
20 | P a g e  
 
current spectroscopy technology and others, such as fluorescence. We also brought a world renowned NIR expert, Dr. Emil Ciurczak 25  
(widely known as the ‘NIR Prof’ and internationally recognized) over to us from New York in June 2015 in order to spend 3 days mentoring 
senior management in relation to market strategy an d the business aspects of NIR-based solutions comme rcialisation, whereby he 
advised us on such aspects as pricing, and gave expert insights into the status of Process Analytical Technology adoption in the industry, 
as well as current regulatory frameworks. He also p rovided training courses to our engineering staff i n aspects such as engineering 
challenges, sampling, integration, etc. All these e xperiences and the feedback that we have had from i ndustry have strengthened our 
belief in the VISUM offering and the associated business opportunity.  
Since 2011 we have commenced our strong specialization in spectroscopy-based advanced monitoring solutions by developing ad hoc 
solutions for clients in the food and now more rece ntly the pharmaceutical industry. The VISUM platfor m concept is born out of our 
industry experience and an understanding of the cha llenges and opportunities in relation to a revoluti on in real-time monitoring and 
advanced control that is undoubtedly going to take place as Industry 4.0 concepts take a real foothold  in the process industries- which 
primarily include food & beverages, pharmaceuticals , chemicals, oil & gas, among others. Increasing ma rket demand for high quality, 
consistent or uniform end products in process industries, as well as for value added and customized products (which involve increasingly 
complex processes and also require increasing flexi bility in manufacturing procedures), as well as ind ustry need to reduce downtime, 
and to ensure safety and security for plant operators, are all fuelling the growth of the Sensing, Monitoring and Control market. The Global 
Sensing, Monitoring and Control market was estimated to be worth €377 BN in 2015, with the European market being worth €122 BN 26 . 
With a projected growth of 7% per year in the Monit oring and Control segment and 6% in the Sensing seg ment, projections to 2020 
estimate the Global Market to reach €524 BN by 2020, with Europe reaching €171 BN. These volumes are highly achievable, in view of 
a huge and growing market opportunity for robust, r eliable, affordable, and readily integratable IR sp ectroscopy based chemical 
monitoring solutions.  
We have defined our sales target for the first 5-year commercialisation period (i.e. from 2019 to 2023). Over that period, we aim to install 
~1000 units in processing lines/facilities in food, pharma and other process industries in Europe and globally (Table 8). Based on market 
analysis work we performed during the Phase 1 proje ct, we can confirm that this is an achievable and r ealistic target, considering the 
strong industry demand for real-time monitoring and QC systems (and also considering that some of the larger clients will acquire multiple 
units for multiple lines, processes and sites. It is expected that the global market will offer high growth potential for the medium to long-
term as our international distribution networks kick in (with high growth markets in the longer term being Asia where increasing processing 
activity and rising standards will drive market demand for affordable solutions), whereby we expect a situation beyond 2023 that will see 
2:1 international vs. European sales. The maintenance contracts and chemometric upgrades (known as ‘models maintenance’) will also 
be an area for sustained growth, as will revenue se cured through offering data analytics services (to mine the historical data stored on 
the cloud).  
By 2023, we expect to have generated a cumulative t otal (Table 9) of €29.25M from unit sales and €13.3 5 M in service contracts (data 
services, model development, maintenance contracts,  etc.). These figures have been calculated based on  an average sale value of 
standard installed VISUM solution being €22.5k. Rev enue will also be generated from Lifetime Maintenan ce Contract costs per unit 
(based on typical averages for industrial analytical instrumentation), and income from data services (data analytics contracts and model 
building), which will be a high growth area for the future. Based on a present day turnover of € 4.8 M in IRIS, VISUM® will allow IRIS to 
increase its turnover >4-fold by 2023 and grow its workforce by an additional ~39 staff. An average 35 % gross margin will yield gross 
profits for period of almost €13.7 M, which will provide revenue for further investment in technological improvements and new applications 
for further growth in relation to widening the rang e of specifications for accessing to a larger varie ty of applications. In this sense, it is 
envisaged that the VISUM specs could be extended in terms of higher and lower environment temperature limits (e.g. from -20 to 90 C), 
sampling rate (faster, e.g. <1 mS acquisition time) , and simultaneously keeping or improving S/N- to b e used in intensified processors, 
which require faster PAT tools, wider wavelength ra nge (from SWIR (0.0-1.7 um) to E-SWIR (0.9-2.5 um)) , ability to acquire more 
chemical information and consequently extending the applicability to more “difficult” samples and, finally, more sophisticated chemometric 
tools, by including the latest mathematical achievements derived from the development of machine learning (artificial intelligence) state-
of-the-art, with algorithms such as SVM (support vector machine) and SGD (Stochastic Gradient Descent). 
TABLE 9- VISUM UNITS DEPLOYED IN EU AND GLOBALLY & REVENUE GENERATION 2019-2023  
  
                                                        
25  Emil Ciurczak since works with IRIS as an in-house consultant and his CV is included in Section 4.1 
26  Jorge Perieia (2007). Monitoring and Control. Toda y’s market and its evolution till 2020. Final Report of the Study SMART 2007/047. European Commission Information Society and Media.  
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Total 
New 
Jobs Margen 
Number of units sold in Europe 20 60 130 230 360 800 
Number of units sold in US 5 25 70 140 260 500 Installed system (based on average for fully standa rd installation 
@€22.5 k) € 562,500 € 1,912,500 € 4,500,000 € 8,325,000 € 13,95 0,000 € 29,250,000 27 €9,371,250 
Service contracts: data servcies, additional models , software upgrades, 
maintenance contracts € 168,750 € 669,375 € 1,800,000 € 3,746,250 € 6,975,000 € 13,359,375 12 €4,382,438 
Total € 731,250 € 2,581,875 € 6,300,000 € 12,071,250 € 2 0,925,000 € 42,609,375 39 €13,753,688 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
21 | P a g e  
 
HOW THE COACHING SERVICES OF THE SME INSTRUMENT WIL L BE USED 
During the Phase 1 project, experts at Enterprise I reland (EI) performed an Innovation Diagnostic on o ur company that yielded above 
average results (which was to be expected based on the vast innovation management planning and continuous improvement approach 
of our company in the preparation for securing- and  now for maintaining - ISO 9001:2008 and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management 
Systems R&D&I certification ). The VISUM Management team in conjunction with the E I experts, consider that coaching services 
focussed on commercialisation activities would be very valuable. This coaching would focus on defining the ‘Compelling Value Proposition’ 
and the Promotion, Placing and Pricing aspects. Thi s information would help design and drive a focusse d marketing campaign for 
VISUM®. 
FUNDING REQUIREMENTS FOR REACHING COMMERCIALISATION  STAGE 
There are 3 key stages to 
the commercialization: 1) 
Start selling  (we will 
leverage the Phase 2 
project to gear up to this so 
that first sales can 
commence in the 
immediate post-project 
phase); 2) Expand the 
sales effort and 
applications support and 
rapidly increase 
distribution network ; 3) 
Going global - creating a network of centres and support. Table 10 provides an overview of the costs in the 1
st  year post-project . The 
financial mix will be own funding and mainly revenu e from first sales, whereby based on targeted sales  of 25 units (i.e. 2019), we will 
generate a sales revenue of an estimated €731k. How ever, if first year sales to do match targets, our financial mix will be own funds 
combined with other external funds (bank loan, regional funds (e.g. ESIF smart specialisation funding) or an investment round if needed).
2.2 MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT 
A) DISSEMINATION AND EXPLOITATION OF RESULTS  
KEY STAKEHOLDER INVOLVEMENT FOR SUCCESSFUL EXPLOITA TION  
The following stakeholders have been identified for  their possibility to add value and to facilitate t he commercial exploitation of the 
VISUM® platform: ■ Additional beta clients from different food segments, pharmaceutical proces sing (and chemical industries) who 
will enable us to create additional application stu dies and Business User Cases;  ■ Reputable and effective distributors and sales 
agents for building our European and global commercial net work, along with OEMs  (e.g. Metalquimia) that could be interested in 
integrating VISUM into their equipment to create a ‘smart’ or ‘intelligent’ equipment offering; ■ Industry Associations and Clusters who 
can provide a very powerful pathway to their member s. They also enable active engagement with policy m akers and in helping the 
industry and policy-makers to work together towards common goals in relation to process efficiency, quality, safety, sustainability, etc. ■ 
MEMS-NIR sensor providers , whereby VISUM® provides them with an integration partner to mainstream the adoption of their sensors 
in in-process industry applications. ■Equipment certification consultants to facilitate all the steps involved in obtaining c ertifications; 
■ Renowned academics and industry influencers  who can independently test the VISUM platform and publish/disseminate the results.  
FURTHER STEPS NEEDED BEFORE THE RESULTS ARE MARKET READY  
Our approach to the planning the steps to being market ready has centred on the well-established 4 Ps Marketing Mix- Product, Price, 
Promotion, Place  (Table 11), which we have used as a framework to m ap out the necessary actions and measures to ensure  we are 
well prepared to successfully reach the market with our VISUM product (based on past experience we know this is a robust and complete 
approach to planning a pathway from product to market). Through WP5-Gear up to market , we will implement, build on and further detail 
plan of activities.  
TABLE 11- 4 PS MARKETING MIX APPLIED TO THE VISUM P HASE 2 AND THE POST-PROJECT PHASE 
4 Ps Marketing Mix  Related Project activities  Related Post -project activities  
Product  (product 
functionality and 
features, services, 
brand, etc.)  
■ Structure the value proposition of our  new product (to validate and 
improve our value propositions we have formulated).  
■ Draw up the product datasheets that will outline the key information 
■ Plan and implement a Roadmap of 
product/service improvements and additional 
features for effective product lifecycle 
management  
TABLE 10 - FUNDING RE QUIREMENTS FOR REACH ING COMMERCALISTAION  PHASE  
Setting up the manufacturing and warehousing facili ty (conditioning work in IRIS facilities) €35,000 
35 units will be built in the post-project year to serve first orders and build up a stock inventory ( average manufacturing cost is 6k/unit) €210,000 
Additional costs associated with securing certifica tions, validations, etc. (ISO, ATEX, CE mark) €15,000 
Building the extended sales and distribution channe ls €22,000 
Product marketing/promotion (including product laun ch and exhibitions) €80,000 
Investment in the first sales effort (travel client  visits, sales support costs, e.g. lab tests, etc.) €30,000 
Staff costs (full and part-time production team, ap plication team, sales team, management team) €500,00 0 
Overhead costs (contribution to rent, admin, utilit ies, etc.). €100,000 
Shipping, packaging, insurance costs for deliveries  to serve orders €6,250 
Expected installation costs associated with first y ear units sold (approx.25 units envisaged in 2019) € 58,500 
After sales support on units installed €29,250 
Total costs in first year of commercialisation €1,08 6,000 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
22 | P a g e  
 
■ Create product brochures outlining applications (th e applications that 
have been validated in this project and additional applications), 
highlighting the benefits, etc.  
■ Define the services that support the product (main tenance service, 
customisation services, upgrades to the software an d models, data 
services and consultancy based on sensor use and data understanding). 
 
■ Brand building activities to strengthen brand identify.  
■ Implement new applications development plan 
(additional foods and beverages, additional 
pharmaceutical applications, chemical industry, 
bioprocessing, etc.) 
Price (price lists, 
discounts, margin, 
credit terms, etc.)  
■
 Finalise and validate 2019 price list based on our manufacturing and 
logistics costs, required margin to have a profitable business, necessary 
margin for distributors/sales agents, and desired pricing positioning vis-
à-vis market tolerance and competitors (we have ini tially estimated the 
expected price for an average installed unit at €10 -35k- based on our 
existing technology and market experience).  
■ Define our pricing policy in relation to discounts, credit terms, etc.  
■ Review and maintain pricing .  
Promotion 
(Communication, 
Advertising, Sales 
Promotion, etc.)   
■Exhibition at 4 tra deshows ( e.g. Alimentaria, FoodTech , ANUGA , 
ACHEMA, EXPOQUIMIA, etc.) 
■ Presentations at 2 exhibitions/conferences (e.g. Global Food Safety 
Conference, Annual European Food Manufacturing & Sa fety Summit, 
Pharma Process, APACT, EuPAT…);  
■Publishing at least 4-6 articles in industrial/sec toral channels 
(technical/sectoral magazines, etc.) and in peer reviewed journals (2-3). 
■Publishing at least 2 whitepapers and at least 4 a pplication notes on 
the product page of our website, etc.;  
■ Write 4 own blogs that will be published on our website and promoted 
via our social media accounts and write at least 2 feature blogs as guest 
bloggers on relevant on-line sources  
■ Design and implementation of a social media campa ign (whereby we 
will for example publish regular tweets- at least 1 per week, whereby we 
are disseminating our own content or related content of third parties- e.g. 
content in relation to product quality and safety, Industry 4.0, PAT, etc.). 
■ Preparation of at least 3 press releases over the course of the project 
(one at project launch and 2 more to coincide with key milestones).  
■ Creation of promotional materials (webpage, leaflet, posters, banners, 
QR code, video and virals, etc.)  
■ Organise o fficial product launch (along with a 
press conference) 
■ Roadshow of exhibitions and tradeshow 
■ Presentations at conferences 
■Publishing regular articles in industrial/sectoral 
channels and in peer reviewed Journals 
■Publishing regular whitepapers and additional 
application notes on website, etc.;  
■Advertising via digital ad campaigns  
■Sponsorship of selected industry focussed 
conferences/events;  
■ Active PR campaigns (e.g. whereby we will 
aim to reach out to industry influencers who 
could be a powerful source of reviews) 
■ Regular publishing of feature blogs as guest 
bloggers in on-line sources;  
■ Sales promotion: e.g. we will use this tool for 
our launch campaign- discount for companies 
that place orders during the launch period, sales 
promotions linked to exhibitions, etc.    
Place (Distribution 
Channels, 
Coverage, 
Inventory, Logistics, 
etc.) 
■
 Establish manufacturing and associated logistics (Task 4.4) -the first 5 
product units will be produced and quality assured. 
■ Establish and train internal Sales Team (Our sales  staff will play a 
major role in promotion (see above) of the product,  and in the Phase 2 
they will be trained fully on the VISUM. 
■ Establish Application Team (who will support the Sales Team)  
■ Set up First Tier Distribution network (identification and negotiation) 
■ Establish agreements with shipping companies for transportation and 
insurance companies  
■ Build product stocks  
■ Set up warehousing inventory 
■ Set up second tier distribution network 
STRATEGY PLAN FOR COMMERCIALISATION OF THE BUSINESS  INNOVATION PROJECT  
Our commercial strategy  is to commercialise the VISUM system through own commercialisation . Marketing process sensors is a 
specialist business. In-situ process sensors typica lly have an extended sales pipeline, with considera ble upfront customer interaction, 
evaluation and testing, and due to the nature of the process manufacturing industries, process analytical systems require some level of 
customisation, and they also need to be integrated (and especially as we are offering a turnkey solution) and ongoing support has to be 
ensured. Even while the VISUM platform will facilitate the integration work (and this is one of its Ke y Value Propositions), some degree 
of installation and ongoing support has to be ensured. As such, there are two key aspects of the business plan: a) the creation a specialist 
Application Team  (to support Sales) and, b) the upfront development  of a Network of Distributors and Agents  to open up sales in 
European and international markets.  
Under the leadership of the CEO, the core Sales Team in  VISUM will be nominated and trained. In parallel, the Application Team  will 
be created and will be composed of dedicated engine ers who will provide support to the sales team by t esting materials (e.g. samples 
from prospective clients and for building new appli cation notes), performing detailed site visits, whe re required, providing advice and 
support during system installation, providing training, and handling both site and remote customer support. In relation to our own current 
and planned geographical presence (figure 3), VISUM  currently has production and commercial facilities  in Ireland (which allows us to 
serve UK as well) and Spain (which enables us to se rve Portugal and Italy), and as part of our further  internationalisation strategy we 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
23 | P a g e  
 
have recently opened 
technical/sales offices in US 
East Coast (New York City) and 
West Coast (San Francisco). 
Our plans for 2016/2017 are to 
open offices in Germany (that 
will also serve Switzerland and 
Austria), France (which will 
serve Benelux), Japan (for our 
Asian presence) and Mexico. In 
relation to establishing a 
network of distributors and 
agents to help us build sales, 
and to provide a 
local/regional point of 
contact for customers and 
follow up on the sales 
process , we will focus first of all 
on securing distributorships 
(and agent agreements) in the regions where we have  identified as Priority 1 by end of 2018 (1 
st  Phase), i.e.: Europe, US, Japan and 
Mexico. This work will involve identifying and negotiating agreements (e.g. exclusivity or not, margins, etc.). By 2020, we will expand to 
include Distributors in other key markets. Our dist ributors and agents will initially be supported by our own internal Sales Team and 
Applications team. However, the longer-term plan is to see these relationships being long term partnerships and ultimately growing these 
into regional centres of expertise able to deliver complete solutions. Hence over time these regional centres will develop local application 
teams and the local sales support will be complimen ted by the establishment of regional integration agreements with engineering 
companies  to directly support our commercial and technical centres. Agreements will also be established with global OEMs for delivering 
built-in VISUM systems in their equipment (e.g. METALQUIMIA, GLATT, GEA among others).  
Time to first sales is Jan 2019, whereby we will commence the sale of first units to our beta clients in the immediate post-project phase 
and we will build out our sales effort from there. The end-user involvement in the Phase 1 and Phase 2 of this Innovation Project, through 
our ‘beta clients’ or early adopters from the food and pharmaceutical industry will provide a quick ro ute to first sales if industry trials at 
each site are successful. 
B) INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, KNOWLEDGE PROTECTION AND REGULATORY ISSUES  
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY RIGHTS ASSETS  
VISUM owns the VISUM® brand and all the know-how behind the development to date. VISUM will own all the knowledge items that 
will be generated through this SME Instrument . We have agreed to grant our early adopters (METALQUIMIA, SALGOT, DAIRYGOLD, 
SALGOT) with preferential use of the results (free industrialisation of the first VISUM system installed in their plants in exchange for them 
acting as validators of the system). In relation to our freedom to operate, we have performed periodic patent reviews in parallel with our 
developments to date, which have all concluded that no existing patent directly competes with the envisaged VISUM® system as a whole.  
MEASURES FOR ENSURING COMMERCIAL EXPLOITATION  
As a measure for ensuring commercial exploitation of the project results, a systematic Technology Watch task will be implemented over 
the course of the work plan (through T5.1) to ensure we keep up to date of relevant competing developments. In addition, every 6 months 
a patent review will be performed to reconfirm our ‘freedom to operate’ and to ensure we are not infringing on the IPR of a third party. A 
SWOT analysis will be prepared at M6 of the project by the VISUM Management Board and it will be reviewed and updated each quarter 
in relation to the VISUM ® solution strengths and w eaknesses and in the context of the market opportun ity and any threats to realising 
commercial exploitation. A major effort we have made in order to pave the way forward for commercial exploitation has been lining up a 
powerful group of “early adopters”, through our 4 first beta client companies of different sizes, representing different segments of the food 
industry (dairy, olive oil and meat) and the pharmaceutical industry. These will allow us to gain serious endorsement value from the Phase 
2 project and to document impactful case studies/business cases in the use of VISUM ® for in-process monitoring applications.   
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION STRATEGY  
A patent search has been performed to confirm our freedom to operate. The last patent search was performed on March 21 st  2016 using 
the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) PATENTSCOPE database (https://patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/search.jsf) using 
the key words: ALLTEXT: NIR + measuring; ALTEXT: pr ocess analytical technology; ALLTXT: online probe s pectroscopy. The results 
revealed that no patent exists that would affect th e VISUM development. In fact, many of them are asso ciated to specific processors 
FIGURE 3 - TIMELINE FOR IMPLEM ENTATION OF COMMERCI AL STRATEGY  

SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
24 | P a g e  
 
such as drum coaters, sorters as well as specific b odies -such as tablets- or substances -such as flou r or crude oil- while VISUM is 
intended for generic applications no matter the spe cific nature of the processor or the product to be monitored. Likewise, a relevant 
number of patents are associated to Raman spectroscopy while VISUM is designed on the basis of IR spectroscopy. In this set of patents, 
the following are particularly relevant: FOSS ELECT RIC A/S: EP0935749: A METHOD AND FLOW SYSTEM FOR SP ECTROMETRY 
AND A CUVETTE FOR THE FLOW SYSTEM, which is particu larly focused in milk and dairy products; BUEHLER A G and PERTEN 
PETER: EP0539537: PROCESS AND DEVICE FOR THE IN-LIN E NIR MEASUREMENT OF POURABLE FOODSTUFFS, which is 
focused in grains. However, there are some patents that are too generic because many of their claims w ere not novel enough at the 
application date. A further in-depth analysis of po ssible conflicts should be undertaken. As examples of such kinds of patents: 
WO1999058959: NEAR INFRARED SPECTROMETRY FOR REAL T IME ANALYSIS OF SUBSTANCES; WO2000020834: MULTI-
COMPONENT PROCESS ANALYSIS AND CONTROL. Basically, we can conclude that there are no evident IP conflicts between VISUM 
and existing (patented) similar systems because, on the one hand, the most of the related patents are constrained to specific applications 
and, on the other hand, IR spectroscopy has been used during the last 50 years for process monitoring; there is no room for novelties in 
terms of IP blocking.  
In relation to the novelty of our VISUM development, in line with the design and development work that will be performed in the Stage 2 
we will analyse all outputs for their novelty and f or their protectability through Patents, Trademark,  Industrial design, Copyright, Trade-
secret, or Confidentiality, as appropriate (i.e. th e form which offers the most adequate and effective  protection for each type of result). 
We envisage that we will gain IPRs through a number of aspects of the development (all of which will be confirmed and pursued as the 
developments unfold): ■ The designs for the self-calibration feature, whereby the specific combination of optomechanical solutions with 
ad hoc procedures could be protected as key knowhow; ■ The designs for a universal sampling unit will imply developing novel setups 
aimed at facilitating plug & play features which are not currently available; ■ The optical setup will be specifically designed for optimizing 
signal/noise ratio and reducing the drawbacks assoc iated to scattering due to the sample nature; such a novel design will be also 
protected in some way (knowhow or patent); ■The self-calibrating models, which will be protected by copyright in Europe and could be 
patent protectable in the US will necessarily involve radically new approaches in terms of artificial intelligence (deep learning) tools that 
have not previously used in traditional chemometrics. As addressing the ideation of such solutions will be tackled according to the TRIZ 
methodology, it is envisaged that some of the outpu ts could be novel and specific enough for being pat ented. In fact, one of the 
advantages of using such a methodology is its productivity in terms of novelties. During the Phase 1, we submitted a trademark application 
for protecting the VISUM brand name and its logo. D uring the Phase 2, we will study deeper the registr ation of the MINI-PAT concept, 
which is consists in having a complete set of basic PAT (Process Analytical Technology) tools integrated into the one instrument whereby 
the probe is designed for plug and play use. The MINI-PAT concept has the potential to be the Holy Grail of the PAT movement in industry. 
It is our intention to also register the “Get in line” commercial tag line.  
REGULATORY AND/OR STANDARD REQUIREMENTS TO BE FULFI LLED  
All EC and national regulations that could influence on the commercialisation of the project outputs will be studied and their influence on 
the development or the future use of VISUM platform  will be taken into account. The requirements in re lation to adherence to: ASTM 
E1655-97; ASTM E1866-97; ASTM E1790-04; IUPAC Guide lines for Calibration in Analytical Chemistry; 
EMEA/CHMP/CVMP/QWP/17760/2009 Rev2; 11 CFR Part 35; 21 CFR Part 11, EC Machinery Directive and food-processing equipment 
(EU 98/37/EC Directive), etc.) and standards (e.g. EN45011 or ISO65 quality standards and all manufacturing standards set by ISO and 
to the GMP regulations, as well as to compliance wi th the CE Mark, will be given particular attention during the design stages of the 
system. ATEX certification requirements will also be fulfilled. Through Task 1.2, the regulatory and standard requirements will be studied 
with the end-users to ensure that all necessary actions that need to be performed during the development work in Phase 2 are carefully 
planned. During Task 4.1, certification applications will be made and the appropriate steps will be in itiated towards obtaining approvals 
by the standards bodies and to ensure compliance with guidelines, standards and regulations so that VISUM® can be sold and used in 
food and pharmaceutical processing in Europe and internationally.  
MEASURES TO PROVIDE OPEN ACCESS TO PEER-REVIEWED SC IENTIFIC PUBLICATIONS 
It is our intention to publish aspects of the proje ct results in peer-reviewed scientific publications, and these will be made available free 
of charge through Green Open access publishing. Our  intention is to have publishable results from the validation of the chemometric 
models from T1.4, among other publication opportunities.  
C) COMMUNICATION  
In line with the Promotion part of our 4Ps Marketing Mix described in Table 11, the communication activities that will be performed over 
the course of the project will have the principal o bjective of communicating the benefits and value of our VISUM p roduct to our 
future clients . As such, a big emphasis will be on communication activities to increase awareness about the product and its benefits to 
our target segments. We know from past experience t hat the strongest promotional tool is successful applications . Early testing 
provides material for early promotion. Building our  product development around ‘beta clients’ gives th e product the evidence to prove 
SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
25 | P a g e  
 
capability and the push to have strong growth from day one. This will provide us with engaging and pow erful content for our 
communication campaign towards our future clients.  
We intend to build the brand identity and promote the product actively through standard means such as the project web, leaflet, poster, 
etc., as well as through more vanguard and dynamic tools such as blogs, social media (LinkedIn and twi tter), Infographics, etc. We will 
also produce white papers as an impactful communica tion tool. Digital marketing will also be employed for reaching users. In Internet 
marketing, storytelling is a potent method of converting sales prospects to customers. As such, we will use the ‘business stories’ technique, 
whereby we will document case studies from our early adopters (no sensitive processing information will be disclosed and only relevant 
non-confidential information will be used) to communicate the business benefits of investing in the VISUM system in an impactful, creative 
and engaging way in order to effectively connect wi th industry decision makers. We will showcase and e xhibit results at 4 
exhibitions/tradeshows over the course of the proje ct ( e.g. Alimentaria (Barcelona), FoodTech- formerly BTA - (Barcelona), ANUGA 
(Cologne), ACHEMA, EXPOQUIMIA, ANALYTICA etc.)  and in at least 4 conferences (e.g. Global Food Safety Conference, Annual European 
Food Manufacturing & Safety Summit, Pharma Process (Barcelona), APACT, EuPAT, etc. ). We will also publish 4-6 articles in 
industrial/sectoral channels (technical/sectoral ma gazines, etc.). Publications of non-confidential an d protect results in peer reviewed 
journals (e.g. J. of Spectroscopy, J. of Food Processing, J. of Process Control, J. of Process Analytical Chemistry, etc.) are considered 
as very powerful marketing tools to the industries,  such as pharma, food, chemical and other process i ndustries, as well as to policy 
makers and standards bodies, and will aim for at least 2-3 papers resulting from the project. We will mobilise our membership in networks 
and cluster memberships to promote the VISUM soluti on and to participate in events/workshop, etc. that  would enable us to present 
VISUM and disseminate the successful case studies: SPIE (International Society for Optics and Photonic s), A. SPIRE (Sustainable 
Process Industries), SECPHO (Southern European Photonics Cluster), among others. In short, our communication activities will ensure 
we maximise the future dissemination and exploitation of the project results.  
Finally, as we are benefitting from tax-payers contributions, and given the high societal relevance of KETs that help to ensure food/pharma 
quality and safety, there is scope through social media to make the general public aware of the VISUM development and the associated 
societal benefits, e.g. contribution to improved industrial competitiveness, job creation, prosperous regions, access to high quality, safe 
and affordable products, the ability to enjoy healthy environments; these are all benefits that contribute to our quality of life as EU citizens.  
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 WORK PLAN – WORK PACKAGES, DELIVERABLES AND MIL ESTONES  
OVERALL STRUCTURE OF THE WORK PLAN 
We envisage a 24-month work plan and 6 
work packages as follows (The Gantt Chart 
(below) and the Pert (Figure 4) show the 
timings and interdependencies between the 
different WPs and tasks): WP1 will 
commence by preparing samples from each 
of the end-users so the feasibility prototype 
system available in VISUM we will undertake 
an initial demonstration of the system on 
these applications to provide test data for the 
model development. An integration strategy 
for each installation will also be defined. 
Based on the system specifications that were 
defined in a co-creation approach with these 
end-users (and output from the Phase 1 
project), designs of the VISUM® system 
hardware and software layers can 
commence (WP2) , and the hardware 
prototypes units will be manufactured. The 
integrated VISUM hardware and software will 
be integrated and pre-validation tests will be 
performed, prior to integration in the industry. The VISUM prototypes will then be installed and beta tested  on the selected applications 
at the end user sites by the end users and supported by the development team to validate the design  (WP3) . Having validated the design, 
we will translate the prototype to a product (WP4)  through the creation of the manufacturing documentation package using the engineering 
information and specifications. This will be passed  to purchasing and production engineering to enable  manufacture. Deployment of 
these first products will be in our participating e nd-users and to additional selected Beta customers to enable early refinement and 
FIGURE 4 - PERT DIAGR AM OF WORK PLAN  

SMEINST-07-2016-2017                     
26 | P a g e  
 
troubleshooting support by the Application Team. In  parallel with the product development work, we wil l further develop our business 
development plan (WP5) . As part of this activity the 4 Ps marketing plan will be implemented and we will build our internal Sales Team, 
Application Team, along with the first tier of our international distribution network for reaching key markets. Finally, a project management 
framework will be implemented through WP6  and the 1-page Gantt is an effective tool for high -level project control and a helicopter 
overview for effective project management. 
TIMING OF THE DIFFERENT WORK PACKAGES AND THEIR COM PONENTS   
 
GRAPHICAL PRESENTATION OF THE COMPONENTS SHOWING HO W THEY INTER-RELATE 
See Pert Diagram (Figure 4) in the work plan introduction.
3.2 MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE AND PROCEDURES  
■ ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND DECISION-
MAKING - As this is a single entity project, the organisat ional 
structure (Figure 5) is practical and simple, yet highly effective. 
The Project Manager (PM) is  Marie Callanan . She will be 
responsible for ensuring that the work programme ad heres to 
its schedule, fulfils its objectives (according to the principles of 
on-time, on-budget and to high quality), and that t he project 
meets the requirements of the company. The Project 
Milestones (Table 3.2 a) will be used as a valuable  tool for 
determining whether or not the project is on schedule. She will 
be responsible for the management of the internal p roject 
development team, as well as in managing the relationship with 
stakeholders (beta clients) system from the VISUM existing client base) who will be involved at different stages of the work plan. She will 
be active in steering the evolution of the project by closely monitoring and controlling the progress of the work, as well as the engagements 
and contributions from the stakeholders. She will be responsible for ensuring that the project is managed in adherence with the internal 
project management procedures that are certified by ISO 9001:2008 and UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems for R&D&I, and 
with support from the VISUM Project Management Offi ce (PMO). Marie will also be the interface with the  sponsors (the European 
Commission) on behalf of VISUM, and she will ensure that all contractual obligations are fulfilled. Marie CV in Section 4.1 highlights her 
proven experience and track record in managing and participating in product developments, and her outstanding academic achievements 
whereby she graduated with a. B.Sc. in Engineering and went on MBA. 
No WPs and Tasks Del. & 
Milestones 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 
1 Integration strategies and model building ML1, ML3 # #
1.1 Sample preparation and laboratory activities
1.2 Definition of the integration strategies 
D1.1 ■
1.3 Model building D1.2, D1.3 ■ ■
1.4 Model validation D1.4 ■
2 System hardware and software development ML2, ML4, ML5 # # #
2.1 Design and building of the system hardware D2.1, D2.2 ■ ■
2.2 Development of the system software D2.3