1.1 Objectives and ambition 
INPERSO is a holistic deep renovation programme addressing t he building’s entire lifecycle and combining 
industrialisation and personalisation. The project will deliver inclusive, affordable, efficient, and sustainable 
renovation, adaptable to var ious climate zones and building typologies, but focused on residentia l and heritage 
buildings. INPERSO is designed to ad dress th e lifecycle of a building, from project design to the end -of-life, 
addressing the challenges of digitalisation, fragmentation, quality, efficiency and rapidity, while adopting a human-
centric approach. This will be reflecte d in the Integrated Results (IR) of the project,  that comprise innov ations 
targeted to address the needs of the sector:  
Digitalisation: The slow pace of digitalisation, the lack of unified resources traversing the building’s life cycle and 
the time/effort requirements for data collection in pre-renovation buildings will be addressed through the integration 
of AI and AR-based solutions in innovative products in RE SUITE integrated platform for renovation management  
(IR1). The platform will provide all the tools needed by owners, man agers, and contractors to manage the building 
throughout its lifecycle, addressing inefficiencies and generating significant savings. 
Fragmentation: The renovation and construction value chain is highly fragmented, user feedback is not an integral 
part of the process, renovation is capital -intensive disruptive, noisy, and polluting and often does not meet user 
expectations. In INPERSO, Low -Carbon Renovation Models ( IR2 – LCRM) will introduce a human -centric 
approach to de ciding and designing renovation proj ects, th at minimise the performance gap and result is user 
satisfaction and sustainable behaviour. 
Quality, productivity and safety : Reducing the amount of CDW generated, increasing productivity, up - and re-
skilling the workforce, improving workplace condi tions and reducing the  embodied CO2 of buildings throughout 
their lifecycle  will be achieved through innovative products and processes: the INPERSO Retrofit – Kit (IR3), 
comprising active/passive envelope systems, renewable energy generation and ventilativ e HVAC s olutions and a 
vertical Façade 3D Printer (IR4), enabling rapid and efficient retrofit, minimising reworks.  
Efficiency: Achieving and retaining building performance (both in terms of energy and comfort), is a crucial step to 
increase trust towards renovation. The Energy & Comfort Optimisation Interface ( ECO-I, IR5) enables combining 
personalised renovation according to user needs and providing smart systems to optimize energy demand, especially 
in warmer climates, and areas with significant natural ventilation and cooling potential.  
Rapidity: To achieve the 2030 and ulti mately 2050 climate goals, solutions need to be deployed rapidly and at 
significant scale, presenting replication and transferability potential while also adapting to current climate changes. 
The INPERSO completed system (IR6) will be demonstrated and completed to deliver a near-market solution. 
 
 
 
1 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/construction_en 
2 McKinsey (2016). Imagining construction’s digital future 
3 European Environment Agency (2020). Construction and demolition waste: challenges and opportunities in a circular economy  
4 Accidents at work - statistics by economic activity, Eurostat 2020 
5 Clean energy for all Europeans, EC – March 2019 
6 European Commission (2020). A Renovation Wave for Europe 
7 Commission Recommendation on Building Renovation (EU) 2019/786 
8 JRC (2019). Digital Transformation in Transport, Construction, Energy, Government and Public Administration 
9 Committee for European Construction Equipment (2019). Construction: The least digitised sector in Europe 
10 European Commission (2019). Supporting digitalisation of the construction sector and SMEs Including Building Information Modelling 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 3/70 
INPERSO is a solution to the multifaceted deep renovation challenge addressing the indiv idual needs of key 
stakeholders involved in the ret rofit process. For building owners & managers, INPERSO will provide a ser vice 
encompassing the entire lifecycle of the building, from supporting decision making (when, what to renovate, how 
much to spend), making them an integral part of the process and en suring that the results reflect their expectations. 
For stakeholders in the  B&C sector (industry and research organisations), the project will deliver services and 
products rendering the renovation process  more cost, resource, and time efficient, more sust ainable, reducing the 
embodied CO 2 in buildings and improving the quality o f projects. For the European citizen , building user or 
neighbour, the project will make deep renovation more impactful and accessible.  
 
 
 
Figure 1 Overall project concept 
1.1.1 Project objectives 
Strategic Objective (SO) 1. Deliver a unified and interoperable resource for information access and 
management throughout the building’s lifecycle, enabling efficient communication between stakeholders. 
By delivering an integrated platform (DMO, IR1 - RE Suite) unifying resources and information across the building’s 
lifecycle. The platform already possesses functionalities such as portfolio management, control & mainten ance, 
energy, and safety, but will be adapted to interface with the project’s modules (T3.2–DMO): (a) SCAAI (T3.1– R2M) 
and (b) RIALTO (T3.3-R2M). The RE Suite platform will also be used throughout the renovation processes (WP5) 
and the use phase of the buildings (WP4, and demonstration in WP5). The final version of the platform will provide 
tailored access to the stakeholders: firstly, according to the analysis of the target groups, and subsequently based on 
a dynamic and customizable interface, and contri buting to data sovereignty and increased uptake of building 
logbooks11 12. Last, the RE Suite will be utilised in capacity building: upskilling and reskilling workforce and aiming 
for zero-waste & accidents construction sites, as a tool for interaction through the Inhabitant App.  
SCAAI - Scan to BIM and asset recognition tool (R2M/DMO, R2.1): Scan-to-BIM processes for outdoor building 
materials and components by segmentation of the global point cloud and recognition (databases and descriptors) to 
produce BIM models in common formats 
RIALTO - AR tool for reno vation support (R2M, R2.1): AR based solution offering guidance through HoloLens 
(and other mobile devices) to contractors, additionally utilised in inspection, commissioning and training. 
KPIs: 5-7% reduction in project costs and 10-12% improvement in project timing, with up to 80% reduction in  work 
time during the pre-retrofit phase, 80% reduced scanning and inspection time, 60% less time for AR-supported tasks. 
 
  
 
11 https://op.europa.eu/en/40f40235-509e-11eb-b59f-01aa75ed71a1/language-en/format-PDF/source-184010877  
12 https://www.ebc-construction.eu/wp-content/uploads/201117-EBC-Position-Paper-on-BDLs-and-BRPs_final.pdf  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 4/70 
SO2. Generate new, low-carbon renovation models that bridge the gap between designed and built, are 
affordable, adaptable, and provide resilience, integrating the user in the renovation process. 
Low-Carbon Renovation Models (IR2, LCRM) will be developed, based on new design methodologies (T4.1-TAU), 
user engagement methodologies to increase the  acceptance of smart technologies (T4. 5–TAU), promotion of 
sustainable value chains (T2.1 -MIRC), with the co rresponding plans for green financing (WP6 -CORE), and new 
processes for optimised management of sustainable renovation workflows (T4.4-IVE), supported by post-occupancy 
evaluations (WP5, T5.6-TAU). The approach will include capacity building to up/re-skill the workforce (T4.2–R2M) 
and reduce accidents (T5.1- EUROC), as well as activities promoting the participation of citizen groups, via energy 
communities (T4.5-IVE). 
New renovation design methodologies (TAU-R2.1): (a) mapping and deciphering the interactions between processes 
and stakeholders in  industrialised renovation; (b) implement information gat hering measures in the demonstration 
sites; (c) address decision and design (pre-retrofit), construction & renovation (during-retrofit) and use-phase (post-
retrofit) issues, linking post- and pre- retrofit stages; (d) assess acceptance and efficacy through user engagement; (e) 
participate in citizen science and open science; (f) evaluate the methodologies in operational environment.  
Sustainable B&C value chains (EVET-R2.2): (a) mapping of renovation value chains in the demonstration regions; 
(b) LCA-based decision making for improving metrics; (c) sustainable value chains for INPERSO manufacturing. 
Sustainable financing plans (CORE-R2.3): (a) select KPI and metrics aligned to the EU Taxonomy; (b) esta blish 
roadmap; (c) monitor and evaluate impact for the end-users. 
Capacity building (R2M -R2.4): (a) collect training material and consolidate the INPERSO training platform, (b) 
carry out activities up- and re-skilling workforce.  
Stakeholder engagement / e cosystem empowerment (IVE -R2.5): plan and implement (a) s takeholder analysis, 
identification, and engagement ; (b) pr omote energy community related initiatives, (c) promote open science and 
citizen science. 
KPIs: Deliver renovation solutions comprising deep and nZEB (<1500€m2) achieving savings from 25-75% based 
on the investment and 70% reduced CO2eq/m2 
 
SO3. Accelerate the adoption of advanced manufacturing and prefabrication technologies in renovation, 
reducing waste and the energy demand of the process itself. 
The INPERSO Retrofit-Kit is the 3rd Integrated Result (IR3) of the project, comprising four different elements (R3.1-
4): sustainable ETICS (T2. 2-AMS), integrated ventilative HVAC (T2. 3-VENT), building integrated photovo ltaics 
(T2.4-METSOL) and solar windows (T2.5-IWIN). These technologies will be implemented and validated to ensure 
interoperability according to the plan for each demonstration site (T5.1) and the development cycle will be finalised 
in WP6. Each of the tec hnologies, processes and products will be designed for circularity (T2.1 –MIRC), designed 
for disassembly and with quantified goals towards  reducing the embodied CO 2 of buildings, results that will be 
verified by LCA (T4.4- IVE). 
Integrated ventilative HVAC (VENTI, R3.1): (a) Interconnect the system with the platform and EMS; (b) deliver 
new control algorithms that can be tuned to the applica tion; (c) enlarge user base by demonstrations in multiple 
countries; (d) collect user feedback; (e) demonstrate in operational conditions and (f) finalise development. 
Smart Wall (AMS, R3.2): (a) Integrate on-board monitoring and controls with the platform  and EMS; (b) deliver 
new prototypes with sustainable materials; (c) prototype heritage complying products; (d) assess  acceptance, 
accessibility and user feedback; (e) demonstrate in operational conditions, focusing on comparative assessment with 
other inn ovative and conventional retrofit solutions and (f) finalise development, establishing manufacturing 
capacity. 
Solar windows (IWIN, R3.3): (a) Integrate windows with EMS, exceed 7% efficiency in typical wi ndows sizes of