4. Personal Data Page
Does this activity involve processing of personal data? Yes No
Does this activity involve further processing of previously collected personal data (including 
use of preexisting data sets or sources, merging existing data sets)?
Yes No
Is it planned to export personal data from the EU to non-EU countries? Specify the type of 
personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Is it planned to import personal data from non-EU countries into the EU or from a non-EU 
country to another non-EU country? Specify the type of personal data and countries involved
Yes No
Does this activity involve the processing of personal data related to criminal convictions or 
offences?
Yes No
5. Animals Page
Does this activity involve animals? Yes No
6. Non-EU Countries Page
Will some of the activities be carried out in non-EU countries? Yes No 1
Switzerland, UK
In case non-UE countries are involved, do the activities undertaken in these countries raise 
potential ethics issues? Yes No
It is planned to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic material, 
live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or flora samples,
etc.)? 
Yes No
Is it planned to import any material (other than data) from non-EU countries into the EU or 
from a non-EU country to another non-EU country? For data imports, see section 4. Yes No
Administrative forms
Page 174 of 177
Proposal ID 101069820
Acronym INPERSO
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 19/10/2021 16:03
Is it planned to export any material (other than data) from the EU to non-EU countries? For 
data exports, see section 4. Yes No
Does this activity involve low and/or lower middle income countries, (if yes, detail the benefit-
sharing actions planned in the self-assessment) Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the activity at risk? Yes No
7. Environment, Health and Safety Page
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants.(during the implementation of the activity or further to the 
use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
Does this activity deal with endangered fauna and/or flora / protected areas? Yes No
Does this activity involve the use of substances or processes that may cause harm to humans, 
including  those performing the activity.(during the implementation of the activity or further 
to the use of the results, as a possible impact) ?
Yes No
8. Artificial Intelligence Page
Does this activity involve the development, deployment and/or use of Artificial Intelligence? (if 
yes, detail in the self-assessment whether that could raise ethical concerns related to human 
rights and values and detail how this will be addressed).
Yes No 27
9. Other Ethics Issues Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues above and that, if any ethics issues apply, I will complete the 
ethics self-assessment as described in the guidelines How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
Administrative forms
Page 175 of 177
Proposal ID 101069820
Acronym INPERSO
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 19/10/2021 16:03
Ethics Self-Assessment
Ethical dimension of the objectives, methodology and likely impact
INPERSO will use AI for optimization of construction/renovation processes in the project but no human-based data or process 
of personal data is involved in INPERSO activities. The data will be acquired from from sensors, machine and process controls. Then by 
application of AI, this data will be processed in order to provide relevant information regarding further optimization of these 
processes and decision making. 
The AI developments within this project have been designed accordingly with the trustworthiness guidelines for all the AI-based 
techniques/systems made in Europe. All the developments performances will be properly quantified and tracked ensuring the 
possible detection of deviations from expected behavior. Considering the scope of this project, only strictly necessary data will be 
captured and processed. Considering the level of interaction of the proposed developments with humans, the work proposed here, 
does not go into conflict with any fundamental right of individuals, safety or discrimination.
Remaining characters 3978
Compliance with ethical principles and relevant legislations
INPERSO will be undertaken in accordance with commonly agreed standards of good practice, as laid down, for example, in the 
European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies, the Declaration of Helsinki, the Economic and Social Research Council 
(ESRC) Research Ethics Framework. INPERSO ensures trustworthy and ethical AI within the project's activities, the consortium partners 
are committed to follow and fully comply with the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence that was presented by the 
European High-Level Expert Group on AI on the 8th of April 2019. 
According to these Guidelines, trustworthy AI should be: 
1. Lawful, meaning that it respects all applicable laws and regulations, 
2. Ethical, in the sense that it respects ethical principles and values; and, 
3. Robust from a technical perspective while considering its social environment. 
The Guidelines put forward a set of 7 key requirements that AI systems should meet in order to be deemed trustworthy: 
- Human agency and oversight. 
- Technical Robustness and safety. 
- Privacy and data governance. 
- Transparency. 
- Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness. 
- Fostering diversity. 
- Societal and environmental well-being. 
- Accountability. 
INPERSO will carry out an assessment of the project's activities to verify the application of each of the key requirements as according 
to 
the specific assessment list that the Guidelines has established. This assessment list for the ethical AI has gone through a pilot test 
until December 2019, however, INPERSO commits to follow-up on any possible modifications or adaptions of the same. Furthermore, 
a 
collaboration will be established with the European AI Alliance to provide continuous possibility feedback and best practices, as well 
as with the AI4EU Observatory on Society and Artificial Intelligence (OSAI) that supports the distribution and the discussion of 
knowledge about the Ethical, Legal, Socio-Economic and Cultural issues of AI (ELSEC-AI) within Europe . 
INPERSO will ensure compliance with all related legal standards, namely: 
- Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence that was presented by the European High-Level Expert Group on AI 
on the 8th of April 2019; 
- Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information 
society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (Directive on Electronic Commerce)
Remaining characters 2537
Administrative forms
Page 176 of 177
Proposal ID 101069820
Acronym INPERSO
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 19/10/2021 16:03
Security issues table
1. EU Classified Information (EUCI)2 Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials requiring protection against 
unauthorised disclosure (EUCI)? Yes No
Does this activity involve non-EU countries? Yes No
2. Misuse Page
Does this activity have the potential for misuse of results? Yes No
3. Other Security Issues Page
Does this activity involve information and/or materials subject to national security restrictions? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
Are there any other security issues that should be taken into consideration? 
If yes, please specify: (Maximum number of characters allowed: 1000)
Yes No
2According to the Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, “European Union 
classified information (EUCI) means any information or material designated by an EU security classification, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause varying 
degrees of prejudice to the interests of the European Union or of one or more of the Member States”. 
3Classified background information is information that is already classified by a country and/or international organisation and/or the EU and is going to be used by the 
project. In this case, the project must have in advance the authorisation from the originator of the classified information, which is the entity (EU institution, EU Member 
State, third state or international organisation) under whose authority the classified information has been generated. 
4EU classified foreground information is information (documents/deliverables/materials) planned to be generated by the project and that needs to be protected from 
unauthorised disclosure. The originator of the EUCI generated by the project is the European Commission.
Administrative forms
Page 177 of 177
Proposal ID 101069820
Acronym INPERSO
Horizon Europe ver 1.00 20210928 Last saved 19/10/2021 16:03
5 - Other questions
Two-stage calls
The full stage-2 proposal must be consistent with the short outline proposal submitted the to stage 1 - in particular with respect to the 
proposal characteristics addressing the concepts of excellence and impact
Are there substantial differences compared to the stage-1 proposal? Yes No
Essential information to be provided for proposals including clinical Trials / studies / investigations
Clinical study means, for the purpose of this document, any systematic prospective or retrospective collection and analysis of health data obtained 
from individual patients or healthy persons in order to address scientific questions related to the understanding, prevention, diagnosis, monitoring or 
treatment of a disease, mental illness, or physical condition. It includes but it is not limited to clinical studies as defined by Regulation 536/2014 (on 
medicinal products), clinical investigation and clinical evaluation as defined by Regulation 2017/745  (on medical devices), performance study and 
performance evaluation as defined by Regulation 2017/746 (on in vitro diagnostic medical devices).
Are clinical studies / trials / investigations included in the work plan of this project? Yes No
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 1/70 
HORIZON-CL5-2021-D4-01-02: Industrialisation of deep 
renovation workflows for energy-efficient buildings (IA) 
 
INdustrialised and PErsonalised Renovation for Sustainable sOcieties 
# Participant organisation name Acronym Country Type 
1 Technological Institute of Aragon: ITAINNOVA ITA RTD ES 
2 Universitat Politècnica de València - Instituto Universitario de Restauración 
del Patrimonio UPV-IRP RTD ES 
3 CORE Innovation Centre NPO CORE RTD EL 
4 TAMPEREEN KORKEAKOULUSAATIO SR TAU RTD FI 
5 FUNDACION CARTIF CARTIF RTD ES 
6 MIRTEC S.A. MIRC LE EL 
7 Instituto Valenciano de la Edificación IVE RTD ES 
8 R2M Solution SRL R2M SME IT 
9 UAB MODERNIOS E-TECHNOLOGIJOS METS SME LT 
10 IRIS Technology Solutions S.L.  IRIS SME IE 
11 DEMO Consultants BV DMO SME NL 
12 EUROCORE Consulting sprl EUROC SME BE 
13 Ventive LTD VENT SME UK 
14 Advanced Management Solutions AMS SME EL 
15 AUMSA - Actuacions Urbanes Municipals S.A AUMSA NPO ES 
16 Stichting Monumentenwacht Noord-Brabant MWNB NPO NL 
17 DIMOS VARIS - VOULAS - VOULIAGMENIS DVVV NPO EL 
18 ACCIONA CONSTRUCCION SA ACCIO LE ES 
19 VIAS Y CONSTRUCCIONES SA VIAS LE ES 
20 University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland SUPSI RTD CH 
21 iWin - innovative Windows IWIN SME CH 
22 École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne EPFL RTD CH 
 
Table 1 Nomenclature 
Means of Verification: MoV Milestone #: MS# Building & Construction: B&C 
Wireless Sensor Networks: WSN Data Acquisition: DAQ Indoor Environment Quality: IEQ 
Machine Learning: ML Integrated Result: IR Product as a Service: PaaS 
Energy Management System: 
EMS 
Construction & Demolition Waste : 
CDW 
Occupational health and safety 
environment: OHSE 
Augmented Reality: AR Heating, Ventilation, Air 
Conditioning and Cooling: HVAC 
Artificial Intelligence: AI 
Building Integrated Photovoltaics 
BIPVs 
Demo Case #: DC#  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 2/70 
1 Section 1: Excellence 
Introduction 
The building & construction (B&C) sector is a key pillar of the EU economy, accounting for 18 million jobs and 
contributing to almost 9% of the GDP1. The B&C industry’s size and importance renders sectoral challenges all the 
more important: competitiveness, labour shortage, productivity, gender balance, resource and energy efficiency exert 
significant pressures on the sector. For instance, B&C sector productivity grew over the past two decades, but only 
at around a quarter of the rate of the manufacturing sector (1.0% vs. 3.6% respectively)2. Construction and demolition 
waste (CDW) remains the largest waste stream in terms of mass, generating 374 million tonnes per year in the EU3, 
and construction workers face the highest accident incidence rate at 3,319 events per 100,000 persons employed4. In 
the near future, increasing demand for infrastructure and accommodation due to urban sprawl necessitates rapid and 
sustainable adaptation in the shortest timeframe possible, while increase the safety levels. In this context, affordability 
and quality of construction works, especially in renovation, adds another layer of complexity. Buildings account for 
40% of final energy consumption and 36% of greenhouse gas emissions in Europe 5, a result of the age of European 
building stock6 but also the stagnating rates of renovation (1-1.5% with deep renovation even lower, at 0.2%7). 
The integration of digital technologies in the B&C sector has been established as a key enabler in addressing these 
multifaceted and interconnected challenges. Yet, the construction sector is one of the least digitalised sectors i n the 
economy8,9, with only Building Information Modelling (BIM) being widely adopted, primarily by large enterprises10.