3.1 Work plan and resources 
 
Figure 16 Gantt chart of INPERSO  
 
Figure 17 Pert chart of the INPERSO project 
Table 3.1a: List of work packages 
# WP Title Lead Acronym PMs Start End 
1 WP1 End user requirements and project specifications 7 IVE 94 1 6 
2 WP2 Sustainable renovation products and processes 5 CART 263 7 31 
3 WP3 Integration of BIM-based workflows 11 DMO 207 7 31 
4 WP4 New models for deep low carbon renovation 4 TAU 139 7 31 
5 WP5 Validation and demonstration 14 AMS 372 1 48 
6 WP6 Preparation for market roll-out 3 CORE 103 1 48 
7 WP7 Dissemination, exploitation and communication 6 MIRC 112 1 48 
8 WP8 Project Management 1 ITA 87 1 48 
   Total 1377   
Description Lead Start End 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
WP1 End user requirements and project specifications IVE 1 6 1 Milestones
T1.1 Definition of end user requirements IVE 1 6 1 Deliverables
T1.2 Consolidation of technological and system specifications UPV 1 6
T1.3 Identification and plan for the involvement of local stakeholders TAU 1 6
WP2 Sustainable renovation products and processes CART 7 28 2 3 2
T2.1 Establishment of sustainable material supply chains MIRTEC 7 24
T2.2 Sustainable prefabricated components AMS 7 28
T2.3 Integrated ventilative HVAC VENT 12 28
T2.4 BIPV modification and integration METSOL 12 28
T2.5 Solar windows manufacturing IWIN 7 28
T2.6 Introduction of advanced manufacturing technologies VIAS 7 28 3
WP3 Integration of BIM-based workflows DMO 7 31 4 4
T3.1 SCAAI - Scan to BIM and asset recognition tool R2M 7 18
T3.2 BIM-based management platform - RE Suite DMO 7 31
T3.3 AR-enabled renovation support R2M 7 31
T3.4 IoT and WSN integration IRIS 7 24
T3.5 Multi-Stage Energy Consulting System CORE 7 31
T3.6 Network and Interface for air quality optimisation EPFL 7 31 5
WP4 New models for deep low carbon renovation TAU 7 31 5 6
T4.1 Low carbon renovation design TAU 7 31
T4.2 Capacity building R2M 7 31 7
T4.3 Stakeholder engagement IVE 7 31 6
T4.4 Life Cycle Analysis & Cost Benefit Analysis IVE 7 31
T4.5 User interaction with novel digital systems TAU 7 31
WP5 Validation and demonstration AMS 1 48 7 8 8 9
T5.1 Monitoring and commissioning of demonstration sites UPV 1 29
T5.2 DC #1 – Calle Estrella AUMSA 1 43
T5.3 DC #2 – Trinity Complex MWNB 1 43
T5.4 DC #3 – Social Shelter Litous Street DVVV 1 43
T5.5 Monitoring of renovation energy footprint ACCIO 12 32
T5.5 Post occupancy evaluations TAU 24 48
T5.6 Demonstration activities and evaluation of results ITA 32 48 9 10
WP6 Management of INPERSO innovations CORE 1 48 10 10
T6.1 Standardisation, certification and regulatory monitoring EUROC 1 48
T6.2 Ecosystem empowerment activities IVE 24 48
T6.3 INPERSO development cycle finalization UPV 31 48 11
T6.4 Market analysis, Target Groups, and Value Proposition CORE 1 48 11
T6.5 Sustainable Innovation Management CORE 1 48
WP7 Dissemination, exploitation and communication MIRTEC 1 48 12 12 12 12
T7.1 Communication and dissemination MIRTEC 1 48
T7.2 Exploitation strategy CORE 1 48 13
WP9 Project Management ITA 1 48 13 14
T9.1 Administrative and financial project management ITA 1 48 15 15 15
T9.2 Technical and scientific management UPV 1 48 16 16 16

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 48/70 
WP1 End user requirements and project specifications 
Work package number  WP1 Lead beneficiary IVE  Start 01 
Work package title WP1 End user requirements and project specifications End 06 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PM 2 4 6 3 3 2 18 5 2 7 4 4 2 2 7 4 2 3 2 8 2 2  
WP1 Objectives: To identify and establish the needs and requirements where INPERSO will be implemented, 
collect and consolidate technical information and refine the scope of the proposal where details are missing.  
(1) Define, analyse, and consolidate user requirements  
(2) Compile technological and system integration specifications 
(3) Construct a plan for the involvement of local communities and regional stakeholders 
Description of Work – WP Leader: IVE 
T1.1 Definition of end user requirements - (IVE), M01-M06 
This task will consolidate end user related information and deliver a comprehensive report refining the goals of the 
demonstrations. The demonstrators (AUMSA, MWNB, DVVV) will provide feedback with regards to (a) existing 
technical and non-technical issues with their properties, and (b) their expectations from INPERSO. The conclusions 
will be used to  facilitate the communication between the Consortium, provide common goals and establish solid 
foundations for the dissemination, exploi tation and communication a ctivities. Specifically, the following aspects 
will be consolidated: 
• User requirements (UPV): Technical (i.e., building design specifications), budgetary (how much is intended to 
be invested for the new construction or retrofit) a nd functional (energy performance and operation, additional 
functions such as storage, EV charging etc). 
• Consolidation of available building designs and BIM assets (DMO) from the demonstration sites. A systematic 
review and collection of available plans and information will be carried out to lay the groundwork for the planned 
interventions. 
• Stakeholder mapping relevant to each neighbourhood (TAU) 
Partners involved : Demonstrators will provide requirements. Output: Consolidated end-user requirements 
included in D1.1. 
T1.2 Consolidation of technological and system specifications - (UPV), M01-M06 
Specifications relevant to the technologies, processes and tools employed will be consolidated to ensure 
interoperability is not compromised and that synergies are maximized. Selection of sensor and IoT devices will be 
conducted based on data requirements including parametric scenarios based on both real -time data (or almost real 
time) values of energy (thermal – electricity consumption), insolation, occupancy, shading, window positions and 
other parameters relevant to the workplan. The end-users will provide input with regards to requirements (the level 
of optimization and cost savings they would consider satisfactory) and preferences (intrusiveness of additional 
electronics, cost etc). The finalized selection will be accompanied by a refined and consolidated set of KPIs agreed 
by the Consortium. Partners involved: All partners will be involved. Output: Consolidated technical specifications 
included in D1.1. 
T1.3 Identification and plan for the involvement of local stakeholders - (IVE), M01-M06 
The human dimension will be placed in the core of each stage of the project 
and the resulting service. To design a solution that is useful to humans, it is 
needed they are eng aged i n a process known as human  centred desi gn. 
Human-centred design is not a perfectly linear process, and each project 
invariably has its own contours and character. The process is best described 
as a “converge-diverge” cycle, where you go big in your thinking, dial down 
into specifics and practicality, look back at the big picture, and iterate. 
Figure 18 Source: The Field 
Guide to Human-Centered Design 
This process will be expanded in INPERSO project through a stakeholder-centred approach as an iterative process 
where interaction with the different stakeholders (users, technology/service providers) will be carried out to refine 
the final output to:  Analyse and cluster the demand -side and s pecify the development drivers for the different 
technologies/services from a user -centred approach. The stakeholder-centred approach will be used to know the 
drivers for the different technologies from the different stakeholder’s point of view to help technology providers to 
improve their final products.  In that sense, a stakeholder engagement p lan will be designed with instruction s on 
how the local/national networks of stakeholders that partners can reach could be engaged from the beginning of the 
project. First, focus groups meetings, workshops (online/in-person) with stakeholders will be proposed. In a second 
stage surveys and in quiries will be designed to go d eeper to figu re out and understand final users’ needs. The 
conclusions will strongly interact with the demo cases, exchanging methodologies and information, provide input 
for the definition of the user-centred approach and the development drivers for the different technologies and drive 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 49/70 
the matching of the business models between demand and industry. Partners involved : TAU- analysis of 
performance gap Output: Stakeholder engagement plan included in D1.1. 
Deliverables 
D1.1 INPERSO Specifications and user requirement report (IVE, R, SEN, M6): Report comprised of the outputs 
of T1.1-4 and describing in detail the scale and scope of the INPERSO project. 
MS1.1 Action plans for demonstrations (M6): Demo groups and action plans ready. 
 
WP2 Sustainable renovation products and processes 
Work package number  WP2 Lead beneficiary CART  Start 07 
Work package title WP2 Sustainable renovation products and processes End 28 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PMs 42 20 0 0 45 14 2 0 12 0 0 0 24 27 0 0 0 0 13 30 34 0  
WP2 Objectives: The objective of WP2 is to consolidate the Retrofit -Kit configurations, addressing challenges in 
the modification and prototyping of systems and components, as well as establishing LCA -based decision making 
to facilitate the reduction of the CO2 footprint in supply chains. WP2 will be led by CART. 
(1) To assess and improve the CO2 footprint of renovation processes and products; 
(2) To produce CDW based building components with excellent structural, thermal and acoustic properties, with 
embedded sensors, energy storage and controls;  
(3) Integrate energy harvesting through BIPV with improved cost efficiency and increased versatility in adaptation 
to the heterogenous building typologies involved; 
(4) To prototype components considering the requirements of heritage buildings; 
(5) To deliver integrated, ventilative HVAC system and interface it with INPERSO platform resources; 
(6) To deploy solar windows with integrated controls, storage functions and implement manufacturing options 
allowing easier access to markets. 
T2.1 Establishment of sustainable material supply chains - (MIRC), M07-M24 
In this task, MIRC will establish a strategy and channels for sustainable construction component supply chains: 
-CDW valorisation pathways through (a) replacement of raw materials, (b) direct integration new components. The 
inputs will examine material flow valuating proximities and synergies withing the B&C and other verticals for the 
three demonstration sites . Moreover, in this tasks, product and service developers will be supported in rendering 
their technologies compliant with design -for-disassembly methodologies and provi ding c omprehensive plans to 
manage their end-of-life phase. Partners involved: VIAS, CART, METSOL, IWIN, AMS  Output: Sustainable 
B&C value chains report (R.2.2) included in D2.1&2 reports. 
T2.2 Sustainable prefabricated components - (AMS), M7-M28 
In this task, the Smart Wall component will be modified to increase its flexibility with regards to sustainable material 
integration. This will also include the instructions towards material producers r elevant to the integration process. 
More specifically, after th e requirements for the Greek dem o building have been defined, AMS will perform the 
designing of the Smart Wall system and its combination with a number of additional technologies. The design will 
take into account whether the system will serve for internal  or external use or as a standal one wall and will be 
selected the appropriate insulation materials and frame system according to the materials thermal behaviour, eco -
friendliness and recyclabil ity. In addition, AMS will produce in the Technology Upscaling Pilot Plant: a) multi-
functional coatings with self -cleaning, self-healing, IR reflective, anti -moulding properties and ii) geopolymeric 
pastes from CDW that will serve as claddings for the Smart Wall systems. Moreover, the appropriate HVAC systems 
and sma rt win dows (i.e. photochromic) w ill be selected and either integrated in the Smart Wall or installed as 
standalone systems, based on the specific requirements of the demonstration. 
Partners involved: MIRC Output: Smart Wall (R3.2) prototype as part of the D2.1 INPERSO Retrofit-Kit. 
T2.3 Integrated ventilative HVAC - (VENTI), M12-M28 
In this task, the system integration will feature new control strategies oriented towards the low-carbon renovation 
models. Moreover, preparatory work for the interop erability with the INPERSO monitoring and c ontrol modules 
will also be conducted. Following the manufacturing of the units, functional and performance tests will be conducted 
for validation. The units will be shipped to demo cases as  per the requirements of WP1. In addition, high capacity 
PCM based thermal storage materials will be integrated to the Energy Pod and tested to identify the optimal operating 
conditions. The high-capacity thermal energy storage in which PCM materials are used as medium and where  the 
heat transfer from/to the module will be improved by embedding a heat pipe heat exchanger. The heat pipe structure 
is designed and experimentally validated to demonstrate efficient heat delivery from the heat source to the PCMs 
and heat release to the  ultimate heat sink fluid. A comparative as sessment between the PCM thermal storage and 
other types of storage (water, virgin PCM) will be conducted in operational capacity. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 50/70 
Output: Energy Pod (R3.1) prototype as part of the D2.1 INPERSO Retrofit-Kit. 
T2.4 BIPV modification and integration - (METSOL), M12-M28 
Design and development of Photovoltaic systems for seamless integration into building envelope (roof/facade).  
Optimize design to meet both economical and aesthetical requirements for further integration into  Retrofit-Kit. 
According to the designs, BIPVs will be relevantly modified and manufactured to accommodate the orientation and 
integration (roof, façade, outdoor) in the demonstration sites. A share of BIPV modules will be modified for  
integration in the new prefabricated elements. Interfacing of BIPVs with the integrated ventilative HVAC units will 
also be a part of this task, to deliver interoperable plug-and-play systems. Aesthetic optimization will be conducted 
and heritage requirements (colour/texture and others) will be assessed. Partners involved: VENTI Output: Roof 
and façade BIPVs (R3.4) prototype as part of the D2.1 INPERSO Retrofit-Kit. 
T2.5 Solar windows manufacturing - (IWIN), M7-M28 
In T2.5, IWIN will : (a) conduct prototyping for the solar windows  to be a ssembled according to heri tage 
requirements and (b) upscale production capacity according to their commercialisation roadmap to achieve TRL9.  
For (b), a semi-automatic manufacturing will be preferred due to the significant variations of window types ordered 
by clients. SUPSI will support IWIN in increasing the automation level of processes by streamlining manufacturing 
parameter integration. Moreover, IWIN will collaborate with B&C experts of INPERSO to identify, verify  and 
address pain-points in the process of commercialisation. For (a), IWIN will receive information regarding the visual, 
textural and other features of the heritage demonstration sites (DC#1 and #2)  and produce a number of testing 
prototypes to assess adherence to heritage status. This process will also include interfacing with local manufacturers 
(frames, blinds) where the solar glass will be integrated. SUPSI will support the product technology validation of 
iWin innovative windows through the definition of specific quality and testi ng pla n needed. The performance 
validation of the innovative window will be done at SUPSI PVlab. Relevant façade typologies will be taken into 
account in relation to the architectural integration scenarios. Moreover, the technology will be subjected to som e 
extended performance-based tests, in relation to mechanical and electrical safety, by adapting the test set-up to BIPV 
combined requirements for the product typology. SUPSI will support the manufacturing process by providing all 
the needed specifications  in or der to ensure representati ve sam ples/prototypes. SUPSI will collaborate for 
developing technology concepts and technical solutions for best integration of BIPV in an adaptive façade system, 
taking into account costs, needed skills, quality assurance,  production, logistics, building construction efficiency, 
viability of maintenance and end-of-cycle including possible disassembly. 
Partners involved: SUPSI Output: Solar windows (R3.3) prototype as part of the D2.1 INPERSO Retrofit-Kit. 
T2.6 Robotic, vertical façade 3D printer integration, (VIAS), M7-M28 
This task features the following activities: (i) System requirements elicitation, (ii) System conceptual design. From 
previous subtask outcome, a conceptual system will be sketched. (iii) Definition of the validation plan, (iv) Prototype 
detailed design. Mechatronics and robotics engineering a ctivities needed for the detailed design of the prototype 
system. Modelling and simulation -based systems engineering will be applied in this development to handle the 
expected complexity and reduce the technological risk. (v) Manufacturing and testing of subsystems (vi) Integration 
and commissioning of the system.  To deliver the vertical 3D printing pro totype, the following systems will be 
integrated: (a) Global positioning subsystem. The 3D printing robot will be fixed to a scaffold motorized platform 
that can cover the façade envelope and which allow autonomous movement according to higher level orders.  (b) 
Safety subsystem based on robotic perception sensors and SW that will allow all the move ment of the global and 
local mobile parts preventing collisions and shar ing space with human operators without  a safety fence. (c) BIM 
integration SW to define and control the whole renovation process.  (d) Mobile concrete pump adapted to specific 
requirements of the printing materials. (e) Power generator to provide the energy to the different subsystems.  
Partners involved: VIAS: Façade 3D printing requirements preparation, last generation materials selection, system 
validation and product exploitation. CARTIF: 3D printing extrusion head integration in industrial robot arm. Printing 
control, including the pumping system. ITAINNOVA: Façade 3D printing positioning and moving system design & 
development. Perception system to allow safe Human Robot collaboration, UPV: 3D printing constructive process 
requirements, BIM integration, relation to  INPERSO renovation workflo w Outputs: 3D Printing subsystem 
(integrated head, arm, pump) (UPV,CART); Global positioning subsystem (ITA) as consolidated in the D2.2 Façade 
3D printing prototype. 
Deliverables 
D2.1 INPERSO Retrofit-Kit (ITA, DEM, M28, SEN): Prototypes of technologies described in T2.1-6, installed at 
the demonstration sites and report describing the integration process and sustainable material supply chains.  
D2.2 Façade 3D printing prototype  (VIAS, DEM, M28, SEN): Prototype of integrated 3d -printing system 
including documentation for design and implementation regarding BIM and site operations and sustainable material 
supply chains. MS2.1 Heritage compliance status - Status report and corrective steps presented 
MS2.2 Prototype progress Early prototypes presented 
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 51/70 
 
 
 
 
 
WP3 Integration of BIM-based workflows 
Work package number  WP3 Lead beneficiary DMO  Start 07 
Work package title WP3 Integration of BIM-based workflows End 31 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PMs 0 0 31 5 4 0 0 30 0 33 27 0 11 8 0 0 0 14 0 3 2 39  
WP3 Objectives: To identify and establish BIM-related parameters and  integrate the components of the INPERSO  
platform. 
(1) To consolidate the RE Suite BIM-based platform as the main tool for implementing the project; 
(2) To integrate the IoT, OnSite, Passport RE Suite modules and interface with the SCAAI and RIALTO tools; 
(3) To interface the platform with ECO-I 
(4) To deliver low-cost and low-energy configurations for WSNs, addressing DAQ needs in the demonstrations; 
(5) To consolidate a holistic IEQ management interface, and expand it to include outdoor conditions;  
(6) To deliver the Multi-Stage Energy Consulting System (MuSECS) and integrate in the ECO-I; 
T3.1 SCAAI - Scan to BIM and asset recognition tool - (R2M), M07-M18 
This task will develop new methodologies for the Scan to BIM proc ess, for the automatic detection of building 
objects from the point cloud generated using scanning technologies. The a pplication of AI will allow to perform a 
segmentation of the point cloud and an automatic association of identified object with elements within a BIM library. 
The innovative approach of the tool allows the fast assembly of a BIM model based on a scanned 3D  point cloud, 
instead of reconstructing it.  3D scanning intended to capture a physical object’s exact size and shape into the 
computer world as a digital 3 -dimensional representation. This technique captures information like the complex 
geometry, intrigue shape, colorized texture, and other details of the 3D object that is scanned. In this task different 
tools will be investigated to provide  the most suitable output that can b e used for AI classification, with the focus 
on laser 3D scanning and photogrammetry scanning technologies. This output could be either a 3d point cloud, OBJ 
file, hi -res photos, or a combination of all to provide an accu rate classification of the models’ o bjects and 
components. Furthermore, a definition of an open -source BIM object library – which defines the BIM component 
and geometry that represents its physical characteristics - will be defined, with certain characteri stics such as: the 
availability of d ifferent variables that can be modified to match the classified objects. This task  deals with the 
implementation of the AI tool. Python will be used together with Pytorch and Tensorflow. Initially some tests will 
be made in Jupyter notebooks before developing the tool, to train and test the models. The AI application should be 
able to e xtend the BIM model from the information obtained from the segmentation, classification and database 
load. The generated BIM file which in cludes the info coming from the data base, will be checked and corrected 
manually if needed, then it will be managed in RE Suite (T3.2). Partners involved: DMO, ACCIO Output: SCAAI 
- Scan to BIM and asset recognition tool (R1.1). 
T3.2 BIM-based management platform RE Suite - (DMO), M07-M31 
In this task, RE Suite passport will be developed to host all building related data during the renovation stage. It will 
provide all market stakeholders, including financing institutions, investors, insurers, policymakers, owners and 
operators with access to comprehensive buildings-related documentation and information to enable them to properly 
assess the many factors impacting the overall quality and performance of buildings. RE Suite passport will 
facilitates/enables all relevant information flows between d esigners, builders, local authorities, regulators and 
assessors from the beginning to the end of the renovation process in a BIM based approach. Furthermore, it will also 
include and manage the outputs of T3.1, where building materials and components will be defined, and BIM models 
are generated. RE Suite Passport is an essential supporting tool for the Circular Economy, as it will demonstrate the 
importance of consistent capture and management of building related data al ong the life cycle. To propose and 
develop optimized renovation solutions, a good understanding of the as-is situation of a building as well as the needs 
and requirements of the prospective inhabitants is required. Inhabitants’ inputs are crucial to comple ment a set of 
analyses and simulatio n results particularly concerning comfort. In this respect, a user -friendly ap plication is 
developed to collect such input from inhabitants. An interactive BIM viewer is implemented in the app to facilitate 
the communica tion of spatial questions. Inhabitan ts can indicate a space in response to a question.  Partners 
involved: TAU Output: RE SUITE integrated platform for renovation management (IR1, D3.1). 
T3.3 AR-enabled renovation support - (R2M), M07-M31 
This task will deve lop a AR -enabled solution to support  on-site operations during the planning and execution of 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 52/70 
renovation activities. Op erators will be facilitated in the identification of activities to be performed and possible 
issues to be reported, thanks to the creation  of virtual layers containing techni cal data and images extracted from 
BIM models, reports and other documents generated during the building lifecycle. This information will be retrieved 
from the BIM management platform (T3.2) and, through mobile devices, made available for consultation, upd ate 
and integration directly from the renovation site. Partners involved: ACCIO, DMO Output: RIALTO - AR tool 
for renovation support (R1.2) as part of the RE SUITE platform (D3.1). 
T3.4 IoT and WSN integration - (IRIS), M07-M24 
Based in the overall system speci fication defined in WP1 regarding the suitable sensor -based control for the 
deterioration monitoring in each test site, this task entails a more in -depth analysis of the technical features of the 
hardware and software. An overall architecture of the system will be created. Sensors for the monitoring of critical 
parameters will be selected and integrated to the ov erall PCB based system. The overall selection of material will 
be oriented to a low-cost solution. On the other hand, a wireless sensor network will be proposed. The system will 
be consisting of a heterogeneous wireless sensor network with several RFID nod es and one (or more if required) 
master node covering a large area and acting as a gateway for the RFID nodes. In both cases, each node will 
conceptually comprise a sensor unit (SU) and a communication unit (CCU) as part of the integrated design, plus a 
power supply system able to power the nodes through the required time as defined in the specifications. 
Partners involved: EPFL Output: Low-cost (R5.2) and low-energy (R5.3) wireless sensor networks. 
T3.5 Multi-Stage Energy Consulting System - (CORE), M07-M31 
The Multi-Stage Energy Consulting System (MuSECS for short) will utilise AI/Machine Learning tools combined 
with energy data to provide better ma nagement of energy resources and improve the energy efficiency goals, 
combining energy data from heterogeneous sources (within the site, whether it is a construction site or building) as 
well as information from the energy grid provider and external services into a local database. Specifically, the EMS 
will collect and monitor (real-time) information from (a) process energy loads, ie the total energy consumption curve 
of the process, (b) on-site renewables energy production (c) energy storage capacities (d) the available energy mix 
from the grid & energy prices, and (f) process requirements and constraints. Using the available information, the 
EMS be able to anticipate the overall process energy needs and will take decisions on the optimal energy mix to be 
used by finding the most cost -effective energy policy, i.e. the scheduling of the energy sources and storage 
components that minimize energy costs while satisfying the expected energy consumption of the overall process and 
the corresponding process constraints.  This will be implemented by formulating the energy optimisation problem 
into a suitable multi-objective optimization model based on meta-heuristics algorithm with a given “cost criterion” 
(objective function) that has to be optimized. The objective f unction defines the optimisation goals and typically 
reflects the operational energy costs as weighted sum of the various energy sources, favouring the use of renewables 
by considering the energy prices and the correspon ding CO2 emissions. Moreover, the EM S will enable multiple 
data analytics routines & AI to learn from the historical energy patterns and past actions with the aim to identify the 
energy intensive sub -processes and optimize their energy efficiency.  The Ass et Health Monitoring agent of the 
integrated EMS will be responsible for 2 primary functions: (a) condition monitoring: monitoring the current st ate 
of critical assets in real -time and (b) anomaly detection: conduct advanced data analytics and machine lear ning 
algorithms for detecting deviations from the normal states and assets with high probability of failure. The value of 
this function will be t o inform the operator of the smooth operation of the device and provide advance warning in 
case a deviation fro m operational specifications is anti cipated, so that decision planning for maintenance can be 
facilitated and justified. Finally, the proposed EMS will be able to handle conventional and renewable energy sources 
and will be based on a flexible, modular, and scalable architecture that can be easily extended and retrofitted to other 
similar use -cases according to their needs. This architecture and ap proach to optimisation will enable: (a) the 
application of MuSECS in the construction/retrofit phase; (b) optimisation of asset and building energy performance 
in the use phase; (c) interfacing with the RE SUITE platform, commercial BEMS, user prompts (nudge architecture) 
and (d) interoperability with other optimisation modules such as RE SUITE components and the IEQ interface. 
Partners involved: ACCIO Output: Multistage energy consulting system (R5.1). 
T3.6 Network and Interface for air quality optimisation - (EPFL), M07-M31 
T3.6 will deliver the following outputs: (a) A methodology for benchmarking the I EQ in build ings that have 
undergone energy renovation; (b) A personalized, sensor-driven recommendation system for air pollution exposure, 
thermal stress and inadequate noise and lighting avoidance, which can be used during construction works and during 
the normal op eration of the building. Development  of a new methodology to benchmark the IEQ performance in 
buildings will include deployment of low-cost IEQ sensing platforms in three demo sites (~50 apartments) and three 
schools accompanied with occupancy surveys in order to derive a unified IEQ rating index. This index will contain 
weighting coefficients for each parameter of the indoor environment that is: 1) likely to change in the process of 
deep energy renovation; 2) that can be measured using accessibl e, low-cost and validated methods; and 3) has a  
demonstrated impact on people’s comfort and well -being. We plan to develop ICT solutions for the user 
recommendation system based on low -cost sensor data, which in turn will be guiding behavioural and technic al 
environmental quality interventions and info rm the application of solutions that have the mandate of being 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 53/70 
accessible, pleasurable and inclusive. User feedback (data labelling) will be provided through a screen interface that 
will be installed in each o f the inves tigated spaces. Users will be meanin gfully informed and enabled to make 
behavioural adjustments that will lead to the reduction of exposure and stress and increase of comfort. Our end 
product will be a tool (consisting of sensing array and data analytics) that will aid in decision making to reduce our 
daily exposure, increase comfort and productivity and generally enhance our well-being without compromising the 
energy use. Partners involved: CORE, VENT, ACCIO Output: IEQ management interface (R5.2). 
Deliverables 
D3.1 Integrated BIM-based RE Suite platform (DMO, OTH, SEN, M31): platform prototype with scan-to-BIM 
and energy management integration as inputs from T3.1-3.4. 
D3.2 Energy and air quality optimisation interface (ECO -I) (CORE, OTH, SEN, M 31): Integrated ECO -I 
system prototype consolidating the outputs of T3.4-6. 
MS3.1 DAQ optimised and calibrated (M18) DAQ in each DC is fully operational. 
 
WP4 New models for deep low carbon renovation 
Work package number  WP4 Lead beneficiary TAU  Start 07 
Work package title WP4 New models for deep low carbon renovation End 31 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PMs 0 2 2 34 0 14 18 14 2 0 12 6 2 2 6 2 1 0 2 12 6 2  
WP4 objectives: Improving actual building energy efficiency decreases carbon emissions towards the EU’s 2050 
climate targets. The longevity of buildings means they ‘lock-in’ their performance for decades to come and this has 
two important consequences : (1) renovations will need to mitigate the possible negative impacts of a changing 
climate; (2) user behaviour influences energy use hence the social dimension and acceptance of renovation 
technologies should not be side-lined as they determine the success of our quest to reduce carbon emissions. WP4 
combines these aspects. The goal of WP4 is to create new models for nZEB building renovation with low embodied 
carbon footprint that is also met in reality and meets future local climate change scenarios: 
(1) To collect, map, compare and synthesise renovation criteria and standards in each country, also technology 
acceptance by users; identification of barriers and opportunities.  
(2) To create energy and embodied carbon models of the pil ot case studies, enabling whole-life carbon scenarios, 
with sensitivity analyses of different low carbon renovation combinations based on the consortium’s innovations 
and solutions. Tested for future climate change scenarios. Creation of optimal low carbon renovation models. 
(3) To t est acceptability of the optimal LCRM with stakeholders, including users and local community and 
technology acceptance. Creation of new user-centred low carbon renovation models for each location. 
(4) To create a multi-objective optimisation model based on the above models and criteria, and other parameters. 
(5) To create a ‘pattern book’ of user-centred solutions.  
T4.1 Low carbon renovation design - (TAU), M07-M31 
This task consolidates and advances the state of the art by collecting, mapping, comparing, synthesising and testing 
renovation criteria and standards and performance ap issues (caused by e.g., by inadequate models, or construction 
techniques) in each coun try. Further, we will use energy and embodied carbon models (enabling the wh ole life 
carbon evaluation and  creating truly zero carbon renovation models) and current and future predicted climate 
scenarios to create optimal renovation models. These will then be tested with stakeholders and users in local focus 
groups (min. 3 focus groups in each pilot study country with n=7 in each group, so overall min. 63 participants), and 
further refined to create new user -centred low carbon renovation models for each pil ot study location. It will be 
based on the technologies and innovative solut ions offered by the consortium  partners, and will lead to a third 
refinement that includes all of these criteria in addition to health and safety, cost, accessibility, maintenance,  
interoperability of systems, ease of installation, waste reduction etc. A multi-objective decision-making model with 
be created to includes these parameters, enabling sensitivity analyses with additional criteria. This will then create a 
‘pattern book’ for the INPERSO project, but also acts as a blueprint for future projects in t he regions (D4. 1). Of 
particular importance in this task is the detailed study of the embodied carbon, maintenance and longevity and 
interoperability of the consortium’s solutions and will also help the consortium partners to advance their Technology 
Readiness Level. End user and stake holder inclusion will follow the WP1 plan . This optimisation models will be 
dynamic tools that will be adapted and adjusted during the retrofit and po st-retrofit as more information compares 
available, enabling ‘live’ decision s to be made and to create a r ealistic model for future decision -making in T5.6. 
Partners involved: IVE Output: Renovation design methodologies (R2.1). 
T4.2 Capacity building - (R2M), M12-M31 
This task will design and implement a strategy to develop compete nces necessary for the correct  adoption of the 
INPERSO solutions. The objective is to create an INPERSO Training Programme, offered on the INPERSO 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 54/70 
platform but also through a serie s of Training Actions (workshops, webinars, on -site training at Pilot premis es) 
targeting the stakeholders identified in T1.4. Technical partners will develop training contents for each INPERSO 
result, that will be annotated (to facilitate search and aggregation) and combined in training modules and associated 
to specific renovation products and processes. 
Partners involved: IVE, TAU, EUROC Output: INPERSO Training Programme (R1.4). 
T4.3 Stakeholder engagement – (IVE), M07-M31 
INPERSO seeks to carry out a holistic deep renovation process that not only involves a specific punctual intervention 
to improve the physical conditions of the building, but also seeks the involvement of all the intervening stakeholders, 
especially the end users of the building, to al so achieve their transformation improving their day-to-day behaviour 
and the u se they make of the building. In order to meet this objective and based on the results of Horizon 2020 
previous projects with successful results about the interaction with users (TripleAreno, Mobistyle Drive0, INFINITE 
a.o.), the objective of this task is to create and apply a methodol ogy for the involvement of end users and all 
stakeholders who intervene in the day -to-day of the building to improve their awareness of energy effic iency and 
circularity so to achieve the best performance possible of the renovated buildings. The methodology will imply the 
proposal of the appropriate communication mechanisms in each case, the possible advice and language to be used 
and the tools availa ble to carry out such interaction. The task also involves accompanying the pil ots in the 
implementation of t he methodology.  Partners involved : R2M Output: Engagement / living lab methodology 
(R2.2). 
T4.4 Life Cycle Analysis & Cost Benefit Analysis – (IVE) M07-31 
In this task, an S -LCA will be carried out leading to the optimization o f the constructive solutions t o the climatic 
conditions and life cycle considerations. To assess impact along supply chains, Life cycle-based methodologies have 
been developed ov er time. Life cycle assessment (LCA) considers mainly environmental impacts al ong supply 
chains, from extraction of raw materials to end-of-life of products. Similarly, social life cycle assessment (S-LCA) 
integrates traditional life cycle assessment methodological steps while having social impacts as focus. Coupling the 
assessment of environmental and socio-economic issues may support more comprehensive sustainability assessment 
of impacts, benefits, and related trade -offs. The task will develop a methodol ogical framework for the social 
sustainability assessment in building retrofit : a) Draft of a causal loop di agram according to the system dynamics 
approach to identify the cause -effect relationships among the different variables, stakeholders, and impacts areas 
related to building retrofit. b) Performance of a social hotspots screen ing to detect major potential social impacts 
and risks related to building retrofit and most contributing processes to social issues. The screening will combine 
different tools and methods, such as a literature review, thematic interviews with key stakeholders and a preliminary 
social LCA study with SimaPro 9.1 LCA software using related methods such as EPS2015, damage-oriented impact 
assessment method. c) Selection of social indi cators suitable for the assessment and monitoring of the social 
sustainability performance of retrofitting. e) Validation of the framework with the local demo cases. The task will 
produce a report on the developed methodology (draft at M18, final at M28). Output: LCA &CBA report (D4.1). 
T4.5 User interaction with novel digital systems - (TAU), M07-M31 
A selection of the most promising smart tech (apps, sensors, robots, games etc.) based interaction design concepts 
will be tested with local users in focus group studies in each pilot country – invited as per WP1 plan, and as per T 
4.1 (n=63). This study will create a shortlist of smart tech to be tested in more detail and over a longer period with 
a smaller user group (max. 50% of the sample; i.e. around 10 users in each region.) The most promising smart tech 
concepts (based on user frie ndliness, user expe rience, energy saving potential and actual energy saving or other 
sustainable behaviour benefit) and guidelines will be applied in the INPERSO renovation model, creating a ‘human-
centred smart tech renovation guide’. This approach will provide valuable feedback in the process of maturing the 
technologies. Partners involved: Tech developers Output: Human-centred smart tech renovation guide (R2.6). 
Deliverables 
D4.1 INPERSO deep low carbon renovation models (TAU, R, SEN, M18,31) Report describing the INPERSO 
methodology (M18-TAU) and engagement / living lab methodology (IVE M18) including a ‘user-centred smart tech 
renovation guide. The report will be updated in M31 for post-occupancy evaluations including details on stakeholder 
engagement activities (M31-IVE) and LCA& CBA and INPERSO upscale to prepare for early adopters engagement. 
A h uman-centred smart tech renovation guide  comprising a  multi-objective de cision-making model enabling 
sensitivity analyses with additional criteria and a ‘pattern book’ for the INPERSO project as a blueprint for future 
projects in the regions (D4.1) will be included.  
D4.2 INPERSO training programme (R2M, OTH, PU, M31) A package of on-line training material for TGI,II 
professionals and TGVI INPERSO users and public.  
MS4.1 Stakeholder engagement progress (M18) Status presented and corrective steps MS4.2 Plan for capacity 
building (M18) Draft plan circulated. 
 
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 55/70 
WP5 Validation and demonstration 
Work package number  WP5 Lead beneficiary AMS Start 01 
Work package title WP5 Validation and demonstration End 48 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PMs 18 30 25 19 12 3 6 10 9 17 24 23 10 42 20 14 18 27 5 6 14 20  
WP5 Objectives: To validate and demonstrate the completed INPERSO system in three project demonstration sites. 
(1) To implement project activities in the demo cases and carry out all administrative, technical or other actions 
needed to pre pare the demo cases regarding logistics, construction project management alignment, permissions, 
stakeholders involved and evaluation groups; 
(2) To validate each technology and subsystem (IR) in the operational environment of the demonstrations; 
(3) To carry out comprehensive demonstrations of each of the project’s results and highlight the innovations; 
(4) To evaluate the results and collect data to be utilised to increase the TRL of the solutions to 8 (WP6). 
T5.1 Monitoring and commissioning of demonstration sites (UPV) M01-M29  
In this task, the activities carried out to realise the scope of the INPERSO demonstrations will be monitored and 
supported. Each demonstration will follow the Common Implementation Methodology, adapted per the respective 
Action Plan. The individual interventions are described in T5.3-5. The common approach is as follows:  
Phase 1 – Design (M7-18): following the conclusion of WP1, the refined and consolidated specifications & 
requirements will allow each demonstrator to finalise their demonstration designs (M18). Smart meters for overall 
building consumption will be installed as soon as possibl e for basic data collection (M3). Demonstration groups 
(individuals from each participant) will be defined to facilitate management  according to the following draft 
assignments: DC#1 AUMSA, IVE, ACCIO; DC#2 MWNB, DMO, R2M; DC#3 DVVV, AMS, CORE, VIAS. 
 In parallel, administrative actions (obtaining permits, submitting plans a.o.) will be carried out and any risks will be 
reported, updating the risk log. A detailed bill-of-materials and tender information will be reported. Key stakeholders 
(as identified in WP1) will be approached and involved in conjunction with the activities of WP4. Health, safety and 
accessibility aspects will be assessed rigor ously (EUROC), especially with  regards to fire, seismic safety and 
waterproofing. In this context, regulatory risks will also be identified and reported in  the Risk Log. A monitoring 
plan will be deployed in each of the selected buildings (IRIS, DMO, R2M, CORE) for the test sites.  UPV will 
oversee this part of the work focusing on aspects on communication, uniformity, good coordination between actors 
in the projects and avoidance of additional costs incurred. 
Phase 2 – Integration (M19-28): Buildings will be monitored for a full year (not counting calibrations) to establish 
the energy performance baseline prior to the interventions. Air quality sensors and acoustic sensors will be installed 
to assess the noise and dust levels and compare with conventional co nstruction values based on li terature and 
elaborated via the Advisory Board and consultation with stakeholders. Each of the technologies of the Retrofit -Kit 
will be integrated during this stage. Following the design activities of Phase 1, components will b e manufactured, 
shipped and installed during this period.  
Phase 3 – Validation (M24-31): During this phase, the integrated systems will be validated in the operational 
environments of the demonstration sites. Evaluation of the proposed actions from a technoeconomic perspective will 
also be conducted (CORE), Feedback from the citizens in terms of elaborated user satisfaction will be included.  
RE Suite: DMO and R2M will integrate the RE Suite components and deploy the platform (IR1) and utilise it data 
collection at the demo sites, addressing also challenges with regards to heritage asset entry in BIM libraries. 
Façade 3D Printer: ITA and UPV will work with CART and VIAS to deploy the façade 3D printer (IR4) at the sites 
which allow for deployment due to spat ial considerations (DC#2 and D C#3). Issues will be identified and if 
deployment is problematic an alternative demonstration site will be imp lemented. The prototype will be tested 
according to the plan defined and the capabilities and areas of improvement w ill be identified and reported before 
releasing the system for the operational demonstration.   
Retrofit-Kit: AMS, VENT, IWIN, SUPSI and METSOL will verify the technological configurations, manufacture 
and support the installation of the Retrofit-Kit and associated components (IR3) in the demonstration sites according 
to the detailed designs.  
ECO-I: CORE, IRIS and EPFL will deploy the ECO-I, that will be used with ACCIO’s support to assess and optimise 
construction works (IR5). 
Accessibility, safety & health review (EUROC). This review will compare these parameters in  the consortium’s 
different innovation systems, feeding into the optimisation models in Task 4.1. Typical renovation accessibility and 
OHSE issues encountered  on-site will be reviewed and compiled in a digital  health and safety operation guide.  
Output Validation report (D5.1). 
T5.2 DC #1 – Calle Estrella (AUMSA) M01-M43  
DC#1 is a multifamily building constructed in 1850 and renovated in 2002. DC#1 features 22 interior (courtyard 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 56/70 
facing) windows and 2 doors. The exterior (heritage protected) comprises 16 balconies, 10 windows (2 on the sloped 
roof) and two gateways. The exterior façade has a total area of 314.16m 2, while the interior is 244.8m 2. The 
demonstrations will be centred around showcasing the improvements of building performance and user satisfaction 
from the renovation works. The main challenges are: (a) the heritage status, (b) the location (city centre, occupancy, 
ground floor market), (d) low smartness and ageing equipment. Interventions will be focused on improving the CO2 
footprint of renovations by means  of sustainable products & processes, modification of prototypes to adhere to 
heritage regulations, introduction of digital solutions and user engagement. For the design (pre-retrofit) phase, DC#1 
will be supported by IVE  & TAU to define user needs and loc al contexts and deliver a plan for engagement and 
LCRMs. For the retrofit phase, the 3D printing of façade elements (or prefabricated elements) will be assessed, while 
focus on modifying solar windows and BIPVs to address the heritage requirements will also be committed. The level 
of disruption and pollution of renovation works will be closely monitored as in all cases.  
Partners involved: all, mainly IVE, UPV, ACCIO Output: Demonstrator #1 Valencia (R5.1) reported in D5.2. 
T5.3 DC #2 – Trinity Complex (MWNB) M01-M43 
DC#2 entails three buildings in a 130,000m 2 area in the city of Velp, the province of North Brabant. All building 
are culture heritage buildings and protected by law, which add another complexity dimension in the renovation work. 
The three buildings illustrate well the developments in the religious field in the Meierij and the Land van Ravenstein, 
adding a significant cultural dimension to the heri tage aspects . The entire  area is planned for renovation and 
landscaping. INPERSO will be an integral part of th e design process to achieve a low-carbon retrofit in the entire 
area. Given the size and scope of the pilot site, it is not possible to carry out deep renovation in each building, but 
the entire area is available to test the project’s solutions and upscale into a neighbourhood scale retrofit. The change-
of-use of buildings B,C and D (into services such as restaurants and accommodation) is also an a dded challenge, 
and the cultural significance of the area adds another layer of complexity with regards to tolerance to disruption 
(noise, pollution, activity). For DC#2, piloting and optimising low-disruption, pollution and energy retrofits is key 
(CORE, EPFL, ACCIO). Moreover, IEQ and energy balance will be differentiated from the other cases as the climate 
is less conducive to natural ventilation and humidity poses a risk also to the heritage components. Finally, DC#2 
provides a unique opportunity to exp loit (a) the plans for a heating network that is planned to be installed , and (b) 
the high proportion of visitors compared to local users. In this context, the approach will be focused on achieving 
behavioural change  also in the case of visitors , a factor that will influence the characteristics of the energy 
community. Partners involved: all, mainly DMO, R2M, VIAS Output: Demo#2 Velp (R5.2) reported in D5.2. 
T5.4 DC #3 – Social Shelter Litous Street (VVV)M01-M43 
DC#3 is a multiapartment building that was initially designed and built as a hotel in 1962 prior to renovation and 
donation to the Municipality of Vouliagmeni (VVV) during the 80s. It’s a 4-storey building (no basement) with a 
total surface area on all floors of 1389,00 m2 (388m2 each floor except for the 3rd that spans 225m2), total building 
height of 11,50  m and total volume of 2931,00  m3. The building has a 32,10 m long façade on Litous St. and is 
around 6,90 m in depth, with open spaces at all sides of the plot. DC#3 does not have any her itage restrictions and 
thus a multifaceted approach to renovation can be employed. The ground floor will be fully refurbished to maximise 
indoor comfort and energy performance. The ground floor features all the common spaces that are used for activities, 
and also it is the location where the groups congregate, emphasizing the need for good indoor air quality. The Smart 
Wall will be the main component for the renovation. BIPVs and solar windows will also be installed in a 
multifunctional interface that will prioritise interoperability. In this 4 -storey building in Greece the following 
retrofitting works could take place, depending on the outcomes of WP1 and 2: i) installation of the smart wall system 
in one floor, ii) installation of commercial ETICs in a second floor, iii) replacement of the old windows with energy 
efficiency window systems, iv) insulation on the roof or terrace of the building, v) installation of HVAC systems and 
vi) installation of PV systems. In addition, urban farming facilities with the use of recycled wastewater of the building 
as well as lighting of the surrounding area with the use of PV are foreseen.  Partners involved: all, mainly AMS, 
CORE, EUROC, EPFL Output: Demonstrator #3 Voula (R5.3) reported in D5.2. 
T5.5 Monitoring of renovation energy footprint (ACCIO) M012-M32  
In this task, the transferability of MuSECS and the IEQ interface will be carried out to optimise construction and 
renovation works. The goal is to collect data from the renovation works (assets deployed, activities planned, timeline 
and work durations a.o.) and generate a prediction of the daily energy demand (CORE). This prediction will have 
dynamic characteristics meaning that the construction site manager will receive optimised configurations for the 
scheduling of energy demanding activities. This approach will benefit sites where RES and storage are available, as 
demand-response will be made available at the construction/retrofit phase. Moreover, a similar approach will be 
implemented to monitor the noise, pollution and th ermal stres ses (EPFL), y ielding data valuable in assessing 
construction work-related risks. These approaches will also provide information that will be correlated with the 
perception of building users with regards to renovation works and will be implemented in all three sites (TAU, IVE). 
Partners involved: Demonstrator groups Output: Renovation energy footprint (R5.3) reported in D5.2. 
T5.6 Post occupancy evaluations (TAU) M024-M48  
Following WP1 user and stakeholder engagement plans post-occupancy evaluation will be undertaken to ensure that 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 57/70 
as designed and planned renovation will work as intended in real -life. This includes building performance 
monitoring (e.g. energy use, thermal bridging (use of IR camera) and also the thermal comf ort conditions of 
representative units (e.g. on  the ground floor, middle and top floor, large and small etc.). n= min . 10 in each pilot 
case study. Walk-throughs will also be included with users, alongside a post -occupancy interview or survey with 
each household. This will be un dertaken in the first 6 months of the completion, and ideally repeated 1 year and 2 
years post completion. Any issues raised will be passed on to the relevant parties to ensure they are rectified, and 
continuous monitoring will be u ndertaken to ensure the issues are resolved. Specific focus will be on day -day use 
of smart and digital technologies, their acceptance and user friendliness and potential to encourage more sustainable 
lifestyles. This will lead to a validation report, and lessons learned (D5.1.). Academic articles (min 1) will also be 
published). Partners involved: EPFL, CORE Output: Post occupancy evaluation reported in D5.2. 
T5.7 Demonstration activities and evaluation of results (ITA) M32-M48  
INPERSO will be demonstrated in full operational scale in the three demo cases. The monitoring data collected to 
characterize the existing situation prior to intervention will be compared with data after the intervention, focusing 
on the use-phase and engagement.  
The RE Suite integrated platform  (IR1) will be demonstrated in  full capacity with the Passport, IoT and OnSite 
modules, as well as the integration of SCAAI and RIALTO and interfacing with the other components 
(DMO,R2M,CORE,EPFL,TAU,ACCIO).  
The Low-Carbon Renovation Models (LCRM, IR2) will be employed in the demonstrations throughout the lifecycle 
and used for the active participation of stakeholders (TAU, MIRC, CORE, R2M, IVE). 
The Retrofit -Kit technologies ( IR3) will be demonstrated following their integration in the demonstration sites 
according to each corresponding configuration (AMS, VENT, IWIN, SUPSI, METSOL). 
The Façade 3D Printer (IR4) will be demonstrated through the production of a large-scale façade as described in the 
objectives, to showcase work quality through the automated process (VIAS, UPV, CART, ITA). 
The Energy & Comfort Optimisation Interface  (ECOI, IR5) will be employed in each demo case, as well as the 
replication cases to highlight the potential of IAQ coupled with energy optimisation  both in the use and in the 
construction phase (CORE, EPFL, IRIS, ACCIO). 
The INPERSO completed system (IR6) will be the product of WP6, based on the wealth of operational data and 
feedback collected via T5.7 and the rest of WP5 tasks (AUMSA, MWNB, VVV, EUROC). The overarching goal of 
this task is to verify the technical, economic and social key performance indicators and interpret acceptance so that 
a roadmap for the final stretch towards commercialization (TRL8-9) can be defined. In addition, best practices will 
be collected and published (D5.1). Output: Demonstration report and steps forwards (D5.2). 
Deliverables 
D5.1 Validation report  (UPV) (R, PU, M 18,31) Detailed description of the preparation, commissioning and 
implementation (activities as documented in phases 1-3 of the demonstration consolidating T5.1 outputs. 
D5.2 Demonstration report and steps forward  (ITA, R, SEN, M48)  Detailed report showcasing demo best 
practices regarding technological, stakeholders feedback and steps forward for INPERSO upscaling. 
MS5.1 Design phase complete (M18): Presented at the review meeting MS5.2 Start of validation (M28): Start at 
each demo case verified MS5.3 Start of demonstrations (M31): Start at each demo case verified  MS5.4 Draft 
replication plan (M36): Draft plan circulated. 
 
WP6 Management of INPERSO innovations 
Work package number  WP6 Lead beneficiary CORE Start 01 
Work package title WP6 Management of INPERSO innovations End 48 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PMs 2 1 21 11 4 3 12 12 2 0 2 14 2 2 5 2 1 2 1 0 2 2  
WP6 contains activities to ensure a successful market entry for INPERSO. The financial framework of operation for 
all INPERSO stakeholders will be established to achieve benefits on an EU level during scale-up activities. Multiple 
target groups will be involved, and the market roll out will be designed and delivered implementing a bottom-up 
approach. A critical design review for the project’s results will be carried out to achieve TRL8 and plan TRL9. 
WP6 has the following specific objectives:  
(1) To catalogue current standards & certification, as well as contribute to emerging industrialised high automation 
standards in B&C and to conduct a roadmap for future standardisation contribution. 
(2) To design and develop novel user-centric scalable and EU agile business models for multiple B&C stakeholders, 
end users, occupants and utilities providers aligned with the INPERSO proposed business models (WP7DEC). 
(3) To finetune the proposed b usiness models through participatory processes and user input from all relat ed 
stakeholders, user profiles and decision-making hierarchies. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 58/70 
(4) To engage external stakeholders along the entire energy provision value chain and collec t feedback for future 
market uptake as a project Advisory Board. 
(5) To plan follow-up activities and ensure continuity in order to safeguard market entry , update the State-of-the-
Art analysis and define the initial position of INPERSO in the market, To analyse the target markets on an EU and 
global level, identifying opportunities for market launch and manage intellectual property, through the protection 
and exploitation strategies definition , identify target users and customer segments, analyse their need s and align 
INPERSO offering to meet these needs, prepare an exploitation plan for the INPERSO solutions, ensuring research 
and commercial exploitation and develop suitable business models for the developed technologies, to ensure their 
market entry; and develop a roadmap for realising INPERSO expected impacts and for full-scale deployment; 
T6.1 Standardisation, certification and regulatory monitoring – (EUROC) M1-M48 
In this task, EUROC will coordinate the effort to assess the offerings of INPERSO, ensure that it follows all the 
rules necessary for market viability and highlight areas where targeted innovations can bring value to each target 
group. EUROC will coordinate the inputs of all partners, who will submit their relevant standards and certification 
processes. The activities will comprise: 
Monitoring of regulations and relevant legislation : All project’s activities, from development of technologies, 
software and systems to their integration and implementation as the INPERSO system will be monitored with regards 
to European regulations and national legislation. Additionally, emerging initiatives, new laws or other developments 
that may impact the project’s activity positively or negatively will also be monitored.  
Monitoring of certification and standard ization activities: A li st of the relevant standard s will be compiled and 
presented. Relevant standards relate to indoor environmental parameters, energy performance of buildings, energy 
performance calculations, assessment of overall performance, thermal performance, air flow ra te calculation, 
methods for certification and thermal conditions for occupancy. Necessary certification activities will be reported in 
M12 and conducted by the end of the project. Indicatively, the following list of standards will b e employed by 
category: insulation heating (EN 15316-1 and EN 15316-4), domestic hot water (EN 15316-3), cooling (EN 15243), 
ventilation (EN 15241), lighting (EN 15193) and controls EN 15232 (CEN 2012). Moreover, the EUBAC standard 
will be pursued.  
Data security and privacy monitoring: All project activities relevant to the acquisition, aggregation and processing 
of data or any related activity will be conducted in full compliance with GDPR and the associated EU and national 
regulations. During this task, EUROC will collect input  provided by the partners i nvolved and will assess the 
measures taken to safeguard user data. 
Partners involved : all partners providing input on corresponding standard compliance, national regulation 
adherence. IVE has its own Certification entity, which is focused on the development of voluntary certifications for 
buildings. The one that is active in this moment is BES (Well-being in sustainable spaces).  
Output: Industrial positioning and regulation compliance roadmap reported in D6.2. 
T6.2 Ecosystem empowerment activities - (IVE), M24-M48 
Two types of interconnected activities are planned. Firstly, activities that exploit the progress of the INPERSO demo-
sites will be planned for implementation on a post-project timeframe to attract early adopters (R5.1-3). The following 
types of activities are planned: (a) Scale up of implementation in the demo sites, through enlargement of the scope 
of INPERSO installation to include more services , increase coverage and expansion of community aspects . (b) 
Integration of additional buildings  under the same organization, which is applicable in all demo sites.  (c) 
Integration of early adopters involved via The INPERSO Advisory Board, both on regional level relevant to  all 
demo locations involved, as well as other locations (i.e. through clustered projects and joint activities with ecosystem 
projects). Partner Roles: The demo-site owners / managers will liaise with external actors with the support of the 
Coordinator, the DEM, the Task  Leaders of T6.3, T6.4. In this task, replication and transferability actions will be 
planned and carried out, through the participation and support of the Advisory Board and other EU R&I initiatives. 
Output: Transferability and replication strategy reported in D6.2. 
T6.3 INPERSO development cycle finalization – (UPV) M31-M48 
This task performs a qualification checklist: the verification and validation (V&V) activities are completed, the ML 
algorithms are trained, the IoT components are integrated,  the IoT platform is tested according to technical standards 
in a representative share of /or operating conditions, interoperability and communication issues are solved, 
demonstrations including actual users are completed, user feedback is provided, documentation is completed , 
standards are and producing a qualified commercial product. 
Partner Roles: All partners will complete the checklist to justify the increase of the readiness level to TRL7-8. 
Output: INPERSO TRL8 qualification checklist reported in D6.2. 
T6.4 Market analysis, Target Groups, and Value Proposition (M1-M48) - CORE, All Partners 
Market analysis will be performed by analysing market intelligence information from relevant industry associations 
of EU’s and world’s biggest markets. Customer segmentation will focus  on elaborating the alre ady conducted 
identification of Target Groups an d Customer segments and analysing their needs and pain points. Based on this, 
the INPERSO pain relievers and gain creators will be carefully developed. Using our End-Users as proxies for target 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 59/70 
customers, the final step is the design of the INPERSO value p roposition, i.e., a detailed analysis of the value that 
INPERSO unlocks for its’ target Customers and Users. INPERSO Value Proposition will be built through carefully 
designed questionnaires, workshops and interviews. 
Partners involved: MIRC will perform a  market analysis, defining the relevant market segments, their size and 
future growth prospects. A specific focus will be placed on the EU B&C industries, while key global markets will  
be analysed. CORE will define the Customer segments and Users. CORE wil l lead the design of INPERSO value 
proposition and analyse how this addresses the needs of both target Customers and Users. In this Task, key input 
will be provided by our End -Users, w ho will indicate key tar get geographical markets for INPERSO 
commercialisation. Also, our End Users will provide input on their needs as possible customers, the main needs they 
face and how INPERSO can match these needs. Output: Market analysis reported in D6.1. 
T6.5 Sustainable Innovation Management (CORE), M01-M48 
In the project, we will advance INPERSO technology to TRL-7-8; hence, after project ends further investments will 
be needed to advance INPERSO to TRL-9 and realise the expected impacts. In this Task, our goal is to facilitate the 
use of sustainable financial products for INPERSO, after project ends. Specifi cally, we will employ a data driven 
sustainability assessment framework that will use data analytics technologies to accurately assess the sustainability 
aspects of the INPERSO technology. Initially, the environmental sustainability goals of the INPERSO co nsortium 
will be translated to relevant Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) from the six environmental objectives of the EU 
Taxonomy Regulation. In addition, Social, Go vernance and Viability goals will be considered and translated to 
relevant KPIs following the guidelines of the European Federation of Financial Analysts Societies (EFFAS). Once 
KPIs are established, the consortium partners will pro duce the roadmap with ac tions to achieve the forecasted 
savings. Then, technology providers will deploy the Indust ry 4.0 technologies (IoT systems, predictive analytics, 
AR etc) that will monitor the achievement of these KPIs. During the demo activities, the achievement of these KPIs 
will be carefully assessed and will be reported in an impact assessment s tudy, which, post-project, will be used as 
the main document to raise sustainable finance to accelerate the commercialisation activities of the INPERSO 
technologies. In addition,  our Innovation Management activities will focus on the following topics: (a) SWOT 
analysis: Provide insights about INPERSO’s internal technological Strengths and Weaknesses, as well as external 
market-related Opportunities and Thre ats. (b) PESTLE analysis : Analyse key factors (Political, Environmental, 
Societal, Technological, Legal, Economic) that could influence the commercialisation of INPERSO technologies. 
(c) Porter Five Forces analysis : Evaluate INPERSO competitive landscape i n the process industries, through the 
Five Forces model of Prof. Michael E. Porter. (d) Innovation Potential : Analyse INPERSO market potential, 
innovation readiness and innovation management, following JRC’s Innovation Radar methodology. (e) Future 
Financing Plan: Develop the pos t-project financing plan for attracting further financing to advance INPERSO to 
TRL-9. The financing plan will include both public (i.e. Invest EU fund, EIC fund, etc) and private funding (Venture 
Capitals, EIB, etc) sources. Partner Roles: CORE will lead T6.6 receiving input from all partners. Key input about 
the Industry 4.0 infrastructure that will be used for tracking the environmental KPIs will be provided by the Technical 
Manager. The End Users will provide input about how thes e KPIs are translated  into meaningful environmental 
parameters that characterise their processes. Output: Sustainable Innovation Management reported in D6.1. 
T6.6 Advocacy - (MWNB), M12-M48 
This task will aggregate best practices in Europe related to BIM incentives, renovation policies, training and uptake 
measures package them and then conduct advocacy to spread these best practices to other countries. Often, a simple 
example or template of a policy or program can unlock action toward replication somewhere  else. Examples to 
highlight include the “the importance of MonumentenWacht system” that developed by MWNB. This result of this 
task will be advocacy materials, stakeholder types to which advocacy actions should take place and an advocacy 
roadmap outlining key actions structured in a logical manner to promote and facilitate the uptake of INPERSO 
results and increase the project impact. Output: Advocacy roadmap reported in D6.2. 
Deliverables 
D6.1 INPERSO Business Cases and Impact assessment report (CORE, M18/48, R, SEN): The report will assess 
the Environmental, Social, Governance and Viability Impact of the INPERSO technologies for the business cases 
that will build on our Use-Cases. Also, in the report we will calculate INPERSO’s contribution to the objectives of 
the European Green Deal and to EC’s Circular Economy Action Plan consolidating the outputs of T6.4&5.  
D6.2 INPERSO pre -launch activities  (UPV , R, SEN, M48 ) A report summarising all INPERSO activities 
contributing in speeding up the market launch of the syste m and consolidating the outputs of T6.1-3,6 namely: (i) 
Standardisation, certification and regulatory activities (EUROC); (ii) Ecosystem empowerment activities (IVE);(III) 
development cycle finalization activities (iv) advocacy roadmap (MWNB).  
MS6.2 Initial positioning and SoA of INPERSO (CORE-M12): Identify state of the art in relevant solutions and 
review benchmarks, investigating and updating the SoA, analysing new, existing and past projects, initiatives and if 
new products/technologies have been introduced into the market. A final repor t will be delivered, wit h a special 
focus on new potential opportunities and possible threats. 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 60/70 
WP7 Communication, Dissemination, Exploitation 
Work package number  WP7 Lead beneficiary MIRC Start 01 
Work package title WP7 Communication, Dissemination, Exploitation End 48 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PMs 2 4 19 4 3 26 4 5 4 2 4 4 4 4 1 4 2 4 4 0 4 4  
WP7’s objective is to establish the appropriate dissemination, communication and exploitation measures for project 
outputs, ensuring the commercial and research exploitation of project outcomes.   
(1) To develop an effective dissemination and communication strategy and support it with appropriate tools; 
(2) To raise public awareness and generate dissemination and communication material to create a project identity; 
(3) To identify target groups, key messages, communication channels, and exchange experience with projects and 
groups working in the field in order to join efforts, minimize duplication and maximize potential; 
(4) To support capacity building toward the INPERSO target audience; 
Partners involved: All partners will participate in C&D activities promoting the project 
T7.1 Dissemination of INPESRO results (MIRC), M1-M48 
Dissemination activities will aim at describing and making available for uptake the project results, so that they can 
be used in their own work by a target audience specifically segmented, and in l ine with the protection of IPRs. 
Following EC guidelines, this specific package will execute “the public disclosure of the results by any appropriate 
means, including by scientific publications in any medium”, pursuing: 1) transfer of knowledge and results  to the 
ones that can be st make use of it; 2) maximization of the impact of research, en abling the value of results to be 
potentially wider than the original focus. The package will be based on timeline and approach of §2.2. Main results 
of the research pr oject will be collected and organized in scientific articles that will be published in t he main 
scientific journals of the industry. Open Access will be pursued at all times. All consortium members will make 
contacts with their network in order to form a d atabase of stakeholders, with a focus on relevant associations. To 
support communication and dissemination packages, and to address the target audience in a tailored way, INPERSO 
will also rely on the following four classes of events with different target audiences and planning, namely: i) 
dissemination events/workshops; ii) demo sites field trips; iii) the INPERSO final conference; iv) the participation 
in third parties’ events, related to the specific project target domains. 
T7.2 Exploitation strategy (CORE), M01-M48  
All partners will contribute to the developme nt of the exploitation plans for project results. The Exploitation Plan 
will aim to define the way (a) each partner will individually exploit their Exploitable Results and (b) the consortium 
will j ointly exploit  INPERSO Integrated Results. Both for the Ind ividual Results and the Integ rated Results, 
appropriate IPR protection methods will be considered, and IPR ownership among consortium partners will be 
defined. The INPERSO Exploitation Plan will be accompanied by carefully developed sustainable business models, 
that will analyse and t est key business concepts for taking project results to the market. To this end, the Business 
Model Canvas methodology will be implemented focussing on the development of a Triple Layer Business Model 
Canvas which c omplements and extends the original economically -oriented business model canvas concept with 
new canvas layers exploring environmental a nd social value creation . The key consortium partners to de liver the 
INPERSO Value Proposition (D6.1) and strategic part nerships which are necessary for the delivery of INPERSO 
product to the markets, will be identified. Building on the Customer analysis ( performed in WP6), the type of 
Relationship and Channels that each Customer Segment expects from INPERSO partners will be analysed. To this 
end, the already established Relationships and Channels among the consortium partners and their clients will be used 
as a basis. Also, the necessary Activities and the relate d Resources to implement each  business model will be 
analysed. Key Activities that will be analysed to swiftly introduce the project results to the market will include 
Research & Innovation, Techno logy tuning, certificati on, IPR protection and skills/compe tencies building. The 
Resources will be categorised by their type; Physical, Intellectual (brand patents, copyrights, data, etc.), Human and 
Financial. The analysis of costs for both Activities and  Resources will provide the detailed cost structure of each  
business model. Based on the  defined cost structure, INPERSO pricing strategies will be optimised and for each 
Customer Segment revenue streams will be developed. The environmental layer of the tr iple layer business model 
canvas will be developed based on  a Life Cycle perspective of INPERSO’s environmental impact. Moreover, the 
social layer of the triple layer business model canvas will be developed based on a stakeholder management approach 
balancing the interests of INPERSO stakeholders (i.e. customers, suppliers, citizen communities leaving close to 
industrial areas, governmental bodies, etc). Finally, all three layers will be integrated into the triple layer business 
model canvas and the most sustainable business model will be selected.  
Partners involved: UPV will lead the definition of the joint results, the tuning of their IPR strategy and will manage 
the IP ownership among consortium partners, supported by CORE, MIRC and ITA. CORE will lead the development 
of the INPERSO business models. Several business models will be built and the most profitable will be selected. To 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 61/70 
achieve this goal, CORE will use their Profit Simulation Tool which allows the simulation of the commercialisation 
phase and the enables the calculation of financial forecasts. Commercial partners will identify and consolidate the 
existing channels and relationships they maintain to reach and serve their customers. Moreover, they will provide 
input regarding existing pricing strategies of their products and of competing products. The End-Users will provide 
their feedback on the final business models and elaborate on their willingness-to-pay based on the final INPERSO 
business model. MIRC will lead LCA activities will focus on developing the environmental layer of the triple layer 
business model canvas. CORE with input from all partners will lead the development of the social layer of the triple 
layer business model canvas. 
T7.3 Communication activities (CORE), M1-M48 
This task will  create the brand of the  project, including all the aesthetic elements to communicate to the general  
public. This includes the design of the logo and visual brand for project deliverables, presentations, leaflets, website, 
etc. Such communication assets will be translated to all project languages to maximize the scope of public addressed 
among Europe. Communication activities will be active during the whole project duration, informing about project 
objectives, progress, milestones and results. Modern and wi dely used tools such as videos, dedicated to the main  
steps of the project development will be realized and published. One video for each use case will be produced. The 
most used and professional social media networks will be used by setting up specific ac counts or hashtags to be  
bounced on all project partners accounts (YouTube, Twitter, LinkedIn). The project website will also be launched. 
Deliverables  
D7.1 Strategic plan for Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication of project results  (MIRC, R, SEN, 
M18,36, 48)  
D7.2 INPERSO digital ID (CORE) (DEC, SEN, M12) DEC digital material consolidating the visual identity of 
INPERSO, such as logo, website, colour palette, leaflets and brochures in digital format.  
D7.3 INPERSO Exploitation report (CORE, R, SEN, M18,36, 48) Report deta iling the INPERSO exploitation 
strategy and outcomes of the exploitation activities.  
MS7.1 DEC activities fully initiated (M6) Circulation of the project visual id, of the related documents templates, 
of the e-communication package, printed materials and draft DECP. 
 
WP8 Project management and coordination 
Work package number  WP8 Lead beneficiary ITA Start 01 
Work package title WP8 Project Management and Coordination End 48 
# 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  
 
ITA 
UPV 
CORE 
TAU 
CART 
MIRC 
IVE 
R2M 
METS 
IRIS 
DMO 
EURO
C VENT 
AMS 
AUMS
A MWN
B DVVV 
ACCI
O VIAS 
SUPSI 
IWIN 
EPFL 
 
PMs 20 18 3 3 3 3 3 1 3 0 3 3 3 3 1 3 1 3 3 1 3 3  
WP8 Objectives: To develop an effective and comprehensive administrative, financial, tech nical and legal 
management in order to ensure the successful execution of the project.  
(1) To ensure the achievement of all project objectives in terms of time, quality and costs.  
(2) To set the appropriate coordination and management tools, methods and decision-making processes.  
(3) To perform smooth and effective management and coordination of the consortium guaranteeing joint 
understanding among the project partners and ensuring the right functioning of the governing bodies established.  
(4) To carry out periodic communications and high-quality technical and financial reporting of the project’s progress 
to the European Commission (EC). 
T8.1 Administrative & financial management Coordination - (ITA), M01-M48 
This task will include the overall legal, co ntractual, financial and  administrative management of the project,  
including: (a) Compilation and supervision of Technical and Financial Progress Reports; (b) Final check and  
distribution of all required documents such as deliverables and progress reports;  (c) Cost management, bu dget 
controlling and accounting; (d) Organisation of Project Management Team meetings and their documentation; (e)  
Monitoring/control of the progress of the project according to the contractual schedule; (f) Legal and contractual  
issues, such as the prepar ation of the GA, CA and amendments (if needed).  ITA will be the main contact point 
between the EC Project Officer and the consortium and will thus inform all the partners of the EC communications 
and requirements, gather all the needed information with the partners and answer to the EC. In particular, Mr. Carlos 
Bernad who will be the Project Coordinator (PC) has PMP certification (Project Management Professional) and 
more than 20 years’ experience managing private and public funded industrial research proj ects. He will be 
supported by ITA project office who has coordinated four H2020 projects in the last years. ITA will lead the internal 
communication within the consortium, ensuring the information reaches every partner. Regular meetings and other 
appropriate channels of communication (virtual and physical m eetings, when possible; periodic reports or other) 
will be used to ensure optimal information flow among all partners. The Project  management will be supported by 
setting up and using collaboration tools: document repository, application sharing tools, common data repositories. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 62/70 
T8.2 Technical Management - (UPV), M01-M48 
ITA will monitor the progress of work activities in cooperation with the WP leaders, ensuring that both the general 
project objectives and the individual WP objectives are met. Technical pro gress reports, in collaboration with the  
WP leaders, will be issued at six-month intervals in order to monitor the project progress and allow for re-planning 
the remaining work and proposal of changes to project tasks, if necessary. To properly manage the UCs and ensure 
an effective interrelation between the different WPs, a technical manager of ITA will be appointed to take  
responsibility for the overall scientific/technical management and for the technical coordination between WPs. The 
TM will facilitate the communication between WP leaders, organising technical meetings, monitoring the work  
progress and enforcing the timely submission of deliverables. Each WP leader will report to the TM. 
T8.3 Quality Assurance and Data Management Plan - (ITA), M01-M48 
Guidelines and instructions to ensure the quality of the works and, generally, the quality of the project will be 
circulated by ITA. These procedures will be integrated in D8.1, based on the following conce pts: quality 
requirements of the project; planning  and control; organizational structure; quality control of regular deliverables; 
quality; quality control of communication materials; quality control of the project. For that purpose, specific 
instructions will be included in the Project Handbook. Regular deliverables will undergo a simpler preparation and 
review process, including DLV responsible, task participants, WP leader and PC in a step -by-step review process. 
Also, a Data Management Plan (DMP) will be defined with the goal of establishing the measures for promoting the 
findings during the project’s life. In this sense, the DMP will set the basis for the dissemination and exploitation, 
which is of utmost importance, and the procedures for the sharing o f data of the project. INPERSO will be part of 
the open data initiative under the H2020. This task will evolve during the project’s lifetime in order to present the 
updates of INPERSO in data management.  
T8.4 Advisory Board Management - (ITA), M01-M48 
The project will engage an International Advisory Boa rd (IAB) to advise on the scientific progress of the project, 
potential dissemination routes, offer advice for what could be achieved on the pilot sites and the potential 
exploitation strategies and routes to market which could be employed. Furthermore, in creasing the visibility, 
participation and scope of the demonstrations will be one of the main objectives of the IAB. The IAB will include a 
representative from the project Management Board (MB) who will then report the outcomes of the IAB reviews to 
the MB. There will be two official meetings of the IAB at M36 and M42 of the project, however the IAB will be 
kept up to date with respect to project progress as it happens. The IAB will be assembled by M12 of the project. 
Deliverables  
D8.1 First, interim and final project reports (ITA, R, SEN, M18/36/48) . 
D8.2 Data Management Plan ITA (R, SEN, 3,24,48) . 
MS8.1 Project Start , M1, Kick -off meeting minutes delivered  MS8.2 Advisory board completion, M12, 
Composition of AB finalized and presented in the M12 meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.1c: List of Deliverables 
# Deliverable name WP Lead Type D. Level Date 
1 D1.1 Specifications and user requirement report  1 IVE R SEN 6 
2 D2.1 INPERSO Retrofit-Kit  2 AMS DEM SEN 28 
3 D2.2 Façade 3D printing prototype  2 VIAS DEM SEN 28 
4 D3.1 Integrated BIM-based RE Suite platform 3 DMO OTH SEN 31 
5 D3.2 Energy and air quality optimisation interface 
(ECO-I) 3 CORE OTH SEN 31 
6 D4.1 INPERSO deep low carbon renovation models 4 TAU R SEN 31 
7 D4.2 INPERSO training programme  4 R2M OTH PU 31 
8 D5.1 Validation report  5 UPV R SEN 31 
9 D5.2 Demonstration report and steps forward  5 ITA DEM PU 48 
10 D6.1 INPERSO Business Cases and Impact assessment  6 CORE R SEN 18/48 
11 D6.2 INPERSO pre-launch activities  6 UPV R SEN 48 
12 D7.1 Strategic plan for Dissemination, Exploitation and 
Communication of project results 7 MIRC R SEN 18/36/48 
13 D7.2 INPERSO digital ID  7 CORE R SEN 6 
14 D7.3 INPERSO Exploitation report 7 CORE R SEN 18/36/48 
15 D8.1 First, interim and final project reports  8 ITA R SEN 18/36/48 
16 D8.2 Data Management Plan  8 ITA R SEN 3/24/48 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 63/70 
Table 3.1d: List of Milestones (each MS will be presented at the corresponding PSC meeting) 
# Milestone name WP Date Description 
1 MS1.1 Action plans for demonstrations 1 6 Demo groups and action plans ready  
2 MS2.1 Heritage compliance status 2 12 Status report and corrective steps presented 
3 MS2.2 Prototype progress 2 18 Early prototypes presented 
4 MS3.1 DAQ optimised and calibrated 3 18 DAQ in each DC is fully operational 
5 MS4.1 Stakeholder engagement progress 4 18 Status presented and corrective steps 
6 MS4.2 Plan for capacity building 4 18 Draft plan circulated 
7 MS5.1 Design phase complete 5 18 Designs finalised and presented 
8 MS5.2 Start of validation  5 28 Start at each demo case verified 
9 MS5.3 Start of demonstrations  5 32 Start at each demo case verified 
10 MS5.4 Draft replication plan  5 36 Draft plan circulated 
11 MS6.2 Initial positioning and SoA  6 12 Confirmation of INPERSO innovation potential 
12 MS7.1 DEC activities fully initiated 7 6 Website online, material available, PEDR  
13 MS8.1 Project Start 8 1  KOM minutes circulated 
14 MS8.2 Advisory Board finalized 8 12 Composition of AB finalized and presented  
Table 3.1e: Critical risks for implementation 
In this table, the most prominent risks are described in terms of Likelihood and Impact (L/I, scale 1-3) 
Risk Description Risk-mitigation and contingency measures 
R1. Large number of partners, tasks, 
deliverables may cause  delays or 
person in key organization departs the 
project (WP8, L/I:2/2) 
Extensive Consortium experience in EU funded R&I projects, clear role 
descriptions, specific result expectations. The implement ation structure 
and resources are designed to allow for full completion of the activities 
without delays. 
R2. Limited engagement of 
stakeholders in project’s activities and 
results (WP7, L/I:2/2). 
Prediction and early revision of DEC strategy based on init ial user 
engagement, monthly retention, and other metrics. Key DEC actions such 
as workshops, and resources  (videos, interviews, assets for visual 
identity) will be accelerated to be made available earlier. Full utilization 
of EC resources, collaboration with other R&I initiatives and the AB.  
R3. Hesitation o r disagreement in 
exploitation of results (WP7, L/I:2/2). 
Exploitation & IPR management workshops will be held within the first 
6 months of the project. 
R4. “Black Swan” event such as 
COVID disrupts project activities, 
(WP7, L/I:2/2). 
Utilisation of signific ant online resources, remote working and 
collaboration, digital tools and digital tours, sharing of data. Safety and 
security protocols to be managed by EUROC. 
R5. Demonstrator savings not 
reflecting expectations (WP7, 
L/I:2/2). 
Thorough planning in WP2 ,3 &4, early implementation of monitoring 
plan and optimization of interoperability and installations. 
R6. Demo site unavailable  (WP5, 
L/I:2/3). 
Site managers have access to many candidate sites (see 2.1). 
R7. Technological mismatch or 
interoperability issues of smart  
Systems . (WP2,3, L/I:1/3) 
Development and modification to be conducted in parallel with dynamic 
communication. Temporary removal or replacement until the issue is 
remediated, multiple configurations to mitigate. 
R8 Difficulty interfacing with 
contractors to collect scheduling da ta 
for MuSECS. (WP3, L/I:1/3) 
DAQ requirements will be stated in the tender and supported by the demo-
groups, if contractors cannot adapt to schedule  then the improvements 
will be reported and contractor feedback will be included in design 
review. 
R9 3D printing or other material-
dependent components cannot address 
heritage requirements -low 
acceptance. (WP2, L/I:2/3) 
Demonstration of the technology in another demonstration site, 
potentially even chosen from the replication sites or other Advisory Board 
member. 
Table 3.1g ‘Subcontracting costs’ items  
Participant Cost Description 
VIAS €69,000 Characterization in a printing centre of last generation printing materials and performing 
pumping tests under laboratory and operational conditions. 
VENT €100,000 Testing and validation of upscaled prototype in specialised test cell 
AUMSA €449,528 Budget of material execution = 399,651.60€: Main façade insulation = 22,960.00€, Roof 
insulation = 9,840.00€, Carpentry = 42,640.00€, Ground floor insulation = 6,560.00€ , 
DHW pumps = 52,398.00€ , Renewable energy = 49,200.00€ , Lighting facilities = 
24,600.00€, Terraces = 82,000.00€, Exterior staircase = 40,786.80€, Lift = 40,786.80€ 
Removal of architectural barriers = 11,480.00€ , Auxiliary elements = 16,400.00€ , 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 64/70 
Drafting of the project and direction of the work = 27,975.61€, - Management of material 
execution = 8,392.68€ , Security and health = 1,119.02€ , Quality control = 3,996.52 ,  
Engineering (project + construction management) = 8,384.57€ 
Table 3.1h ‘Purchase costs” items  
1. ITA Cost Description 
Travel and 
Subsistence 
€35,000 5 physical project meet ings with 2 attendants x 1000€ / 2 trips for conference 
attendance x 1 people x 1500€ / Travel expenses to support in demos 22000 
Other goods, 
works &  
€110,000 3D printing prototype materials 100 k€, Open Access Dissemination 3.5 k€, CFS 
costs 3.5k€,  Other 3 k€ 
Total €145,000  
6. MIRC Cost Description 
Travel and 
Subsistence 
€37,000 Justification (8 physical project meetings x 2 people x 1000€ + 6 trips for 
workshops/dissemination events x2x1000 + 3 Conf erence/Expo attendance x 2 
people x 1500€) 
Other goods, 
works & 
services 
€33,000 
€12,000 
Dissemination material, Conference/Expo attendance, cluster eCODOMH events, 
Booth rent, Books, subscriptions (e.g. market data, open access) etc 
Standards, Consumables for testing/validation, Collection/transporting costs 
Total €82,000  
9. METSOL Cost Description 
Travel and 
Subsistence 
€24,000 Justification (8 physical project meetings x 2 people x 1000€ + 6 trips for 
workshops/dissemination events x1000 + 1 Conference/Expo attendance x 2000€) 
Other goods,  €44,000 Manufacturing, shipping and support for BIPV installation. Prototy ping costs for 
heritage-compliant components. 
Total €68,000  
14. AMS Cost Description 
Travel  €17,000 7 meetings x 2 persons + 3 travels to demo sites + 2 EU workshops 
Other goods, 
works & 
services 
€472,000 Audit (4k€); Engineering service for Smart Wall  production (30k€);  Modifications 
in the existing production line for Smart wall (37k€);  Modifications in the production 
line for the production of coatings (27k€); Provision of raw materials &nanoparticles, 
PCMs, desiccants etc., ( 35k€); Consumables for VVV Smart Wall production & 
installation (110k€): Provision of PV & HDW solar panels, boil ers, fan coils, heat 
pumps, etc. for  VVV inst allation (40k€); Electrical installation (20k) Wi ndows, 
blinds & doors for VVV installation (50k),  Cranes, hoists, scaffolding etc. for VVV 
installation (15k€); PV panels installation (40k); Transportation of elements to other 
manufacturers (10k€); Engineering service for E&M installation in VVV accordi ng 
Greek Law Provisions (6k€); Sensors and monitoring systems (48k€) 
Total €489,000  
20. SUPSI Cost Description 
Travel and 
Subsistence 
€ 23,700 Justification (e.g., 9 physical project meetings x 1.5 peopl e x 1200€ plus 3 trips for 
conference attendance x 2 people x 1500€ 
Other goods,  € 60,000 Testing consumables, cables, light, cutter, electronics, mockup    
Total €90,200  
21. IWIN Cost Description 
Travel and 
Subsistence 
€ 23,700 Justification (e.g., 9 physical project meetings x 1.5 people x 1200€ plus 3 trips for 
conference attendance x 2 people x 1500€    
Equipment € 240,000 Roll to roll quality control, cutting station, lamination, forming and other 
manufacturing,  
Other goods, 
works 
€ 160,000 expedition to glasswork & Demo, PV foils, Glass, other materials for the finishing of 
the PV slats and windows    
Remaining  € 9,400 Exhibition, stand, roll up, papers    
Total €423,700  
22. EPFL Cost Description 
Travel and 
Subsistence 
           
€15,000  
Physical project meetings 8 x 2 people x 750€  (12000€) plus 2 trips for conference 
attendance x 2 people x 750€ (3000€) 
Equipment 
                                
€136,000  
Demo sites (Spain, Nethrlands, Greece): Two sensors (T, RH, CO2 or TVOCs, light, 
motion) per apartment for fifty apartments 50 x 2 x 250€ (25000€). One tablet for 50 
apartments 50x200€ (10000€). Six gateways 6 x 1500€ (9000€). Installation costs for 
the three demo sites 3x2000€ (6000€). For ten selected appartments additional 
sensors for more advanced IEQ parameters for the IEQ index developmant (operative 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 65/70 
T, anemometer, sound, occupancy, motion, CO2, TVOCs, PM2. 5,  10x1500€ 
(15000€). Two outdoor air quality sensors for each site (PMx, NO2, O3, SO2) 6 x 
1000€ (6000€). Cloud service set up, configuration and operation for three years 
(5000€). Swiss case studies: WSN of 20 sensors (T, RH, CO2 or TVOC) plus 
additional sensors for more advanced IEQ monitoring,  including gateways and cloud 
services  for each of the three schools 3 x 15000€ ( 45000€). One outdoor air sensor 
per school 3x1000€ (3000€). For one school automatization of the windows (12000€) 
Other 
goods, 
works & 
services 
                                 
€28,600  
Two publications gold open acces 2 x 3300€ (6600€).  Consumables for the 
callibration of high-grade equipment, which will be used for the validation of the low-
cost sensors' recordings (4000€). Su bcontractor to install the WSN and provide 
consulting services for the optimization of the 3 Swiss case stydy buildings 3 x 6000€ 
(18000€)   
Total €179,600