2.2 Measures to maximise impact — Dissemination, exploitation, and 
communication  
2.2.1 Dissemination and exploitation of results 
INPERSO addresses the full r ange of potential users and uses along with the related i ssues concerning the  
dissemination, exploitation, and knowledge management of intellectual property rights (IPR) by proactive planning 
and agreements. The following sections describe in detail the pr ogrammed steps and the available tools of the  
dissemination and exploitation strategy. Since INPERSO has a dominant energy dimension, it can/will exploit 
findings and recommendations for future developments by the BRIDGE initiative (sharing community that gathers 
together H2020 & HE demonstration projects in the Energy Systems Implementation Plan) from its classified four 
groups (data management, business models, customer engagement and regulations).  
Dissemination in INPERSO is focused on (a) disclosure of  results to specific target audience segments under the 
protection of the appropriate IPR strategy in order to maximise result uptake and b) generating impact within the 
academia and R&I sectors, measured by publications and other metrics of engagement wit h these communities.  
INPERSO will use a smart networking and clustering policy at the European and national/regional level and will 
establish close collaboration and synergies with clusters’ members/stakeholders maximizing the visibility of the 
project results and contributing to raising awareness. Cluster eCODO MH “Cluster of companies for Efficient and 
sustainable Construction, buildings & infrastructure”, with MIRC as its facilitator, aims to the integration of 
innovation and technological transformation of the construction sector and envisages the successful t ransition of 
Greek companies to the new era. Founding members of e-CODOMH Cluster are 17 SMEs and Large Enterprises of 
the Greek construction sector and collaborators are Greek Industrial Association s and renowned Academic 
institutions and research centres. 
Communication in the project is aimed at describing and conveying key messages and information about INPERSO 
to a multitude of heterogenous audiences, promoting and encouraging a two-way exchange. Communication will be 
oriented towards highlighting the i mportance of sustainable B&C and how European R&I is spearheading climate 
crisis mitigation efforts. This will be supported by the local focus of the project (elaborated in WP4). Finally, 
Exploitation is focused on accelerating and streamlining both the uptake of individual INPERSO results, as well as 
the commercialisation of the system as a whole. Use evaluation scenarios, system qualification, risk & barrier 
identification, management and miti gation, data management and IPR protection are also key a ctivities. These 
activities will be aligned with Horizon 2020/Europe and the overall EC guidelines43 
2.2.1.1 Dissemination and Communication Plan 
The INPERSO Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication Plan  (DECP-WP7) will be delivered by M6, with 
updates reported in months 18, 36 and 48. At the end of the project, we will have developed several case studies and 
collected a wealth of information on the individual scientific and technological advancement, alo ng with  the 
commercial advantages as well as with the contribution to the regulations and standards. The Dissemination and 
Exploitation Manager (DEM) will champion dissemination of information, particularly for the purpose of ensuring 
future exploitation, strongly supported by all the partners. General dissemination activities will include the inclusion 
of project results on the partner’s websites  and the disclosure of information through project brochure to relevant 
associations in the building & construct ion, energy in buildings, smart homes and energy labelling sectors.  The 
Project exploitation and dissemination of results strategy relies, in terms of target groups, on the following sub-sets. 
Each of these sub-sets will be engaged using an adapted strategy and tools.  
DEC strategy timeline  
The DECP will evolve in parallel to the project’s course (see §1.2.1 and WP7) to maximise the uptake potential. 
INPERSO will address the first stages of commercialisation to establish a solid foundation by (a) the conso lidation 
of project IRs, (b) the demonstration of project results, (c) an IPR management plan, (d) business plan and 
exploitation roadmap, including access to green finance. The timeline is as follows: 
From the start of the project and until the end of the integration phase (month 31, TRL6, Q2 - 2025): During 
months 1-6, D&C will aim to inform the Target Groups of the project’s objectives and raise initial awareness towards 
the approach and targeted impacts.  DEC efforts will be oriented towards consolidatin g the DECP (M6), individual 
technological offerings and solutions, but the main focus will be on the involvement of local stakeholders, 
emphasizing citizens and communities. The Advisory Board will be completed at this phase ( M12) and potential 
replicators will have been identified. From M10 - M30 more targeted activities and focus on IP protection (see 2.2.2).  
Start of demonstrations and until the end of the project (M48, TRL7&8, Q3 - 2026): In this phase, focus will 
shift significantly towards the demonstrations, not only from a technological but also from a stakeholder perspective. 
Post-occupancy evaluation will be completed and the INPERSO prototype will be qualified. This phase is crucial to: 
(a) establish networks and collaborations, (b) agreements with early adopters and replicators, (c) facilitate and plan 
 
43 EC Research and Innovation FAQ ID 929, EU IPR Helpdesk Fact Sheet “The Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of Results in 
Horizon 2020”, Participant Portal Horizon 2020/Europe online Manual 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 41/70 
for scale-up, (d) plan for additional funding, (e) evaluate the project’s innovations, results and expectations. For this 
reason, a revision and possible pivoting of the Business Plan will be considered, if necessary. All Target Groups and 
DEC tools will be available and exploited to the fullest at this stage.  
End of the project +1 year (TRL9, Q3 - 2027): Following the project’s conclusion, DEC will be oriented towards 
streamlining and securing a strong market entry.  
Table 14 Target groups, sub-groups and KPIs for INPERSO DEC activities  
KPIs: 1Website  / 8Newsletter  / 12Conferences/Events  / 700followers: LinkedIn 
400followers: Twitter  / 18Publications  / 6Videos  / 8Articles  / 6Datasets  
Target Groups Message and Goal Channels 
I. B&C stakeholders (a) SMEs and LEs companies 
in the building and construction (B&C) industries 
incl. contractors/subcontractors (b) Other 
industries in the AEC sectors 
Highlight results, impacts, replication and 
transferability potential in the context of  the 
2030 climate goals.  
/ / /
/ /  
II. Industrial stakeholders  SMEs operating in the 
engineering, renewable energy & utility providers, 
secondary products supply chain, bui lding energy 
efficiency system OEMs. 
Down- scalability, cost savings, sustainability, 
innovative business models. New markets 
digital championing. 
/ / /
/ /  
III. Academia and research ecosystem  (a) 
Academia and schoo ls, students, researchers, 
academic e ntrepreneurs involved in engineering, 
energy, environment, industrial circular, and 
digitized pr oduction. (b)  Industrial R&D 
organisations  
Sharing of knowledge, open science, citizen 
science, new results and open -source 
resources with multi - and inter -disciplinary 
character, new innovative technologies, 
digitalised assets.  
/ / /
/ / /
 
IV. Policy makers and financing  (a) The political 
system generating ideas, laws, plans, including 
policymakers and local/ national/ European 
administrations. The European  Commission DGs 
of interest, (i.e. CLIMA, COMP, ECFIN, EAC, 
EMPL, ENER, ENV, CINEA, ERCEA, REA, 
GROW, JRC) (b) Financ ing insti tutions and 
initiatives (ECB, ERDF a.o.) 
Policy feedback from demo case 
implementation, feedback on OS altmetrics, 
adherence to ta xonomy, establishment of 
processes on local level to pursue “green 
finance”, leveraging private investment in the 
twin transition. 
/ / /
/  
V. Citizens and general public  (a) Culture-based 
public Media -based public Journalists, bloggers, 
think-tanks, inf luencers. (b) Civil society: The 
widest possible target public at large, namely 
citizens and grassroots 
Impact potent ial, new economic and s ocial 
activity paradigms, acceleration of circular 
economy adoption, preservation of resources 
and ecosystems, job c reation, capacity 
building opportunities.  
/ / /
/ /  
VI. Partnerships and Associations (a) Associations 
in the construction industry (b) Neighborhood and 
real-estate associations (c) The European 
Innovation Partnerships (EIPs): Smart Cities and 
Communities (EIP-SCC) 
Overcoming barriers, addressing low 
digitalisation, sharing best practices, 
transferability, improving acceptance to R&I, 
job creation. 
/ / /
/ / /
/  
Open Science KPIs:  Early shared pre-prints/presentations/posters >4; open project repository: 1; Articles in ORE 
2; Open research outputs: 3; Publications with Open Data:2; Open data in the repository: 2; Articles in open peer 
review: 4; Researchers in open peer-review:4. 
The partners will be encouraged to publish the project’s results in sc ientific and industrial communities through 
papers and articles, published in refereed conferences and high impact factor journals. They will mainly include open 
access journals (“gold”) and self-archiving (“green”) to non-open access journals to comply with the Horizon Europe 
Guidelines on Open Access. Table 15 outlines potential journals and conferences that INPERSO aims to be published 
in at least 8 of the listed. In addition, at least 2 articles in ORE will be published.  
Table 15 Conferences, Journals, and Magazines where the INPERSO system plans to be published 
Media (Journal or Conference) Impact Factor Open Access  Open access cost 
Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews 10.556 Gold € 3112 
Applied energy (Elsevier, Journal) 8.848 Gold € 3800 
Energy  6.082 Gold € 2900 
Renewable Energy 6.274 Gold € 2950 
Automation in Construction 5.669 Gold € 3100 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 42/70 
Energy Policy 5.042 Gold € 3000 
Building and Environment 4.971 Gold € 3150 
Environmental Modelling & software 4.807 Gold € 3200 
Energy and Buildings (Elsevier Journal) 4.867 Gold € 2600 
Journal of Building Performance simulation 3.458 Gold € 2200 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 5.846 Gold € 1650 
Cities 4.802 Gold € 1500 
The consortium will t arget to disseminate the knowledge produced during the project through several relating 
European and international organisations. 
Table 16 Networking events for the dissemination of INPERSO results 
Event Type 
ICEEB 2022: 16. International Conference on Energy Efficiency in Buildings44 Conference 
International Conference on Sustainability in Energy and Buildings45 Conference 
Conference on Advanced Building Skins 46 Conference 
CISBAT47 Conference 
WREC48 Conference 
AIVC conference49 Conference 
Vie dei Mercanti International Forum50 Conference 
IAQVEC - Conference on indoor air quality, ventilation and energy conservation in 
buildings51 
Conference 
ECTP (European Construction Technology platform) events   Networking events 
International Conference on Renewable Energy Sources and Energy Efficiency Bi-Annual Conference 
BAU World’s Leading Trade Fair for Architecture, Materials and Systems Conference 2022 
ECOBUILD Trade Fair/B2B 
Future of Building B2B event 
Smart City Expo Trade Fair 
Future of Buidling Chamber of Commerce Matchmaking&Conf. 
 
2.2.1.2 Exploitation and business plan 
Commercial exploitation of the integrated INPERSO offering is projected to begin in Q1 2028, following the 
project’s conclusion in Q3 2026. Nonetheless, the I Rs will be exploitable in the short -term following the project’s 
end, through extended field trial s (replication and transferability). Digitalisation and AI are key sectors that are 
projected to experience explosive growth until 2030, given the low digital isation rate in the B&C sector. In this 
context, the project’s partners will establish a strategy to attract green finance, both as means to accelerate market 
entry and as added value towards the end-user. The exploitation and commercialization of the project end results will 
occur in several distinct phases, covering product, process and methodology d evelopment, initial exploitation, 
European establishment and global expansion. The exploitation strategy is outlined below and will be revised as we 
progress through the project and at the end of the first year of exploitation. 
TRL8 - Project Duration (4 y ears – 48 months/ Q3 - 2026): The validation and demonstration activities in 
INPERSO project will last for 48 months, with the dissemination and exploitation of results starting from the 
beginning of the  project. Additionally, early adopters, relevant organizations and other R&D&I initiatives will be 
identified and approached (as described in WP7-8). Within the duration of the project, INPERSO will be implemented 
in Spain, Netherlands and Greece. These use cases will be utilized as “examples” that will facilitate the subsequent 
adoption in other cases by demonstrating the advantages, both in terms of energy, as well as sustainability and 
socioeconomic KPIs. This phase, which corresponds to the project duration, consists of the application of INPERSO 
at the use cases the identification of suitable early adopters and the planning of longer -term collaborations in other 
European countries. Near the end of 2025, with the completion of the project, focus will shift to the completion of 
the INPERSO syst em ( IR6) through a critical design review, consolidation and certification activities. I n-field 
performance tests will provide detailed case study material to consolidate a pre-market ready solution. The project’s 
end-users and the legal entity members’ es tablished network will provide an instant commercial route for  initial 
exploitation, his phase includes Software debugging, streamlining of functions, interoperability  optimizations,  
44 https://waset.org/energy-efficiency-in-buildings-conference-in-june-2022-in-vienna 
45 http://seb-18.kesinternational.org/ 
46 https://abs.green/ 
47 https://cisbat.epfl.ch/ 
48 http://www.wrenuk.co.uk/ 
49 https://www.aivc.org/news/aivc-2019-conference-15-16-october-2019-ghent-0 
50 http://www.leviedeimercanti.it/ 
51 https://www.iaqvec2019.org/about-iaqvec/ 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 43/70 
documentation, standardization and certification of materials and components.  
TRL9 – Product to European Market (+1 year/ Q4 2027): The feedback received from the early adopters of the 
system and the end -users, will provide the final preparati ons to the established channels for INPERSO to hit the 
market. Initially the European markets will be targeted as defined by the final business studies. In this stage major 
European constructors, private or public building owners, energy service providers and public authorities will be 
approached. The plan for strategic collaborations will be fully implemented. Final certification will be conducted. 
TRL9 - Rest of the Developing World (+ 2 year /2029): During this stage the technology will be disseminated 
throughout the rest of the world. In addition, the effort will be directed towards penetration in additional markets. 
Business model 
As described in §2.1, INPERSO will utilise six business models (BM1-6) as a baseline for exploitation.  
Table 17 Initial Business Models for INPERSO exploitation and projections 
Business Model Target Group-segment Utilised by INPERSO Results 
BM1. Low -Carbon 
Renovation Models  
TGI-Building owner/manager, TGV-user Applicable to all INPERSO results 
BM2. Ci rcular economy -
based construction material  
TGII-B&C services and product providers, 
TGIII-regional/municipal actors 
Mainly Retrofit -Kit ( IR3), façade 
3D printer (IR4) 
BM3. INPERSO energy & 
comfort optimisation service  
TGI-Building owner/manager, TGV-user Mainly ECO-I ( IR5) and RE Suite 
(IR1) 
BM4. Guaranteed Energy 
Savings Contract 
TGI-Building owner/manager, TGII -
Energy service providers TGV-user 
Applicable to all INPERSO results 
BM5. INPERSO system 
franchise opportunities 
TGII-B&C LEs and SMEs in INPE RSO 
network 
Applicable to all INPERSO results 
BM6: Construction site 
energy management 
TGII-Construction industry Mainly ECO-I ( IR5) and RE Suite 
(IR1) 
RESUITE integrated platform for renovation management (IR1-DMO, R2M). Users of the platform will have 
the option of requesting a Scan -to-BIM service with proven results in identification of thermal bridges and vastly 
improved accuracy that minimizes the performance gap. The building information modelling (BIM) market size is 
projected to grow f rom EUR 3.7 billion in 2020 to EUR 7.24 billion by 2025, at a compound annual growth rate 
(CAGR) of 14.5%. Rising urbanization and infrastructure projects, growing benefits offered by BIM for the AEC 
industry, and increasing government mandates for BIM ado ption are am ong the factors driving the growth of the 
BIM market52. DMO’s advantages of reduced cost of deep renovation design; reduced cost to deliver the retrofit (25-
35%); improved quality and accountability; compliance with legislation; access 25-year guarantees provide excellent 
market prospects of the service. Moreover,  the global construction & demolition waste recycling market size was 
valued at €108.89 billion in 2019, and is expected to reach €125.19 billion by 2027, registering a CAGR of 2.7% 
from 2020 to 202 753. The market is primarily driven by the proactive policies implemented, urbanization and high 
rates of economic development in Asia and Asia Pacific. MIRC will provide the main routes of exploitation through 
their established market channels being suppor ted by the significant industrial alliances in EU. At least 24 projects 
are projected in 2028. With a cost on average at 450-650€ / m2, the projections show that scaling up to accommodate 
more clients will be the major challenge.  
IR2 (TAU) Low carbon renovation models(LCRM):  The new renovation design methodologies and processes 
will be adapted into a set of tools and indicators consolidated into a streamlined form to be useful both to experts and 
non-experts for deep renovation activities. The tool has the purpose of expanding th e perception of renovation and 
new construction projects to the scale and impacts on the neighbourhood a nd community. The LCRM will be 
empowered by digital technologies and implement a user-centred approach to design. The tool itself will be free to 
use with basic functions to attract a mass of users who will purchase INPERSO services. 
IR3 INPERSO Retrofit-Kit (AMS): The Retrofit-Kit will provide the useful function of de-risking technologies in 
terms of interoperability. The portfolio of highly integrated and interoperable technologies featuring both active 
(HVAC) and passive (e.g. BIPVs)  elements is designed and incorporated to supplement the bioclimatic approach. 
The global heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) market is projected to reach about €3 billion by 2030, 
based on a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 3.9 percent between 2020 and 2030. A more recent projection 
estimates that the market volume of the HVAC market will reach 151.1 million units by 2024. Growth in the HVAC 
market is likely due to continued growth in construction sector revenues, from both publicly and privately funded 
projects54. An integrated HVAC, DHW, energy and thermal storage and PV inverter that will exploit the free running 
potential to the maximum. Especially in post COVID recovery, optimal indoor air quality has been rightly increasing 
in importance. The global building-integrated photovoltaic market size was valued at USD 13.1 billion in 2019 and 
is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 23.1% from 2020 to 2027. Favourable government  
52 Building Information Modeling Market (BIM) - Global Forecast to 2025 
53 Allied Market Research 
54 Grandview Research 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 44/70 
policies to enhance integrated photovoltaic installations in commercial facilities along with the growing deployment 
of solar energy harnessing systems are anticipated to propel the market growth over the forecast pe riod. Rising 
awareness about green infrastr ucture including zero -emission buildings is also expected to boost market growth. 
Building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) provides a sustainable and effective solution for retrofitting structure 
exterior, enhancing the energy efficiency of the structure, and providing significant savings, in terms of conventional 
power consumption 55. The price projection is at 450-650€/m2, depending on the functionalities . INPERSO will 
provide VENTI with opportunities especially in residential buildings estimated at 6 initial sales.  The BIPV modules 
will retain the highly competitive price of 80€/m2 or 2,3€/kWp, and METSOL is projecting the commissioning of at 
least 5 new systems in 2028 (25-50kWp) 
   
IR4 INPERSO energy and comfort optimisation interface (ECOI) (CORE) : A hardware agnostic modular IoT 
based product comprising low-cost /high value sensor networks (hardware) and advanced ML algorithms with energy 
expenditure and air quality predictive functions (software) will opti mise the deeply renovated buildings ene rgy 
management and indoor air quality during and after renovation works offering user energy savings and wellbeing. 
The smart home market is expected to continue its growth trajectory, reaching more than 207 million units in Europe 
in 2025 — a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 13.961% in 2020–202556. The revenue  of energy management 
systems in EU is expected to show an annual growth rate (CAGR 2021 -2025) of 13.71%, resulting in a projected 
market volume of €3,753m by 202557. 
 
IR5 INPERSO completed system. The consortium will unify the INPERSO service and methodology  components 
into a unified Platform as a service/ system of systems , to allow sustainable highly automated deep renovation 
operations from design to con struction to operation. The system will incorporate a complete package of 
documentation and capacity building module as well as a post -occupancy evaluation toolkit. The EU Remodeling 
Market share was valued at EUR 1379.54Bn in 2019 and is anticipated to grow with a CAGR of up to 3.3% during 
2020 and 202658. As most INPERSO solutions cover both deep renovation as well as remodelling interventions it is 
safe to assume that the full scale of this market size can be considered for future economical projection. In this respect 
it is estimated that offering a highly competitive price of 25,000 EUR/yearly licence the consortium expects the 
commissioning of at least 25 new licences in 2028. 
 
Policy feedback 
INPERSO has a proper and aligned communication strategy towa rds the policy makers, complemented by targeted 
activities. INPERSO will ensure a significant impact in this area during and after the lifetime of the project by 
prioritizing regulations in the pipeline for revision by the EU regulatory authorities, partic ularly those envisaged in 
the work programmes of 2021 and 2022. INPERSO will foster the dialogue among the industrial associations 
facilitating the exchange of information and best practices in th is area. The outcome of this action will be a set of 
 
55 https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/building-integrated-photovoltaics-bipv-market  
56 Smart Home Market 
57 https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/smart-home/energy-management/europe?currency=EUR  
58 https://www.graphicalresearch.com/industry-insights/1638/europe-remodeling-market  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 45/70 
recommendations to the associations for enriching their internal processes when responding to regulation and 
standardization issues. The recommendations will contain a list of regulatory bottlenecks, lis t of standardization 
needs, list of barriers to transferabil ity of innovative solutions, characterisation of participation of process industry 
in EU legislative and regulatory process, and main conclusions from workshops and Networking events, as well as 
measures to address barriers and bottlenecks. The differences  in size, type and number of members, resources, etc. 
of the associations will be considered when drawing these recommendations.  
2.2.2 Project results and management of intellectual property 
Organization of IPR ownership and user rights (e.g., licenses, royalties) among partners 
Project methodology and results will be published, but products and models developed will be evaluated by an IPR 
committee within the Project Consortium to evaluate any damage o f property rights. The Consortium will take into 
consideration IPR issues and market uptake, as part of the GA sessions. INPERSO will follow the IPR Management 
Guidelines from the proposal stage to the end of the project and IPR issues will be treated and agreed during the 
negotiation of the Grant Agreement. Thus, it will be focused on: background, foreground, results ownership 
exploitation of the results. A review system will be set up. During the Consortium Agreement signing (priori to 
project start) the partners will confirm their background IP and create an IP baseline. 
Consortium Agreement (CA):  The IP issues will be covered in the Consortium Agreement that will be written 
based on DESCA. All consortium partners will agree and sign acceptance of the CA at the outset of the project. A 
final version will be completed prior to project commencement. Result ownership and rules accessing b ackground 
knowledge vital to the successful completion and exploitation of the project results by each beneficiary are addressed 
in WP7. Table 18 provides a preliminary list of Background IP of partners, and it will be confirmed in the CA. 
Table 18 Background IP of INPERSO partners 
Background IP:  The Background knowledg e of the 
partners, as stated before will be identified prior to the 
writing of the Consortium Agreement. Background IPR 
will remain the property of the Originator Company or 
organisation. However, where needed, during the period 
of the project, all ―backgr ound knowledge, necessary 
for carrying out the project, will be available for use by 
any other partner of the consortium. 
Background IP Partner WPs 
Smart-Wall AMS WP2 
Energy Pod (Ventilative HVAC) VENT WP2 
BIPVs METSOL WP2 
Solar Windows – shading devices IWIN WP2 
SCAAI Tool R2M WP3 
RE SUITE DMO WP3 
Access rights will be granted, royalty -free by the owning partner. In terms of post -project exploitation, access will 
be once again granted by the owning partner, either royalty-free or by charging a license fee under reasonable terms, 
promoting in that way the collaboration among nations and the advancements of the research and innovation 
employing NDAs as needed. 
Patents and Knowledge Sharing: If the results of the project are eligible for patenting, actions will be taken at the 
earliest possible date. In cases of joint inventions, the ownership will be shared in accordance with a notified 
agreement. A framework for access rights for jointly conducted research wi ll also be reported in the DECP. The 
results and associated ownership are reported in Table 18. Patents and Knowledge Sharing: If the results of the project 
are eligible for patenting, actions will be taken at the earliest possible date. In cases of joint inventions, the ownership 
will be shared in accordance with a notified agreement. A framework for access rights for jointly conducted research 
will also be reported in the DECP. The results and associated ownership are reported in Table 3. trademark will also 
be developed for the novel innovation by the Project Coordinator and other Consortium members. More over, 
trademarks can also be set for individual components for branding and commercialization purposes in other industries 
by the DEM in consultation with the consortium partners. 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 46/70