3.2 Capacity of participants and consortium as a whole 
In Figure 19 the main roles of the participants are shown, correlated with the six integrated results of the project: 
IR1- RE SUITE integrated platfor m, IR2 - Low-Carbon Renovation Models (LCRM) , IR3 - Retrofit – Kit, IR4- 
Façade 3D printer, IR5- Energy & Comfort Optimisation Interface (ECOI) and IR6- INPERSO completed system. 
Each of the results is connected to the correspondi ng objective in §1.1. As shown in the next sections, each of the 
partners is fully capable in excelling in their respective roles: The INPERSO team is comprised by experienced RTOs, 
ambitious SMEs, Large Enterprises and NPOs.  
 
Figure 19 INPERSO participants and activities 
3.2.1 Matching of project objectives 
There are eight (8) r esearch organisations (ITA, UPV, CORE, TAU, IVE, CART, SUPSI and EPFL) from Spain, 
Greece, Finland and Switzerland. INPERSO also comprises 8 SMEs (R2M, METS, IR IS, DMO, EUROC, VENT, 
AMS and IWIN, from Italy, Lithuania, Ireland, the Netherlands, Belgium, UK, Greece and Switzerland). SMEs will 
claim 41% of the funding. Three LEs participate: ACCIO, VIAS, MIRC, two from Spain and one from Greece, as 
well as 3 NPOs: MWNB, VVV and AUMSA, corresponding t he three demonstrations. Moreover, in each of the 
project’s activities, RO- and IN-TSPs work together to facilitate knowledge transfer and accelerate innovation. Open 
science will be integral to the project, with multiple results (Table 3, DEC KPIs in §2.2) generated through the project, 
mainly through the work of TAU, IVE, EPFL, SUPSI and CART . SSH is one of the three pilla rs of the project, 
complementing the “green” and “digital” dimensions and is mainly described in WPs6&7. While gender equality is 
not m andated in this topic, it is  still a matter of priority for the Consortium, as an integral part of the inclusive 
workspaces envisioned in the just transition and will also be addressed in WP6 (EUROC). 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 66/70 
  
Table 3.1f Summary of staff effort 
3.2.2 Access to critical infrastructure 
3. CORE Within CORE premises, a High -Performance Computing infrastructure is installed, taking advantage of 
the SOA advancements in hardware evolution. The multithreaded architecture can parallelise many tasks (AMD 
EPYC), while allowing for memory intensive model ling and simulation approaches (512GB ECC RAM). This, 
combined with the latest in Graphical Processing Unit architectures (nVidia Volta V100) allows for the development 
of highly complex Deep Neural Network architectures, end -to-end data ingestion, preproc essing and Machine 
Learning pipelines, as well as efficient hyperparameter optimisation, essentially accelerating the whole data sci- ence 
package. Furthermore, the FP64 capability of the HPC infrastructure, allows the simulation of complex physics 
phenomena using FEA and CFD solvers. 
4. TAU: The FSD (Finnish Social Science Data Archive) is hosted by TAU which also offers access to the CESSDA 
ERIC (Consortium of European Social Science Data Archives) to be used for background and s tatistical research 
data. The Human-Technology Interaction Labs Faculty of Information Technology and Communication Sciences 
hosts five fully equipped laboratory spaces for various types of user studies of novel technologies. Moreover, the 
Low Carbon and H ealthy Buildings In-situ Diagnostics Kit   by the Faculty of Built Environment offers access to 
field work equipment (e.g. temperature, air -flow, CO2 and Relative Humidity sensors to monitor indoor 
environmental quality and thermal comfort conditions, etc.). 
5. CART: CART offers access to three-dimensional measurement systems, Concrete 3D printing systems, Long & 
short Range Scanning, Structural Dynamic Assessment and Inspection equipment. The equipment includes 3D laser 
scanners, laser profilometers and photogrammetric systems and surveying equipment such as robotic total station and  
differential GPS devices.3D printers developed by CARTIF use various construction materials (cement, plaster, 
mortar) able to print on horizontal and vertical surfaces with an approximate printing area of 2 x 2 meters. 
6. MIRTEC: MIRTEC owns accredited labs for testing & validation of building materials and preparation of 
samples, physical, mechanical and microstructural properties characterizations of materials used for building 
products. (e.g.Compression-Bending strength machine, Vibrating table concrete mixer drum type, moulds, sieving 
equipment, MZ2 Laboratory easy to clean Z -Blade mixer, ageing chambers XRD, XRF, SEM, etc.). Their 
infrastructure offers labs & open areas for demonst rators’ production, as wel l as appropriate premisses for 
dissemination actions. 
7. IVE: IVE will contribute with their access to monitoring equipment to measure energy consumption and IEQ 
conditions (air temperature, globe temperature, air speed, humidity, CO2 concentration, level of illuminance, level 
of noise). 
10. IRIS: IRIS is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs 
(2), and an electronics & telecommunications lab.  
13. VENT: VENT will contribute offering their R&D  Design Office provi ding a c utting edge mechanical design 
facility kitted with appropriate workstations, as well as their R&D Workshop (F-Gas compliant and refrigerant safe) 
designed to assemble and test various refrigerant and high pressure systems for the needs of their INPERSO activities. 
18. ACCI: Acciona have their own R&D Technological Centre  in Madrid composed by a multidisciplinary an d 
international team of more than 60 highly qualified researchers from a wide range of disciplines. Main research areas 
are Sust ainable Buildings, Materials (Concrete, New Materials), Construction Processes (Roa ds, Railways and 
Tunnels, Maritime Works and Structures) and Digital Innovation. 
Name WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 PMs Budget %
ITA 2 42 0 0 18 2 2 20 86 5.65%
UPV 4 20 0 2 30 1 4 18 79 3.54%
CORE 6 0 31 2 25 21 19 3 107 5.10%
TAU 3 0 5 34 19 11 4 3 79 4.95%
CART 3 45 4 0 12 4 3 3 74 3.34%
MIRTEC 2 14 0 14 3 3 26 3 65 3.49%
IVE 18 2 0 18 6 12 4 3 63 2.83%
R2M 5 0 30 14 10 12 5 1 77 4.27%
METS 2 12 0 2 9 2 4 3 34 2.34%
IRIS 7 0 33 0 17 0 2 0 59 3.93%
DMO 4 0 27 12 24 2 4 3 76 6.78%
EUROC 4 0 0 6 23 14 4 3 54 3.03%
VENT 2 24 11 2 10 2 4 3 58 5.65%
AMS 2 27 8 2 42 2 4 3 90 9.23%
AUMSA 7 0 0 6 20 5 1 1 40 5.19%
MWNB 4 0 0 2 14 2 4 3 29 2.43%
DVVV 2 0 0 1 18 1 2 1 25 0.84%
ACCIO 3 0 14 0 27 2 4 3 53 2.58%
VIAS 2 13 0 2 5 1 4 3 30 2.40%
SUPSI 8 30 3 12 6 0 0 1 60 5.49%
IWIN 2 34 2 6 14 2 4 3 67 9.44%
EPFL 2 0 39 2 20 2 4 3 72 7.49%
Total 94 263 207 139 372 103 112 87 1377
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 67/70 
19. VIAS : VIAS´ Machinery Base , l ocated in Pancorbo, Burgos has 27,675 m2 total area, with 1,390 m2 of 
workshops, with a reserved area for pilot test demonstrators. Resources, equipment and material are available for the 
testing. The machinery base is connected to the Spanish conventional rail network 
 
3.2.3 Partner description 
1. ITA is a non-profit technology centre aiming to promote competitiveness in the industrial sector by means of the 
development, acquisition, adaptation and transfer of innovative technologies. ITAINNOVA offers its services with 
a clear market orientation, providing real and innovative solutions from its lines of research and development, which 
transform and ac celerate the technological p rocesses of companies or new challenges in o ur society. ITA’s 
mechatronic and robotics group is expe rienced in robotization and advanced automation applied to construction 
machinery also leading the working group “Robotization a nd Automation of Machinery” in PTEC (Spanish 
Construction Technology Pla tform). They are a reference partner for ANMOPYC (The Sp anish Manufacturers´ 
Association of Construction, Public Works and Mining Equipment) and collaborate with CECE (Committee for 
European Construction Equipment). ITAINNOVA is leading the Aragón DIH “HPC-Cloud & Cognitive Systems for 
Smart Manufacturing, Robotics and Logistics”. In INPE RSO, ITAINNOVA will be the coordinator partner; it has 
participated in almost 60 European Research projects in the FP7 and H2020 framework, coordinating 17 of them and 
it h as the required expertise and structure to play the role  in administrative matters, being supported by UPV in 
building and edification aspects. In terms of technical activity, ITAINNOVA will use their machinery, mechatronics 
and robotics knowledge and meth odologies to design and develop the 3D façade printing s ystem, integrating the 
extrusion head from other partners. 
2. UPV-IRP Instituto Universitario de Restauración del Patrimonio of the Universitat Politècnica de València (ES) 
is a public institution was established in 2000 comprising more than 100 researchers and is dedicated to promoting 
heritage conservation research and practice. IRP works to advance conservation research and practice in the fine arts, 
architecture and sites. IRP aims to develop and to exploit new conservation techniques and approaches, to disseminate 
the cultural heritage conservation research results, and to train profe ssionals. In INPERSO UPV-IRP will focus on 
3D printing constructive process require ments, BIM integration, and their relation to  the INPERSO renovation 
workflows. 
3. CORE is a non-profit RTO, subsidiary of CORE In novation & Technology OE , aiming to provide individuals, 
industries and companies with opportunities  to reach their true potential,  to make industries smarter and greener, 
more sustainable and more socially inclusive. Industry 4 .0 is where CORE chooses to focus our research and 
innovation efforts. Advances in a range of technologies i.e. IoT, big data, machine and deep learning, edge and cloud 
computing are deployed to maximise the potential of both people and entities in multiple sectors. CORE builds upon 
their extended experience leading D&C activities in multiple H2020 projects, showcasing a large portfolio of digital 
identity material (e.g. H2020 project websites, logos, videos) as well as highly impactful channels of communication 
in multiple platforms  and will be the leaders o f INPERSO DEC activities. CORE will also lead the efforts in the 
development of MuSECS focusing on state of the art  Machine Learning and Deep Learning algorithms to provide 
meaningful energy management insights. 
4. TAU Faculty of Built Environment, Architecture (FI) will lead the post-occupancy feedback and optimisation task, 
contributing on three main aspects: (i) performance gap analysis and consequence minimisatio n; (ii) coordination 
and mon itoring building performa nce; (iii) human -centric dimension. This contribution is based on the 
interdisciplinary research groups Sustainable Housing Design (ASUTUT) and Human-Centered Technology (IHTE) 
groups: ASUTUT combine thr ee areas of expertise (Agile , Ecological, and Inclusi ve design) to re -define what 
sustainable housing design is, opening up new design solutions that enhance living environments and spatial qualities 
and peoples’ well-being. IHTE’s areas of expertise are based on user experience of smart mobility solutions, human-
centered design of artificial intelligence applications, social colla borative robots, and digital participation for 
sustainable and inclusive society. 
5. CART is a prominent Applied Research Centre leading technology transfer activities since 1994 employing more 
than 170 researchers. The Industrial and Digital Systems Division of CART  is one is one of the three main fields of 
knowledge and activity. CA RTIF participation in intern ational activities has be en materialised in the current 
participation in more than 45 on -going inter national projects, including 25 projects from H2020 (6 of them 
coordinated). Additionally, CARTIF is one of the founding members  and main promoters of the S mart City VyP 
initiative carried out in the Spanish cities of Valladolid and P alencia. Their role in  3d printing will focus on the 
integration of an extrusion head  industrial robot arm appropriate for façade material printing as the pumping system 
and their control. 
6. MIRC is a multi -sectoral-Technological company , active in Applied Re search & Technological Innovation, 
Quality Control and Certification in a wide range of Industrial materials & products. It operated under the supervision 
of the Ministry of Development and among its shareholders are dynamic companies of the construction sector. MIRC 
has a key role in the ecosystem of the construction industry in Greece and is “a single-point lab” for the construction 
sector, as it operates in the entire value chain: Research & Development - Networking & Clustering- Quality Control 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 68/70 
& Certification. It is a Notified Body in European Union for construction products (Notif. No. 0437) and a Technical 
Assesment Body (TAB) for the issuance of European Technical Assessment documents under the Regulation (EU) 
No 305/2011 - Construction Products. It o perates independent and privately owned accredited (EN ISO 17025) 
laboratories and is also member of Netwo rks IQNet, Oeko-Tex, IECEE CB (ENEC, CCA & HAR Group) . Today, 
the company is working for more than 20 European/International/National R&D projects (funded and private) and is 
the Facilitator of Cluster e-CODOMH (“Cluster of companies for Efficient and sust ainable Construction, buildings 
& infrastructure”). 
7. IVE- Valencian Building Institute (ES) is a public interest foundation, established in 1986, IVE’s mission includes 
improving the processes related to  building and urban space, p romoting research and improving the training of 
professionals, to achieve levels of quality, sustain ability, safety, accessibility and durability in accordance with the 
needs of society, also specialising in the economic valuati on of construction processes based on the analysis of the 
resources allocated and the expected returns. In INPERSO IVE’s main ro le lies within identifying end -user needs, 
along with the engagement of multiple stakeholders. 
8. R2M is an engineering and consultancy company offering services to the energy and construction sectors. R2M 
has proved expertise and services in BIM models creation and management, support to the adoption of digitalisation 
solutions across the building lifecycle, and f or different types of sustainability certification. R2M will lead BIM 
model development tasks, capacity building activities and will offer its outstanding experience in accompanying the 
innovation transition into the market, to support exploitation planning and market uptake. 
9. METSOL (LT) is a manufacturer of tailor -made solar panel solutions specialising in innovative design and 
development as well as bepoke power and electrical solutions for a variety of solar projects integration. In the project 
their design and development team will modify their panels’ visual and textural features through heritage compliant 
prototypes and lead the integration efforts of their roof /façade BIPV modules contributing to the INPERSO Retrofit 
Kit. 
10. IRIS (ES) is a technology SME established 20 07 currently  employing 56 people and specializes in the 
manufacture and integration of Process Analy tical Technology (PAT)-based real-time quality monitoring solutions 
for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly target ed at the fo od, 
pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In addition to photonics -based analysers, they also work with IoT sensor s 
for enabling equipment and  machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioning industry to the Industry4.0 
paradigm. Their sol utions are c loud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi -site applications. IRIS 
Innovation Division is experienced in w orking in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 (both as coordinators and 
partners) and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI programmes. IRIS is certified under ISO 9001:2008  and UNE-
EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems R&D&i.  
11. DMO is an in dependent consultancy (SME) specialized in Real Estate Information Management combining 
consulting, software, and research to support their clients in making optimal choices for developing and managin g 
real estate. DMO employees are building engineers, real estate specialists, researchers, and IT specialists. DEMOC 
produces innovative software products f or the development and management of buildings and civil i nfrastructure 
(e.g.  the Real Estate Suite)  and expert systems with user friendly apps, dashboards, and numerous practical features. 
Their RE Suite comprises BIM, GIS, IoT, Big Data, VR/AR, and Art ificial Intelligence technologies. In INPERSO 
DEMOC will advance the features of RE Suite into an overall deep renovation IoT platform including a social aspect 
to embrace all INPERSO subsystems and processes based on RE Suite’s high interoperability. 
12. EUROC is a member of the GEP Group of companies ( www.gepgroup.gr ), is a young,  and fast -growing 
company providing multi-sectoral expert consultancy and professional technical support to modern business, with 
special focus on the fields of occupational health & safety and environment. EUROC also specialise s in Energy 
Efficiency and R enewable Energy Sources, Environmental Impacts and Protection, Sustainable Management of 
Resources and Eco-Applications, coupled with the relevant investing, business -doing and development consulting 
aspects. EUROC’s main role in the project lies within developing protocols for safe deep renovation worksites, while 
also leading Standardisation, certification and regulatory monitoring activities.  
13. VENTI is a pioneer SME in the design of naturally intelligent ventilation systems to deliver fresh air at minimal 
energy cost. VENT collaborate with top researchers and publishes academic papers that expand their knowledge base 
gaining numerous awards for their innovation and commitment to sustainable architecture including the Best Startup 
at the Lloyds TSB Enterprise Awards and more than 20 sustainability, retrofit and innovation awards).In INPERSO 
VENT aim to deliver an integrated ventilative HVAC as a component of the Retrofit Kit. 
14. AMS is a technical consulting SME established in 2004 with the goal to provide state -of-the- art services 
inextricably linked with the Research, Development & Production of novel energy efficient procedures & materials 
contributing to the constantly i ncreasing demand of “eco -friendly”, energy efficient and “value for money” novel 
products to a rapidly forward moving  world. AMS has been active in 11 EU Funded Projects mainly focused in 
energy efficiency either thro ugh the dev elopment of new materials or  new processes with very promising results. 
AMS will advance their Smart Wall solution within the INPERSO Retrofit Ki t by integrating on-board monitoring 
and controls with the platform and EMS also delivering new sustainable and materials heritage complying prototypes. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 69/70 
15. AUMSA is an urban society established in 1986 by the City Council o f Valencia with the corporate purpose to 
carry out urban studies and carry out municipal project management (PM) and own project execution works. AUMSA 
PM focusing on infrastructure works (urbanizations, collectors, etc.), landscaping, expropriations, drafting of urban 
plans, housing construction, emblematic buildings, ornamental fountains, participation, management and monitoring 
of major projects and archaeology. Their own building pro jects entail land management actions, promotion and 
execution of homes and car parks. In INPERSO AUMSA will provide the Calle Estrella building     for the 
demonstration needs of the project. 
16. MWNB (NL) is a non-profit  public organization funded in 2001 to support owners in the quality maintenance 
of their heritage buildings and monuments .They specialise in heritage building inspection, engineering, green 
monuments, providing  inspection reports and advice for maintenance.  In INPERSO MWNB will lead the Trinity 
complex demo activities. 
17. VVV is a large municipality in southern Attica representing the third INPERSO demo case as they are the building 
owners of the Litous Street Social Shelter, in Vouliagmeni, Athens. Their Organisation and Programming Unit and 
the Department of City Planning & Building Permits are very active in retrofitting and urban projects aiming at the 
energy efficiency of the Municipality and they will be leading the demonstration activities in Greece. 
18. ACCIO is s a global g roup that develops and manages sustainable inf rastructure solutions, especially in 
renewable energy. Their business spans the entire value chain, from design and construction through to operation 
and maintenance. ACCIONA’s goal is to lead t he transition to wards a low -carbon economy, bringing technical  
excellence and innovation to all of its projects to design a better planet. With a presence in more than 40 countries 
and sales of €6,472 billion in 2020, the company is committed to contributing to the economic and social development 
of the communities in which it operates. In INPERSO ACCIONA is leading the activities in monitoring the energy 
footprint of the renovation process also supporting demos 1,2  to assess and optimise construction works. 
19. VIAS is a construction firm tha t belongs to one of the world's largest construction and services groups (ACS 
group), with over 85 years' experience. Headquartered in Madrid (Spain), VIAS ha ve offices in Poland, United 
Kingdom, Portugal, Canada and the U.S. in order to boost their international expansion. VIAS’ general construction 
business focuses primarily on major projects for railways, motorways and roads, airports, water works, coastal works 
and ports, industrial works and urba n development, environme ntal works, buildings,  etc. have an extensive 
experience in the construction of buildings for residential and administrative uses, and in terms of turnover and 
profitability, it is one of Spain's' l argest construction firms.  In the project VIAS will focus on the preparation of 
façade 3D printing requirements, last generation materials selection, the 3d printing system validation and product 
exploitation. 
Role of associated partners 
INPERSO features three partners from Switzerland, an associated country, represented by SUPSI, IWIN and EPFL. 
SUPSI and IWIN are committed to the commercialisation of the solar window, which is a product very compatible 
with the INPERSO approach, as it can be integrated in a wide variety of frames, addressing the heritage requirement 
in a unique way. EPFL is focusing in IEQ, which is a crucial part of the project, but the differentiating factor is the 
inclusive and affordable approach, that is at the core of the INPERSO project. Moreover, all three partners have 
established collaborations with Cantonal Organisations in Lausanne and Geneva, aimed at replicating field trials.  
20. SUPSI (CH) is s one of the nine professional universities recognised by the Swiss Confederation. Their Institute 
for Applied Sus tainability to the Built Environment (ISAAC)  covers the research areas associated with renewable 
energies, the rational use of energy, the refurbishment and maintenance of buildings and also energy planning at the 
regional and local levels. SUPSI will support iWin with their system development. SUPSI will support the product 
technology development throug the identification of user needs and archtypes defini tion in which the photovoltaic 
windows and BIPV element could be integrated and installed. SUPSI will support the validation and development 
products and systems (iWin and METSOLAR) and TRL enhancement through the definition of specific quality and 
testing plan needed in relation to LVD (low voltage directive) and CPR (construction pr oduct regulation). The  
performance validation of the innovative window, defined on TRL5-6 i-Win functional prototypes, will be tested at 
SUPSI PVlab (according to IEC PV -related standards, by assessing the product quality before the implementation 
into the demo-site in WPXX. The relevant façade typologies identified in WPYY will be taken into account in relation 
to the architectural integration scenarios. Moreover, the technology will be subjected to some extended performance-
based tests, in relation to mechanical and electrical safety, by adapting the test set-up to BIPV combined requirements 
for the product typology. SUPSI will support the manu facturing process by providing all the needed specifications 
in order to ensure representative samples/prototypes. The functional product prototypes, mounting instructions, etc. 
will be provided by i-Win and METSOLAR. 
21. iWin – innovative Windows Sagl (CH) is a privately held company founded in 2019 as a start-up of University 
of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland (SUPSI) . iWin have a strong domain expertise integrating 
photovoltaics into custom building integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) solutions. iWin’s pioneering solution applies 
photovoltaic blinds inside insulated glass unit and responds to the unique challenge and market opportunities in 
transforming conventional and existing buildings into smart infrastructures by offering renewable energy production, 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 70/70 
solar protection and glare and solar heat gain control in a single construction element.  iWin has developed a novel 
photovoltaic wi ndow and equally unique manufacturing processes to proof the concept of the technology. Key 
success has included achieving a technology readiness level TRL 5-6 using copper indium–gallium selenide (CIGS) 
solar cells. This latest result and its potential has been unprecedented. IN INPERSO iWIN will further advance their 
system as part of the Retrofit Kit to reach a TRL8 market ready product. 
22. EPFL The École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) is a research and innovation institute and university 
in Lausanne, Switzerland, that specializes in natural sciences and engineering. It is one of the two Swiss Federal 
Institutes of Technology, and it has three main missions: education, research and technology transfer at the highest 
international level. EPFL is widely regarded as a world leading university. The QS World University Rankings ranks 
EPFL 12th in the world across all fields in their 2017/2018 ranking, and 14th in 2021; whilst Times Higher Education 
World University Rankings ranks EPFL as the world's 11th best school for Engineering and Technology.The Human-
Oriented Built Environment Lab (HOBEL) is the research laboratory of Dr. Dusan Licina, whose focus is centered 
on advancing the knowledge of the intersections between people and the built environment with an aim to ensure 
high indoor environmental quality for building occupants. The key mission of HOBEL is to improve the knowledge 
in the domains of indoor air quality, advanced ventilation systems and controls, tools and methods for enhanced  
building environmental monitoring, thermal comfort of humans and their behavior. The HOBEL has contributed to 
activities of organizations such as International Society for Indoor Air Quality and Climate (ISIAQ), American 
Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air -Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), World Green Building Council, 
International WELL Building Institute, and has been collaborating with corpo rations such as Honeywell, Velux, 
Estia, WindowMaster and others. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carlos Bernad on 19/10/2021 15:46:24 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)