1.2 x 2.5 m, to guarantee a service life of over 25 years and to improve visual comfort; (b) upscale manufacturing 
capacity and automation, (c) interface with local manufacturers, users and other stakeholders, (d) address heritage 
requirements; (e) demonstrate in operational conditions and (f) finalise development. 
BIPVs (METSOL, R3.4): (a) Modify panel visual and textural features through heritage complian t prototypes; (b) 
integrate into energy balance management tools; (c) expand customer b ase by projects in multiple countries; (d) 
collect user feedback; (e) demonstrate in operational conditions and (f) finalise development. 
KPIs: Ventilative cooling, PV inverter 5kWp of up to size, storage 14kWh thermal, 4kWh electric with inverter, heat 
pumps (AS/EA) with CoP>4, suitable for air tightness 3-9, reduced energy consumption > 50% for HVAC and DHW 
and savings >75% when combined with DR, Power density of the cu stom BAPV/BIPV = 190 Wp/m2; Cost < 80 
€/sqm; positive aesthetic assessment, windows: 8-12% efficiency, 1000-1500€/m2 final selling price. 
 
 
 
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 5/70 
SO4. Deploy on-site 3D façade printing 
Advanced manufacturing of building components will be introduced (T2.6 - VIAS) into an integrated Façade 3D 
printer system ( IR4) by deployin g a multi -layer 3D prin ting system including robotic technologies for façade  
renovation looking for energy performance improvement. It will be fully automated and integrated with BIM to 
improve quality and reduce on-site operation time and material, and hence, make it more affordable. Special attention 
will be put on safety aspect s as it is a clear barrier to make such a system feasible in a high TRL. The prototype 
system will be demonstrated in TRL7 in a demo of at least 6x6m. Specific analysis, studies an d tests based on the 
results of this pilot will be made to upgrade the technology to the required TRL8:  
3D printing subsystem (UPV/CART – R4.1): 3D printing constructive process requirements, BIM integration, 
relation to INPERSO renovation workflow, 3D pr inting extrusion head integration in industrial robot arm. Printing 
control, including the pumping system. Façade 3D printing requirements preparation, last generation materials 
selection, system validation and product exploitation. 
Global positioning subs ystem (ITA -R4.2): Façade 3D printing positioning and moving system design & 
development. Perception system to allow safe Human Robot collaboration,  
KPIs: Minimum 50% reduced refurbishment duration, >25% cost, >50% less dust / noise generated>40% less CDW 
 
SO5. Address personalised comfort requirements inclusively, by increasing building smartness 
The Energy and Comfort Optimisation Interface (ECOI - ΙR5) is featuring low consumption (T3. 4 - IRIS) wireless 
sensor networks for IEQ (T3. 6 - EPFL) and proactive energy balance optimisation (T3. 5 - CORE) throughout the 
building’s lifecycle.  
Multistage energy consulting system (CORE -R5.1): (a) Expand the f unctionalities of the EMS into a multi -stage 
system by addressing the construction (or retrofit phase) reducing energy demand by 10-20% and generating data of 
significant value for furthe r reductions via RES and electrification; (b) interf ace the EMS with other optimisation 
agents of the project, as well as the RE SUITE and commercial BEMS, (c) validate the models with operational data 
from the demonstration sites; (d) establish business networks and collaborations, (e) finalise development. 
IEQ management interface (EPFL-R5.2): (a) develop a unified IEQ index methodology to assess the impact of 
renovation on IEQ and human comfort, (b) monitor environmental quality (indoor and outdoor -during and af ter 
retrofit) and provide prompts to users as a low-cost solution, (c) assess the acceptance of the proposed solutions and 
engage with users to guide their behaviour, (d) validate and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
methodology and solutions during operational conditions. 
Low-cost and low-energy wirele ss sensor network (IRIS -R5.3): (a) assess and select low -cost and DIY sensor 
components, (b) introduce energy consumption into monitoring decision making; (c) improve acceptance and 
engagement, e specially through open science and citizen s cience; (d) ident ify and pursue partnering/licensing 
opportunities, (e) validate and demonstrate the solution. 
KPIs: Energy consumption forecast accuracy of 8%+/-, leading to 25% HVAC energy reduction, over 30% of total 
energy use, Minimum 30% energy consumption reduced within personalized comfort levels (ASHRAE thermal sense 
scale and UNI15251 ). Energy consumption of mechanic al ventilation & cooling reduced over 70%, number of 
overheating hours<5%, Metabolic CO2 <1000ppm universal, CO<35 mg /m3 1hr mean, 10 mg /m3 8 hrs me an, 
total VOC<300 μg/m3 for an 8h exposure, formaldehyde<100 μg/m3 for a 30 min exposure, NO2 <20 μg /m3 annual 
mean , particulates PM2.5 <25 μg /m3 PM10 < 50 μg /m3 24hr mean15,  adhere to IAQ standards, 95% accuracy 
on equipment degradation detection, 30% lower maintenance costs. 
 
SO6. Deliver a complete system comprised of almost-commercial readiness level products and processes. 
IR6 INPERSO completed system: demonstrated in operational conditions (T5.1-5), system completed through design 
review and TRL8 checklist (T6. 3 – UPV) and uptake by B&C end -users for transferability, replication, and 
commercial exploitation (T6.4,5 – CORE) 
INPERSO Demonstrators (Respective – R6.1-3): INPERSO will be demonstrated in Valencia, Velp and Voula by 
AUMSA, MWNB and AMS respectively.  
Design review (Respective – R6.4): (a) finalise the development cycle 
OHSE - Protocols for safe construction workplaces (EUROC -R6.5): (a) define new risks in construction sites 
stemming from the integration of technologies but also enabled by digital solutions; (b) deploy new human -robot 
collaboration protocols (ITA); (c) implement the protocols in operational conditions and report on the outcomes. 
INPERSO market launch strategy  (CORE T6.4) A market analysis will be performed to further address  bespoke 
Target Groups need and consolidated into a sustainable, flexible and scalable value proposition read y for market 
launch. KPIs: 4 demonstrators, 6 business models, over 50% reduction of accident incidence  
 
 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 6/70 
Pertinence to the topic’s objectives 
CL5-2021-D4-01-02 Requirements SO1 SO2 SO3 SO4 SO5 SO6 
Reduction of construction time by >40% and cost by >25% √ √ √ √  √ 
CDW reduction >30% and construction CO2 footprint reduced by >30% √ √ √ √   
Performance gap <10%, acceptance/ satisfaction of results > high √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Reduction of accidents and risks > 50% √ √ √ √  √ 
Demonstration sites where project is implemented      √ 
20% of users engaged as participants during the project (energy 
communities, open science, citizen science a.o.) 
 √   √ √ 
Building energy demand reduction >25-75% kwh/m2a   √ √ √  
6 Business Models (BMs) for INPERSO adoption      √ 
Accessibility, safety, acceptance and indoor health and comfort √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Performance tracking and information throughout the lifecycle √ √   √  
Integration in energy networks & energy community fostering  √    √ 
 
1.1.2 Ambition 
Innovation #1 Information capture and management throughout the building’s lifecycle – DMO/R2M 
State of the art: Digital transformation is taking place at a slow pace in the European construction industry means a 
huge gap between theoretical digital opportunities and the realities of on-site construction. Beside the huge interest 
in the scientific community and the acceptance of digitalisation is increasing in other sectors, still BIM and AI are 
not widely used in the construction sector. Moreover, BIM data are not easily accessible on premises and are usually 
consulted on PC in the office. Generating these models is a challenge in itself, requiring significant computational 
resources and is time consuming. As of now, the most common informat ion sources when developing a project for 
existing buildings are the existing 2D digital or paper drawings. 
INPERSO advancement: RE Suite and its modules enable the management of the renovation process and physical 
assists through a digital process, which is more efficient and cost-saving. Furthermore, it is enabling the integration 
of BIM in this process which have other huge benefits, such as collecting, identifying, and present data about HVAC 
systems in a digital format, which can be then linked to the other RE Suite modules to be used in different analyses, 
such as maintenance programme and LCC analysis, as shown below: 
State of the art Innovation 
Gap between as -built and as -designed and 
unconformity issues: Current unconformity tracking 
applications lack features, such as, the automat ic 
location, automatic displaying information over 
objects, overlaying and comparing design models to 
as-built models and  voice entry capabilities.  
RIALTO will allow an efficient construction tracking and 
conformity chec king during the construction proces s. 
SCAAI to ol to allow BIM developers to create BIM 
models of buildings through 3D point clouds from laser 
scans more quickly; providing automation steps for all 
standard geometries; integ rated methods for automated 
component recognition and BIM data enrichment.  
Involvement of stakeholders and decision making 
during the renovation process : most of the current 
solutions also lack the synchronization with 
Construction Management Software ,  thus not 
allowing  information sharing with stakeholders that 
are not physically present on site 
INPERSO tools will allow the streaming of the onsite 
operation to allow the involvement of different 
stakeholders which will lead to a fast decision making. 
Progress tracking and the link between issu es and 
BIM models: Issues are currently recorded in a table 
format, can be referenced to a specific location in a 
pdf/ drawing file, however, the link to a BIM file is 
not created. 
The project will allow the site  progress tracking and the 
link between the issues in the construction site and BIM 
models which will store the development history in the 
building and products passport. 
Real world location and AR information sharing : 
Cloud anchoring and real-world AR position is being 
used mostly in  games and marketing campaigns, 
Application in th e construction sector are not yet 
taking full advantage of these innovations. 
Rialto uses motion tracking, using simultaneous 
localization and mapping (SLAM) techniques to track the 
device position in the world and e nvironmental 
understanding, allowing the  device to understand the 
surfaces in th e environment.  Rialto makes use of cloud 
services for storing and sharing 3D content and for 
positioning the information in real-world locations. 
Plug and play Energy consump tion pr ediction and 
monitoring: There are in the literature a few attempts 
Extending self-adapting artificial intelligence modules to 
optimize energy consumption in buildings and 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 7/70 
to model, analyse and predict energy consumption in 
building, but most of them are plug and play, nor 
extendable. 
construction. 
 
Innovation #2 Deep low-carbon renovation models - TAU 
State of the art: Deep low carbon housing renovations are crucial strategies to achieve carbon neutral goals and can 
lead to significant energy savings for residents, addressing key social challenges such as affordable housing an d a 
just low -carbon energy transition. Realistic sustainable technical solutions already exist to retrofit the existing 
housing stock, such as insula tion, high performing windows, efficient building services, low car bon energy 
technologies, etc. Low carbon retrofits are urgent because of the climate crisis, but they are also disruptive to residents 
and costly to owners. Thus, it is critical that low carbon retrofits optimise an effective flow of construction workers 
and materials during renovation, reducing  disruption and duration. Additionally, international research has 
highlighted a ‘performance gap’, which is a mismatch between the predicted buildin g performance and carbon 
reductions and what achieved in reality. One of the major causes of this underperformance is how residents use their 
home and systems. For example, ill -informed design and technology that do not meet users’ needs can lead to 
increased energy use and poor indoor environmental quality (IEQ), affecti ng residents’ health and well -being and 
jeopardising carbon reduction targets. Smart technology is increasingly deployed to monitor building performance 
and to engage residents with their day-to-day behaviour, but their potential remains underexploited. This project will 
include different smart tech with the aim to: 1.) reduce disruption and manage expectations with residents; 2.) manage 
the flow of people and materials during construction to  reduce disruption; 3.) close the performance gap with real -
life monitoring; 4.) nudge architecture to encourage residents to make more sustainable choices long term. TAU will 
study these new and optimised processes with integrated smart technology solutio ns towards transforming the low 
carbon retrofit of urban environme nts from the earliest stages (design/pre -retrofit) to completion (post -
occupancy/retrofit). 
INPERSO advancement: To address these challenges, and the novelty of this project, we will study the acceptance 
of different smart technologies at different stages of the project. We will also ideate and c o-create new optimized 
construction models and processes with stakeholders to minimize retrofit disruption and cost.  This will support the 
development of optimised flow of construction workers and materials to reduce retrofit duration, disruption, and cost. 
Furthermore, smart technology acceptance and their potential in persuading residents to reduce their carbon impact 
long-term will be tested, including the utilisation and study of different smart technologies to monitor actual carbon 
reductions and IEQ, impact of user behaviour on performance and how this can be optimised.  
Finally, the inclusion of smart tech at different stages is in and of itself a new low carbon renovation model and the 
INPERSO project provides the perfect test bed to study the challenges, successes, and barriers to its contribution to 
carbon reductions, and wider implementation. 
State of the art Innovation 
The social interaction and feedback during the 
renovation process is usually not taken into 
consideration, which decreases the awareness of 
such renovation projects and therefore the 
willingness to participate in them. 
RE Suite inhabitant app enables the so cial integration and 
decision making and linking it to the BIM models, that is 
the feedback from the inhabitants can be used dir ectly to 
modify some design/operational input. 
 
Apart from technical and industry barriers, the social 
environment and citizens’ expectations and needs are 
other key factors that, jointly to financing supporting 
schemes, need to be addressed for deep reno vation 
deployment. The intense intervention that is needed 
by the building industry to offer and implement 
competitive solutions in order to face the challenges 
in climate change is not always in line with 
individual and local priorities. Therefore, the success 
of upscaling deep renovation depends on optimized 
industry solutions and more prepared local 
communities13 
In line with the new European Bauhaus aiming to “bring 
the European Green Deal to life in an attractiv e, and 
innovative and human -centred way”, INPERSO will 
include the human dimension by mapping the demand side 
and know the drivers for the different techn ologies from 
users’ point of view to help technology partners develop 
them. This will be achieved by u sing the stakeholder -
centred approach init ially indicated (workshops, focus 
groups meetings as a first step, then by surveys and 
inquiries adapted to demo cases and local communities, to 
be able to produce industrialised and personalised 
renovation including heritage buildings.  
  
Innovation #3 More efficient construction through innovative components and manufacturing 
Conventional refurbishment processes suffer from fragmentation, extended downtimes, significant waste generation, 
increased costs and also often result to significant deviations fro m the owner’s vision. The Retrofit -Kit (IR3)   
13 D'Oca, Simona & Ferrante, Annarita & Ferrer, Clara & Pernetti, Roberta & Gralka, Anna & Sebastian, Rizal & Veld, Peter. (2018). 
Technical, Financial, and Social Barriers and Challenges in Deep Building Renovation: Integration of Lessons Learned from the H2020 
Cluster Projects. Buildings. 8. 174. DOI: 10.3390/buildings8120174. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 8/70 
comprises a portfolio of innovative technologies and approaches, as well as an open -ended structure enabling the 
addition of any brand of type of technology. What sets INPERSO apart from similar approaches, is t he focus on 
realistically low cost, highly integrated and prefabricated. In reality, low-income and vulnerable groups are excluded 
from even light renovation, as the indicative cost of up to 60€/m2 can be prohibiti ve for a household of 50m 2. The 
Just Trans ition declares that no one should be left behi nd, but this requires dramatic cost reductions in the 
transformation process. 
State of the art Innovation 
A wide range of heating and ventilation products is 
available but vast majority provide no connectivity , 
no performance feedback and no capacity for real 
time operational adjustment. There is also a growing 
range of 'bolt on' controls with internet connect ivity 
(Nest, Hive or Switchee) but these monitor one area 
(hallway), control heating or air conditionin g only 
and have limited efficiencies (15% at best) and no 
load shifting capacity 
Ventilative HVAC (VENTI) Connected, demand 
responsive, fully integrated heat recovery ventilation, 
heating and hot water systems pre -configured with 
renewable energy generatio n and storage to enable quick 
and simple installation. The Ventilative HVAC will 
interface with the data driven controls and optimize based 
on user prefe rences, especially with regards to indoor 
conditions, maintai ning healthy and comfortable indoor 
environment while adapting to DR and saving energy and 
emissions. 
Shading devices :  In different types of building, 
especially in renovation, the opaque surfaces of the 
façade able to host renewable energy systems, such  
as photovoltaic, are very limited. This i s mainly 
because of limited opaque area in the roof or 
restriction from cultural offices. Therefore, windows 
and transparent facades can serve as new  kind of 
energy producer. Today, there are just a couple of 
manufacturers offering shading devices that produce 
solar energy in the building sector. They are young 
companies producing photovoltaic blinds suitable 
only for external or internal use. The solu tions for 
external use have compatibility problems with fully 
glazed facades and they are not recommended f or 
multi-story buildings, as they do not typically bear 
the wind load. The photovoltaic blinds suitable for 
indoor use can be used in any type of bui ldings, but 
since the solar heat is transmitted through the 
windows, the incoming sunlight overheats the indoor 
spaces, and therefore it is required additional cooling 
loads, especially in summer. 
The main advantage of iWin with respect to alternative 
photovoltaic blinds laid in the integration into the insulated 
glass unit. It reduces the heat transmission to the indoor 
spaces and the glass panes seal and protect both the 
photovoltaic Venetian blind and the control system against 
dust, dirt and weather con ditions, avoiding performance 
losses and guaranteeing its optimal performance during its 
lifetime. The inte gration into the building façade is 
compatible with highly glazed buildings and no 
maintenance is required. The invention related to 
photovoltaic blind window has been previously considered 
with different approaches. However, the previous systems 
require to arrange crystalline solar cells on at least one side 
of the slats and therefore, their interconnection is 
complicated and expensive, especially whe n the width of 
the insulated glass unit remains below 30 mm. Our solution 
offers a monolithic interconnection between cells and high 
throughput connection between slats compatible with an 
automatic and continuous production line and provides a 
competitive market price. 
 
BIPVs Expensive, economic products do not 
consider the aesthetic dimension. 
BIPVs in INPERSO will be investigated as prefabricated 
components in addition to their conventional function, with 
all due visual and aesthetic considerations. 
 
Innovation #4 Vertical, robotic Façade 3D printing 
State of the art : 3D printing applied to construction is c urrently in a phase between the demonstration and the 
beginning of its arrival on the market, and only in certain areas 14. Until now, it has been applied on a small scale to 
buildings, bridges, street furniture, mod els, elements for interior design, moulds or prefabricated construction 
components. Its use in facades has been fundamentally for the walls of new buildings wit h a single storey or by 
means of prefabricated elements for enclosures15. There are few on-site applications and even fewer that contemplate 
the rehabilitation of buildings on a large scale.  Among the most important challenges today is the energy 
rehabilitation of façades, using new printing materials, more efficient and sustainable 16, compatible with 
constructions to be rehabilitated, generati ng multilayer systems. In addition, it is necessary combine safely and 
reliably automated processes and human intervention, improving finishes and integration in rehabilitation process. It 
is also necessary to develop new modelling protocols incorporated into BIM systems, which can directly connect the 
 
14 European Construction Sector Observatory (2019). Trend Paper - Integrating digital innovations in the construction sector: The case of 
3D Printing and Drones in construction. 
15 V. Mechtcherine, V. N. Nerella, F. Will, M. Näther, J. Otto, and M. Krause (2019) Large-scale digital concrete construction – 
CONPrint3D concept for on-site, monolithic 3D-printing. Autom. Constr., vol. 107, no. August, p. 102933, 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.autcon.2019.102933 
16 Hamidi, F., & Aslani, F. (2019). Additive manufacturing of cementitious composites: Materials, methods, potentials, and challenges. 
Construction and Building Materials, 218, 582-609. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 9/70 
design phase with the construction phase. 
INPERSO advancement: The proposed system takes an important step in the conception of 3D printing systems to 
rehabilitate facades. It could bring important improvements in execution time and costs, adaptability to irregularities 
in what has already been built and an increase in overall efficiency, both in the process as of the result. That is because 
until now only have been proposed solutions for new walls on the ground floor or to rehabilitate with prefabricated 
elements, which do not contemplate working on-site. In this sense, the 3D printing solution with multilayer insulating 
materials, the collaborative human-robot work and the BIM integration, coordinating design and manufacturing, are 
very ambitious goals that are considered achievable. Above all, the most far -reaching bet i s providing the system 
with the ability of moving along the façade plane directly carrying out the rehabilitation. 
 
Innovation #5 Increasing the smartness of buildings through proactive optimization 
Most prominent commercial smart home products highly rely on wired solutions for more sophisticated control and 
operations (Honeywell, VIMAR, Gira KNX, ABB i-bus KNX). In many renovation works additional wiring can be 
an option entailing respective costs, installation work and tenant burden. In light ref urbishment and in low impact 
domestic upgrades much lighter interventions at the co re infrastructure of the building are expected such as plug -
and-play solutions, wireless thermostats and IoT controls for lighting and security. Current state of the art wir eless 
solutions focus on remote sensing a nd control (Legrand Netatmo) via mobile interfaces and smart home  hubs and 
speakers (Google Nest, SmartThings, Echo Dot). In small scale BeMS applications such as single buildings, energy 
logging meters can be connected to an existing BeMS for logging energy. However, several outdated components 
and parts are no longer compatible with latest advancements in BeMS or are no long er supported by manufactures. 
In cases such as complex buildings/sites bei ng monitored, dedicated hardware and s oftware p latforms are 
implemented to obtai n adequate data for analysis. This leads to capital intensive investments on the side of the 
building owners, and disruption in business-as-usual operation of the building. 
INPERSO advancement: The Multi-Stage Energy Consulting Syst em (MuSECS) is designed to introduce highly 
impactful functions in a flexible manner. The monitoring of key assets (mainly HVAC, energy generation and storage 
devices) is a prerequisite to maintaining peak performance, which directly affe cts energy performance. Moreover, 
performance degradation of these assets is associated with costs, disruption, discomfort and even threats to human 
health and wellbeing. As opposed to conventional solutions, MuSECS will require limited wiring, instead employing 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN),  can be integrated on the edge, taking advantage of full signal resolution and 
granularity to produce more accurate results. This means that insights are immediate, saving a lot of time for facility 
inspection, and are  communicated to the facility managers  with minimal latency and maximum accessibility and 
modularity. The multi-objective optimisation function of the energy balancing will supplement BEMS by introducing 
objective values and mathematically maximising the potential of savings. MuSECS will also integrate with the IEQ 
management interface, resulting in an inclusive and affordable energy optimisation solution. Finally, the integrated 
system will be transferred to the renovation phase and applied to optimise the scheduling of renovation works based 
on clean energy availability, in order to reduce the CO2 emissions of the process.   
 
1.1.3 Technology Readiness Level of INPERSO 
RE Suite (DMO-IR1) RE Suite is currently used by DMO to manage over 100,000 properties (projected to triple by 
2025) (TRL9). The RE Suite passport will be developed to host all building related data during the renovation stage, 
it will be tested and validated in the demonstration sites. The RE Suite will be interfaced with RIALTO (R2M) and 
SCAAI (R 2M/DMO). Both components are validated and  will be demonstrated in INPERSO (TRL7). Through 
debugging and design review, IR1 will achieve near-market readiness pending final certification (TRL 8).  
Retrofit-Kit (AMS-IR3) The individual components of IR3  
Retrofit-Kit elements current TRL Final TRL 
Integrated HVAC (VENTI): The energy pod has 
been prototyped and validated delivering substantial 
improvements to energy performance (TRL6). 
Value optimization, design for manufacture, 
interoperability optimization  and demonstrations, 
development finalisation (TRL8). 
Smart Wall (AMS) TRL 5-6. The proposed solution 
has been installed in a wall in AMS premises and its 
performance has been validated. (TRL5). 
TRL 7 -8. In the framework of INPERSO the proposed 
solution will be demonstrated in a building in Greec e and 
is expected to be a completed and qualified system by the 
end of the project. (TRL8). 
Solar windows (IWIN) The technology has been 
tested in SUPSI laboratory and in an open rack under 
real outdoor condition as relevant environment, 
(TRL6). 
demonstrate a system prototype in an operational 
environment at SUPSI outdoor mockup installation 
reaching TRL 7 and in one  or more the demo sites at the 
end of the project to reach (TRL8). 
Façade 3D printing (VIAS, CART, ITA, UPV) Components of the 3D printing integrated system (IR4) have been 
demonstrated under relevant environments and various application scenarios (TRL6). The pump and 3D printing 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 10/70 
extrusion head will be integrated in the industrial robot arm ; the positio ning system will be designed and 
manufactured, with Perception functions to facilitate Human -Robot collaboration. The system will be integrated in 
BIM through the RE SUITE. Following system prototyping and validation, it will be demonstrated in operational  
conditions (TRL7). VIAS will carry out assessment and verification to include in commercial services (TRL8). 
WSN (IRIS) Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN)  (TRL6). The technology has been developed, prototype has been 
produced and tested in lab and pilot scal e(museums). Demonstration of the prototype  adjusted to the needs of the 
projects (TRL7). IRIS will carry out technoeconomic assessment and integration into their services (TRL8). 
Energy Management System (CORE) TRL5. Has been demonstrated in applications for manufacturing equipment 
and buildings, transferability prototypes have been demonstrated (TRL7). Will be implemented in actual processes 
post-training wi th historic data and integrated with other optimisation modules and d emonstrated in operational 
environment, prior to verification and debugging (TRL8).
1.2 Methodology 
1.2.1 Common implementation methodology 
INPERSO is an ambitious project that will achieve near-market status for its results at TRL8. Thus, the activities are 
centred on delivering high quality renovations in operational environment, that will be subsequently used to finalise 
the development cyc le. Commercially, INPERSO is envisioned as a service with product and PaaS components, 
which means that it needs to possess the intrinsic flexibility for implementation in very different renovation scenarios.  
Therefore, demonstrations in each demo -case (DC#) will follow a common implementation methodology, adapted 
to suit the unique requirements of each site, and showcasing the flexibility of INPERSO: 
Digital and data-driven technologies have a foundational role in the project, as unifying information stre ams into 
actionable intelligence is one of the key components. These solutions will have a pivotal role throughout the 
building’s lifecycle and need to be implemented at the earliest stage possible to initiate data acquisition. Hence, from 
M1 to M6, an ass essment of the data acquisition infrastructure of the demonstrations will be conducted, 
complemented by the definition of the data architecture, which will be comprised of the RE SUITE platform and the 
interfacing of the various digital & smart solutions with it. M7-12, data acquisition will be implemented and by M18 
monitoring and communication systems shall be fully operational, although effort will be invested in achieving this 
status earlier. From M19 and until M30, models and algorithms will be trained  with operational data as opposed to 
M1-18 where historical and reference (from nearby stations and databases, or pre -existing DAQ) data will be used. 
This approach allows a full annual cycle for tra ining and validation, prior to the onset of the demonstra tions phase 
M31-42). Post-demonstrations (M43-48) and as part of the development finalisation phase, software debugging and 
interface streamlining will compr ise the final set of activities, complemen ted by a critical design review and next 
steps forward.  
Active and passive envelope components  are addressed in INPERSO through the lenses of sustainable 
industrialisation as well as personalisation, while heritage-related constraints are also considered. During M1-6, the 
scope of each demonstration will be refined (see description of individual demonstrations) and a thorough review of 
technical (interoperability, complexity, CO 2 footprint) and non -technical risks (regulatory, heritage constraints, 
delays in the tendering and administrative processes) will be ca rried out to deliver the Demonstration Action Plans 
and update the Risk Log. M7-18 the designs will be finalised, and the tendering processes will be initiated according 
to the decision -making framew ork of each demonstrator organisation. By M30 the renovat ions, including the 
installation and validation of INPERSO components will be completed through the commissioning process and in 
M31 the demonstrations will begin. During the retrofit (M18-30), data will be collected from the site to carry out the 
energy balance and working conditions assessment through ECO -I, in addition to interacting with stakeholders as 
described in the Low-Carbon Renovation Models (LCRM).  
The social dimension of the project will  be comprised of the activities of the LCRM and stakehold er engagement 
activities. An ambitious plan for the early identification and involvement of citizens and related groups (see §2.1 
Target Groups) will be deli ver by M6 and updated during the course of  the project. The plan will elaborate on the 
appropriate measures to: (a) promote energy community related initiatives, (b) promote open science and citizen 
science, (c) maintain a focused renovation strategy centr ed on user satisfaction, inclusivity, acce ssibility, IEQ and 
capacity building, (d) foster sustainable economic growth and access to green finance.  
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 11/70 
Figure 2 methodology for the implementation of INPERSO 
In summary, INPERSO will feature four distinct phases: Decision and  design (pre-retrofit), integration (during -
retrofit) and validation & demonstrations (post-retrofit). A fourth phase dealing with the finalisation of development 
will conclude the project, although some activities described here will overlap with previous phases. In the Validation 
& Demonstration phase, the INPERSO components will be validated as a system in the demonstration cases, ensuring 
that the start of the demonstrations will be cond ucted at the planned readiness level. The aim is to provide a bette r 
understanding of how to optimise the three main stages (pre -retrofit, during retrofit, and post -retrofit) of the deep 
renovation of energy efficient buildings and ensuring the designed for carbon emissions are achieved in reality. Hence 
addressing the ma in social and technical challenges along the entire design and construction and use phases are 
crucial, whereby smart technology can aid safety, wellbeing and positive behaviour change, and  improving user 
acceptance of low energy and low carbon renovation interventions.  
1.2.1.1 Pre-retrofit 
RE SUITE integrated platform (IR1), DMO 
Information throughout the lifecycle of the building will be managed through the RE Suite. RE Suite is comprised of 
several solutions : real estat e development, control, asset and portfoli o management, maintenance (NEN 2767 ), 
financial exploitation, energy and safety. RE Suite is used for developing and optimising the real estate management. 
The software is used by professio nal real estate managers,  such as housing associations, municipalit ies, (air)ports, 
hospitals and contractors. It uses and connects with novel techniques and standards: BIM, IFC, GIS, CityGML, etc. 
 
RE Suite provide s a wide array of 
functionalities: 
• Input & edits through smartphone 
• Multiple analytics 
• BIM & GIS – based 
• Workflow management & 
dashboards 
• Multi-user and language 
• Cloud based / SaaS 
• Adaptable security& access aspects 
• Long term maintenance schedules 
• Fast data processing. 
RE Suite’s architecture is modular, 
employing Ajax,  WPF, Xamarin, 
SQLServers, noSQL Servers, continuous 
integration and deli very and Agile / 
Scrum. 
In INPERSO, BIM Passports for both buildings and materials, standardised BIM Family Ontologie s and Object 
Libraries, will be introduced and managed on RE Suit e passport. It will be used to collect, ma intain and store 
information about existing buildings over their life cycle. Moreover, Models generated from SCAAI tool will be 
managed and integrate d in RE Suite,  besides, the Inhabitant App which will evaluate th e renovation acceptance 
solutions. In INPERSO, three RE Suite component will be used: 1-RE Suite Passport : BIM Passports for both 
buildings and materials, standardised BIM Family Ontologies and Object Libraries, will be introduced and managed 
on RE Suite p assport. It will be used to collect, maint ain and store information about existing buildings over their 
life cycle. Moreover, Models generated from SCAAI tool will be managed and integrated in RE Suite. 2-RE Onsite: 
through the Inhabitant App which will evaluate the renovation acceptance solutions and increase the social interaction 
in the project. 3-RE IoT: to monitor ana analyse building data and performance, with three main objectives: a) data 
access, b) data management, c) easy and efficient export of data, that will be used in pilot scale. Moreover, interfacing 
with ECO-I will also be carried out. 
Scan-to-BIM with AI capabilities (DMO-R2M) 
The scan-to-BIM process of indoor buildings materials and components remains mainly a manual process due to the 
difficulty in data registration, and huge amount data to manage, the segmentation of partially occluded components 
and the absence of semantic information to annotate and model the registered da ta. In this pr oject, a data -driven 
method for point cloud data extraction and semantic parsing of the 3D scene is proposed to extract BIM information 
from 3D data. The process contains the following steps:  
• Segmentation of the global point cloud in smaller  point cloud clusters corresponding to individual components. 
Several up-to-down and down-to-up segmentation methods will be explored to avoid over -segmented or under-
segmented point cloud clusters;  
• The development of the automatic classification of the s egmented point cloud components extracted from the 
previous step;  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 12/70 
• Determinate material categorization of segmented objects of the previous step from prior knowledge and feature-
based descriptors from shape and intensity data included in point cloud data;  
• Transforming and exploiting the information of the building obta ined from previous steps to BIM compatible  
format. A BIM compatible format to export data will be selected from the most common formats (IFC, DWG) 
and information will be adapted to its scheme. 
 
SCAAI tool allows the automatic classification of objects in a point cloud and matching it with a BIM object library, 
changing the necessary parameters in the BIM objects to fit it with the scanned objects which would lead to the 
creation of a semantic BIM model. The innovative approach of the tool allowing the fast assembly of a BIM model 
based on a scanned 3d point cloud, instead of reconstructing it.  
RIALTO, R2M 
AR based solution, offering guidance through Hololens or other mobile devices to operators in the construction site 
   
and within existing buildings,  during renovation 
operations, to detect g aps and discrepancies 
between a s-design and as -built and generate 
reports. Operators can see building features and 
technical information obtained fro m BIM 
models, that are over imposed on the reality, thus 
they can easily see if the as designed corresponds 
to what has been constructed. RIALTO will 
contribute to the “at least 30% and towards 5 0% 
reduction of on -site construction / renovation 
work time and 25% costs reduction” impact. 
Low-Carbon Renovation Models (IR2), TAU 
Low-Carbon renovation models will be developed and implemented to introduce the human -centric dimension to 
industrialised renovation. This approach will synergise and supplement the B IM-based workflows of IR1. In short, 
new optimized construction models and processes with stakeholders will be deployed to minimise retrofit disruption 
and cost, but primarily to achieve the meaningful translation of user requirements into the delivered result. Coupled 
with post -occupancy evaluations and nudge architect ure, LCR Ms will contribute to decisively r educing the 
performance gap. LCRMs will also be applied closely with stakeholder engagement and capacity building activities, 
constituting a wide spectrum of SSH activities that are in fact necessary to fully explo it the digital solutions. Thus, 
acceptance of smart and digital solutions by the users of the buildings as well as the B&C industry will be a key 
activity that will unlock positive behavioura l shifts in target groups. Finally, the LCRMs will collect, process, and 
circulate valuable data with regards to the technologies presented in INPERSO themselves, contributing to addressing 
barriers, bottlenecks and pain-points in the process of achieving near market readiness. 
1.2.1.2 Advanced renovation components and technologies – during renovation 
INPERSO Retrofit-Kit (IR3), AMS, VENT, METSOL, IWIN, SUPSI 
Smart Wall, prefabricated panel, AMS 
Smart Wall is a prefabricated all-in-one wall panel that can be insta lled externally or internally in existing building 
envelopes but a lso can be a standalone wall, suggesting a  feasible, adaptable and cost -effective solution for deep 
renovation. It is constituted of multiple layers and other components as presented in the figures below, aiming to 
ameliorate existing building’s performance on different levels (e.g. thermal, acoustical performance, fire resistance). 
It can be filled with eco-friendly and recycled insulation material such as rockwool, cellulose or even Super Insulation 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 13/70 
Material (SIM) to improve the thermal transmittance of the external walls. It can operate also as a standalone HVAC 
system, able to maintain indoor thermal and air quality comfort conditions and can integrate mechanical, electrical 
and plumbing d istribution and equipment. The configuration of the Smart Wall can b e supple mented by 
photochromic windows enhancing the visual as well as the thermal comfort of the interior space. Vacuum Insulation 
Panel (VIP), as the most promising SIM for applications in building sector, can be used behind the mechanical parts 
of the Smart Wall, but it can also be used as the main thermal insulation of the panel depending on each building’s 
energy demands. All the components of the panel are enclosed in a steel stud, ti mber or other type of frame that is 
easy to install and consequently  achieving less time on -site and less disr uption to the occupants. The Smart Wall 
panels are versatile and customized according to the specific needs of each building case. Combined with a  high-
performance heat pump and photovoltaic modules placed on the façade or the roof, it can lead the overall performance  
 
 
of a building to reach the 
NZEB standards.  
(1) Functional coating 
(2) Mortar – fire protection 
(3) Cladding (CDW%) 
(4) Water resistant air barrier 
(5) Acoustic insulation 
(6) Thermal insulation 
(7) Structura frame 
(8) PV system 
(9) integrated HVAC  
The use of recycled materials 
will be considered for the 
components of the smart wall 
system: recycled plastic, 
wood etc. for the frame of the 
system, recycled insu lation 
materials, use of CDW in 
order to produ ce claddings 
made of geopolymer. 
Kit iWin – window and shading device, IWIN 
The kit iWin is a photovoltaic venetian -blind shading device that is integrated inside an insulating wi ndow (double 
glazing unit). iWin allows to combine in one single element different functi onalities adding value to construction 
elements nowadays necessary: renewable energy production (useful for the building operation), light and solar 
radiation control (especially in summer), glare protection and superior aesthetics. 
  
Figure 3 IWIN prototypes 
The sealed environment of the glass -enclosed chamber 
(insulating window) ensures total protection against dirt, 
dust, or weather conditions and almost no maintenance is 
required t o the blinds. iWin solution is based on our 
international patent pending metho ds for continuous 
production that integrates thin film photovoltaics solar cells 
on venetian blind inside a two glasses -enclosed chamber 
with an easy installation framing structure su itable to 
retrofit conventional insulated windows or to be installed 
in n ew Zero Energy Buildings.  iWin is developed to be 
marketed worldwide, in particular where solar protection is 
needed to shield building from overheating during summer. 
For iWIN the ambition is to develop intelligent algorithms 
in order to optimize the use of the dynamic system, to 
develop a solution performing around 7% efficiency in  
typical windows sizes of 1.2 x 2.5 m, to guarantee a service life of over 25 years and to improve vis ual comfort. 
Moreover, the manufacturing line will be further develop in order to reduce the stress-dependent of electrical contact 
resistance, Demonstration in real buildings at the end of the project will s erve as pilot and demo providing en ough 
reliable data to scale up the solution using a semi -automatic manufacturing approach able to deploy new processes 
and technology that have a considerable potential for rapid and broad deployment at European level. 
Strong collaboration with local façade maker and glass maker is foreseen in order to effective involve the buildings 
supply chain, in particular local or distributed SMEs, as well as of building owners/tenants and other relevant 
stakeholders. iWin solution i s also designed to be integrated in to cultural he ritage buildings with high design and 
aesthetic requirements. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 14/70 
Ventilative HVAC, VENT 
The ventilative HVAC component is designed for mass retrofitting – (i.e., ‘home engine’) a connected, intelligent, 
plug-and-play comfort system for houses (combining heating, hot water, free cooling and ventilation) that comes in 
one, easy to integrate box combining: Heating and domestic hot water generation through exhaust air (EAHP) and 
air sourced (ASHP) heat pumps, ventilation and cooling through MVHR with passive cooling loop, thermal storage 
and electricity storage (4kWh battery with AC inverter) and PV inverter.  
 
Figure 4 Ventilative HVAC systems (left), installation design (right) 
The Energy Pod is designed for easy integration into the heating – cooling network of the building, minimizing on-
site work and disruption. Moreover, through the thermal and electricity storage, the Energy Pod is ideal for DR 
schemes and can be interfaced with renewable generation, EV charging as well as other functions, providing holistic 
energy management in a highly optimized package.  
Customized BPIVs, METSOL 
In INPERSO, METSOL will design and develop the active building elements 
(BIPV/BAPV – Building Integrated/Applied Photovoltaics) which will serve 
to act as a retrofit construction material for roofing and/or façade applications; 
and produce renewable electr ical energy for self -consumption of the 
households by integrating them with cooling, HV AC and other systems. The 
BIPVs & BAPVs will be integrated with  the passive elements and 
implemented in t he demo sites. These elements will be designed and 
developed, ta king into account economical, efficiency and aesthetical 
requirements for such systems/applications. Seamless integration with the 
building envelope ( not looking like PV solutions) for greater  household 
owners’ acceptance – special bill of materials  (BOM) will be utilized to 
achieve this. In terms of efficiency, power density of 190 Wp/m2 will be 
achieved, at a cost of 80 €/m2 for the PV panels for BIPV considering mass 
production. Furthermore, a plug -and-play approach will be implemented so 
that the systems are designed in such way that they could be installed without 
specific training and done by regular  construction workers (apart from 
electrical connections). 
Vertical, robotic, façade 3D printer (IR4), VIAS, ITA, UPV, CART 
Robotics can be fully applied to refurbishment works on  site. 3D printing technology can be implemented to work 
on outdoor skin shapes with significant autonomy. The goal is to print autonomously vertical surfaces using layer‐
by‐layer techniques in a safe way and in a reduced time. Based on using a digital model of the building a robot will 
be able to move precisely over the working surface, adding material wherever required while avoiding damaging any 
physical element in the work environment or people.  The reduction of labour risks, execution time, environmental 
impact and economic costs  are envisioned through the INSPERSO façade printing system as it will be based on a 
combination of new technologies enabling vertical printing for construction elements while enabling more traditional 
machinery systems to work autonomousl y through modifications . The system  will integrate the following 
subsystems: 
• 3D Printing subsystem: a prototype extrusion head capable of printing construction materials mounted in an 
industrial robotic arm. This system will allow the required degrees of freedom to adapt to existing building 
geometries and conditions an d meet the process requirements and monitor the quality of the process with 
appropriate sensors. 
• Global positioning subsystem: the 3D printing robot will be fixed to motorized a scaffold platform covering 
the façade that will allow autonomous movement according to higher level orders. 
• Safety subsystem: based on robotic perception sensors and SW that will allow all the movement of the global 
and local mobile parts preventing collisions and sharing space with human operators without a safety fence. 
 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 15/70 
• BIM integration: SW to define and control the whole renovation process. 
• Mobile concrete pump: adapted to specific requirements of the printing materials. 
• Power generator: to provide the energy to the different subsystems. 
 
 
Figure 5 Vertical Façade 3D printer design (left) and pattern generation (right) 
To produce and 
demonstrate the 
capabilities of the 
INPERSO 3D printer in 
renovation works for 
energy-efficient 
buildings and reduce the 
technological risk  
involved in this 
challenging objecti ve, 
the prototype will be 
based on previous 
research project results 
and integration and 
modification of 
commercial machines,  
components, and materials wit h a progr essive TRL upgrade. To guarantee successful integration  and manage the 
system complexity, a model-based V-design methodology will be followed with intensive use of virtual prototyping 
and verification of critical development aspects in experimental tests under controlled conditions before integration. 
The 3D printing head is available from 3D C ONS project (VIAS and CARTIF) in which the feasibility of vertical 
printing has been demonstrated in laboratory conditions and cement-based materials. In INSPERSO, the system will 
be first tested in the same conditions wi th a range of last generation therm al insulation materials available in the 
market. 
In a second step, this printing head will be mounted on an industrial robot arm, which will replace the current cartesian 
system allowing 6 degrees of freedom (DoF)  movement, extending the capabilities to freely adapt to existent building 
envelope geometries. To achieve industrial scale application this subsystem will be fixed to a mobile p latform 
designed to move on the bridge of a commercial motorized scaffold, which will be modified with specific controllers 
for autonomous operation. This global positioning system will be upgraded with robotic perception technologies 
(Lidar/cameras) making the machine aware of its environment. From the acquired information, Artificial Intelligence 
libraries combined with m apping techniques will be used to detect any potential collision with static or moving 
elements and will allow the system to safely “navigate” over the façade while even sharing the scaffold bridge with 
human workers when required. All these s ubsystems will be thoughtfully tested to verify that they fulfil technical 
and operational requirements and once validated, the integration process will start. The system commissioning and 
set up will be carried out in two phases: 
In the first phase the system will be validated and demonstrated in a relevant environment in ITAINNOVA facilities. 
In this phase the main target will be to make system adjustments to get the required productivity performan ce and 
safe operation.  In the se cond phas e, the prototype system will b e transferred to the most  suitable demo site to 
demonstrate the performance in operational environment and assess , not only the productivity compared to 
expectations, but also the characteristics of the resulting construction element, with a specific focus on quality (build- 
as-designed) and energy performance (thermal insulation improvement).  Finally, the results from the pilot will be 
analysed in detail, and specific studies or adjustments will be carried out. These steps will lead towardsthe system 
qualification with attention to regulation and standard compliance and following COVR project recommendations.  
1.2.1.3 Post retrofit monitoring and optimisation 
Energy & Comfort Optimisation Interface (ECOI) 
Multi-Stage Energy Consulting System (MuSECS) 
The Multi-Stage Energy Consulting System (MuSECS) is a holistic energy management resource that comprises 
multiple stages of the building’s lifecycle. The system is comprised of four sub-modules: (a) data analytics, (b) asset 
monitoring, (c) forecasting and (d) energy optimisation, utilising AI Machine Learning tools to translate process data 
into actionable information. For each module, as well as  the integrated system, process data will be enriched with 
external data, su ch as energy pricing , energy mix, weather information and LCA data among other types. Process 
data streams will be comprised of: process energy loads in selected resolutions, ener gy generation and storage 
capacity, requirements and constraints (such as th e indoor environmental quality or baseline energy requirements) 
and asset operation and condition data. Once the data architecture is finalised, the MuSECS will be applicable across 
the entire building lifecycle. During building operation, the system will anticipate the overall process energy needs 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 16/70 
and will take decisions on the optimal energy mix to be used by finding the most cost -effective energy policy, i.e. 
the scheduling of the energy sources and the energy storage components that minimize energy cost s while on the 
same time satisfying the expected energy consumption of the overall process and the corresponding operational 
constraints. This will be achieved  by formulating the energy optimisation problem into a suitable multi-objective 
optimization model based on meta-heuristics algorithm with a given “cost criterion” (objective function) that has to 
be optimized. The objective function defines the optimisation goals and typically reflects the operational energy costs 
as weighted sum of the various energy sources, favouring the use of renewables by considering the energy prices and 
the corresponding CO 2 emissions. Moreover, the system will enable multiple data  analytics routines & AI to learn 
from the historical energy patterns and past actions with the a im to identify the energy intensive sub-processes and 
optimize their energy efficiency.  
 
Regarding refurbishment or new construction design, MuSECS is primarily designed as a tool to influence decision 
making, providing adopters with accurate information, but also validating the reliability of the process itself. In this 
case, operation data will be used to construct a mathematical model of the unit and based on the demand response 
performance, an optimal energy system configuration will be proposed (the RES-Selector module). The module can 
be expanded with expert knowledge on passive systems (insulation, ventilation, cool-roofs a.o.) to incorporate these 
interventions in the module, as part of a Building Renovat ion Passp ort solution. In case more advanced  data is 
available MuSECS will validate the configurations resulting in much greater accuracy.  
 
MuSECS will also be applied 
during construction works such 
as demolition, refurbishment, or 
new construction. For this 
application the principles of the 
system are the same: util ising 
energy data, scheduling advice 
will be provided to the operators, 
so that the energy footprint of the 
construction process ca n be 
minimised.  
 
The Asset Health Monitoring (AHM) module o f MuSECS will be responsible for: (a) condit ion monitoring: 
monitoring the current state of critical assets in real-time and (b) anomaly detection: conduct advanced data analytics 
and machine learning algorithms for detecting deviations from the normal states and assets with high probability of 
failure. The value of this function will be to inform the operator of the smooth operation of the device and provide 
advance warning in case a deviation from  operational specifications is anticipated, so that decisio n planning for 
maintenance can be facilitate d and justified.  There are two types of interoperability options that will increase the 
value of the system: (a) Expert knowledge, for instance on thermal simulation or indoor air quality will allow more 
accurate prediction of extreme weather events, that generally do not have the required frequency to generate data for 
training the models. Expert knowledge in the CO2 footprint of various components and pr ocesses will enable 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 17/70 
prediction and optimisation of emissions, in addition to energy and associated costs; (b) Module interoperability will 
be pursued with selected solutions such as dynamic LCA, home-automation, BEMS and other monitoring and control 
software that can utilise the knowledge generated by MuSECS to improve other processes of the building’s lifecycle. 
An example is  the delivery of day -ahead energy scheduling where a BEMS would be required to micromanage 
electronic devices. In cases where automation is difficult to integrate, user prompts will be used to deliver actionable 
information. 
Low-cost sensor network and IEQ management, IRIS, EPFL 
A pre -/during-/post-renovation occupant -centred system for people’s comfort and wellbeing by providing good  
indoor environmental quality (IEQ) in the population in an energy-efficient manner will be consolidated comprising: 
(a) an indoor environmental quality index using a low-cost IEQ monitoring platform. This effort will include the 
deployment of numerous IEQ sensing platforms in European buildings accompanied by occupancy surveys in order 
to produce weighting coeffi cients for various p arameters. Moreover, a methodology will be developed for 
benchmarking the IEQ in buildings that have undergone energy renovation. Th e reason for this is threefold: 1) to 
guarantee that IEQ is not degraded during the renovation to satisf y the existing manda tes; 2) to document any 
improvements in IEQ after renovation; and 3) to estimate potential additional benefits from renovation, incl uding 
benefits for health and well-being, as well as the financial benefits from improved productivity and increased value 
of a building on the market.  
(b) a personalized, sensor-driven recommendation system for air pollution exposure and thermal stress avoidance. 
Based on data from a network of low -cost sensors, w e aim to develop a methodology that provides  personalized 
recommendations to the users to improve their IEQ (e.g., opening windows to ventilate, interact with the heating 
thermostat during winter to reduce overheating and save energy etc).   
(c) improvement of working conditions in construction sites with regard to ambient air pollution. The sensor-driven 
recommendation system will be transferred to the application during the retrofit phase, collect ing air quality data 
from external APIs (or interfacing with the MuSECS that will be already processing this data) to analyse the working 
conditions of renovation activities. This information will then be used to assess and update risks in the context of 
occupational health and safety in WP5. 
1.2.2 INPERSO Demonstration Cases (DCs) 
INPERSO will be demonstrated in  fully operational conditions in Valencia (Spain), Velp ( Netherlands) and Voula 
(Greece). The INPERSO demonstrations will follow the common implementation meth odology unless specified 
otherwise (within the description). The overall goal of the demonstratio ns is not only to hi ghlight the INPERSO 
innovations, but also to generate the conclusions needed to advance the system to TRL8. 
 DC#1 Valencia 
(AUMSA) 
DC#2 Velp NL 
(MWNB) 
DC#3 Voula EL 
(VVV) 
 
 
   
Scope & objective Near-zero retrofit 
maximising natura l 
ventilation . 
Pilot solutions ahead of large 
scale retrofit of heritage 
buildings into services and 
accommodation. 
Comparative evaluation 
of INPERSO  nZEB 
with conventional 
retrofit. 
Climate classification BSk: Cold semi -arid 
climates 
Cfb: Temperate ocea nic 
climate 
Csa: warm and 
temperate 
Unique direction  City centre, heritage, 
residential 
Heritage, large scale 
landscaping, services 
Social housing 
Networks and 
communities 
Establishment of energy communities and support via stakeholder engagement and 
capacity building  
Replication – scalability 
potential 
AUMSA manages 598 
dwellings where 
INPERSO can be 
replicated. 
MWNB managing over 2000 
sites with heritage status. 
Interface with > 40 
energy communities in 
Attica, VVV manages 
62 buildings. 
Interfacing with sites in Lausanne and Geneva as living labs and replication in other 
cantonal buildings (over 200 school buildings available).  

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 18/70 
 
1.2.2.1 Demo Case # (AUMSA) Calle Estrella, Valencia, Spain 
Description of the demo site 
The Calle Estrella building is in the neighbourhood called “La Roqueta” with a population of 4,489 people, which is 
in “Extramurs” district. There are four nei ghbourhoods in this district of 50,897 peo ple. DC#1 is comprised of 16 
housing units (four apartments per floor, with four floors available) plus a market on the ground floor. There are 16 
apartments (over 40 people). In each floor, there are 2 apartments with 1 bedroom and 2 apartments with 2 bedrooms 
(there are 2 stairs with 2 apartments per stair and floor). On the ground floor there is a market (281 m2).The Estrella 
building was constructed in 1850 and is protected by heritage regulations, providing strict guidelines on any potential 
retrofit activity affecting the visible part of the building. The key economic activities of the neighbou rhood are 
professional activities 43% (financial institutions, insurances, services provided to companie s etc.) and tra de and 
service activities 37% (commerce, restaurants and lodging, repairs). 
Demo Case #1 Calle Estrella 
 
Figure 6 Calle Estrella location and façade 
Type Mixed use (multifamily and 
ground-floor market) 
Built / Refurbish 1850 / 2002 
Occupancy >40 tenants 
Heated area 16 apartments (880m2) 
Ground floor market (281m2) 
Heated area: 709m2 
Total neighbourhood area Block: 4700m2 
Extramurs district: 1,972 km² 
Energy consumption  170.15 kWh/m2a 
Renewables None 
Data acquisition – 
controls- smartness 
None 
 
   
Figure 7 Calle Estrella 4-6 location of the neighbourhood and building (left), courtyard façade (centre) and aerial 
view (right) 
The district where the building is located is a historical dist rict because its housing stock is mostly older than fifty 
years (57% of the housing stock was built from 1901-1960). The building is included in the protection level number 
3, with basic architectural and subsidiary environmental protection. Therefore, onl y the demolition of its invisible 
parts from public roads can be  authorized and its own elements must be preserved. And only the restorin g and 
undertaking the replacement of the pre -existing volume with care and respect for the original characteristics of the 
building and ensuring the congruence of the works with the maintenance of the façade and with the environment can 
be carried out. 
 INPERSO Implementation 
The goals of DC#1 are to carry out deep renovation of the Calle Estrella building , improving build ing energy 
performance, focusing on indoor environment and ventilation, promotion of energy communities and adherence to 
the heritage status: 
Passive and active envelope components: The renovation of the building currently planned is to carry out passive 
measures ( insulation of the building envelope: main façade o n the  inside part, courtyard f açade and roof; new 
windows). The construction of new terraces on the courtyard façade in each floor and the installation of elevators to 
make the building accessible. Façade refurbishment will be conducted in accordance with AUMSA procedures. The 
heritage status of the building renders the utilisation of prefabricated elements in the building façade challenging, 
hence the Consortium will conduct component  early prototyping adhering to the visual and textural requirements . 
Solar window, smart wall and 3D printed façade elements will be prototyped towards this goal, while BIPVs will be 
restricted to the roof area and inner courtyard. Smart wall components and ventilative HVAC pods will be utilised in 
selected interior areas. New connections to replace the old DHW boilers will also be assessed.  Moreover, through 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 19/70 
LCA-based tools, the CO2 footprint of the conventional renovation materials and works will be improved. 
 
Figure 8 Layout of Calle Estrella 4-6 
Digital and data-driven technologies: DAQ will be carried out 
as described in the common implementation methodology. Given 
the location and climate of DC#1, natural ventilation potenti al 
will be maximised. The renovation process will adhere to the data 
acquisition requirements during the construction works, that will 
be used to validat e the ECO -I in both retrofit and post -retrofit 
stages. RIALTO and SCAAI will be utilised in conventional and 
heritage a sset appl ications. The result will provide valuable 
feedback fo r the refinement of the solut ions. All data will be 
stored in the RE Suite , and the three main modules: Passport, 
OnSite and IoT. The interface between the modules and ECO -I 
will be optimised.  
The social dimension: AUMSA manages a large portfolio of buildings in Valencia, in distrib uted locations and 
various typologies. The goal of INPERSO is to establish and foster energy communities as “local lighthouses” that 
will naturally expand to encomp ass the s urrounding neighbourhoods. Spanish regulations require that energy 
communities can span a radius of 500m, that reinforces the lo cal character. DC#1 will hence be employed as a 
lighthouse project implementing the activities of the Stakeholder Engag ement Plan, considering local and social 
contexts throughout the three phases of pre-, post- and during-retrofit. The buildings in the same neighbourhood will 
be invited to install photovoltaic systems on their roofs and participate in citizen science and engagement activities, 
including the formation of energy community. It will be given priority to the buildings in the same block of buildings 
given that the energy generated in an energy community can be distributed in 500m maximum. In case there are not 
interested neighbourhoods, different option s will be  studied. On the ground floor of the building, there ar e some 
commercial premises being part of a bigger market. In the roof of this market, photovoltaic panels will be installed. 
The market also has a loading and unloading area on the street where the installation of a charging station for electric 
vehicles can be studied. 
 
1.2.2.1 Demo Case #2 (MWNB) Trinity Complex, Velp, Netherlands 
Description of the demo site 
Monumentenwacht is an organization that specializes in the periodic inspection of built her itage to raise awareness 
among owners and caretakers of the importance of proper maintenance and preventive conservation. It originated in 
the Netherlands in 1973. Each province ha s its own Monumentenwacht organization so nationally there are 10 
chapters. MWNB is the Noord-Brabant province chapter. MWNB support and advise 2800 owners. It inspects 1800 
monuments a year: so some annually and some once every two years. Varying from sm all house and tombstones to 
large cathedrals and industrial complexes. That would off er a big spectrum of demonstration project to apply 
INPERSO methodology and increase the project impact. Example of potential deomnstration projects are detailed: 
The Trinity building: The pilot complex is m ainly composed by 
three building with a total plot area of 130,000 sqm. It is in the city 
of Velp in the province of North Brabant in the south of the 
Netherlands. All building are culture heri tage buil dings and 
protected by law, which add another complexi ty dimension in the 
renovation work. The  three buildings illustrate well the 
developments in the religious field in the Meierij and the Land van 
Ravenstein. When active practice of the Catholic  faith in  the 
Meierij was banned, the Land of Ravenstein became  a refuge for 
many Catholic monastic orders and believers, since there was still 
religious freedom here. The whole co mplex will be subjected to 
renovation with changing the function into residential and services. 
Regarding the building HVAC system, which w ill be a big 
challenge due to the type o f buildings, the plan is to have one 
heating system serving the who complex 
Building A: Saint Vincent's Church which is owned by the local 
government, it is the o ldest building of the Velpse trinity, dating 
back to the twelfth century. Over the centuries, the relatively simple 
tufa Romanesque church has been expanded with, among ot her 
things, a choir and a brick church tower. The building will be 
renovated to be th e main service hub of the area with restaurants, 
cafes and cultural hubs  
 
Figure 9 Location of the three buildings 
 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 20/70 
Building B: Monastery Castle Bronckhorst, it has a long history of 
renovations and expansions, in 1990, the complex was redeveloped 
for residential purposes. It is now owned  by a pri vate developer 
with the aim to renovate the building in to modernized residential 
units 
Building C: Capuchin Monastery Emmaus, it has its origins in the 
Eighty Years' War, it was also subjected to different expansion and  
Figure 10 St Vincent’s Church (Building A) 
 
 
Figure 11 Monastery Castle Bronckhorst 
renovation, that continued well into the twentieth century, until 
under increasing secularisationthe number of novices continued to 
decline from the 19 60s onwards. This eventually led to the 
dissolution and repurposing of the monastery complex. 
Boiler house: Completely in line with its historical function, the 
Ketelhuis will become the (figu rative) warm heart of the Tilburg 
Spoorzone. The monumental, fo rmer NS building (main train 
service company in th e Netherlands) is being completely 
transformed. This example of post-war utilitarian construction has 
served as a heat source for the Werkplaat s for man y years. First 
with coal, and later with gas. Now the Ketelhuis is given a new 
lease of life as a place to live, work and relax. Located on the corner 
of the Burgemeester Brokxlaan and the Willem II passage, you can 
also reach the center of Tilbur g within one walking minute. The 
building has a total area of 4500 sqm and will be renovated to host 
48 homes 
  
Figure 12 Capuchin Monastery Emmaus (left) and Boiler House (right) 
INPERSO Implementation 
DC#2 entails three buildings in a 130,000m2 area in the city of Velp, the province of North Brabant. All building are 
culture heritage buildings and protected by law, which add another complexity dimension in the  renovation work. 
The three buildings illustrate well the developments in the religious field in the Meierij and the Land van Ravenstein, 
adding a significant cultural dimension to the heritage aspects. The entire area is planned for renovation and 
landscaping. INPERSO will be an integral part of th e design process to achieve a low carbon retrofit in the entire 
area. Given the size and scope of the pilot site, it is not possible to carry out deep renovation in each building, but the 
entire area is available to test the project’s solutions and upscale into a neighbourhood scale retrofit. The change-of-
use of buildings B,C and D (into services such as restaurants and accommodation) is also an added challenge, and 
the cultural significance of the area adds another layer of complexity with regards to tolerance to disruption (noise, 
pollution, activity). For DC#2, piloting and optimising low-disruption, pollution and energy retrofits is key (CORE, 
EPFL, ACCIO). Moreover, IEQ and energy balance will be differentiated from the other cases as the climate is less 
conducive to natural ventilation and humidity poses a risk also to the heritage components. Finally, DC#2 provides 
a unique opportunity to exploit (a) the plans for a heating network that is planned to be inst alled, and (b) the high 
proportion of visitors compared to local users. In this context, the approach will be focused on achieving behavioural 
change also in the case of visitors, a factor that will influence the characteristics of the energy community. 
Passive and active envelope components : Façade refurbishment will be conducted in accordance with MWNB 
requirements considering the adaptability of prefabricated elements. Thus, early prototyping will be carried out. To 
install solar windows, the existing frame requirements will be analysed, and local produ cers will be contacted. A  
select number of smart wall and 3D printed façade elements will be assessed with regards to the potential application. 
The BIPVs will also be considered i n roof areas and auxiliary spaces. Ventilative HVAC pods will be utilised in 
selected interior areas  presenting the maximum co ngregation. An assessment of the existing and planned heating 
network will be conducted in the context of integration.  
Digital and data -driven technologies : DAQ will be carried out as described in the common implementation 
methodology. Given the location and climate of DC#2, natural ventilation potential is limited, but will be maximised 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 21/70 
nonetheless. The renovation process will adhere to the data acquisition requirements during the construction works, 
that will be used to validate the ECO-I in both retrofit and post-retrofit stages. RIALTO and SCAAI will be utilised 
in conventional and heritage asset applications. The result will provide valuable feedback fo r the refinement of the 
solutions. All data will be stored in the RE Suite, and the three main modules: Passport, OnSite and IoT. The interface 
between the modules and ECO-I will be optimised. Piloting the construction stage energy optimisation of MuSECS 
will be focused, given the potential energy and CO2 impacts of undertaking such a large project.  
The social dimension : The cultural importance of DC#2 will be highlighted in the renovations. Given the use 
adaptation of the buildings, different high-level strategies will be implemented in the LCRMs. DC#2 has a different 
user profile, comprised primarily of building managers, employees and visitors. Establishing an energy community 
and carrying out capacity building will consid er these differentiations, as well as their impacts o n the project ’s 
objectives. 
 
1.2.2.1 Demo Case #3 (VVV) Social shelter Litous street, Vouliagmeni, Athens 
Description of the demo site 
The Shelter for Adults is located at the municipality of Vari-Voula-Vouliagmeni on a plot of land of 1628,41 m2 and 
covers a surface of 388 m2 in a green environment. It was initially designed, built and used as a small hotel and later 
was donated to the Vouliagmeni Community of Georgia Achillea Karatzas. The task of converting and renovating a 
small hotel into a state -of-the-art Social Hostel f or Greece by comp aring it with others in this field was done with 
work carried ou t entirely by the technical staff of the Vouliagmeni Municipality. It’s a 4 -storey building (no 
basement)  with a total surface area on all floors of  1389,00 m 2 (388m2 each floor except for t he 3rd th at spans 
225m2), total building height of  11,50  m and total volume of 2931,00  m3. The building has a 32,10 m long façade 
on Litous St. and is around 6,90 m in depth, with open spaces at all sides of the plot. The building has been placed in 
a 45 degrees angle to the street so that the main façade faces south, giving a wonderful orientation combined with a 
unique view. The building was erected at the early sixties (1962-1964). It is rectangular in shape and the load-bearing 
structure consists of piles, beams and slabs of reinforced concrete and the walls are filled in with brickwork. The 
ground floor houses the communal areas of services such as: the main entrance, the main stairwell, offices of the 
staff, and other facilities. The floors have approximately the same layout and consist of 4-5 apartments and auxiliary 
spaces. The roof structure has a surface area of 225 m2 and is covered by ceramic tiles, while the rest of the roof area 
functions as a terrace for the 3rd floor. The surrounding area of the building is approximately 1363 m2 appropriately 
designed by Community workshops for use by the institution's guests with outdoor dining, promenade and daytime 
functionality. 
Demo Case #3 Building #1  
 
 
Type Shelter for 
adults 
Built 1962-1964 
Occupancy 40 people  
Heated area 977m2 
Energy 
consumption  
89kwh/m2a 
HVAC 
overview 
N/A 
Renewables N/A 
Data 
acquisition –  
N/A 
 
 
 INPERSO Implementation 
The Municipality of Vari Voula Vouliagmeni (VVV) has identified a number of retrofitting actions that are needed 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 22/70 
to this 60 years old building. These needs are mainly focused on the improvement of insulation of buildings envelope, 
replacement of the old windows with new ones, as well a s HVAC systems. Moreover, VVV would wish to 
aesthetically improve the surrounding area (more than 1000m2) and also utilise this area for creative activities of the 
residents but also of for the whole community. In DC#3 deep renovation will take advantage of the space uniformity 
to conduct valuable comparative assessment between retrofit configurations.  
Passive and active envelope components: The Smart Wall will be the main refurbishment component of DC#3. A 
selected floor will be ful ly refurbished with the Smart Wall, another will be fully refurb ished using commercial 
products and services and the remaining façade and roof area. DC#3 does not have any heritage restrictions and thus 
a multifaceted approach t o renovation can be employed . The gro und floor will be fully refurbished to maximise 
indoor comfort and energy performance. The ground floor features all the common spaces that are used for activities, 
and also it is the location where the groups congregate, emphasizing the need for good indoor air quality. The Smart 
Wall will be the main compone nt for the renovation. BIPVs and solar windows will also be installed  in a 
multifunctional interface that will prioritise interoperability . BIPVs will be considered i n all relevant areas . 
Ventilative HVAC pods will be utilised in selected interior areas presenting the maximum congregation.  
Digital and data -driven technolog ies: DAQ will be carried out as described in the common implementation 
methodology. Given the location and climate of DC#2, natural ventilation potential is limited, but will be maximised 
nonetheless. The renovation process will adhere to the data acquisition requirements during the construction works, 
that will be used to validate the ECO-I in both retrofit and post-retrofit stages. RIALTO and SCAAI will be utilised 
in conventional and heritage asset applications. The result will provide valuable feedback for the refinement of the 
solutions. All data will be stored in the RE Suite, and the three main modules: Passport, OnSite and IoT. The interface 
between the modules and ECO-I will be optimised. 
The social dimension: On one hand, DC#3 houses vulnerable citizen groups. This will require a different approach 
from the other demonstration ca ses. Moreover, there are 40 active energy communities in the wider Attica region. 
Interfacing with them will provide a second pillar for DC#3. Finally, the extensive network in Greece that is managed 
by MIRC, AMS and CORE will also be introduced via advisory board and clustering actions to replicate the project. 
 
1.2.2.2 Replication cases 
In addition to the residential and historic religious heritage buildings, the INPERSO technologies will also be applied 
and tested in three school buildings in Switzerland. These buildings are equipped with different ventilation systems, 
and they will be monitored before and after the application of smart technologies in order to quantify the amelioration 
in the IEQ.  
B1-"École des Boudines" is a school complex with two different ventilation systems. Some spaces are equipped 
with mechanical ventilation with heat recovery (MVHR), while som e other s paces are ventilated via automated 
windows controlled by the indoor and outdoor environmental parameters. The WSN will be installed to collect data 
for IEQ parameters in order to evaluate the IEQ. Then, the personalized recommendation system will be installed, 
which by taking data from the WSN, will inform the occupants to take actions to improve their indoor environment.  
B2-“Collège de Montchoisi” is a naturally ventilated school with the manual opening of the windows, where there 
are indications for poor IAQ after the renovation. The WSN will be installed to evaluate the IEQ, and in a later phase, 
two techniques will be applied to improve the air quality. 1) In some classrooms, the windows will be automatized, 
and 2) in some other classrooms, the  personalized recommendations system will be applied to inform t he users to 
take action to improve their IEQ.   
B3-“Collège de Florimont” is a school building equipped with a hybrid ventilation with the exhaust in the toilets, 
air inlets in the classrooms,  and permits the windows' manual opening. The WSN will be instal led for the IEQ 
evaluation and to activate the personalized recommendation system at a later stage.  
B1 "École des Boudines" 
 
B2 “Collège de Montchoisi” B3 “Collège de Florimont” 
   
Built: 1965 ren. 2015 Built: 1953 (Ren. 2015) Built: 1906 (Ren. 2013) 
MVHR  and automated NV Occupant driven NV Hybrid ventilation 
The results of the three case studies will : 1) test the effectiveness of the IEQ index devel oped in INPERSO (WP3-
T3.6) to evaluate the indoor environments ; and 2) quantify the benefits in IEQ when the developed personalized 
recommendation system (W P3-T3.6) is in operation. In addition, the monitoring of the three sites will permit a 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 23/70 
comparison of the four most common ventilation systems for schools in Switzerland (MVHR, occupant driven NV, 
automated NV, and hybrid ventilation). This comparison will reveal the advantages and disadvantages of each system 
in providing adequate IEQ for the pupils.  
 
1.2.3 Do No Significant Harm 
The Taxonomy Compass was used to perform a preliminary analysis of the activiti es in INPERSO. The following 
activities were assessed with regards to their relevance to the 6 areas of the Taxonomy: installation, maintenance and 
repair of energy efficiency equipment, renewable energy technologies, education, energy generation using PV, CSP, 
non-fossil gaseous and liquid fuels, bioenergy, transmission and distribution of energy, storage (thermal- electrical- 
hydrogen-), data processing, hosting and related  activities, programming & consultancy, manufacturing of RES, 
batteries. Substantia l contribution and DNSH criteria are adhered to. Moreover, INPERSO makes substantial 
contributions to: (1) climate change mitigation, (2) climate change adaptation, (4) trans ition to a circular econ omy 
and (5) pollution prevention and control. During the project and as part of T7.3, the positioning of INPERSO will be 
elaborated, as one of the key activities of the project is the securing of green financing.  
 
1.2.4 Relevant R&I activities 
IR1-RE Suite Platform : DMO will integrate innovations and results from BIMSpeed (GA: 820553 , DMO is 
Technical Coordinator) which develop harmonised Building Information speedway for energy-efficient renovation. 
Additionally, P2ENDURE (GA: 72339) which develop Plug -and-Play product and process innovation for Energy -
efficient building deep renova tion, PRECEPT (GA: 958284) which develop ed a novel decentralized edge-enabled 
prescriptive and proactive framework for increased energy efficiency and well -being in residential buildings  and 
MOBISTYLE (GA: 723032) which develops motivating end-users behavioural change by combined ICT based tools 
and modular information services on energy user, indoor environment, health and lifestyle.  
SCAAI (R1.1) & RIALTO (R1.2): R2M will utilise BIM4REN4ReinEU pro( GA 820773) and SPHERE (GA 
820805) for BIM and Digital Twins for buildings and will refine the RIALTO solution; 4RinEU (GA 723829) 
defines robust, cost-effective, tailorable deep renovation techno logy packages supported by usable methodologies, 
feeding into reliable business models. R2M serves as innovation manager. R2M leads the EU-wide Framework for 
a Digital Building Logbook (DBL), tender, aiming to support EU-wide adoption17. 
IVE participates in INFINITE (GA: 958397) carrying out the demand -side mapping and aggregation through a 
stakeholder-centred approach for the increase of the market penetration of industrialized all-in building envelope kits 
for deep renovation, in DRIVE 0 (GA: 841850) enhancing a consumer centred circular renovation process in order 
to make deep renovation more attractive for consumers and in HAPPEN (GA:785072) designing and implementing 
the engagement and training strategies market uptake of deep retrofitting of buildings. IVE will transfer this know-
how and innovative methodologies and also innov ative sys tems and approaches from:  re-MODULEES (GA: 
955529) where GIS web-based tools for the retrofit market activation and up-take and BEEP  where a method for the 
energy rehabilitation using BIM was proposed.  
Retrofit-Kit (IR3): Solar Windows: iWin as a start-up have received support by different Swiss Agency such as the 
Fondo energie Rinnovabili FER of the Ticino Canton and the Swiss climate Foundation for the project TiWinen with 
the aim to develop and MVP of the window and improve the  production processes to minimise yield losses 
AMS participates in PLURAL (GA: 958218) having as main roles: i) the development and prototyping of a 
retrofitting system coupling insulation, heating-cooling, ventilation, heat harvesting systems and smart windows, ii) 
the installation of these sy stems in a demo building in Greece and iii) the monitoring of the performance of these 
systems. This knowledge will be further utilised in INPERSO for developing, constructing, installing and monitoring 
the performance of retrofitting systems in a demo bui lding in Greece.  AMS participates in Surefit (GA: 894511) 
having as main role: i) the installation of retrofitting systems in an apartment in Greece and ii) the monitoring of the 
performance of these systems. This experience will be transferred to the INPE RSO project for a successful 
installation of technologies and their performance monitoring. 
Vertical, robotic façade 3D printer: UPV, ITA, VIAS and CART will introduce results from the H2020 projects 
REZBUILD (Development of new technologies for the rehabilitation of houses to reduce energy consumption and 
installation time), HINDCON (Hybrid industrial construction through a 3D printing “all-in-one” machine for large-
scale advanced manufacturing and bu ilding process es) and COMPAIR (Vision system to allow HRC in 
manufacturing). The following public-private national projects will also be used: 3DCONS (3D printing technologies 
in the construction industry, both in the field of new construction and in the restoration and rehabilitation of heritage), 
ROBIM (Robotics for inspection and evaluation of buildings with BIM integration), DETECMA (Perception system 
for safe machine operation) and AUTODUMP (Autonomous mobile machinery for construction environments) 
ECO-I (IR4): MuSECS: CORE participates in RECO2ST (GA: 768576) conducting innovation management and 
has developed the individual EMS system components of ECO-I in E-DYCE (GA: 893945), PVadapt (GA: 818342) 
 
17 : https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/cacf9ee6-06ba-11eb-a511-01aa75ed71a1 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 24/70 
and PRELUDE (GA: 958345). CORE will transfer innovative syst ems and approaches as well as the Industry 4.0 
principles from projects such as Level-Up (GA: 86999146) and Z-BRE4K47 (GA: 768869). 
 
1.2.5 Multi-inter-disciplinary approach 
INPERSO is an ambitious project aiming for the rapid evolution of the B&C industry. This is primarily reflected in 
the introduction of automation in deep renovation processes , an effort that by its elf requi res the harmonious 
collaboration of disciplines: applied sciences such as Architecture and Engineering (A&E), Computer Sciences (CS) 
with an emphasis on Data Science, as the main disciplines, Social Sciences and Humanities & Economics ( SSE), 
Material Science (MS), Environmental Sciences (ES), Physics and Mathematics (PhM).  
WP CS A&E SSE MS ES PhM Multi- and inter- disciplinary advances in INPERSO 
WP2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Advances in sustainable renovation products and processes 
WP3 ✓ ✓ ✓   ✓ Integration of BIM-based workflows 
WP4 ✓  ✓   ✓ New models for deep low carbon renovation 
WP5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ BIM-enabled sustainable deep renovation operations&, upscaling plan  
WP6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Human centric design, co-designed business models, capacity building 
and engagement in green funding 
 
1.2.6 Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH) dimensions in the project 
The interdisciplinary approach of INPERSO integrates the contributi ons of SSH, economics and market studies to 
provide insights into the needs and challenges in industrialisation of deep renovation workflows for energy-efficient 
buildings. This is also a result of the SWOT and barrier analysis of §2.1.1 that revealed integration, cost, knowledge, 
and acceptance as the main barriers . Thus, the technologies and met hodology of INPERSO were designed with an 
intrinsic SSH dimension a nd feature a portfolio  of activities directly aimed at working “with and for European 
society”. This will be achieved by involving local stakeholders such as occupants’ groups, neighbourhoods, but also 
civic society, promoting and supporting the formation of energy communities and skills building, an effort with social 
and market aspects. The goal of t hese activities is both technological, in terms of leveraging energy storage and 
reintroducing secondary material into the building deep renovation cycle. Moreover, economics and market studies 
will be used to provide evidence to complement contributions collected from partners, stakeholders, citizens’ etc. to 
elaborate the DEC strategy. This contribution wi ll go on beyond the project to reach TRL9 when, in addi tion, own 
market studies will have to be developed to fine tune the business model, as well as ba nkability analyses for 
sustainable business approach. SSH methods will enable the development of the local ecosystems that human-centred 
and tailored to involv er actors’ needs, and thus they are instrumental from project objectives definition to TRL9 
attainment and to ensure a wide adoption of the solution to attain the expected impacts.  
 
1.2.7 Gender dimension 
To fulfil proj ect objectives, as well as to maximise its  impact, it is necessary to specifically consider expectations 
and needs (incl. skills) of women with regards to the INPERSO results, since women in construction report a male 
dominated training landsc ape. In this line, INPERSO will take care of offering a  gender-neutral environment, for 
both contents and framework. User studies (WP 5-6) will be carried out on gender-balanced user panels. INPERSO 
will develop a Gender Equality Plan supported by the results of a co-designed digital survey, engaging the industrial 
communities involved with its Use Cases and addressing intersectional and context specific c hallenges. Rethinking 
the work environment, endorsing successful past approaches and inventing new pract ices when nec essary and 
combining dedicated training sessions INPERSO aspires to set out the overall objectives for integrating an equality 
and inclusivity culture. Complementarily to that, actions to involve women in results exploitation will be sought, 
namely promoting women entrepreneurship reaching them through relevant Women in STEM initiatives. Moreover, 
women Web entrepreneurship is supported and e ncouraged with close access to the WeHubs, which connects 
business ecosystems and provides them with men toring tools to support women entrepreneurs in the digi tal sector. 
Moreover, actions addressing women in B&C and training activities to be developed in the project will also look to 
leverage gender neutral careers to attract and retain women to enrich in q uality and talent and address the global 
shortfall of qualified employees in key sectors as ICT and B&C industry, directly addressed by  INPERSO. Issues 
based on local contexts (e.g., male-dominated energy communities in Greece) will also be considered when designing 
and implementing the project’s activities.  
 
1.2.8 Open science management 
The Open Science Practices (OSPs) are intrinsic to the project methodology. To successfully attain project objectives 
and deliver a solution to deploy in B&C industry, it is ke y to va lidate research outputs with those involved in t he 
collective R&I effort to bring about energy efficiency in this industry, with the project results playing a pivotal role 
in this endeavour. In addition, INPERSO will engage citizens and local communities and hubs to shape together its 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 25/70 
scientific design and output. The citizens’ and local communities’ engagement will also allow their early awareness 
and involvement, integrating their valuable input in the project in a co-design manner, thus contributing to attain all 
project objectives . Looking towards pr oject impact, OSPs foster opportunities for the necessary long -term 
commitment of key actor s. The y also contribute to the quality of research by improving its transparency and 
traceability, so others can validate project results, as well as to take into the project aspects like gender dimension or 
workers needs and concerns as part of a responsible R&I effort. The INPERSO partners are fully committed to ensure 
immediate open access to peer -reviewed publications are required under Horizon Europe Grant Agreem ent terms. 
To this end, partners will publish in the Open Research Europe, Full Open Access journals and self-archive peer-
reviewed publications with a CC-BY license (or a license with equivalent rights) and without embargoes (green OA). 
Peer-reviewed publications will either the author accepted manuscript (final peer-reviewed manuscript accepted for 
publication) or the final published version. Journals allowing fulfilment of the requirements are select ed using 
Directory of Open Access Journals, and Journal  Checker Tool.  Selection of self -archiving repositories like 
multidisciplinary (e.g. Zenodo) or institutional (e.g. Trepo  by TAU) will be guided by compliance with OpenAIRE 
and community’s preferences. The lead of ITA and the procedures in the Data Management Plan (DMP, D8.2), the 
DEC strategy (WP7 and §2.2) ensure OSPs, as follows, are appropriately implemented throughout the project:  
Early and open sharing of research: Early detection of opportunities is enabled through the continuous monitoring 
of dissemination activities by the DEM automatically triggering openness assessment, through the philosophy of “As 
open as possible. As closed as necessary” . The project is an opportunity to gradually implement the practice of 
depositing pre-prints, posters, presentations in open repositories at their submission to journal/event committee when 
feasible. Having accompanying information and data in digital format will speed sharin g. The occupants and local 
communities’ engagement activities will also result in early research sharing. The management of research outputs 
generated in INPERSO will be performed during the project´s lifetime for making their data/research outputs 
findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR). All provisions and procedures will be set in the DMP in the 
first 6 months of the project, as indicated in 1.2.9. Measures to ensure reproducibility of research outputs: Further 
to practices adopted to ensure early sharing, when according to the DMP, research output (excl. publication) is made 
open, it will be accompanied by relevant metadata to ensure reproducibility (data treatment/ analy ses procedures, 
processing tools, etc.). This will also apply to AI tools by providing a suitable explanation of their decision-making 
process. Providing open access (OA) to research outputs: INPERSO consortium will ensure OA to peer reviewed 
scientific publications and will seek for opportunities to provide OA to other sci entific publications (monographs, 
conference proceedings, etc.). Publication in Open Research Europe (ORE) platform will be prioritised, as well as in 
other open journals and publications (2.2). In case that publication in hybrid or subscription journals is strategically 
convenient to widely reach a target audience, it will be explained in the DEC Plan. OA will be ensured through the 
journal or by depositing the post-print in a trusted open repository, for this partners/authors will retaining sufficient 
IPR to comply with OA requirements. Partners will seek opportunities to publish in OA other research outputs, i.e., 
software, under appropriate licences (CC-BY, Apache2, GPL, etc.). Partners have already resources and experience 
in OA to research outputs, i.e ., OA repositories  (e.g. Zenodo), agreements with publishers for OA, OA licences. 
Provisions to ensure OA to another research output is detailed in 1.2.9. Participation in open peer-review will be 
fostered by prioritising publication in ORE. Opening the project to relevant actors : INPERSO  considers the 
participation of relevant stakeholders, through an Advisory Board, as well as to occupants and local communities 
through dedicated activities. Their input will drive project development, co -design of results and its future way to 
market. The OSPs will contribute to attain the relevant topic outco mes and progress in the pathway to reach the 
expected impact (sec.2.1). Finally, INPERSO project will contribute to achieve EC goals for OS18 by monitoring the 
use of OSPs (KPIs in DEC plan, 2.2). 
 
1.2.9 Research data management 
INPERSO is expected to mainly generate, collect and manage research the following types of data: 
Table 2 Types of data considered in research data management 
Types of data managed in INPERSO Relevant part of the project 
BIM data, designs, models, modelling results, 
testing procedures and results, KPIs and 
financial projections 
WP1: Deep renovation workflows WP 2: CDW streams and 
secondary material databases, advanced manufacturing WP3: 
point-clouds, BIM libraries , IoT raw data. WP4: user wellbeing 
parameters 
software, algorithms, protocols  WP3: SCAAI tool, RESUITE, EMS/IAQ, WP4: Process 
digitalisation 
industrial specifications, stakeholders’ data, 
contact data of partners’ personnel involved 
in the project implementation project events 
WP1: Specifications, WP5: Demonstration data & site visit data, 
WP6: Data from engagement, WP7: Participant data from 
capacity building 
 
18 https://ec.europa.eu/info/research-and-innovation/strategy/strategy-2020-2024/our-digital-future/open-science_en  
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 26/70 
Use or purpose of the different research output and their format will be defined in the Data Management Plan (DMP, 
D8.2, M6). In addition, procedures for appropriate management of the research output will be defined in this DMP, 
to be updated du ring the project. Different openness levels are established: Open (O), Sensitive (SEN) and 
Confidential (CO). The consortium will proact ively work to make rese arch output open, specifically “underlying 
data” and associated metadata, as soon as practicable possible. All outputs and datasets will be first checked for 
their exploitation potential before dissemi nation and confirmed with their respective beneficiaries. In some 
cases, research output may be categorised as RE or CO according to the accepted exempt ions (protection, 
confidentiality, personal data, project´s objectives in jeopardy, 3rd party data) and as explained in the DMP. For reuse 
of open data, the FA IR principle will also be applied. Nevertheless, CO and SEN datasets’ metadata will also be 
elaborated and released offering readers all needed information (including Digital Object Identifier -DOI) to where 
and how to apply for Data Acces s and conditions for gr anting. Personal data will be managed according to EU/ 
national Data Regulations (WP8, part A-ethics), specific provisions, measures and mechanisms (regarding storage, 
secured and controlled access, pe rson in charge, data treatment p rocedure, etc.) will be  described in the DMP. 
Research output management: A list of relevant datasets to be generated during the project will be included in the 
DMP, that will be under updating. The key tool for research out put management will be the Datas et Fiche, to be 
prepared for each dataset comprising all information required for its management during the project and on the long 
term, including measures to comply with FAIR principles according to Horizon Europe guidelin es19. DMP 
management will rely o n ITA and implemented by  partners as part of their scientific work. Other roles and 
responsibilities, allocation of resou rces and specific measures to ensure data security (appropriate data recovery 
strategies as criterion of repository selection), ethics compliance or long-term data storage, when applicable, will be 
clearly defined, and dataset quality will also be addresse d in the DMP, ensuring applicable standards and protocols 
are followed. To ensure research outputs furth er compliant with FAIR principles the following procedu res will be 
implemented: i) Data publishing strategy: Datasets will be deposited in a trusted repository under the latest available 
version of the Creative Commons Attribution International Public Lice nse (CC BY) or Creative Commons Public 
Domain Dedication (CC 0). Metadata will be open under a CC 0 license . Any tools, documentation, explanation or 
software needed for reading, processing or re-using data of a given dataset will be provided in the metadata, enabling 
not only reusability but given an insight of research output quality. INPERSO partners are com mitted to use open-
source software when possible: AVUBDI, Python, FIWARE, SyMSpace, HOTINT, ii) Preparation for sharing: in 
addition to the co nsortium using, whenever possible, open source -based and/or interoperable formats and tools for 
data generation and reuse, prior to research output sharing co mpliance with related discipline standards will be 
ensured in the DMP. Moreover, metadata will be assigned to the dataset comprising compulsory ones according to 
GA provisions and other relevant metada ta (title, creator, date, keywords, description, format , resource type, DOI 
and access rights) in a exportable format. The allocation of a DOI will enable to uniquely identify each dataset (for 
evolving datasets, DOI enable version tracking).  Sharing the d ataset: INPERSO uses trusted repositories 
(GitHub.com, GitLab.com) for the open -source software. For the OS S and research data, the common publication 
databases (e.g. Zenodo, see above) that provide persistent identifiers (e.g. DOI, URN) are used in order to ensure rich 
metadata and enable easy citations. Data  services specific to the community will be used to share, store, preserve, 
manage and use data and metadata. TAU’s repository Trepo can store metadata of research data. Moreover, to ensure 
permanent link between research output and related peer-reviewed scientific publications data availability statements 
will be included in the publication (minimum reference to repository). Metadata associated to dataset will be regularly 
updated by the dataset respon sible (defined in DMP) and supervised. The DPM Manager,  ITA  and the relevant 
partners will define how to proceed with the dataset in terms of curation and storage (including long-term storage) 
considering relevance of retention of such data. This informat ion will be included in the Dataset Fiche.  IDS 
(International Data Spaces):  Specific subsets of d ata, once appropriately treated to avoid any privacy an d 
commercial issues, will be defined and become candidate open data to be shared with the scientific community. These 
data, together with the meta-data needed to explore and use them properly (e.g. dataset reference and name, dataset 
description, standards  used, unit of measure, data privacy level, data owner), will be accessible also from the 
INPERSO platform through IDS connectors, so to enable data sharing as well as data sovereignty. The data will be 
also promoted in IDS format in the AI4EU community to further promote their usage and analysis. 
 
1.2.10 Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI 
In recent years AI projects and applications have increased exponentially, becoming one of the top strategic priorities. 
Around 50% of the companies are increasing their usage of AI and the dedicated budget; moreover, 52% got at least 
one-use case applying AI 20. This tendency has  also been reflected in European programs (FP7, H202 0, GD). 
Nevertheless, besides the high potential of AI, there are also risks, such as privacy, malicious use and jobs opportunity 
decrement, among others21. Hence is crucial to assure its proper use having  in mind its trustworthiness, as recently  
19 Horizon Europe Programme Guide and Data Management Plan Template. 
20 Algorithmia, “2021 Enterprise Trends in Machine Learning”   
21 Jhon Zysman et. al. (2020); Governing AI: Understanding the Limits, Possibility, and Risks of AI in an Era of Intelligent Tools and 
Systems - Berkley University   
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 27/70 
stated by the  European Commission in the E thics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI 22. INPERSO will develop A.I 
algorithms in WP2&3 always following the strictest rules regarding AI defined by the EC. 
The project will leverage partners experience in AI-related H2020 projects (see §1.2.4 Relevant R&I activities ) 
and also ensure the trustworthiness and transparency of all the AI systems used based on the following approach:  
Development and Use of “White Glass” Models  when applicable/acceptable  (e.g., decision trees, models derived 
from human robot interaction)  and yield acceptable performance. “White Glass” Models will be preferred over 
“black-box” models like deep learning when applicable.  
Explaining “black-box” models in cases where they must be used e.g. due to their performance when large volumes 
of data are available. The project will employ probabilistic techniques (Bayesian, Decision trees) and ontologies to 
interpret the models and boost their trustworthiness.  
Dealing with AI trustworthiness in human -centred design will be considered in the INPERSO design parameters 
within the participatory approach of the project engaging users/B&C workers/stakeholders. We consider that a proper 
interaction equates in its majority with  the AI system explainability, i.e., workers understanding the output or 
intentions of the AI components will allow for a fully transparent collaboration. Therefore, the proper balance 
between model explainability, trustworthiness and performance will be sought. This will ensure the reliability of the 
AI systems in context of the INPERSO demonstration. 
Compliance with the mandates of mandatory regulations (e.g., GDPR) and the proposal of the European Parliament 
and Council Proposal for an AI Regulation: The regulations will be ensured and complemented by emerging AI EU 
regulations. The social robustness of the INPESRO AI systems will be explored and guaranteed with proper focus 
on systems that perform live data processing (not storing any information), are “closed circuit” (data are not shared 
with any other subsystems) or encrypted end-to-end (all transmitted data is encrypted/decrypted in both sides of the 
communication) and disregard or remove sensitive features by design. 
Ensuring strong cyber-security for the cloud/edge infrastructures hosting the AI systems will increase further the 
trustworthiness and reliability of the AI systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 European Commission: High-Level expert group on artificial intelligence, “Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI”   
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 28/70 
2 Section 2 - IMPACT 
INPERSO Results 
An overview of the INPERSO results is shown in Table 3. Each of the results is primarily addressed to specific Target 
Groups (TGI-VI): TGI-End users (owners, managers), TGII-Industrial stakeholders, TGIII-Research and Academia, 
TGIV-Policy makers and financing organisations, TGV -Public, tenants a nd users, TGV I-Partnerships and 
associations. The research outputs and exploitation options (Pa: patent, Li: License) are also presented.   
Table 3 Individual (R) and Integrated (IR) INPERSO results 
 
SWOT and barrier analysis  
To accurately estimate the potential of the INPERSO results, an analysis of the barriers and a SWOT assessment was 
conducted. These analyses will be elaborated during the project as part of WP7 activities.  
Table 4 Barrier analysis for INPERSO 
Barriers identified Means to overcome the barriers 
Performance gap and uncertainty. User integration from the design phase to accurate ly define 
requirements, harmonised BIM -based workflows throughout the 
lifecycle, post -occupancy evaluations and dynamic b uilding 
optimisation will reduce the performance gap to below 10%. 
Lack of knowledge dissemination and 
convincing end users of the ben efits of 
deep renovations , particularly on  
conveying no n-energy benefits of  
retrofits. 
Identification and engagement of key stakeholders (Target Groups)  
through local and regional contexts, utilising demonstration sites as 
lighthouse projects and promoting  the formation of local energy 
communities.  
Split incentives and conflicts of interest. 
Limited financing options offered 
Limited financing/insufficient budgets. 
Six new business models and access to green financing plans, 
collaboration with regional and  funding organisations to upscale and 
propagate the pro ject’s results, delivery of win -win solutions and 
massive replication potential.  
Organization a nd structure of the deep 
renovation market. 
Address fragmentation by standardised and unified information flows, 
and capacity building to promote pre-integrated solutions. 
Low adoption of digital solutions Variable investment cost options for inclusive di gitalisation aimed at 
both low-income households but also digital novice SMEs. 
Results and Integrated Results (IRs) Lead Type Exploitation Research Output Target Groups
IR1 RE SUITE integrated platform DMO Product, software Pa/Li N/A I-II
R1.1 SCAAI - Scan to BIM and asset recognition tool R2M/DMO PaaS Li Pub, models I-III,V,VI
R1.2 RIALTO - AR tool for renovation support R2M Paas Li N/A I-III
IR2 Low-Carbon Renovation Models (LCRM) TAU Service Li Pub, models I-VI
R2.1 New renovation design methodologies TAU Knowledge - process N/A Pub, models I-VI
R2.2 Sustainable B&C value chains MIRC Knowledge - service N/A Pub, datasets I-VI
R2.3 Sustainable financing plans CORE Knowledge - service N/A N/A I-II,V
R2.4 INPERSO Training Programme R2M Knowledge - service N/A Publication, case studies I-VI
R2.5 Stakeholder engagement / ecosystem empowerment IVE Knowledge - process N/A Publication, datasets II,III,V,VI
R2.6 Human-centred smart tech renovation guide TAU Knowledge - process N/A Publication V
IR3 Retrofit - Kit AMS Product Pa N/A I-II,VI
R3.1 Integrated ventilative HVAC/HP solution (Energy Pod) VENT Product Pa Case studies, aggregated I,II,V-VI
R3.2 Smart Wall - Multifunctional ETICS with CDW materials AMS Product Pa Case studies, aggregated I,II,V-VI
R3.3 Solar windows - Venetian blinds  IWIN/SUPSI Product Pa Case studies, aggregated I,II,V-VI
R3.4 Building Integrated Photovoltaics - roof & façade METSOL Product Pa N/A I,II,V-VI
IR4 Façade 3D printer VIAS Prototype (PaaS) Li Case studies, aggregated I-III,V
R4.1 3D Printing subsystem (integrated head, arm, pump) UPV, CART Prototype Li N/A I-IV,VI
R4.2 Global positioning subsystem ITA Prototype Li Safety aggregated data I-IV,VI
IR5  Energy & Comfort Optimisation Interface (ECOI) CORE PaaS Li Case studies, aggregated I-III,V
R5.1 Multistage energy consulting system (construction/use phase) CORE PaaS Li Publication, case studies I,II,V
R5.2 IEQ index, mgm interface and sensor configurations EPFL Knowledge - service Li Publication, case studies I-III,V
R5.3 Low-consumption WSN IRIS Product Pa Publication, case studies I-III,V
IR6 INPERSO completed system Respective Product - service N/A N/A N/A
R6.1 Demonstrator #1  AUMSA Demo N/A N/A N/A
R6.2 Demonstrator #2 MWNB Demo N/A N/A N/A
R6.3 Demonstrator #3 VVV Demo N/A N/A N/A
R6.4 Design review UPV Report - status N/A N/A N/A
R6.5 OHSE - Protocols for safe construction workplaces EUROC Service Li Publications I,II,IV,VI
R6.6 INPERSO market launch strategy CORE Report - status N/A Publication, case studies Ι,ΙΙ
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 29/70 
The SWOT analysis was used to identify how internal and external factors will influence addressing the barriers, and 
a brief analysis of the highlights is provided.   
STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES 
Low cost, time sensitive approach to energy renovation 
Human centric; 
Efficient, high quality, applicable to heritage buildings; 
Business potential. 
Low digitalisation rate in B&C and workforce; 
Unproven in large scale implementation; 
Lack of unified policy in FITs, carbon tax and data. 
OPPORTUNITIES THREATS 
Initiatives and policies driving the twin transition; 
Awareness towards climate change; 
Digitalization and electrification trends, ETS; 
Energy community momentum; 
Replication potential. 
COVID or other “Black Swan” events; 
Privacy and data sovereignty concerns; 
Citizen and micro-SMEs hesitation; 
Language barriers and stakeholder communication. 
Policy: Setting energy efficiency as an absolute priority for the EU, through the Green Deal, the Renovation Wave, 
the Clean Energy for All Europeans Package of 2018 and 2019 upgrade and the revision of EED and EPBD phasing 
mandatory minimum energy performance standards for existing buildings.  
Funding: Easier access to public funding will facilitate reaching a critical mass of innovation that will increase the 
rate of private investment. The  2021 Annua l Sustainable Growth Strategy and the Guidance on Resil ience and 
Recovery Plans identified building renovation as a priority for national recovery plans under the European Flagship 
‘Renovate’, and it is expected that this decade will provide unprecedented opportunities for renovation projects. 
Weaknesses and threats: Regarding the weaknesses and threats to wide INPERSO adoption, the Consortium expects 
to face the same barriers that keep the renovation rates low. These barriers are factored in the project, a nd a 
comprehensive plan to address  issues of awareness  (through meaningful stakeholder involvement throughout the 
project lifecycle). Local replications will enable hesitant adopters to visit the demonstration sites. From the technical 
side, while test results and implementation of individual components has been extremely encouraging, the application 
of the integrated system in large scale has not yet been carried out. With an increasing number of technologies being 
connected to the grid,  interoperability i s becoming a true challenge. Howev er, there currently e xist very few 
(inter)national smart grid standards. Compliance with European standardization organizations (CEN, CENELEC and 
ETSI) for smart grid  standards and clear legal definitions of new smart grid  concepts, and for streamlining th ese 
definitions across different policy levels will be pursued in INPERSO to address this barrier. To address these issues, 
the INPERSO Consortium needs the support of the EC to realize the vision of inclusive, clean energ y, healthy and 
comfortable living conditions through buildings operating proactively and efficiently. 
 
2.1.1 INPERSO unique contribution to topic outcomes 
Expected Outcome (EO)#1. Significant improvement in productivity of construction and renovation processes 
for energy-efficient buildings, supporting an increase i n scale in the renovation process and streamlining resource 
efficient nearly zero-energy performance renovation: 30 % waste reduction; improved quality of renovation; at least 
30% and towards 50% reduction of on-site construction / renovation work time and 25% costs reduction. 
The stages and costs of a construction or renovation project need to be con sidered and have been  consolidated in 
Table 5. 
Table 5 Lifecycle impacts of INPERSO 
 
Life Cycle phases Time-savings Cost-savings Quality and satisfaction 
Building design 
phase (A-C) 
Scanning time -80% 
-10-12% project 
duration 
5-7% reduction in project costs 
30% reduced design costs  
60-1500(e)/m2 
Performance gap <10% 
Construction & >40% lower retrofit >25% cost  reduction th rough >50% less dust / noise 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 30/70 
renovation phase 
(A1-5) 
duration, onsite work 
reduction >70% in tasks 
employing AR 
(a) vertical 3D printing 
(b) pre-integrated Retrofit-Kits 
generated, 40% less CDW and 
CO2, reduction of accidents by 
>50% and mistakes by 70%. 
Operation phase 
(B1-7) 
80% reduction in 
inspection, delivery,  
maintenance duration  
and frequency 
-25-75% energy demand 
-50-75% demand for 
HVAC/DHW 
>30% maintenance costs 
>70% reduced CO2 
>90% energy cost savings 
 
Recycling, 
dismantling & reuse 
(C1-4) 
Design for disassembly, building pass ports, increas ed uptake of CDW in the B &C value 
chain. 
 
For reference, the estimations were conducted based on values from previous relevant projects (e.g., CRAVEzero, 
STUNNING a.o.) that provide a wealth of case-study data used to infer industrial averages. For INPERSO: 
In the pre-retrofit phase, the application of (a) low-carbon renovation models (IR2) and utilisation of the RE Suite 
integrated platform (IR1) will streamline the decision process and facili tate project design. The adoption of BIM-
based workflows through the RE Suite modules (Passport, OnSite and IoT) will improve the quality of renovation, 
but will also enable using SCAAI to rapidly scan  and populate the building’s asset library. This is of particular 
importance with regards to the prefabricated components of the Retrofit -Kit (IR3), where pre-defined and proven 
solution sets are provided . In total, the reduction of scanning time by over 8 0% through SCAAI  (R1.1) and the 
utilisation of streamli ned BIM -based process will reduc e design costs by 30%. At a conservative estimate, an 
additional 5-7% of project costs and 10 -12% project time will be further reduced through the use of standardised 
BIM-based workflows, that is in line with industrial aver ages. Design costs average 3 -5% of total cost for 
conventional retrofit and 7-14% for nZEB renovation, typically from 95€/m2 to 223 €/m2. 
In the construction phase, the prefabrication and precasting of envelope components of the Retrofit-Kit (IR3) will 
enable the completion of construction projects at least 50% quicker than conventional construction. This performance 
has been validated in previous projects where the INPERSO participants responsible for the façade and construction 
elements have  participated (§1.2.4). In brief: ventilative HVAC ( R3.1) is projected at 6000 €/unit with DHW 
generation, integrated BEMS and energy storage, installed as plug&play device to the RE Suite. The installation time 
is ~6hrs per unit. The Smart Wall (R3.2) will have a selling price of 150€/m2 for the passive edition (no sensors, PV, 
storage and controls) to 400€/m2 for the fully integr ated version. The Solar Windows ( R3.3) will reach 10-12% 
efficiency by 2024 or up to 215kWh/m 2 year, with a cost target of 1000 -1500€/m2 in a complete insulated window 
with iWin integrated. The cost strictly depends on the characteristics of the glass and on the dimension. Finally, the 
BIPV (R3.4) roof and façade modules will be produced at a very competitive price of 190€/Wp. At TRL9, we project 
that the average cost will be 400 €/m2 for the Retrofit -Kit. The p rice is still over 50% lower than conventional 
construction projects of the same properties. Conventional nZEB values for materials and construction components 
are comparingly in the 1000 -5000€/m2 range. For the construction speed, the Retrofit-Kit will generate significant 
savings in the integration and commissioning stages. A 60m2 property is projected to be fully refurbished in 1 week, 
which corresponds to over 60% onsite work reduction. Two factors will contribute to this result: (a) the pre-integrated 
functions of the Retrofit -Kit and (b) the RIALT O (R1.2) that will be specialised into the integration of retrofit -kit 
components. The vertical 3D façade printer (IR4) will also comprise a highly efficient option: over 25% reduced cost 
and 50% less onsite work duration are projected.  Prefabrication has frequently been associated with increased 
transportation costs and CO2. In INPERSO, the sustainable B&C supply chain optimisation (R2.2) and LCRM (IR2) 
will introduce LCA -based decision making in the renovation supply chain, minimising the distance travell ed for 
components and promoting regionally available sustainable components. Apart from these innovations, INPERSO 
renovation will also reduce the energy demand for renovation and other construction works by over 40% through the 
MuSECS ( R5.1). This reduction will be coupled with significant improvements in workplace safety ( R6.5) and 
working conditions (thermal stress, humidity, air quality – R5.2). 
Post-retrofit: Significant time-savings (>80%) are projected for the inspection and delivery process  by virtue of 
RIALTO and the pre -integrated function of the Retrofit -Kit. Corresponding reductions (duration and inspection 
frequency) are projected for the ma intenance and repair that will be enabled by the asset monitoring component of 
MuSECS (R5.1), with 30% cos t reductions. Applying the LCRM and through a comprehensive delivery process, 
post-occupancy evaluations will ensure that the client (owner, manager, user) will have both the knowledge and 
capacity to operate the building close to design specifications, addressing the behavioural challenge. The projections 
are summarised below: 
Table 6 Comparative retrofitting of the three demonstration cases 
Process and metrics DC#1 Valencia DC#2 Velp DC#3 Voula 
Project estimated cost (full, low-carbon renovation) 673,550 € 24,000,000 € 935,000 € 
Pre-retrofit (Design costs based on current market) 47,149 € 1,680,000 € 65,450 € 
Renovation material costs (conventional) 442,098 € 15,752,896 € 613,707 € 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 31/70 
Renovation service costs (conventional) 208,046 € 7,413,127 € 288,803 € 
Conventional renovation cost (€/m2) 1,050 € 2,071 € 880 € 
Pre-retrofit costs through INPERSO 31,118 € 1,092,000 € 41,888 € 
INPERSO renovation services 135,230 € 4,966,795 € 199,274 € 
INPERSO Retrofit materials 283,600 € 6,000,000 € 440,000 € 
INPERSO renovation cost (€/m2) 635 € 1,005 € 619 € 
INPERSO improvement (cost reduction) 33% 50% 27% 
A similar approach was implemented to estimate the duration of onsite works  focused on DC#1 (in 8hr shifts and 
assuming TRL9 level is reached for the INPERSO components).  
 
Figure 13 INPERSO reductions of retrofit service costs and on-site time 
Overall, INPERSO will del iver renovation solutions at 25% reduced costs, with savings rea ching 50% for larger 
projects through economies of scale. As shown in Figure 13, integrating services generates substantial savings both 
in terms of time and cost. The introduction of prefabricated, pre-integrated and robotic manufacturing solutions will 
slash CDW outputs by over 40%, not including the additional reduction through uptake of CDW in the B&C value 
chains.  
  
EO #2 Tailored access to building information across the life cycle for relevant stakeholders (owners, facility 
managers, contractors, public authorities)   
The Target Groups that INPERSO is addressed to are analysed in Table 7.  
Table 7 Target Groups (TGI-VI) of INPERSO 
Target Groups 
I. End-Users: (a) Building owners, (b) Building management service providers, (c) B&C enterprises 
II. Industrial stakeholders: SMEs or LEs in the (a) digital, (b) engineering and (c) other relevant industries 
III. Research & Innovation ecosystem: (a) Academia and schools, students, researchers, academic entrepreneurs 
involved in energy, environment, industrial circular, and digitized production. (b) Industrial R&D  
IV. Policy makers and financing: (a) The political system generating ideas, laws, plans, including policymakers 
and local/ national/ Europe an administrations. The European Commission DGs of interest, (b) Financing 
institutions and initiatives (ECB, ERDF, local banks a.o.) 
V. Citizens: (a) Beneficiaries (building users, visitors, neighbours), (b) Culture-based public Media-based public 
Journalists, bloggers, think-tanks, influencers. (c) Civil society: The widest possible target public at large, namely 
citizens and grassroots 
VI. Partnerships and Associations: (a) Associations in the B&C, energy, digital sectors (b) EIPs, EIP-SCC, EIP 
Water. Candidates for European Partnerships in digital, industry and in climate, energy. 
Each target group has different information needs. Considering the depth and quantity of data that can be extracted 
from the lifecycle of a single building, it is crucial to  deliver clear, transparent, and actionable data with regards to 
(a) Objectives, (b) Methods, (c) Benefits and (d) Usage and security. 
In the micro-scale, the users / tenants usually pay the energy bills. Knowing a performance gap when they pay the 
bill it is too late. They may act for the next heating or cooling season. In addition, the bill does not inform on the 
energy saving potential. Through ECO-I (IR5) Target Groups Ic and Va will gain proactive and dynamic knowledge 
with regards to energy spending, b ut also indoor air quality. The main vehicle for communicating this information 
with these groups will be the Inhabitant App of the RE Suite platform ( IR1). The app will also feature nudge 
architecture (developed in IR2 for feedback on LCRMs and IR5 for comfort optimisation), that will be an inclusive 
solution in low -automation and smartness installations. The real time information will help the user to understand 
the effect of his actions, his habits on energy performance. This will help to identify  habits that increase energy 
consumption or unnecessary energy spending. The sole proper building commissioning and the possibility to inform 
users on their real-time behaviour in terms of energy efficiency thanks to smart metering and ICT, is expected lea d 
to energy savings in the range of 5-30%, in line with other studies concerning energy savings via to the introduction 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 32/70 
of smart control system. 
In the meso-scale, owners and (group Ia) will be the recipient of technoeconomic and environmental information 
via the RE Suite platform ( IR1), the energy consultation and asset monitoring systems ( R5.1). Building owners 
require full information regarding the state and value of their assets, but also of planned actions (maintenance, repair, 
renovation etc). Managers (Ib), require detailed information concerning consumption (energy, water), asset condition 
and event logging. For them, access to this level of data resolution and proactive functions will facilitate the adoption 
of digital solutions, as the projected gains will now be realisable. Thus, they will be encouraged to do the right choices 
in terms of envelope performance and energy system infrastructure, without costly and unnecessary delays and with 
immediate effects. For owners of many buildings (professional building owner), this information will be transformed 
to accumulated knowledge, a kind of a learning process favouring the most energy efficient actions in reality and not 
only on paper. This information will be communicated using the aforementioned tool s, but also via the low-carbon 
renovation models (IR2). 
In the macro -scale, government and public authorities ( TGIV) will benefit from the immediate feedback of low 
carbon renovation programs to adjust their subsidy or compliance regulations according to their real effect. Currently, 
public authorities may measure the effect of an energy saving action or campaign 3 to 5 years after its entry in force. 
This will be improved in INPERSO, as the high-level reporting will enable more dynamic decision making, including 
funding. Given the significant investment needs for the transition towards a decarbonised Europe, INPERSO will 
provide financiers with the information required to assess the impacts of the project, in accordance with the EU 
Taxonomy. Finally, at this level, the Research and Innovation Ecosystem (group III) will also gain access to datasets 
from operational buildings at a large scale and under full GDPR compliance (aggregated, anonymised data a.o.).  
INPERSO will provide tailored and adaptable information to the Target Groups of users according to their evolving 
needs. Aside from high quality of inf ormation, the intelligence generated will be meaning ful and actiona ble 
throughout the building’s lifecycle. The adoption of INPERSO BIM-focused information and work flows will enable 
the end-users to rapidly replicate and upscale renovation actions, increasing the rates of renovation. 
 
EO #3. More affordable renovation projects for owners, for all building types but with a specific focus on residential 
buildings; EO #4 Innovative, tailored business models for deep renovation allowing increased scale of renovation, 
generating economies of scale and increasing the potential for attractive  and affordable packages for end users 
including financing. 
As shown above, investment in renovation projects will be minimum 27% lower cost compared with conventional 
actions to achieve similar performance results. Nevertheless, there is a large variance between building typologies as 
well as building users. Rather than a singular business model, synthesis of adaptable and sustainable business models 
(R2.3) will provide the most replicable and adaptable results. Developing these business models will be carried out 
in accordance the requirements of the user groups as described in EO#2 (above). In each case, the INPERSO business 
models will identify the “best price for the desired effect at the optimum time”, ensuring that inclusive business 
models can render deep renovation accessible to low-income households and the energy poor. An initial mapping of 
available business models was carried out, based also on work conducted in the EU and US (Figure 14). 
Table 8 INPERSO business models 
Value proposition Customer segment Value chain Unique Selling Points 
BM1 One-stop-shop TGI-Cluster of buildings INPERSO Consortium Integrated process savings 
BM2 Step-by-step  TGI-Building owners INPERSO Consortium Lower CAPEX/CO2 
BM3 PACE-based TGI-Building/homeowners INPERSO Consortium No CAPEX 
BM4 Smart contracts TGI-any, TGV-any user ECO-I optimisation Zero-cost 
BM5 Smart renovation TGII-B&C contractors LCRM, ECO-I, IR2,3 Zero-CO2 focus 
BM6 Franchise TGII-B&C companies INPERSO Consortium Localised approach 
 
Figure 14 Approaches to business models for deep renovation (Source: STUNNING project) 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 33/70 
BM1 One-stop-shop: This approach utilises the completed INPERSO system (IR6) as the main value proposition. 
This requires the establishment of the INPERSO legal entity to exploit the project ’s results. In case partners have 
diverging interests, contingencies will be pursued, especially in relation with other high -TRL projects. This model 
highlights the multidisciplinary nature of INPERSO, and the advantage lies with the optimisation of the value chain 
through the project. For users, the unique selling point is that the process is highly integrated and can deliver the best 
value for money, minimising the performance gap. 
BM2 Step-by-step: BM2 is a more diffused variation of BM1, where the client can spread renovation actions across 
a length of time to maximise the useful life of each component. The need for replacements of various components 
arises at different points in time  which means that in the case of a complete building  retrofit, components that are 
still intact are renewed unnecessarily before their due time, leading to suboptimal investments . The RE Suite (IR1) 
and in particular the logbook (RE Passport) is ideal for this approach, that is targeted towards any kind of building 
owner (homeowner, owner of multiple properties, manager, public or private ownership). Apart from spreading the 
renovation cost over a period of time, this approach is highly compatible with LCA-based decision making (IR2 and 
IR3) to maximise CO 2 savings by timely r eplacement of components. Finally, the asset monitoring component of 
ECO-I (IR5) will close the loop by maximising the useful life of assets and provide early detection of degradation. 
BM3 PACE-based: BM3 requires the close engagement of municipal and fina ncing actors (TGIV). Based on the 
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) that has received enthusiastic recognition in the USA and imported in the 
EU, PACE-based models introduce an “assessment” payment on its property tax bill for a specified term. This model 
establishes a property tax, eliminating upfront costs which renders this BM highly inclusive. INPERSO activities 
(LCRMs-IR2) will commit to working with regional stakeholders (especially AUMSA, MWNB and VVV already 
participating in the Consortium) to implement similar funding mechanisms.  
BM4 Smart contracts : flexible contract based on comfort supply and energy efficiency and IAQ o ptimization 
(primarily through ECO-I, IR5 and the RE IoT of IR1). A service available for both residential and tertiary buildings 
stakeholders, able to match grid needs to dynamic, informed, customisable energy procurement and smart-grid-ready 
decision making enabled by RES & energy demand forecasting along with tariff features aligned with user evaluation. 
BM4 will be preferred as an introductory model for undecided users who may engage without investing. Depending 
on the case, INPERSO will claim 65-85% of savings for three years to pay for the IoT integration and optimisation 
service. Owners benefit from instant energy savings  relieved from capital or installation and commissioning 
expenditure, while the energy performance contract, energy and operational cost savings offset the investment.23 
BM5 Smart renovation : This model addresses a gap in the market for the improvement of t he renovation (and 
construction) processes themselves. Primarily through the MuSECS component of ECO-I, B&C contractors will gain 
access to a dynamic optimisation service that will leverage on-site RES and storage to minimise the energy footprint. 
Moreover, hygrothermal conditions and air quality will be integrated into the assessment, leading to improved 
working conditions and reduced accidents.  
BM5 Franchise: the location-specific circularity approach in secondary material flows (R2.2) along with the benefits 
of capacity skills building (R2.4) offer valuable expansion opportunities for the INPERSO system. INPERSO’s 
bespoke scalability opportunity will be enhanced building upon local stakeholders in energy provision across EU 
countries, as well as adapting  to a rich and diverse EU built heritage in terms of building typologies, construction 
methods, materials, and styles. A localised deep renovation approach that respects the character, identity, and spirit 
of the fragmented, history-rich context of EU uniq ue architectures will emerge through the future INPERSO brand 
upscaling offering opportunities to a vast network of SMEs in construction to grow and adapt INPERSO offerings to 
cover a broader range of bespoke customer needs especially through IR4 3d printing mass customisation capabilities. 
A core parameter of the system upscaling is the engagement of a hi ghly specialised and digitally skilled B&C 
workforce that will be able to evaluate design, and install the system adapted in a variety of buildings across EU. 
Sustainable finance: To facilitate the use of green financial products for INPERSO, we will emplo y a data driven 
sustainability assessment framework based on four group of activities (Figure 15):  
(1) Select Key Performance In dicators (KPIs): We will translate INPERSO environmental sustainability goals to 
relevant KPIs from the six environmental objectives of the EU Taxonomy Regulation. Also, we will consider Social, 
Governance and Viability goals, and employ carefully selected KPIs following the guidelines of the European 
Federation of Financial Analysts Societies (EFFAS).  
(2) Establish roadmap:  Once KPIs are established, the consortium partners will produce the roadmap with the 
technologies that must be deployed at each Use-Case to achieve the target energy efficiency levels and the associated 
environmental benefits.  
(3) Deploy INPERSO technologies: The technology providers will deploy INPERSO technologies at the Use Cases. 
The end of the deployment phase will signal the start of the monitoring phase.  
(4) Monitor and evaluate impact: During the demonstration activities, the achievement of these KPIs will be carefully 
assessed. The potential contribution of INPERSO to EU’s climate and circular economy goals will be evaluated. 
 
23 Sayed, Khairy & A.Gabbar, Hossam. (2018). Building Energy Management Systems (BEMS). 10.1002/9781119422099.ch2. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 34/70 
 
Figure 15 INPERSO sustainability assessment process to accelerate 
post-project access to green finance 
The outcome of this process will be a 
Social and Environmental Impact 
assessment report that will elaborate on 
INPERSO’s environmental, nature 
conservation and social impacts. This 
report will accelerate I NPERSO post-
project access to green financing  
products. Particularly, the goal will be to ensure that INPERSO complies with the eligibility criteria of the European 
Investment Bank (EIB), which through the InnovFin Energy Demo Projects provides loans, loan guarantees or equity-
type financing up to €75 million to first-of-a-kind commercial-scale demonstration projects in the fields of energy.  
The INPERSO business models provide a solid foundation fo r the commercialisation of the innovat ive results. 
Moreover, the availability of not only six options, but also of synthesizing and adapting business models will ensure 
that the results are efficient and robust. Support through green financing instruments and focus on inclusivity and 
accessibility of deep and low-carbon renovation will contribute to increased adoption of INPERSO results. 
 
EO #3.  Enhanced quality of construction, backed up by post -occupancy evaluations, also supporting a better 
integration of design and construction activities, streamlining commissioning of buildings, in particular in relation to 
energy management but also considering cross-cutting issues such as accessibility of buildings. EO #4. Reduced 
performance gap between as -built and as -designed (difference between theore tical and measured performance), 
allowing tracking performance across the life cycle; EO #5 Increased trust towards construction and renovation 
processes, by allowing tracking energy performance across the life cycle.  
Performance gap: The main aspect of renovation quality is the verification that the result corresponds to the agreed 
expectations, primarily expressed by the performance gap (in quantified metrics) and satisfaction. On one hand, 
variance between designed and del ivered performance can be a  significant issue, on the other hand, construction 
quality is also perceived by the user in the context of improving their quality of life.  The performance gap has 
appeared in various building end -use types: 34 % with a standard deviation of 55% for 64 non -domestic projects 
studied24, insulation measures in over 1500 UK domestic homes studied achieved an energy demand that was 50% 
less than what was expected25, even Passivehaus standard buildings present significant performance gaps26.  
Solution mismatch: Traditional state-of-the-art energy retrofits focus on discrete system improvements (i.e., façade, 
lighting, and HVAC equipment), often with traditional technological solutions (i.e., without industrialized and 
prefabricated solutions), and without considering an integrated rehabilitation strategy. These retrofits are often 
efficient in achieving their stated o bjectives and are simple and quick to implement; nevertheless, they frequently 
overlook the chance to save additional energy in a cost -effective way.  Furthermore, traditional remodelling 
procedures need considerable on-site work and must accept greater risks owing to human mistake and harm caused 
by exposure to various climates (outdoor forces, weather conditions, etc.)27.  
Indoor environment: The issue is that  apart from the effect on energy bills , the effect in indoor environmental 
quality (IEQ) is very impactful, especially to vulnerable groups. This is also relevant to  invisible cooling loads  
(expressed in overheating hours) as apart from the south of Europe, cooling devices are not frequently encountered. 
Yet, at an 8% increase in 2018, space cooling became the fastest -growing use of energy in buildings since 2010, 
though it accounted for only a small portion of total demand at 6% 28. Focussing on the cooling energy needs and 
discomfort conditions, it is possible to maximise ventilative cooling (R3.1). INPERSO will achieve the accurate (over 
95%) assessment of indoor environmental quality utilizing KPIs such as pollutant concentration using metabolic CO2 
and relative humidity as IAQ indicators and air and surface temperature and relative humidity as thermal comfort 
indicators (ECO-I, IR5). These will be elaborated and corr elated with energy consumption, occupancy and 
behavioural patterns. Where data protection is an issue, the analysis will be conducted through aggregation and the 
user will be anonymous. Through this approach, the cooling (for thermal comfort) and ventilati on (for IAQ) 
requirements for each residential unit will be precisely assessed in real time and in 8 -hour prediction increments.  
ECO-I will not be restricted to cooling but will comprise a holistic solution for IEQ optimisation. 
User involvement & perception : Moreover, post -occupancy evaluations will be employed following the user -
centred design and renovations (through the Low -Carbon Renovation Models, IR2). Through these models, the  
24 Van Dronkelaar, C.; Dowson, M.; Spataru, C.; Mumovic, D. A Review of the Regulatory Energy Performance 
Gap and Its Underlying Causes in Non-domestic Buildings. Front. Mech. Eng. 2016, 1, 1–14. 
25 Energy Saving Trust. Disaggregation of the Energy Savings Achieved from Insulation in EESoP 3 and the Energy 
Efficiency Commitment; Technical Report; Departmetn of Energy and Climate Change: London, UK, 2008 
26 Larsen TS, Jensen LR and Daniels O. The comfort houses: measurements and analysis of the indoor environment and energy 
consumption in 8 Passive Houses 2008–2011. DCE Technical Report No. 145, University of Aalborg, Aalborg, Denmark, January 2012. 
ISSN 1901-726X 
27 D’Oca, Simona, et al. "Technical, financial, and social barriers and challenges in deep building renovation: Integration of lessons learned 
from the H2020 cluster projects." Buildings 8.12 (2018): 174. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings8120174  
28 UN Status 2019 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 35/70 
“needs and wants” of the end -user will be focused during t he renovation, beyond the singular emphasis on energy. 
Issues such as accessibility will be integrated in the decision making from the earliest phase, and their implementation 
will be monitored to ensure adherence to requirements.  
Reworks: Moreover, an important aspect of renovation is minimising reworks. Reworks routinely increase the cost 
of the project and contribute to the performance gap. In INPERSO, KPIs related to reworks will be monitored and 
improved: Number of defects , n umber of defects due to wo rkmanship, t ime to rectify defects , n umber of site 
inspections conducted, ratio of the number of inspections passed to total number of inspections, total cost of rework, 
customer satisfaction. An 70% improvement of rework related KPIs is projected.  
Asset condition: Finally, the condition of passive and active envelope components will be monitored to assess and  
anticipate degradation, as shown in Table 9. This approach will maximise their useful life and further reduce the gap. 
Table 9 Reduction of performance gap measures in INPERSO 
Building element Validating and optimising performance 
Passive elements (insulation, airtightness) Indirectly through monitoring of IAQ and unit performance 
HVAC Directly through asset monitoring and data analytics (RE IoT) 
Solar Windows & BIPV Indirectly through actual / predicted energy generation 
Behavioural Unit performance measured comparatively to similar units & nudge 
architecture (ECO-I, IR5) 
Summary: To summarise, the as-build vs as-designed performance gap is tackled in INPERSO through four distinct 
approaches embedded in the design of the entire system: 
a) Co-design approach engaging a multi -stakeholder audience with end-users at the forefront of the system 
development and evaluation (IR2). 
b) Advanced and effective pre-renovation mapping of the components through scan-to-BIM technology (R1.1). 
c) Advanced simulation of pre -/during-/post renovation performance for:  energy expenditure and generation 
potential, thermal qualities of envelope materials, air quality and asset health of systems (IR5). 
d) Low-cost/ high value IoT monitoring along the entire life cycle of renovation works and building operation and 
maintenance (R5.3). 
e) Highly automated processes (i.e 3d printing IR4 allowing optimised control and minima l error threshol d in 
material application while offering design adaptability and precision.  
Table 10 Integrated INPERSO process and user perception (Point-of-View) 
Integrated 
process 
Process improvements User PoV 
Pre-retrofit Accurate definition of requirements, faster process based on SCAAI and 
BIM-based libraries & building passport. Lower design costs (30%) and 
overall project cost/time reductions of 5/10%. 
Accessible, 
understandable, 
inclusive, affordable & 
personalised process. During-
retrofit 
Minimum: 50% quicker  (construction & inspection) , 40 % less 
disruptive*, 25% cheaper, user feedback integrated, 70% less reworks 
Post-
retrofit 
>30% reduced energy demand (total demand reduction exceeding 60%), 
optimised IEQ and comfort, nudge arch itecture, 30 % reduced 
maintenance costs. 
Reduced energy bills 
comfortable, healthy 
indoor environment. 
*waste, noise, dust 
As shown in this section, the cascade effect of multifaceted approach of INPERSO in addressing the performance 
gap offers maximum control and alignment between expected and actual outcomes. At the same time data sharing 
hierarchies enable appropriate types of data to be distributed to the right receivers in a transparent, meaningful, and 
ethical manner.  
 
EO #7 Upskilled workforce for industrialised renovation workflows, including automated and robotised 
construction / renovation, relying on interoperable digital modelling data ; EO #8  Enhanced safety of the 
construction workforce and increased acceptance of robotic support for deep renovation 
Integration, cost, knowledge, and acceptance are identified as major barriers in the industrialization and automation 
in the construction industry. Safety and quality, as well as process efficiency and data gathering, are all dependent 
on industrial standards. Standardization and, as a result, interoperability are important for the effective and successful 
implementation of industrialised processes throughout the building lifecycle, given the diversity of stakeholders 
involved in many remodelling construction sites 29. This diversity is explained by the fragmente d nature of the 
construction industry, while the limited qualified workforce is also identified as a barrier to the adoption and diffusion 
of the sector digitalization. Specifically, automation in construction sites under renovation as INPERSO IR4 Façade 
3d printing proposes for onsite upgrades, increasing safety and acceptance towards is critical. By design onsite 3d 
printing activities have the advantage of time, safety, cost and burden minimization for improving the façade thermal  
29 ESCO (2021) https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/45547/attachments/1/translations/en/renditions/pdf  
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 36/70 
properties. By automating thermal insulation in a bespoke  manner such as the potential of 3d printing not only the 
final quality of the project increases, but workers are also less exposed to risks and new materials and techniques can 
be deployed.  Mass customization properties o f 3d printing are critical for ups caling the deep renovation works 
necessary for EU’s building stock which includes a high percentage of heritage buildings: 14% of EU-27 building-
stock dates before 1919, other 12% between 1919 and approximately 120 million Europeans living there 30. The 
refurbishment of heritage buildings can save 180 Mt CO 2 within 2050 (3.6 % of 1990's EU -27-emissions), while 
ensuring indoor comfort for inhabitants and energy-costs decrease. Despite the financing and tax schemes ( e.g., 
Italy’s ‘eco -bonus 110%’ scheme) 31, f or renovating according to special requirements of historic buildings, 
implementation in practice can be challenging. However, a significant barrier in renovating heritage building facades 
stems from the fact that most commercial external insulation solutions consist of either modular prefabricated panels, 
or from uniform layers of material over insulating blocks applied manually. This is a major drawback in deep 
renovation upgrades on buildings in historical areas of high architectural value, as either internal insulation systems 
have to be deployed- with the respective drawbacks that these may entail regarding the building occupancy or burden 
for tenants, loss of useful space- or intervening with caution on external walls (e.g. in Hungary32).  
Workforce upskilling: INPERSO will up - and re-skill B&C workforce to address the challenges of digitalized 
construction, but also to improve working conditions and safety of worksites. The INPERSO training programme  
(R2.4) will be supp lemented by standardisation expertise  (T6.1), as well as D&C measures (WP7), and OHSE 
assessment (R6.5) to demonstrate and assure safe mainstreaming of INPERSO technologies in a deep renovation site. 
Each of the INPERSO partners will deliver training material for the programme. The result of these activities will be 
a comprehensive training programme that is oriented towards professionals as well as non -professionals. For 
professionals (TGI&II), the training will be focused on gaining and improving digital skills, as well as familiarity 
with new technologies and knowledge regarding the risks of modern construction sites. For non -professionals 
(TGV&III), the focus will be on open science, citizen science and other engagement activities to generate awareness 
and improve consumer behaviour (in transition towards prosumer status). Naturally, the formation of energy 
communities will also be a focal point for these activities. The projections are shown below for the duration of the 
project, as well as until 2030 (1 year following market entry in 2028).  
Location Up/re-skilling participants 2028 total 2030 total 
Spain, Greece, Netherlands >30 600 2150 
Other MS >10 650 2200 
Other countries >12 300 1080 
Total >50 >1500 >5000 
The estimates are conservative given the participation of LEs and highly active SMEs and RTOs in the Consortium. 
Moreover, the main tools for these activities (e.g., the RE Suite platform) are already being used by over 100,000 
stakeholders, so the expecte d acceptance and adoption of the new solu tions looks favourable. The availability of 
training resources for students and researchers will also contribute to an influx of qualified, young personnel to the 
B&C sector.  
Safety: in 2018, one in five  (20.5%) o f all fatal accidents at work in the EU -27 took place within the construction 
sector. This translates in 667 workers losing their lives in EU construction sites onl y in one year. Safety culture is 
highly prevalent in the design of technologies for humans at work: dedicated ef fort is foreseen in establishing 
appropriate OHSE workflows to ensure that all innovative digitalised processes come hand in hand with prioritising 
workforce and dwellers’ wellbeing. 
INPERSO will carry out training through the establishment of the INPERSO training programme, featuring elements 
from all the activities of the pro ject and focusing on the safety,  efficiency and quality of constr uction. Given the 
disproportionate increase of the qualified jobs vacancies in construction to the moderate increases in the tertiary 
education and vocational education training, SMEs appear to have more difficulties in acquiring qualified workforce 
than LEs. INPERSO will provide the solutions for SMEs to upskill their workforce, but also for citizens and young 
engineers to improve their skillset for easier entry to the job market. 
 
EO #9  Integration with distributed renewable energy sources in neighbourhoods a nd districts, favouring the 
emergence of related initiatives (e.g. renewable energy communities); EO #10 Enhanced synergies of renovation 
with local resources, e.g. district heating & cooling networks; 
DC#1 Valencia : In May 2021, the Valencia City Council signed a collaboration agreement to promote the 
development of energy communities 33. Valencia is also aa member of ICLEI 34, active in engaging citizens in the 
energy transition. An Energy Office was established in 2019 to provide citizens with information, t raining and  
30 Troi, Alexandra. "Historic buildings and city centres–the potential impact of conservation compatible energy refurbishment on climate 
protection and living conditions." International Conference Energy Management in Cultural Heritage. Vol. 2011. 2011.  
31 Potts, A (Lead Author). 2021. European Cultural Heritage Green Paper. Europa Nostra, The Hague & Brussels.  
32 https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/system/files/ged/d_1.2_mapping_of_current_heritage_re-use_policies_and_regulations_in_europe.pdf  
33 Valencia encourages the creation of energy communities 
34 Local Governments for Sustainability 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 37/70 
personalised advice on energy-related topics and the city aims to have 100 energy communities in the Valencia area 
by 2030. Furthermore, the city has made civic centre roofs available to energy communities for photovoltaic panel 
installation. This recent emphasis is positioned to address the energy transition, given that a district heating network 
does not yet currently. Thus, in the short and medium term, focus is reasonably on microgrids and energy 
communities.  
DC#2 Velp: The North Brabant province shares the ambition of carbon neutrality by 205035. The Province of Noord-
Brabant is the second largest in Netherlands representing 14.7 per cent of total population and 15% of Dutch GDP, 
with main activities focused on trade and services (49%)36. DC#2 does not feature DH or an energy community, but 
the opportunity exists to integrate it as a central part of the local renovation project.  
DC#3 Dimos Varis, Voulas & Vouliagmenis (VVV) : In the Attica region, there were 31 energy communities in 
2020, foll owing the 4513 -law of 2018 defining the lega l context. PV is the undisputed entry point for energy 
communities in Greece, but energy storage, wind power and biomass also appear of interest. The Attica region and 
especially VVV lack any DH infrastructure. It should be noted that only 30% of energy communities in Greece have 
created employment opportunities, while own-funds and lending account for over 90% of financing their activities37.  
In all three cases, the needs are aligned with the priority profiles of  energy communities: promote social economy 
values and manage renewable energy capital. From a practical perspective however, it is also critical to ensure the 
financial longevity and growth of the initiatives. Hence, INPERSO will focus on facilitating and  empowering the 
establishment of energy communities with the tools to leverage growth. As the a dministrative procedures are 
relatively streamlined in all three countries, and growing awareness has generated favourable momentum among the 
public, the focus will be shifted on: (a) supporting early efforts with up-/re-skilling and knowledge sharing (capacity 
building, open science, citizen science), (b) energy infrastructure financing plans (through new business models), (c) 
access to tools (digital services, sensor networks) and (d) an established communication network with other energy 
communities.  The main vehicle to realise these outcomes will be IR2 - Low-Carbon Renovation Models, that will 
also enable the uptake of the digital solutions of IR1 and IR5, and the RES of IR3. These activities are detailed in 
WPs4,5 and 6, while the associated DEC measures are described in WP7.  
Moreover, the communities will possess intrinsic replication potential as the INPERSO demonstrators (AUMSA, 
MWNB and VVV) own and/or manage a cumulative total of over a thousand buildings.  
INPERSO will establish and support energy communities in each demonstration, aiming for replicating and 
expanding the netw ork first throughout the demo -sites, and secondly through  close collaborations  with ot her 
initiatives, clusters and projects.  
 
2.1.2 Impacts, scale and significance 
A summary of the required impact areas and how INPERSO is addressing them is provided in Table 11. 
Table 11 Impact area summary 
Impact areas INPERSO position summary 
beyond merely improving the energy and resource 
efficiency of buildings and also include a qualitat ive, 
aesthetic and human dimension. 
Human-centric approach across the entire lifecycle, 
expressed by involving the user in design, tracking 
renovation progress and post-occupancy. 
renovation or adaptive reuse of historical and heritage 
buildings and sites needs to embrace quality principles 
to safeguard the cultural values of Europe’s historical 
environment and local architectural identity. 
Two out of three demonstrations feature heritage 
buildings with excellent replication potential. DC#2 
features use adaptation. Innovative technologies will be 
tested (3D printing, prefabricated components) for 
heritage-related requirements. 
More energy efficient building stocks supported by an 
accurate understanding of buildings performance in 
Europe and of related evolutions. 
Performance trackin g via unified BIM -based 
information, passports, asset monitoring and IEQ 
optimisation. 
Building stocks that effectively combine energy 
efficiency, renewable energy sources and digital and 
smart technologies to support the transformation of the 
energy system towards climate neutrality. 
Contribution to uptake of digital solutions in the B&C 
sector (elaborated in Table 12). 
, requires a larger involvement of all players across the 
built environment value chain and throughout building 
life cycle.  
SME-centric, business models favouring and supporting 
the involvement of multiple actors in one -stop-shop or 
compatible models. 
 
 
35 Brabant goes for green 
36 Regional Innovation Monitor Plus 
37 Mapping of Energy Communities in Greece, Dec 2020 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 38/70 
Interoperable data enabling B&C digitalisation 
Traditionally, building information  has been extracted and logged using analysis tools and paper data  such as 
cadastres or building models, thus analyses by incorporating several different and heterogeneous data from various 
sources manually is cumbersome and prone to errors. Yet, digitalisation uptake has been very slow in the B&C sector, 
which remains the least digitalised EU industry. As shown in Table 12, the European B&C acceptance to these 
technologies is limited due to: (a) low maturity of digital solutions and associated challenges such as interoperability 
of standards, (b) high degree of fragmentation in renovation services, (c) while the B&C sector is highly SME-centric 
(by over 94%), large enterprises lead digitalisation efforts due to economies of scale.  
Table 12 INPERSO medium term effects on key digital technologies (DTs) in the B&C sector 
DT State of Play in EU INPERSO outcomes 
3D Scanning Low uptake and awareness, primarily in 
heritage applications38. 
SCAAI tool (R1.1) expanding on scan-to-BIM with 
asset recognition via AI for 10 -15% reduced costs 
and time for scanning and 80% reduced sitetime. 
Sensors & 
IoT 
Low IoT adoption (25% 39) due to 
maturity, interdependent on other DTs 40. 
Integrated solutions are needed.  
Industrialisation of DAQ and IoT in integrated, 
lifecycle encompassing INPERSO service through 
the RE Suite platform (IR1) 
BIM (3-7D) Moderate market ad option (29% use 3D) 
and 61% have never used it 40. BIM 4D at 
only 6% 41. SMEs having trouble in BIM 
adoption, even lower adoption in 
maintenance and operation41. 
Fully integrated BIM -based workflows through the 
RE Suite platform ( IR1) reduce overall costs by 
around 7%, 5% saving in planning, risk assessment, 
safety, and assurance, CDW reduced by up to 15%. 
 
Artificial 
intelligence 
Very limited, confined  to pilot projects, 
low visibility, dependence on other DTs. 
Full adoption of AI through integrated solutions 
(IR1-6) throughout the building lifecycle enabling 
>15% construction costs, 10% faster sched uling, 
>20% energy demand reduction, 30% maintenance 
cost reductions. 
Virtual and 
Augmented 
Reality 
(VR/AR) 
Market adoption limited (12% 40) but 
significant growth projected till 202539. 
RIALTO ( R1.2) Quality of renovati on works 
(reduction in r ate of mistakes), safety and accident 
prevention, accelerated training. Projected reduction 
of onsite work by >35% in relevant tasks.  
Robotics & 
3D printing 
Very limited42, steady interest, high costs, 
requires skilled workers. 
Façade 3D printer ( IR4) for hor izontal and vertical 
renovation, reducing costs and waste by 25% and 
time by at least 50%, reduction of accidents by >50% 
and mistakes by 80%.  
Source: 2,8,9,10 
Replication and propagation of results 
It is important to ensure that the pathways described in the previous sections will result into impacts. While the DEC 
strategy of the project is solid, the quality of the Consortium (elaborated in §3.2) ensures that the results will generate 
value for European society. This affects the replication potential, which influences the uptake of the results: 
Spain: In 1979 the thermal regulations started in Spain, so buildings before that date are no insulated. The proposed 
building was built in 1850. In the neighbourhood “La Roqueta”, where the building is located, 86% of the dwellings 
are built before 1980. AUMSA manages a building stock of 598 dwellings, where the renovatio n approach can be 
replicated. Furthermore, in Valencia city, 68% of the dwellings are built be fore 1980. Therefore, the renovation 
approach will be replicable in a 68% of the dwellings in Valencia city, meaning over 279,682 dwellings. The Spanish 
replication is further reinforced by two LEs: ACCIO and VIAS. ACCIO is the biggest construction company in the 
Spanish B&C sector and one of the most innovative companies in the sector, with market cap exceeding €9.2B and 
employing close to 40,000 employees. VIAS has 965 employees at this location and generates €325 million in sales. 
Netherlands: MWNB monitors over 2000 buildings  in North Brabant, all of which possess the heritage quality . 
MWNB will work closely with DMO, who are man aging over 25,000 r esidential uni ts (as well as 100,000 
infrastructure units) with projections to triple by 2025.  
Greece: In the Vari -Voula-Vouliagmeni Municipality, ambitious plans for the energy renovation of public and 
municipal buildings are already bein g carried out. VVV owns 62 buildings that are due for renovation in the near 
future. Moreover, MIRC is coordinating the most comprehensive network of B&C actors in Greece, co mprising 
 
38 Historic England. 3D Laser Scanning for Heritage 
39 European Investment Bank (2019). Investment Survey 2019 
40 European Construction Sector Observatory 
41 ECSO (2019). Building Information Modelling in the EU construction sector 
42 Delgado, J.M.D.; Oyedele, L.;Ajayi, A.; Akanbi, L.; Akinade, O.; Bilal, M.; Owolabi, H. (2019). Robotics and automated systems in 
construction: Understanding industry-specific challenges for adoption. Journal of Building Engineering 26. 
HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 39/70 
names such as Titan and Lafarge, encompassing the entire value chain of buildings. Moreover, recent developments 
in Greece are generating significant momentum in the decarbonisation front.  
Switzerland: EPFL, SUPSI and IWIN have established collaborations with the Cantonal organisations of Lausanne 
and Geneva, providing access to over 100,000 buildings of various typologies.  
For replication purposes, we project that at least 3 new projects will be initiated in Valencia, V elp and the Attica 
region as soon as the current ones are completed-or near completion (Q3 2027 or Q1 2028). The participation of key 
end-users as described in the project will generate at least 15 more projects by Q1 2029, also cons idering the 
replication cases in the Swiss market. The total for 1 year post project is projected at around 25 new INPERSO 
retrofits, primarily utilising the one -stop-shop business model (BM1), which is the one employed for the financial 
projections. The rationale is that throug h active participation in the four years of INPERSO, the end users will be 
convinced of the potential of the approach and will take advantage of financing options to further invest. By Q1 2029, 
it will be possible to fully utilise the entirety of the BM ar senal. In particular the step-by-step (BM2) and franchise 
models (BM6) will allow significant increase in capacity leading to 75 retrofits  by Q4 2029 and 140 by 2030. 
Assuming 1000m2 per project, and based on the outcome projections, the results are: 
Table 13 Impacts of INPERSO until 2030 (* CO2€/t estimated at 50€ constant but will be revised during the project) 
 Replicability 
(retrofit) 
Energy 
Savings 
€ savings* CO2 averted Jobs 
created 
Investment 
leveraged 
+1y (Q1 2028) 25 1.6 GWh/y 0,28 M€/y 0.247 kt/y 155 >11 M€/y 
+2y (Q1 2029) 75 4.8 GWh/y 11.5 M€/y 0.7421kt 312 >33 M€/y 
+2y (Q3 2030) 140 8.5 GWh/y 13.7 M€/y 1.287 kt 653 >58 M€/y 
Cumulative (2030) 240 15 GWh 25.5 M€ >2 kt 1120 >100 M€ 
With an expected completion date in Q3 2026, INPERSO will achieve market entry and full outcome realisation by 
2027 (or early 2028)  and aims to contribute to impacts relevant to the EU milestone year of 2030 and contribute 
substantially to Europe’s “Efficient and sustainable use of energy, accessible for all is ensured through a clean 
energy system and  a just transition”, which is the targeted impact. By 2030, we should be more than halfway to 
climate neutrality, an effort requiring immense dedication. Thus the impacts, their scale and significance will be: 
 
Scientific: By 2030, the results of project will have generated important scientific knowledge, with the majority being 
of multi - and inter-disciplinary nature. The project will generate at least 18 (FWCI~2) publications, a wealth of 
research data (Table 3) and capacity building in a pool of over 500  individuals. These results will propagate into 
impactful research conducted and knowledge generated. T he new directions in the B&C sector, in digital services 
and systems engineering will contribute to >100 jobs created in R&D , further supporting the leading position of 
Europe in the construction sectors. INPERSO will ensure Open Access and be efficient, transparent, and responsive 
to societal challenges aligned with EC´s goals on OS, aiming for over 10,000 citizens participating by 2030.  
Societal: By 2030, INPERSO will have supported the B&C sector’s transition into climate-neutral industrial value 
chains and contributed to SDGs 1,3 -13 by reducing the energy demand by almost 15 GWh/y and averting over 
1.5kt of CO2 per year, with >13M€/y in energy and CO 2 tax savings. Maintenance cost reduction (30%), inclusive 
tools and solutions, as well as six Business Models will render renovation more affordable. Workplaces will become 
more inclusive and safer, as employees will be up/reskille d in these new modes of operation.  Through innovative 
manufacturing and prefabrication, renovation will be more energy efficient, less wasteful and adapted to heritage.  
Economic/Technological: By 2030, the cumulative improvements in the entire lifecycle of the building, from design 
to end of life, contribute to > 50% increased productivity for the B&C sector, through the reduction of renovation 
time, but also 70% reduction of reworks. Based on the INPERSO business plan (§2.2), we project that over 100M€ 
invested and over 1000 jobs will be the effects of INPERSO actions. AR-based solutions and capacity building will 
contribute to reduce accidents. Digital solution uptake in the B&C sector will be promoted. Finally, the user-centric 
approach will increase the accessibility and attractiveness of renovations, contributing to increasing the rate across 
the EU. 

HORIZON-CL4-2021-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-21   
  Page 40/70