3.2  CAPACITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................................................. 41  
4 ETHICS SELF-ASSESSMENT .................................................................................................................................. 45
4.1 ETHICAL DIMENSION OF THE OBJECTIVES, METHODOLOGY AND LIKELY IMPACT .......................................... 45
4.2 COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL PRINCIPLES AND RELEVANT LEGISLATIONS .......... Error! Bookmark not defined.  
  

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 5  
    
1.  EXCELLENCE    Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
  
Heavily industrialized clusters are important sources of jobs and wealth in the EU. However, despite the 
ongoing efforts of EU policies, industries are lagging in the implementation of Industrial Symbiosis (IS) to 
transit to more resource- and energy-efficient setups. Furthermore, citizens living in the clusters' proximity 
suffer from a polluted environment. Despite the EU's strategic priorities in sustainable development, 
human-centred IS awaits to be designed, implemented, and expanded. Currently, the stateof-the-art of IS 
falls short of such a demand. Initiatives like SPIRE (now Processes for Planet: P4Planet) have researched 
and demonstrated pilot concepts of IS and even Industrial-Urban-Rural Symbiosis (IURS), achievable via 
closing energy, resource, an d data loops through infrastructure sharing. In this regard, P4Planet has 
designed the concept Hubs for Circularity ( H4C)1. H4C provide spaces where diverse actors, such as 
businesses, governments, researchers, and civil society, collaborate to accelerate the Circular Economy 
(CE) transition. They are nexuses for knowledge and resource sharing, cross-industrial collaboration, and 
sustainable technology innovation. H4C can take various forms, from physical spaces, such as IS 
Networks (ISNs) and co -working clusters, to virtual platforms such as online communities and digital 
marketplaces. They can also serve as a resource for governmental bodies, providing evidence -based 
research and recommendations for CE policymaking. Overall, H4C pave the way for IS leading to a net -
zero CE. In light of advanced IS implementation, the "From Industrial Symbiosis to Hubs for Circularity: 
IS2H4C” project will deliver a systemic approach of IS to Hubs for Circularity, helping P4Planet 
materialising its goals.  
Next to conventional IS achieved through the exchange of materials, water, and energy, IS2H4C promotes 
infrastructure-, service, and carbon-based IS to transform existing industrial areas into ISNs. These ISNs 
are integrated with surrounding rural and/or urban ecosystems to form physical H4C. The development of 
physical H4C is facilitated by a digital collaboration platform (Digital H4C). DigitalH4C fosters the bottom-
up emergence of ISNs by real -time resource monitoring and tracking, dynamic supplydemand 
matchmaking, efficient and secure information -sharing, and transparent marketplace trading. It also 
performs effective evaluation of top-down coordination strategies based on a multi-dimensional approach 
combining attributional and consequential Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). IS2H4C demonstrates four first-
of-a-kind hubs with business cases and exploitation strategies in the Netherlands, Germany, Spain, and 
Turkey, populated by various industrial sectors (Fig. 1). Cutting-edge green technologies are deployed and 
demonstrated to realise IS in demo hubs, including wind and solar power generation, electrolysis for 
hydrogen, carbon capture and utilisation, waste heat capture and distribution, heat pumps, hydrogen use 
in built environment, and oxycombustion. The tech nology innovation and integration elevate the 
sustainable industrial performance and boost the socioeconomic wellbeing in the surrounding ecosystems. 
In a nutshell, IS2H4C is a real-life demonstrator of H4C in scale. It establishes best IS practices towards a 
climate neutral, circular, and digitised future.  
 
1 Hubs4Circularity (H4Cs) | A.SPIRE. (n.d.). https://www.aspire2050.eu/p4planet/hubs4circularity   

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 6  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Figure 1. IS2H4C’s overall concept  
  
  
1.1. OBJECTIVES AND AMBITION    Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
IS2H4C’s mission is to pave the way towards the development of H4C based on the circularity and 
resilience requirements of existing and future industrial zones and their surrounding ecosystems. To 
achieve this mission, IS2H4C prioritizes resource efficiency, use of renewable energy, and waste 
prevention, and promotes IURS via reuse and recycling of unavoidable solid, liquid, and gas waste 
streams via deployment of innovative sustainable technologies and via systemic integratio n of existing 
and new infrastructure. Importantly, IS2H4C ensures societal and governmental engagement to H4C 
via securing acceptance and trust among citizens based on clear communication, transparency, and 
inclusion, by proposing sustainable business and financial models, as well as respecting the planetary 
health boundaries. IS2H4C’s biggest ambition is to become a reference for promoting H4C as Europe’s 
future sustainable regional development model.  
The consortium formulated six operational objectives with specific Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to 
precisely monitor the technological readiness evolution, the project’s advancement beyond the State of 
the Art (SoA), and to operationally implement IS2H4C's mission.  
  
Objective 1. Deploy and demonstrate near commercial scale industrial symbiosis through 
innovative technologies    
Each hub has strong individualized and already-implemented technologies that aim to comply with the EU 
Green Deal guidelines 2. IS2H4C scales up and integrates recent sustainable technologies (at different 
TRLs) to the involved industries and infrastructure to exploit the hubs' vast room for resource and energy-
use optimisation and IURS implementation. IS2H4C demonstrates how H4C emerge from bottom -up3, 
operate, and evolve in four locations (populated with different process industries and rural/urban 
 
2 EC (2023). The EU Green Deal. Re: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1576150542719&uri=COM%3A2019%3A640%3AFIN 3 Blomsma, F., Brennan, G., (2017). The 
Emergence of Circular Economy. J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 603-614. https:// doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12603  

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 7  
combinations) and brings these H4C to a systemic TRL7/TRL8. IS2H4C proposes two types of synergies: 
(1) 17 synergies technologically demonstrated in the project and (2) 24 synergies to be studied for 
hub expansion in the project. Furthermore, scale-up and further expansion will be supported by on-site 
matchmaking workshops and IS recommenders embedded in the digital H4C via deploying Information 
Technologies. For the first category, IS2H4C proposes the following technology and infrastructure 
deployment and implementations in the involved H4C:  
1. Basque Hub: contains oil refining, steel, pulp and paper and lime industries, and the public wastewater 
treatment plant located in the highly industrialized area of the Basque Country. Planned synergies: (i) 
oxycombustion with O2 and H2 in the steel industry  (potentially from the forthcoming electrolysis of 
the oil refining sector). (ii) CO2 via carbon capture (CC) by the lime industry and used (CCU) to produce 
CH4 (and potentially for the forthcoming production of e-fuels in the oil sector). (iii) Carbonation of steel 
slags with the CO 2 obtained from the lime industry ( CCU) to produce construction products for the 
cement industry.  
2. Dutch Hub: Twente area contains a small -scale hydrogen hub formed by approximately 20 process 
industry companies connected to a nearby village, Aadorp, which is planned to evolve into a positive 
energy district via becoming independent from natural gas and fossil -based electricity. Planned 
synergies: (i -ii-iii) Green H2 obtained from electrolysis based on solar energy and (to -be-
implemented) wind energy is used in five houses  in built environment in Aadorp via (to -be-
implemented) H2 pipelines. (iv) Energy storage is implemented to stabilize the feed of the green 
energy generation mentioned in synergies i-ii to tackle supply uncertainty. (v) H2 is transported to three 
crematoria in Twente by H2 tube trailers & substitutes natural gas. (vi-vii) O2 from electrolysis will be 
sent to the wastewater treatment unit  located 100 meters away from the electrolyser for water 
purification & treated water will be sent to electrolyser for H2 production via (to-be-implemented) two 
pipelines.   
3. Turkish Hub : Izmir -Manisa area contains petrochemical and household appliances companies, 
located nearby an industrialized port area on the Aegean coast. Planned synergies: (i -ii) Green H2 
obtained from electrolysis based on the use of renewable energy and captured CO2 from oil refining 
activities via CC adsorption  technology are used for e-methanol production. (iii-iv) Captured CO2 is 
also used in the production of non-isocyanate polyurethane (NIPU) which substitutes traditional 
polyurethane in the production of refrigerators.