2.2 MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT – DISSEMINATION, EXPLOITATION AND COMMUNICATION    #@COM-DIS-VIS-
CDV@#  
  
  
IS2H4C will establish a dedicated plan for the dissemination, use and valorisation of research and 
innovation results, critically contributing to the delivery of expected outcomes and impacts described in 
Section 2.1. It will also include the communication activ ities to make the society aware of the use of EU 
funds for R&I tackling societal challenges, the impacts of IS in the EU and enhancing the knowledge 
exchange between science, industry and society. WP8 will provide a complete dissemination and 
exploitation as well as a communication plan by M6 (with updates during the project) to lead these activities 
and coordinate partners to deliver highest impact.  Here, a brief introduction to the main elements of this 
plan is offered.  
  
DISSEMINATION AND EXPLOITATION PLAN  
IS2H4C's dissemination and exploitation plan will ensure that the project results and outputs are effectively 
and efficiently disseminated and protected to guarantee their replicability and exploitation. This involves 
the implementation of dissemination and exploitation activities, as well as knowledge and IP management.  
DISSEMINATION PLAN. IS2H4C’s dissemination strategy will boost knowledge transfer and visibility of 
results obtained during and after the project. Stakeholders identified in Section 2.1.1. will be actively 
engaged to enable the uptake of the information and data generated by IS2H4C, thus maximising outcome 
and impact. The dissemination plan will be adaptable in its objectives and activities to better adapt to the 
project’s evolution. Moreover, to facilitate adequate open cooperative work and knowledge trans fer, this 
plan will reflect the project’s “Open Science” approach as described in Section 1.6. It will consist of three 
main phases:  
i. Community building (M1 -M12). The channels for dissemination will be set up for the correct 
diffusion of messages to the targeted stakeholders. It will be focused on generating a community 
of interested stakeholders around the project, informing and generating awareness on the basics: 
IS2H4C’s objectives, expected results and impacts, etc.   
ii. R&D diffusion and cooperation (M12 -M36). As the results of the project emerge, they will be 
spread through several tools, including newsletters, social media posts, scientific articles, and 
conferences. In addition, cooperation with related projects and initiatives will be sought during this 
phase.  
iii. Exploitation enablement (M24-M48). It will support the actual exploitation of the project results 
via workshops, capacity building activities and marketing towards final end -users (commercial 
results).  
As shown in Table 5, various online and offline channels will be established to disseminate the knowledge 
resulting from the project’s activities, including IS2H4C’s vision. Channels and tools such as the website, 
newsletters, press releases and social media fall under the communication strategy but will support the 
dissemination strategy.  
Table 5. Dissemination activities  
Activity  Target group(s)   KPI   
Scientific publications  Academia  At least 30 peer-reviewed papers  
Partners are expected to submit at least 30 peer-reviewed scientific papers by the end of the project. OA to these 
articles will bring additional benefits like greater transparency, opportunities for new scientific collaborations, and 
increased efficiency as research does not need to be repeated but can be shared, reproduced and replicated.  
Relevant High-Impact Journals may include the following (listed below). After the project, effects will be measured 
according to citation-based metrics such as citation counts (aimed at Field-Weighted Citation Impact >1).  
- Applied Energy   - European Journal of Operational Research  - Renewable Energy   
- International Journal of Hydrogen Energy  - Production and Operations Management  - Energy Policy  
 Sustainable Production and Consumptio - Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews - Energy Economics  
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 41  
Capacity building activities  
Industry, 
Academia  
At least 5 e-learning technical guidelines. At least 3 
workshops  
1,200 students engaged  
As part of T8.2, EEIP, in cooperation with the partners will coordinate the development of different training activities 
oriented to both students and workforce, including the preparation of e-learning resources and the arrangement of 
specific workshops/webinars. All contents will be available on IS2H4C’s website up to two years after the project 
end. Academic and industrial partners will involve and train BSc/MSc/PhD students among their activities in the 
project. It is expected to engage at least 1,200 students through the IS Online games and the on-site visits, mainly 
supported by the coordinator UT, all the academic partners of the project and IS2H4C’s hubs.  
Conferences and events   All stakeholders  Attend at least 8 and present in at least 4 conferences/year   
EEIP, as D&C Manager, will orchestrate the organisation of yearly dissemination events (4) to showcase project 
results. IS2H4C’s Advisory Board, together with other renowned R&D/policy experts, will be invited to participate 
in roundtable discussions. Moreover, the consortium will attempt to establish links with EU funded projects under 
the same HORIZON -CL4-2023-TWIN-TRANSITION-01-37 call and any other relevant calls. Preliminary, the 
project will seek to collaborate with the projects HEAVENN, REDOL, CORALI S, INITIATE, Hubs4Circularity 
Community Practice on (i) common dissemination activities, (ii) joint technical workshops, (iii) unified policy, 
standardisation and R&I recommendations. To improve the outreach of the project. Co -organisation of joint 
events/workshops will be sought to obtain more resources and expand their scope and impact. In addition, partners 
will attend other events/conferences/trade fairs to disseminate project’s results, including: (i) Conference on 
Sustainable Development of Energy, Wa ter & Environment Systems (SDEWES) (ii)  Smart Energy Systems 
International Conference (iii) Offshore Energy Exhibition and Conference (OEEC) (iv) Envirotech for Shipping 
Forum (v) World Hydrogen Congress (vi) World Hydrogen Energy Conference (WHEC) (vii) International 
Conference of Industrial Ecology (viii) Mobile World Congress (ix) Cloud Expo EU. CHX will organise 1 helix event 
(M48) and 1 online clustering event (M12).  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 42  
“Circular Industry” helix 
on the  
Open  Innovation 
 platform Crowdhelix (CHX 
is a IS2H4C partner): 
IS2H4C will use and enrich 
 the  already 
 existing international 
 virtual 
community/ecosystem24. 
 The  
Circular Industry Helix will 
be an engine for impact, 
exploitation, clustering 
 and  dissemination activities. The Circular Industry Helix is an international Open 
Innovation  community  of specialists and stakeholders from domains  such 
 as  materials  Figure 9. IS2H4C Circular Industry Helix Ecosystem: Virtual Community  
science, process engineering, mineral waste recycling and industrial innovation, as well as relevant policy 
makers, standardisation agents and citizen interest groups. The helix is currently composed of 79 
organisations from 32 countries. IS2H4C benefits from the CHX network  that gathers 600+ member 
organisations from 57 countries (all EU member states). It has the potential to reach 11,000+ research 
and innovation collaborators  from its existing membership base. This network, supported by a 
customised technology platform, language processing and machine learning tools, has 40+ virtual thematic 
areas/clusters (called “helixes”) that cover all research and innovation fields. Through the helix, the 
consortium will build a network with at least 150 new organisations (M36), including  IS2H4C partners, 
members from existing relevant helixes (i.e., Energy, Solar Energy, Circular Plastics, Water, Hydrogen, 
Raw Minerals, Digital, Manufacturing, Just Transition  helixes, etc.), researchers, industry actors, ethic 
and p olicy makers, civil society , participants of other relevant projects  and relevant 
actors/associations across Europe/International (e.g. EU Factories of the Future Research Association 
(EFFRA), EU Partnership Made in Europe, Clean Steel Partnership (CSP), A.SPIRE -Processes4Planet, 
EIT Digital,  IT InnoEnergy, EIT Climate -KIC, S3P -Industry, Process4Sustainability, Alliance for a 
Competitive European Industry (ACEI), EU Energy Research Alliance EERA, Cecimo, Orgalim, Clean 
Hydrogen partnership, EU Energy Network EnR, Energy Efficiency Financial Institutions Group (EEFIG)). 
To ensure sustainability, CHX will commit to maintaining the helix for at least 2 years after the project has 
concluded. When the project ends, the helix will continue to be hosted on CHX’s platform, and everyone 
signed during the project up will be able to retain their accounts for free (as external organisations), as 
well as have the option for their organisations to join as full members on the network. The CHX Helix 
Manager will identify a member from the helix, that would be interested in strategically leading this helix 
after the end of the project. The new helix will be supported by CHX, for details see Figure 9.  
IS2H4C Clustering plan:  IS2H4C cross-projects collaboration plan is divided in 3 main sections: 
collaboration board, joint activities, and future collaboration plan.   
 
24 Circular Industry Helix - https://crowdhelix.com/helixes/circular-industry/info  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 43  
1)  Projects with similar aims 
and synergies will be identified 
for a collaboration board (1.1), 
including:  
a) the projects funded under 
the same call (sister projects), 
b) other European projects 
and c) national and regional 
projects. IS2H4C will 
collaborate with relevant 
European projects [REDOL 
(CIRCE, EEIP),  
CORALIS  (CIRCE, 
 EEIP, SIDENOR), 
 ReSoURCE  (CHX),  
HEAVENN  (Hydrogen  Valley),   
INITIATE  (engaging with the steel industry sector), Hubs4Circularity Community Practice (engaging with 
other H4C in EU), Covenant of  
companies for climate and energy,  Figure 10. IS2H4C's Clustering Plan  
CircLean, projects funded under the Digital EU Programme, cluster 5- 
destination ‘Efficient, sustainable and inclusive energy use”, Industries in energy transition’, etc.], 
programmes (e.g. EU Innovation Fund, Life Plus Programme, activities of the EIB, EEFIG, eeef) and 
relevant actors/associations  across EU/International (mentioned above). All the projects and key 
stakeholders will be contacted, and the Collaboration Board (CB) will be consolidated ( 1.2). The CB will 
define the Key Performance Indicators (1.3) and the main ways of a fluent and frequent  
  
communication (1.4). A common identity (logo & templates for communication and reporting) will be 
designed (1.5). Joint working groups - project members are organised (1.6).   
2) IS2H4C CB members will promote and encourage collaborative activities with the different projects 
identified above (mainly with the sister projects). These activities include: regular meetings (sister projects 
will be invited to IS2H4C Kick Off meeting) (collaborative ideas and work are expected to emerge thanks 
to these meetings/workshops) (2.1), joint participation and attendance to webinars and local info days 
(organised by projects), CHX will organise 1 online clustering event (M12) (2.2), active partic ipation in 
projects social media sites (Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and similar tools) (2.3), development of joint 
scientific publications (2.4), supporting future legislation (European Industrial Strategy, Circular Economy 
Action Plan, Zero Pollution Action Plan, etc.)  (2.5) and joint participation in scientific conferences and 
business tradeshows (2.6).   
3) Future collaboration plan, a helix event will be organised (M48) to promote the development of 
interdisciplinary research and innovation ideas, to identify target calls aligned with the consortium 
strengths.   
Measuring IS2H4C dissemination and project outputs: Measuring IS2H4C dissemination using Public 
Data Sources: CHX, in collaboration with all partners, will measure the dissemination of IS2H4C outputs 
(Table 6). Using repositories of academic research papers, it will study classic measures of reach, such as 
numbers of article citations, in addition to using topic analysis to understand degrees of interdisciplinary 
dissemination. In addition, other forms of dissemination such as reporting in news articles, blog posts and 
social media will be evaluated using techniques from data science.   
Measuring IS2H4C outputs: CHX, in collaboration with all partners, will measure IS2H4C results (Table 6). 
This may include, but is not limited to, aggregating additional and external data sources to inform on 
broader project outputs, modelling to determine causality of outputs, and statistical analysis to conclude 
on the robustness of outputs measurements.  
  
EXPLOITATION PLAN   
a)Business case. The business case for IS2H4C is based on the development and deployment of H4C in 
four different locations across Europe, which is expected to create new market opportunities for the 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 44  
participants and contribute to the wider deployment of sustainable and circular solutions in the EU. 
Consequently, the targeted market for IS2H4C is primarily the process industries, including oil refining, 
steel, pulp and paper, lime, petrochemical, household appliances, and chemicals and pharmaceuticals 
industries. The estimated market size for these industries in the EU and globally is significa nt, with a 
growing demand for more sustainable and circular solutions to address environmental challenges and 
reduce waste. The solutions developed by IS2H4C are designed to match the market and user needs in 
a cost -effective manner , with a focus on resource efficiency, use of renewable energy, and waste 
prevention. Moreover, IS2H4C 's expected market position and competitive advantage  will be based 
on the project's unique approach to developing H4C, which is expected to become a reference for 
promoting sustainable regional development in Europe.   
German hub. E-methanol, ethylene, acetic acid, and methane production will trigger investments on CC 
and electrolysis. Potential capacity expansion of these technologies will trigger infrastructure investments 
and call for participation of other hub companies in these  investments for sharing costs. As above -
mentioned materials are widely used by diversified industries and have increasing prices, hub companies 
using these materials will benefit from traditional material purchase cost reductions. Considering a scenario 
of higher carbon taxes, hub companies will economically benefit from replacement of traditional production 
techniques with the green ones. As the processes of hubs require high temperature of heat, R&D 
investments for developing more efficient heat pumps (such as to reach higher temperatures of 250 -300 
degrees) will also be triggered, leading to significant energy cost savings in future. Sustainable action must 
take ecological, economic and social aspects into account. The measures have to suppor t companies 
goals to achieve a climate neutrality(in Germany Net Zero CO2 -Emission in 2045!). The measures must 
also make economic sense (global competitiveness). Therefore investment and production costs must be 
carried out in accordance with the specifications of the respective companies, and acceptance, quantities 
and prices on the market for sustainable generated chemicals / heat  must be determined.  
Basque Hub. The different gases and subproducts of the industries will be offered based on the demand 
and production profiles. PETRO will potentially provide O2 and H2 to the identified sectors (steel, foundry, 
cement and lime) and the process CO2 from cement and lime will be used for the production of e-fuels by 
PETRO. This symbiosis will provide a cost reduction and efficient business scheme. The market segments 
to target will be the industries defined (cement, lime, steel). The production and distribution costs with the 
CAPEX and OPEX of the technologies anticipate an investment needed of 150M€ of these industries in 
H2. It is estimated that the H2 could be available at 3,5€/kg by 2028 (after project) and O2 8€/l which would 
be more profitable than having a O2 on-site production system (approx. cost in steel industry of 1M€).   
Turkish hub. Capacity of electrolyser will increase from 5MW to 20MW triggering H 2 investments in the 
hub and subsequently will trigger investments in wind and solar energy to feed the electricity need of the 
electrolyser. Next, oxygen supply will increase which might attract investments of companies widely using 
oxygen in their process es (e.g., chemicals, pharmaceuticals, pulp&paper production). Further, oxygen 
stored in gas cylinders can be also used in hospitals for medical/therapeutic usage. As the CC technology 
will be deployed, extension of CC capacity will lead to production of more e-methanol and polymers, which 
consequently will attract a large number of companies from different sectors. From CC, production of other 
materials can also be considered like in the case of German hub (e.g., ethylene, acetic acid). In particular, 
higher amounts of NIPU production will allow ARCELIK to spread the use of NIPU in its other premises 
and higher amounts of e -methanol will allow TUPRAS to have significant cost sa vings from traditional 
methanol purchase. The use of rigid polyurethane foam, which will be obtained with the NIPU output, in 
Arçelik refrigerator products is completely in line with Arçelik's sustainability strategy. At the end of this 
project, the NIPU technology can be realized and commercialized by serial production of maximum 1000 
units of refrigerator with 10% ramp -up by year for the Northern and Western Europe market where low 
carbon emission and sustainability targets considered  
Dutch Hub. Waste heat Recovery and Oxygen use in water treatment in combination with effluent usage 
in H2 production The hub offers a range of services for stakeholders interested in hydrogen technology, 
including infrastructure testing, consulting, and training programs. To ensure energy supply continuity for 
electrolysis, the hub can trigger investments in solar and wind energy. Increased oxygen supply may attract 
companies that use oxygen as their main resource. Successful testing of H2 in the built environment could 
lead to an investment in infrastructure change. The H2 station's location between the North Sea Baltic and 
Rhine Alpine corridors may attract more logistics companies operating at international level. A biogas 
digestor using cattle manure can help reduce nitrogen emissions for cattle farmers while producing 
renewable energy. This would reduce the Dutch government’s pressure on cattle farming sector (about 
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 45  
nitrogen emissions) which is one of the largest industry in the region. The heat from biogas production can 
be used for district heating in Almelo city.   
   
Strategic Context for all hubs. Symbiosis and circularity are increasingly critical to creating a sustainable 
world shortly. In recent years, we have seen increased water scarcity in the Netherlands. With the ambition 
to increase green H2 production by multiple gigawatts in Europe, we will witness a continental increase in 
water demand. On top of that, we must make the most of the green energy we harvest to avoid wastage. 
By using effluent from the water treatment facility next door, we can limit the use of  tap water or purified 
water acquired elsewhere in electrolysis. At the same time, the water treatment facility should be able to 
run more efficiently using the nearly pure oxygen that we produce as a "by -product" in electrolysis, 
increasing our overall ef ficiency by wasting less energy. Another "by -product" of electrolysis is heat 
produced by the alkaline stack. Under normal operating circumstances, this heat would go to waste. We 
aim to store this heat in geothermal storage on site, where we can recover i t by water-water heat pumps 
to heat the buildings' radiators, tap water, and other heating systems and keep the inflow to the alkaline 
stack at the optimal operating temperature.  
  
Brief economic analysis. By demonstrating and implementing the abovementioned techniques, we aim 
to optimize our energy consumption by effectively improving the COP of the entire facility. In turn, this will 
lead to lower, or preferably no, external consumption of gas and electricity, reducing the operational costs 
of the building significantly.  Furthermore, by using the proposed symbiosis with the wastewater treatment 
facility, we can get cheaper feedstock for our electrolysis process and reduce the cost of wastewater 
treatment while optimizing the potential losses of electrolysis.   
Commercial approach. The knowledge of the subjects will be valuable for businesses in the region of 
Twente and on a national and European level. Having this knowledge, we can support companies in 
Twente to move forward efficiently in the energy transition. Furthermore, corpo rate members stand to 
benefit from the knowledge they receive by taking part in projects, ensuring their future in the energy 
transition, and educating their workers in these new fields.  
Management approach. The proposed projects will be managed through the H2Hub Twente by dedicated 
project leaders overseen by the Hub Manager, as we have been doing successfully in recent years. Each 
project leader will get support from corporate members and knowledge institutions who are affiliated with 
the project's content or stand to benefit from it mainly in the future. This way, we can bundle strength and 
knowledge to ensure the proposed outcome outlined in the project proposal.  
  
b)Exploitation plan for industrialisation. The main goal of the exploitation plan is to effectively use the 
project's results through scientific, economic, political or societal exploitation routes, aiming to turn R&I 
actions into concrete value and impact for society and industry. IS2H4C will produce different types of Key 
Exploitable Results (KERs), individual innovations key for the overarching H4C’s exploitation plans. See 
WP8 for further details on how UT as exploitation manager will handle exploitation activities.  
Table 6. Preliminary identified KERs  
KER (ownership)  Added value  End users  IP Strategy  Exploitation route  
Model  for  self- 
sustaining H4C  
Boosting the systemic TRL 
of Hubs  R&D, H4C, Green 
Energy Companies,  
Green  tech  
manufacturers,  
Investors, Public 
Bodies  
& Policymakers  
Open access  
  
Further R&D, joint 
exploitation agreement, 
engineering services, 
licensing.  
Digital Platform for 
information 
sharing   
Secure information sharing 
between the Hubs  
Utility 
 mode
l, patenting  
Novel  green  
technologies  
Reduction in GHG 
emissions  Open access  
Serious online 
games  Knowledge dissemination  
General Public & all 
stakeholders  
Patenting, 
trade secret  
Further  R&D,  developing  
/selling own services  
Virtual Hubs  Simulating circular 
economy  
H4C managers & 
all  
stakeholders  
Open access  Further R&D  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 46  
Financial canvas  
Identifying financial risks 
and investment 
opportunities   
Investors  &  all  
stakeholders  Open access  
Further  R&D, 
developing/selling own 
services  
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 47  
Smart  decision  
support tools  
Support informed 
decisionmaking processes  H4C managers & all  
stakeholders  
  
Patenting, 
trade secret  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 
05/12/2023 
B2B, B2C, engineering 
services, licenses, 
database for H4C 
managers  
Handbook 
Integrating social 
innovation into 
Hubs4Circularity  
Guideline  for 
 successful 
stakeholder engagement  
H4C managers & all  
stakeholders  
  Open access  
Further  R&D,  European  
Communities of Practice  
Sustainable 
Technologies   
Integrate technologies  to 
provide Hubs and its   
surroundings green energy 
and  
IS  environments   
Investors, general 
public & all 
stakeholders  
Patenting, 
trade secret  
B2B,  B2C,  engineering  
services, licenses, and 
R&D  
By M6, the proposal's preidentified KERs will be updated and reassessed. KERs will be classified among 
commercial and noncommercial KERs, and prioritised according to three main parameters: degree of 
innovation, potential profitability, and impact on the i ndustry. The Exploitation Manager, together with the 
project partners (owners of KER), will define the focus of each KER exploitation strategy. IS2H4C, an IA 
action, is expected to achieve final TRLs between 6&7, meaning that commercial KERs will still be a few 
years before their exploitation. The exploitation strategies will be tailored considering the overarching EU 
masterplan regarding the development and deployment of IS. The exploitation strategy will be crosscut by 
the IP strategy (further explained in the next section), the DMP & OS practices, and in close cooperation 
with the dissemination & communication strategies.  
Follow up plan . The follow up plan is focused on achieving a higher degree of technical, social and 
financial maturity of the four H4Cs in the project, as well as to continue contributing to the expansion of the 
concept across other industry clusters in Europe. Since th e beginning, during the project, the consortium 
is already working on the greatest potential barriers to be addressed in the adoption of the IS concept. The 
execution of WP3 will help to detect additional barriers and adapt the exploitation s trategy to better 
overcome them. One of the key obstacles to reaching higher TRLs is matching value chains,  as this 
requires integrating various sectors and industries into a cohesive system that maximizes the circularity 
and sustainability of resources. To overcome this obstacle, the IS2H4C project will focus on developing 
customized business cases and financi al models that distribute investment costs and risks among the 
involved actors and ensure the replication of these models in diverse geographical con texts. This will 
involve engaging with industrial integrators, policymakers, and other stakeholders to build consensus and 
commitment towards the project's goals. Additionally, the digital tools DigitalH4C and the Circular Industry 
Helix will facilitate this engagement. To address Securing industrial integrators and user acceptance, 
the IS2H4C project will engage with industrial partners and end -users throughout the project, gathering 
feedback and insights to refine and optimize the developed solutions. This will include developing training 
and capacity building programs for stakeholders, as well as establishing a community of practice (ECoP) 
to promote knowledge sharing and collaboration. Another critical requirement is that the technologies 
developed and d eployed during the project enhance their  robustness to reach higher TRLs. This will 
involve a particular pathway for each one of them, involving the further testing and validation of the 
systems, ensuring their technical and sustainability performance, and  their compliance with regulations 
and standards.  
To ensure the commitments of the industrial partners after the end of the project, the IS2H4C project will 
develop a post-project exploitation strategy that includes technical, financial, and legal preparedness. 
This will involve defining attractive business models and feasibility studies for the adoption of IS2H4C's 
innovations, as well as establishing IP provisions and other measures to protect the pro ject's intellectual 
property. The project will also work to identify and engage with potential investors,  customers, and other 
stakeholders to ensure the long-term viability and sustainability of the developed solutions.    
COMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES  
A strategic communication plan will start at the outset of the project and continue throughout its entire 
duration. The aim is to provide universally comprehensible information to the public at large about the 
project goals and results. An integrated commu nication campaign will be designed and launched, led by 
EEIP, using a variety of tools and tactics to communicate the project's success stories, significance, and 

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 48  
the overall operational framework that is understandable to wider public audiences. Through the 
exploitation of mainstream communication channels, the consortium will increase awareness and enhance 
societal perception on how R&I through IS can positively impact the society, while increasing the visibility 
and information flow on the vital role EU funded research in realizing and achieving ambitious EU goals. 
The communication plan will be continuously updated, implementing communication measures and tools 
to maximise social acceptance considering cognitive and awareness raising issues as well as risk 
perceptions. IS2H4C's strategic communication plan will include (i) the development of a Visual Identity 
(project logo and brand for all communication materials), (ii) a dedicated website operational from M3, (iii) 
social media channels such as LinkedIn  running from M3, (iv ) biannual newsletters, (v) press releases, 
(vi) participation and presentation of the project and its results in innovation and networking e vents, 
technological fairs, (vii) participation in other networks and groups, not directly linked to the project, where 
consortium partners have strong links and involvement, (viii) in-house presentations to existing clients and 
collaborators and brainstorming for further extending IS2H4C's results to other applications and markets. 
The following demonstrates the relationship between tools, channels, target groups and monitoring 
indicators / KPIs / Targets:  
  
Table 7. Communication activitiesAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023  
Channels  Tools  Target groups  KPI/target  
Digital means   
Website  All  5,000 visits/year  
LinkedIn/Twitter  
Industry, 
Academia  500 followers  
Newsletters  All  
2 newsletters per year, 10% opening 
rate  
Press-releases  General public  300 media outlets/articles covered  
Digital materials   
Project video and infography  All  1,250 views  
Highlight videos   All  1,250 views  
Events  
Conferences, fairs and 
exhibitions  All  
Presentation on 8 
conferences/fairs/exhibitions  
  
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT  
The overall IPR strategy of the project is to ensure that partners can fully exploit their market position, 
involving IP tools. The partners will sign a CA prior to the signature of the GA with the EC in which all the 
rules for ensuring confidentiality (procedure for granting publication of the results), ownership regime and 
IPR issues (background included and excluded, ownership, licensing terms, etc.). An initial analysis of the 
background IP has been performed at this stage, so it is ensured that the kno wledge already held by the 
partners (data, know-how and any other type of tangible or intangible information) and needed for a proper 
project implementation and exploitation is available. Within the KER's exploitation plans, a more in depth 
Freedom-to-operate (FTO) analysis will be performed (including patent analysis if needed). With regards 
to the foreground IP and the ownership of results, the preliminary KER definition (Table 6) provides an 
overview on the ownership of such results, and the joint exploi tation strategy which the owning partners 
are envisaging after the end of the project. This will be finalised towards the end of the project, when the 
Results Ownership List will be released as final summary. Not just the identified KERs will be subject to IP 
management; additionally, the IP strategy of the project will allow to set specific restriction levels for the 
research outputs, including data, managed under the DMP (open by default). In alignment with the MGA 
obligations, partners will ensure IP protection while also looking for a balance between that and the open 
access to data and results. The discussion on the best suited protection measures (patents, copyright, 
trade secret, etc.) will be conducted during the exploitation workshops led by UT during General Assembly 

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 49  
meetings and in the questionnaires distributed as part of the exploitation strategy. Possible use of Horizon 
IP Scan25 services will be evaluated.     
  
 
25 Horizon IP Scan (europa.eu)  
 
 
Objectives  
To develop sustainable 
technologies and 
demonstrate synergies in 
H4C:  German Hub: CC, 
green H2 generation, heat 
recovery Basque Hub: 
pyrolysis of urban waste, 
green H2, oxycombustion, 
CC.  Turkish Hub: green H2, 
wind energy, CC, polymer 
production.  Dutch Hub:  
green H2,solar energy.     
To ensure the resilience and 
sustainability of H4Cs:  To 
achieve 30% carbon, 10% 
energy and 20% overall 
resource reduction   
To facilitate market 
penetration of H4C through:  
Social innovation: 
stakeholder interviews, 
discussion panels, training 
and education, tailor-made 
business cases Financial 
innovation: innovative 
circular models, cooperation 
and competition, de-risking 
strategies.   
To create regional 
development models   
To develop a Digital  
Collaboration Platform  
To maximise wider uptake of 
IS2H4C’s results  
2028  
Project results and 
expected outcomes  
KIP1: Hubs results will comply with “O1. Reducing the use of virgin resources by at 
least 20% compared to SotA”  
German Hub results: (i) To replace all natural gas with green power, electrification 
of heat, production of synthetic methane (CC and water electrolysis) and biogenic 
methane (reducing 46.2% CO2 emissions; 1.98 million tons of CO2) and utilise it in 
chemical and pharmaceutical industries. (ii) To produce electrical (5.1MW), 
thermal (3.9MW) and biomethane power (10MW) through biogas (from 100 types 
of waste). (iii) To reduce fossil fuel consumption by recovering heat waste through 
heat pumps.  
Basque Hub results: (i) To analyse the obtention of biocoke (3 million kg) and 
biogas (4 GWh) from carbonatation of steel slags to replace pet coke and natural 
gas in the lime, steel, cement, pulp & paper, oil refining and foundry industries 
(reduction of 5.5 million kg of CO2). (ii) To validate stablished H2 production aims, 
based on the production of green H2 from electrolysis (capacities 2.5, 10 and 100 
MW) from renewable sources (reducing 47% of emissions). (iii) To utilise O2 (from 
the electrolysis) for oxycombustion (reducing 25% the use of fossil fuels for 
combustion). (iv) To capture CO2 emitted from the Lime process industry and 
utilise H2 (from electrolysis) to potentially produce e-fuels (2.8 M L/year). (v) To 
use the rejected steel slag from the steel industry (and reducing industrial waste), 
to produce added value products (through carbonatation) for the construction 
sector   
Turkish Hub results: (i) To produce e-methanol from H2 (electrolysis), wind energy 
and CO2 (captured from refining activities). (ii) To produce non-isocyanate 
polyurethane (NIPU) (16 metric tons/year) to produce bio-fridges (53% reduction 
of CO2)  
Dutch Hub results: (i) To replace natural gas with H2 (electrolysis, 130 MWh/year) 
in five houses (17% loss of heat is reduced) and three crematoriums in Aardorp. (ii) 
To recover waste heat (electrolysis) and utilise it in H2Hub Twente offices. (iii) To 
utilise O2 (electrolysis) for wastewater treatment.   
KIP 2: Complying with O2.1 “Use IS and cross-sectoral cooperation to pave the 
way for achieving EU Green Deal objectives” & O2.2 “Providing recommendation 
for optimised regional framework conditions by highlighting barriers and suitable 
innovation policies”    
Results: (i) to implement an effective policy framework, (ii) adaptable business 
models, (iii) boost digitalisation (Digital Collaboration Platform).   
KIP3: Complying with O3. “Citizens living in proximity of heavily industrialised 
environment through IS”  
Results: (i) training and capacity building, educational games, lower energy bills  
(more than 500€ in savings), job creation (40.000+)  
2031  
Target groups & DEC measures   
Target groups:  
- Other circular hubs - 
Green energy companies/green-tech 
manufacturers - Financial 
investors/institutions  
- Research & academia - 
Policymakers & standardization 
organizations - General public  
  
KERs:   
-Model for self-sustaining H4C  
-Digital Platform for information sharing   
-Novel green technologies  
-Serious online game  
-Virtual Hubs  
-Financial canvas  
- Smart decision support 
tools - Handbook integrating social 
innovation into H4C -Sustainable 
technologies  
Dissemination: (i) Scientific publications: at 
least 15 papers; (ii) Capacity building 
activities: at least 5 e-learning technical 
guidelines and at least 3 workshops with 
1.200 students engaged. (iii) Conferences 
and events: Attend at least 8 and present in 
at least 4 conferences/year (to seek 
cooperation with REDOL, CORALIS, INITIATE, 
H4C Community Practice.; (iv) To build the 
IS2H4C virtual community and connect 
with at least 150 new organisations 
Communication:   
Website (1000 visits/year), LinkedIn (500 
followers), Newsletters (2/year), press 
releases (300 articles), project video (1250 
views), Highlight videos (1250 views).   
2033+  
Expected impacts  
Complying with Expected Impact 
“Global leadership in clean, climate-
neutral and resilient industrial value 
chains” KIP1:  By 2030: The German 
Hub will substitute fossil ethylene with 
synthetic ethylene (CCU) (reducing CO2 
emissions by 24.8%) By 2040: The German 
Hub will reach carbon neutrality in their entire 
processes.  By 2050: The Basque Hub will (i) 
increase biogas production in the oil industry 
by 10 (compared to 2028), (ii) achieve a 
production of 23 KT of H2/year in the steel 
industry (enough to reach carbon neutrality) 
and (iii) generate 667 KT of CC CO2 and 4 KT 
of H2/year in the lime industry.   KIP2: 
Contribute to European industrial 
sustainability, competitiveness and resource 
independence by progressing in policymaking 
and digitalisation, lowering non-renewable 
materials, reduction of GHG, and enabling the 
development of innovative value chains.  
KIP3: Achieving a positive impact on society at 
different levels and specifically to the areas 
surrounding the H4Cs by (i) enhancing social 
cohesion and stimulating innovation and 
subsequently leading to new 
product/processes development or 
optimisation,  (ii) Improving public health due 
to improved environmental conditions, 
increases productivity and job generation  
(40.000 at least), (iii) creating a balanced 
economic growth and social well-being.   
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 36