2.1 PROJECT’S PATHWAYS TOWARDS IMPACT   
2.1.1 STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS  
IS2H4C has identified stakeholder groups that will benefit from the results. Attention will be paid also to 
sectoral associations existing in the EU, such as covenant of companies for climate and energy and 
CircLean18.   
  
• Industrial clusters as potential new H4C: The outcomes, knowledge and data generated by IS2H4C 
will become a demonstrator for successful circular hubs in the future. The Digital Collaboration Platform 
(WP7), the methodologies for deployment of SoA technologies, the models for sustainable financial 
 
18 CircLean. (2022, January 20). The project - CircLean. CircLean. https://circlean-symbiosis.eu/the-project/   

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 34  
performance, and the low -waste and highly productive processes in IS2H4C will impact 
society positively by increasing competitiveness of other hubs.   
• Green Energy Companies/Green tech manufacturers: Green tech and energy companies will be 
one of the main beneficiaries of the transition, since IS2H4C’s hubs will broaden and facilitate the use 
of green fuels/renewable energies in various economic and industrial sectors (chemical, refining, steel, 
pulp & paper, household appliances, among others). IS2H4C also contributes to lower the bar of 
regulatory acceptance by engaging in policy -making processes and subsequently reducing costs of 
production and distribution.  
• Financial Institutions/Investors: IS2H4C represents an opportunity for future economic returns due 
to expected increase in overall demand and availability of sustainable value chains. Also, it will help 
financial institutions to better understand the current and future sustainability trends staying competitive 
for future common challenges    
• Research and Academia: Academic partners outside the project will benefit from the OS approach 
and the specific cooperation and dissemination activities targeted (i.e., workshops, events, scientific 
papers). The ground-breaking work of IS2H4C will boost the quality of scientific production around the 
topic, multiplying its effects.   
• Policymakers and Standarisation Organisations: R&D conclusions drawn from the project results 
will directly feed policy initiatives at EU and national level, from the perspectives of industry and 
sustainability policies. The proposed IS methodologies will eventually contribute to a paradigm shift 
towards H4C. In this regard, a partnership with standardisation committees is required to foster the 
development of H4C and their extensions by verifying legal compliance and the accurate/correct 
operation of all technologies (both individually and collectively related to the H4C).    
• General Public: The project deepens the citizen’s understanding in relation to CE, its benefits over 
current linear business models, and the positive impacts (economic, environmental and societal) of 
being part of an IS environment including, most importantly, how they can be involved. This is crucial 
for informed citizens, in view of their potential role in H4C, particularly if they live in zones where hubs 
are and/or will be implemented.  
• Sectoral associations and P4Planet partnership: Sectoral associations are prestigious 
organisations that can serve as gateways to disseminate and promote the results of the project. Other 
type of industry associations and public -private partnerships will benefit from the project. Especially, 
the project will cooperate with P4P as it will become one of the first funded H4C under its portfolio.  
  
2.1.2 EXPECTED OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS  
IS2H4C will make a tangible and enduring impact in paving the way towards the development of Hubs 
for Circularity (H4C) based on the circularity and resilience requirements of existing and future industrial 
zones and their surrounding ecosystems. This impact will be secured through 3 realistic and credible Key 
Impact Pathways  (KIPs) to achieve the expected outcomes of the HORIZON -CL4-2023-TWIN-
TRANSITION-01-37 call along with the expected long -term impacts of “Climate neutral, circular and 
digitised production (2023/24)” Destination of the Cluster 4 Work Programme. Project’s pathways towards 
impacts will be directly coupled with appropriate and quality DEC measures to maximise the expected 
outcomes and impacts. A description of each KIP that will be implemen ted within IS2H4C can be found 
below, detailing the expected status of the innovative solutions at the end of the project (Project results), 
the short-term effect of the uptake, dissemination, and deployment of these results by direct target groups 
(outcomes), and finally the wider effects in the long term (impacts). In addition, the inter-relation between 
the IS2H4C KIPs and the Innovation Areas (IA) established by Process4Planet are illustrated (Figure 8).  
  Figure 8 Relation between KIPs, outcomes, IAs and expected impacts.  
  
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 35  
 
  
Key Impact Pathway 1. Achieving climate neutrality and circularity within the Hubs  
RESULTS—By the end of the project (2028): IS2H4C expects to comply with outcome 1 “O1. Reducing 
the use of virgin resources by at least 20% compared to current SoA” and parallel with the Climate 
Neutrality Pathways of the Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda (SRIA), which are: (i) to integrate 
renewable energy/feedstock; (ii) to reduce emissions through energy efficiency; and (iii) to reduce 
emissions through CO/CO2 capture and use. These actions are implemented in the H4C that are active 
in many indust rial sectors (steel, pulp & paper, refining, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, lime, bio -based 
energy, water, & electrodomestics), & each IS2H4C hub will tackle the IAs using different strategies to 
achieve the project's goals.   
IA1:"Renewable energy integration" - Waste management services from the German Hub will help local 
chemical and pharmaceutical firms achieve carbon neutrality. The Industriepark Höchst biogas plant can 
produce 30,000 m3/d of biogas from over 100 types of waste (food waste, pharmaceutical industry waste, 
oil, grease trap waste, biogenic refuse from biochemical processes, solvent mixtures, sewage sludge, 
alcohols, and others) and generate electrical (5.1 MW), thermal (3.9 MW), and biomethane (10 MW) power. 
Utilising H 2, biogas, green electricity, process electrification, and methane synthesis will reduce energy 
demand by 139.45 GWh/year at the hub. Petronor (Basque Hub) expects to decarbonize their refinery 
through pyrolyzing urban garbage to produce biogas. The plant will produce 4GWh of biogas from 10 KT 
of urban garbage, replacing 2.9 million m3 of natural gas and eliminating 5.5 million kg of CO 2.  Tüpras 
(Turkish Hub) applies Hydrogen manufacturing unit will generate 3,000 tons H2/year with a future capacity 
of 20MW. Carbon capture will be used to produce e-methanol replacing traditional ones saving 4000 tons 
carbon emission.  
IA3: "H2 integration" - By 2027, Industriepark Höchst expects to complete the 1 MW Proton Electrolyte 
Membrane (PEM) electrolysis plant to refill cars, trucks, buses, and rail vehicles and stabilize the local 
electrical system. The Basque Hub will install 2.5 MW, 10 MW, and 100 MW electrolysers by 2027. The 
new infrastructure will provide H2 to the lime sector (CALCINOR) and steel ladle preheating units 
(SIDENOR), reducing emissions of the Basque Hub by 47% (considering that all the NG, the gas from the 
refinery and the coke used nowadays is replaced by H2). The Basque Hub also plans to finish the 2.8 M 
L/year transport efuels (H2 and CO2) pilot plant. They plan to create 8.4 million kg of H2/year to save 4.375 
million kg of CO2/year. H2Hub Twente's green H2 will heat Almelo's residential homes (130MWh per year). 
This reduces 5 dwellings' heating demand. Replacement reduces heating loss by 17%. 550 Almelo 
dwellings might reduce their carbon impact by 65% by replacing natural gas with hydrogen. With 
sustainable energy sources, this can reach 100% without major infrastructure changes. IA9: "Reduce 
emissions through energy efficiency " - Petronor aims to explore energy efficiency improvements in 
their refineries to enhance 25% by 2025 and 10% from 2030 to 2050. The Energy STAR Guide for 

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 36  
Petroleum Refineries recommends focusing on utilities, heat exchanges, and fired heaters for their 
low-investment potential.    
IA6 and IA8: "Circularity of carbon" and "Reducing emissions though CO/CO 2 capture and use" - 
German Hub has identified 4 main sources responsible for 87% of total CO 2 emissions (4.6 million tons 
of CO 2 in 2021), which are: natural gas/methane (46.2% CO 2 emissions), fossil ethylene (24.8% CO 2 
emissions), fossil methanol (11.4% CO2 emissions) and fossil acetic acid (4.5% CO2 emissions).  By 2027, 
green electricity, electrification of heat, CCU -produced synthetic methane, H 2, methane pyrolysis, and 
biomass/biogenic methane will replace all natural gas. This will eliminate 787,500 tons of CO 2 for 
Industriepark Höchst. Calcinor also plans to decarbonise its lime producing processes in the Basque Hub: 
(i) Carbon capture: Calcinor needs 500 Nm 3 CO2 and 2,000 Nm 3 H2 to create 1KT of lime/day (normal 
operation). (ii) Petronor's pyrolysis process will produce biocoke, a fossil coal -free alternative to coke. 
Petronor anticipates producing 3 million kg of biocoke from 10 million kg Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 
- 05/12/2023 
of urban garbage. (iii) Oxycombustion: Calcinor and Sidenor will use O2 in the steel ladle preheating units 
to minimize fuel use by 25%. Smurfit Kappa will use paper waste and lignin to produce 26.7 MJ/L of biofuels 
(replacing 123 million m3 of natural gas and lowering 61.5 million kg of CO2) and chemicals by enzymatic 
hydrolysis and depolymerisation. It expects to create 214,000 m 3 (214.2 million kg) of synthetic gas to 
eliminate 10.6 million kg of CO2. Finally, (iv) biogas production from paper sludge anaerobic digestion will 
be considered. In the Turkish Hub, 1,000 tons/year of CO2 capture capacity and 3,500 tons of hydrogen 
lead to the production of 5.000 tons of NIPU resulting in 500.000 fridges. The total NIPU -related carbon 
reduction is 32,500 tons/year. This contributes to 100% resource saving in the Man isa factory of Arcelik. 
Furthermore, 9.000 tons natural gas from methanol and 40.000 tons of natural gas from polyurethane 
production are saved, with a total of 49.000 tons of natural gas savings   
IMPACTS—Medium/long-term (2030+): The IS2H4C consortium will comply with the Expected Impact 
“Global leadership in clean, climate-neutral and resilient industrial value chains” by accomplishing 
the following actions in the medium/long -term after the project: By 2030: Industriepark Höchst aims to 
substitute fossil ethylene with synthetic ethylene from CCU and plastics recycling and cracking. This 
measure will reduce their CO 2 emissions by 4.8%. By 2040: Industriepark Höchst aims to reach carbon 
neutrality in their entire processes by replacing fossil methanol with synthetic methanol from CCU and 
biogenic compounds, and by replacing fossil acetic acid by synthetic acetic acid from CCS and recycling.  
By 2050: Basque Hub: 1) Oil industry (Petronor): To produce 10 times more biogas compared to 2028 
(40GWh of biogas, from 100 KT of waste). 2) Steel industry (Sidenor): Achieve a production of 23 KT of 
H2/year, which is the estimated amount of H2 needed to reach CO2 neutrality.  
3) Lime industry (Calcinor): To generate 667 KT of capture CO2.   
External barriers and requirements:   
1. The main barrier identified in relation to this KIP involves lack of infrastructure. Due to the dual 
approach of the proposal involving not only policymaking/governance but also heavily relying on 
the technical aspects of the transition, some European regions may lack the necessary 
infrastructure to apply the guidelines developed in IS2H 4C. To address this issue, the consortium 
will consider logistics aspects within the pathway evaluations carried out in WP2, WP3 and WP4, 
and provide alternative routes to overcome lacking infrastructure. The project will cluster with active 
initiatives should regions need coherent bioeconomy strategies and thus increase the intensity of 
bio-clusters and provide the labour force with new sets of skills needed for the circular bio -based 
transition  
2. Lack of awareness:  certain European regions may not be aware of the benefits of industrial 
symbiosis or may not fully understand how to implement it effectively. The capacity building 
activities designed for this project (e-learning resources, workshops/webinars and IS online game, 
see Section 2.2), can help address this barrier.   
3. Resource Matching: Finding suitable partners for resource exchange can be difficult. Industries 
need to identify compatible partners with complementary resource needs and available surpluses. 
The Digital Collaboration Platform and the Circular Industry Helix (CHX) will facilitate networking 
and matchmaking between partners, and also will help to find new suitable collaborators.  
4. Risk Aversion: Industries may be risk-averse and hesitant to engage in new collaborative efforts, 
especially if they are concerned about the security of their proprietary information or potential 

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 37  
liabilities. The consortium has a preliminary draft of IP strategy for the exploitable results (See 
Section 2.2) to be generated within IS2H4C, which guarantee the security of sensible information.  
  
Table 2. KIP 1 implementation indicators  
Time  Indicators of scale and relevance  
 
German Hub: To produce electrical (5.1 MW), thermal (3.9 MW) and biomethane (10 MW) power from 
biogas; to produce 1 MW of H2 for transportation.   
Basque Hub: To produce 4GWh from urban garbage; to have the capacity to produce 112.5 MW of H 2 
overall (from the 3 electrolysers); to produce 2.8 M L/year of e-fuels for transportation.    
Dutch Hub: To replace the heating demand of 5 houses in Almelo with H2 and reducing heat loss by 
17%.    
Turkish Hub: To produce 1000 tons of captured CO2 annually and 3500 tons of H2 to subsequently 
produce polymers and build bio-fridges (Arçelik).   
 
German Hub: To reach climate neutrality by replacing fossil methanol and acetic acid.    
Basque Hub: To upgrade their infrastructure capacities to produce 40 GWh of biogas (oil sector), 23 KT 
H2/year (steel sector), 667 KT of captured CO2 (cement sector).     
Dutch Hub: Replacement of natural gas for heating purposes in Almelo (10,000 houses) will be initiated 
using biogas and H2   
Turkish Hub: To eliminate the use of gas in the polymerisation process, by producing and using polymers 
and optimize production processes and transportation logistics to reduce carbon emissions in the 
production of refrigerators.  
  
Key Impact Pathway 2. Incentives for Climate Neutral, Circular Industry Solutions, and IS  
RESULTS—By the end of the project (2028): Activities carried out in the project duration – and especially 
focussed on the more technical approach of the project such as those proposed in WP2, WP4, WP5, and 
WP6 (and described in the previous KIP) - will directly contribute to the creation of a more efficient and 
sustainable industry across Europe. However, to accomplish the sustainability transition of EU processes 
industries, unprecedented levels of investment are required. Considering this, and complying with 
outcomes O2.1 “Use Industrial Symbiosis and cross -sectoral cooperation to pave the way for 
achieving the EU Green Deal objectives”  and O2.2 “Providing recommendation for optimised 
regional framework conditions by highlighting barriers and suitable innovations-oriented policies”, 
IS2H4C contributes to inspiring and de -risking investment by designing and implementing an effective 
policy framework, providing adaptable business models , and boosting digitalisation. In doing so, 
IS2H4C ensures a safe transition to IS for the process industries involved and improves their 
competitiveness. The policy framework provided by IS2H4C by the end of the project will have the 
purpose of addressing prices, energy and waste regulations and standardisation, which subsequently will 
contribute to “make climate neutral and circular industry solutions economically attractive (IA)”, and 
also to “reduce barriers for market uptake (IA14)”.   
The policy framework will be divided into 3 phases: (i) Raising awareness: one of the keyways to 
promote standardisation and regulation is to raise awareness of the benefits of IS. Complemented by the 
dissemination, communication and exploitation activities (Section 2.2), the policy framework to be 
developed will include best pr actices and recommendations derived from the project’s results and share 
them with relevant stakeholders from different industries, government and academia. (ii) Collaboration: 
IS2H4C provides spaces for collaboration between industry, government and standardisation 
organisations (e.g., CEN, EUR-ISA), to develop guidelines that are applicable across different industries 
and sectors. And, (iii) Training and capacity building: Companies and organisations may need support 
in order to adopt standardised Industrial Symbiosis practices. To this end, IS2H4C organises workshops 
and conferences (see Table 5) to provide this support and ensure that companies have the knowledge and 
skills needed to implement sustainability practices effectively. In order to contribute to “Reaping the full 
benefits of digital technologies (IA13)”, the IS2H4C Digital Collaboration Platform (WP7) will integrate 
intelligent matchmaking decision support and tracking tools, a marketplace and a collaboration module, 
which: (i) facilitates resource matching between companies and industries, (ii) improves information  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 38  
sharing (e.g., energy consumption, emissions, waste generation), (iii) enables collaborative 
planning and decision making to optimise the use of resources and minimise waste, and finally, and, (iv) 
enhances monitoring and tracking of resource flows, which can help identify areas for improvement. 
Moreover, to assess financial investment, credit ris k evaluation and valuation of sustainable and circular 
business opportunities, IS2H4C will utilise AI frameworks to accurately predict the valuation of H4C assets 
(WP5).   
IMPACTS—Medium/long-term (2030+): In medium/long-term, IS2H4C will make significant contributions 
to overall European industrial sustainability, competitiveness and resource independence through the 
implementation of its proposed methodology for policymaking and digitalisation. This wider impact will 
revolve around lowering the use of non-renewable materials, reduction of GHG, enabling climate neutrality, 
increasing resource efficiency, enabling the development of innovative value chains across Europe, and 
overall substitution of fossil feedstocks. Moreover, as carbon emissions will be minimized using renewable 
energy additional savings are achieved, since according to the World Bank, carbon pricing schemes that 
incentivize carbon reduction could generate $23 trilli on in new revenue by 2030 19 . Also, sustainability 
boosts productivity and competitiveness, as studies have shown that sustainable enterprises outperform 
their peers by 15% 20. Finally, throughout IS, and waste management, the waste disposal costs can be 
reduced, economically impacting the H4C and their surroundings. The EU Environment Agency predicts 
that reducing food waste alone may save 131 kg per EU inhabitant per year 35,21.  
1. External barriers and requirements: One of the main hurdles faced by this KIP involves regional 
differences in the progress of policymaking  regarding IS transitions. These differences may 
even extend through micro-meso-macro levels within one country. Some regions may already have 
strong policymaking in place requiring only slight improvements or dissemination, while other 
regions may have on ly planned policies, with none actually implemented. As such, important 
mitigation actions such as regional peer -learning across the EU are essential to balance out 
differences and coordinate actions beyond a single border.  
2. Economic Incentives: The economic viability of industrial symbiosis projects can be a challenge. 
Industries may be hesitant to invest in the necessary infrastructure without clear financial incentives 
or a guaranteed return on investment. The successful deployment of the 4 H4 C presented in this 
project, will prove the efficiency of IS and its solutions. By presenting the results obtained to 
policymakers and standardization bodies, it is expected to convince them of the utility of making 
this transition, and further support the development of economic incentives.    
  
Table 3. KIP 2 implementation indicators  
Time  Indicators of scale and relevance  
Year 1-2 
(Outcomes)  
• Development and implementation of the policy framework and adaptable business models  
• Introducing the IS2H4C Digital Collaboration Platform   
  
Year 3-5 
(Impacts)  
•  
•  
100% of hubs use the digital platform, & benefit from matchmaking recommenders and decision 
support tools offered.Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023  
100% of consortium enterprises (including those directly related to hub's activities) adopt business 
and financial models based on technological integration and process optimisation in an IS 
environment.  
  
Key Impact Pathway 3.  Non-Technological Elements Essential for Successful Innovation 
Deployment   
RESULTS—By the end of the project (2028):  All innovations outlined will only be successful if they are 
supported by nontechnological elements such as (i) societal acceptance, (ii) skills enhancement and (iii) 
market conditions, according to “Human resources, skills and labour market (IA14)” . Although the 
concept of IS has its roots in the late 1980s, a significant portion of society may not be aware of what it is 
 
19 The World Bank (2022, May 24) Global Carbon Pricing Generates Record $84 Billion in Revenue. Retrieved March 25, 2023.    
20 Clark, G.L. et al. (2015) From the stockholder to the stakeholder, How sustainability can drive financial outperformance. University of 
Oxford. Retrieved March 25, 2023 35 European Commission (n.d.) Food waste. Retrieved April 1, 2023  
21 European Commission (2023, February 22) Circular economy: definition, importance and benefits: Retrieved April 1, 2023  

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 39  
and the benefits it brings. Hence, there needs to be a concerted effort to increase awareness among the 
general public. Through DEC activities, IS2H4C engages with the surrounding communities of each hub 
to (i) understand and identify their specific needs, drivers and demands, (ii) promote environmentally 
responsible behaviour, and (iii) build trust and confidence in the concept of IS among different 
stakeholders. Besides DEC activities, IS2H4C will develop a full stakeholder analysis (see Section 2.1.1 
for preliminary analysis) to identify relevant groups that are affected (directly or indirectly) by H4C 
innovations and involve them in decision-making processes.  Process4Planet has identified that skills and 
education are a bottleneck to develop, implement and unfold the full potential of the new technological 
solutions. For that reason, IS2H4C will implement training and capacity building activities which will provide 
useful knowledge that helps the community to better adapt to the sustainability transition . Also, IS2H4C 
believes that making process industries more attractive for the younger generation is crucial to enhance 
deployment of digital technologies, which is why interactive and innovative activities such as IS online 
games and hackathons (further explained in WP8), will be implemented.     
IMPACTS—Medium/long-term (2030+): The results are expected to have a positive impact on society at 
different levels. For instance, by collaborating with villages and surrounding communities, IS2H4C 
enhances social cohesion, stimulates innovation exchange of ideas, knowledge and technology among 
the different industries and sectors, which subsequently will lead to development of new products and 
processes that are more sustainable, efficient and tail ormade for each H4C.  Additional societal benefits 
of the IS2H4C, contributing to “Circular regions (IA12)”, include (i) improving public health due to air and 
water quality (see KIP 1), (ii) generation of at least 40,000 new jobs related to H4C in general and increase 
productivity, and (iii) creating a balanced economic growth, social well-being and environmental protection.   
External barriers and requirements:   
1. The main external hurdle faced by this KIP is the potential lack of interest  from the public and 
other stakeholders. IS2H4C considers co-definition of solutions as a critical aspect for its success, 
the consortium has elaborated a deep and thorough dissemination and communication plan that 
seeks involvement of all relevant stakeholders. Through this action, risk posed by this b arrier is 
mitigated.  
2. Resistance to Change: People and organizations often resist change, especially when it disrupts 
existing routines and practices. Adopting industrial symbiosis may require significant changes in 
operations and relationships, which can face resistance. The activities of the DEC strategy are 
designed to inform and engage the local community and potential stakeholders, in order for them 
to observe the benefits of this transition.     
3. Competitive Concerns: Some industries may view resource sharing as a competitive threat rather 
than an opportunity. Concerns about losing a competitive edge or revealing proprietary information 
can deter collaboration. The solutions to be developed within each H4C are aimed for the industrial 
community welfare, where all gain valuable insight and tools to reduce their emissions and waste 
and subsequently reducing costs for everyone.     
  
Table 4. KIP 3 implementation indicators  
Time  Indicators of scale and relevance  
Year 1-2 
(Outcomes)  
• Full stakeholder analysis   
• Implementing training and capacity building activities   
• Implementing IS online games & development of 1 Hackathon (topic to be discussed).   
Year 3-5 
(Impacts)  
• Generation of at least 40.000 new jobs among H4C22.  
• By instituting energy -efficient practices, a typical household can save up to €500/year; for 
businesses, these savings can be substantial23; therefore, hubs and their environments can reap 
these benefits.   
• By implementing IS, the costs associated with energy, CO 2 capture, water consumption, and 
waste disposal will be shared and, as a result, lowered to the economic and societal benefit of 
all involved.   
 
22 Hub, I. S. K. (n.d.). European Commission Adopts Circular Economy Action Plan | News | SDG Knowledge Hub | IISD.   
23 Energy saving actions by EU citizens could save enough oil to fill 120 super tankers and enough natural gas to heat 20 million homes - News - 
IEA. (n.d.). IEA.   
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 40