4. German Hub : Industriepark Höchst contains chemicals and pharmaceuticals industry, located in 
Frankfurt. Planned synergies: (i -ii) CO2 obtained from (to -be-implemented) CC technology 
implemented in a power generation unit and H2 obtained from existing electrolysis (facilitating industrial 
waste heat use) are both used in e-methanol production replacing traditional methanol in the chemical 
and pharmaceutical industry.   
All hubs: Next to hub -specific solutions, sensing technology will be used to monitor the content and 
flows of one sample resource in each hub. The retrieved data will be embedded in digital product pass to 
achieve resource traceability and data interoperability to improve the performance of IS recommendations 
in the digital collaboration platform (DigitalH4C).   
Specific activities, KPIs and validation means  
- Identify (energy) infrastructure ready to be used and facilitate its use for multiple unpractised users  
- Analyse infrastructure integration scenarios and simulate new synergies   
- Upgrade existing processes and co-design new processes to facilitate coupling and/or 
versatile/shared use of resources by multiple users from diverse sectors  
  
- Develop technologies from TRL3-5 to at least TRL7 and deploy them in demo hubs or directly apply 
technologies with at Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
least TRL7 in the hubs  
- Maximize renewable energy use, utilize green hydrogen as energy carrier or alternative material, and 
implement material/water-/energy-/carbon-/service-based IS models  

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 8  
- Implement an agent-based modelling and simulation framework3 and simulate bottom-up emergence 
and evolution scenarios considering that H4C are complex adaptive systems  
- Analyse the scenarios in the four locations during and beyond project period to propose systemic 
scale-up and expansion strategies for these hubs aligned with the operational objective#8 of 
Processes4Planet partnership  
KPIs: 2 synergies in the German hub, 4 synergies in the Turkish hub, 4 synergies in the Basque hub, 7 
synergies in the Dutch hub will be implemented thanks to the development and deployment of 
sustainable technologies and integration of existing and new infrastructure. These total of 17 synergies 
are direct technology deployment and demonstrations of the IS2H4C. Furthermore, there are 24 hub 
expansion synergies  explained (for sake of brevity) in the description of the IS2H4C hubs in the 
methodology section.  Next  to these, there will be new synergies thanks to the engagement of other 
actors of the hubs to planned symbioses (who are not direct partners of IS2H4C but located in hubs). 
IS2H4C will reach out to a total of at least  150 companies  in all hubs via ad -hoc matchmaking 
workshops and the marketplace embedded in the digital H4C. Furthermore, new synergies will be 
triggered thanks to the adoption of (already developed and to -be-further-improved) two IS 
recommenders4 ,5 . Considering that one IS recommender performs at 33% success rate 6 and one 
synergy involves at least two companies (potential of 75 synergies involving 150 companies), it will 
trigger at least 25 extra synergies. Assuming to increase recommender performance to at least 50%, 
it can achieve 40 extra synergies. IS2H4C will produce simulation scenarios for hub expansion and 
scale-up, via developing one agent-based simulation tool. Depending on parameters and number of 
influential factors6, it can produce thousands of different simulation results. 4 expansion and scale-up 
strategy reports will be produced, one for each hub, customised under different development scenarios 
based on simulation results.  
Validation: 11 technologies to be deployed: water electrolysis (green H 2, TRL9), CC membrane 
technology (TRL7 to TRL9), CC adsorption technology (TRL 6 and higher), NIPU from CO2 (from TRL3 
to TRL7), e-methanol from CO2 (TRL8), synthetic natural gas from captured CO2 (from TRL5 to TRL7), 
oxycombustion (from TRL6 to TRL8), steel slag carbonisation (from TRL5 to TRL7), waste heat recovery 
(from TRL5 to TRL7), oxygen use in wastewater treatment (from TRL8 to TRL9), use of water from 
wastewater treatment in ele ctrolysis (from TRL6 to TRL8), sensing technology (from TRL7 to TRL8), 
and IS recommenders (from TRL5 to TRL7). Activities below TRL7 (such as lab experiments and desk 
research, e.g., as technology modelling) are attributed to WP2, and activities for field work for technology 
deployment (TRL7 & higher) are attributed to WP6.  
5 houses test H2 in built environment using newly developed H2 pipelines (WP6).   
 IS2H4C’s technology details regarding the current level of TRL and achievement of TRL milestones during the project   
Technology  Current TRL  Targeted TRL  
Water electrolysis (green H2, 
TRL9) – (TUPRAS)  
Currently, there is no water 
water electrolyzer in Tupras.   
Tupras will buy commercial water electrolyzer(TRL8+). Tupras will invest more 
than the project requires.  
CC adsorption technology 
(TRL 6 and higher)  
(TUPRAS, TEC & LKT)  
Tupras has CO2 adsorption 
unit TRL6 through EU funded 
MOF4AIR project.  
Since e -methanol production requires high purity (99+%) CO2. Tupras will 
consider either investment of new unit (Amine based CO2 capture, TRL9) or 
additional purification unit for MOF4AIR.  
NIPU from CO2 (from  
TRL3 to TRL7) (FHG)  
 NIPU polycondensation is 
performed on lab scale up to 
1kg per batch. CO2 -based 
monomers for NiPU are 
synthesized in high pressure 
reactors on lab scale up to 0.5 
kg per batch.    
Within the project, the scale-up of monomer synthesis and NiPU polycondensation 
to 10 kg per batch in stirred tank reactor and verify reproducibility for industrial 
applicability shall be realized.  
 
3 EC Processes4Planet. (2023): https://ec.europa.eu/research-and-innovation/sites/default/files/bmr-2022/ec_rtd_bmr-2022-processes4planet-
fiche.pdf  
4 van Capelleveen, G., et al., 2021. Exploring recommendations for circular supply chain management through interactive visualisation. Decis. 
Support Syst., 140, 113431.   
5 van Capelleveen, G., et al., 2018. The influence of knowledge in the design of a recommender system to facilitate industrial symbiosis markets. 
Environ. Model. Softw., 110, pp.139-152.  
6 Castiglione, C., et al., 2021. A holistic technological eco-innovation methodology for industrial symbiosis development. Sustain. Prod. Consum., 
28, pp.1538-1551.  
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 9  
e-methanol from CO2 (TRL8) 
(FHG & CIRCE)  
 Fraunhofer UMSICHT owns 
several laboratory and pilot 
units for the synthesis of 
Methanol as well as the 
necessary downstream 
operations to separate the 
Water/Methanol mixtures. The 
capacity covers up to 2 kg 
methanol per hour.  
 Within the project, the plants will be used to produce methanol based on the gas 
compositions from the real industrial processes provided by the industrial partners, 
e.g. Tupas.  
  
Synthetic natural gas from 
captured CO2 (from TRL5 
to TRL7) (TEC)  
The milli -channel reactor for 
the conversion of 0,5 Nm3/h 
of CO2 to synthetic natural 
gas, has been already tested in 
a relevant environment (with  
The main goal is to develop and demonstrate the viability of 1Nm3/h pilot plant 
using real and continuous combustion gas coming from the industrial site 
(Calcinor) and thus in an industrial operational environment (TRL7). This 
objective will be achieved by  carrying out a capture and cleaning system for the 
industrial gas generated at Calcinor (designed by Lointek) and by designing the  
  
 
  Calcinor’s combustion gas) 
and has demonstrated its 
viability (TRL5).   
reaction system capable of treating 1 Nm3/h of CO2 an 4Nm3/h of H2 Associated with 
document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
continuously (Tecnalia). These two systems will be integrated and will work 
continuously.  
 
oxycombustion (from TRL6 
to TRL8) (TEC)  
Sidenor has already tested the  
effects of small quantity of H2 
in the steel ladle preheating 
and thus demonstrated its 
applicability (replacement of 
NG use) in a relevant scale 
(TRL6).  
The substitution of natural gas air combustion by hydrogen and including oxy-fuel 
combustion in the application of ladle preheating will allow to demonstrate the 
applicability of H2 and O2 in the replacement of fossil fuel in the steel sector 
(TRL8). H2 and O2 trials monitoring and tests will be performed for this purpose  
steel slag carbonisation (from 
TRL5 to TRL7)  
(TEC)  
The patented High Efficiency 
Contact HECO® technology 
is being adapted for 
mineralization of diverse 
alkaline waste streams; among 
others, for stainless steels. The 
device is a fluidised bed 
reactor type, which consists in 
a 360mm Ø 
conical/cylindrical met allic 
body, fed with material 
through its upper mouth, with 
a CO2 gas flow inlet through 
the lower part, and a sampler 
in its lower part. An internal 
draft tube, placed in the gas 
inlet mouth, favours the 
formation of the distinctive 
characteristic movemen t 
(spouting), which resembles 
the movement of water from a 
fountain. This type of 
movement greatly maximizes 
the gas/solid contact rate 
during the reaction, increasing 
the speed of the matter and 
energy transfer. An additional 
internal device (confiner) 
generates a recirculation of 
gas and solid internal to the 
reactor, thereby increasing the 
contact per unit of time, and 
then the CO2 uptake.  
Currently, SBS provides a 
pilot plant reactor validated in 
relevant environments (TRL5) 
but improvements in 
efficiency must be performed.  
It has not been used yet for 
carbonatation of stainless steel 
slags.  
When dealing with direct gas/solid reaction-based technologies for alkaline waste 
mineralization, there are still unresolved optimization challenges: i) the 
maximization of the gas/solid contact for a maximum CO2 uptake; ii) the optimal 
humidity distribution through solids and gas under industrial flue -gas conditions 
with variable conditions (flow rate, temperature, pressure, humidity, chemistry, 
waste nature), iii) the continuous monitoring of the relevant mineralogical 
transformation; iv) minimal process complexity and v) minimization in energy use. 
The goal will be to validate and demonstrate the performance of the carbonated 
stainless steel slags for construction applications, and thus its potential use in an 
industrial sector environment (TRL7).   

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 10  
Waste heat recovery (from 
TRL5 to TRL7) (H2HUB, 
SOLENCO, ALMELO)  
Technology is validated in 
Scandinavia at TRL 5.  
We aim to demonstrate this technology using the geothermal heat storage on site. 
This geothermal source will be used with water -water heat pumps to recover the 
waste heat from the H2 -producten. The two-usage scenario’s will be to heat the 
office and factor y areas as well as to keep the stack’s inflow at the correct 
temperature for optimal operation.(TRL 7)  
Use of oxygen in 
wastewater treatment (from 
TRL6 to TRL8)  (H2HUB, 
SOLENCO, ALMELO)  
TRL 6 is curre 
another 
(Waterschap  
Overijsselse  
Waerschap  
Overijsselse 
Vechtstromen  
information about these tests 
for future implementation. 
ntly proven in 
environment 
Drents Delta).  
Drents  
Delta 
 a
nd 
interchange  
  
In close cooperation with Waterschap Vechtstromen we will implement a realworld 
application of the proven concept, including the two pipelines for oxygen and 
wastewater transport.  
Sensing technology (from 
TRL7 to TRL8)  
 Sensing technologies 
(prototypes or products) 
demonstrated in an 
operational environment will 
be used along for real time 
data exchange in a secure way 
with the IS2H4C digital 
collaboration platform.  
 The sensing technologies will be completed and qualified next to hub -specific 
solutions, used to monitor the content and flows of sample resources in the 
largescale real environment of hubs. The retrieved data will be embedded to 
achieve resource traceability and data interoperability to improve the performance 
of IS recommendations in the digital collaboration platform.  
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Information technologies influencing synergy implementation and hub scale -up/expansion: IS 
recommenders, marketplace, and conceptual digital product passports will be developed in the form of 
decision-support tools (WP4) which are going to be embedded in the digital H4C (WP7).  
  
 State of the art - Recommender Systems Technology for Industrial Symbiosis Implementation  
Introduction:  
Recommender systems have emerged as valuable tools in the field of industrial symbiosis, aiding 
industries in identifying potential resource-sharing opportunities and fostering collaboration.   
Industrial symbiosis is the practice of collaborative resource sharing among industries to optimize resource 
utilization and reduce waste. Recommender systems in this context act as decision support tools, 
suggesting potential symbiotic partners, resources, or processes to enhance sustainability and circularity.  
Current State of the Art:  
• TRL Assessment (Current TRL: 4-5):  
Recommender systems for industrial symbiosis are currently at TRL 4-5. Research and development have 
yielded promising results in controlled environments and pilot projects, but widespread implementation and 
scaling are limited.  
• Key Features and Capabilities:  
• Data Integration:  Recommender systems integrate various data sources, including 
resource inventories, production processes, and environmental impact data, to identify 
symbiotic opportunities.  
• Machine Learning Algorithms:  Advanced machine learning algorithms, including 
collaborative filtering, content -based filtering, and hybrid approaches, are employed to 
analyze and predict resource-sharing possibilities.  
• User Interaction:  Many systems offer user -friendly interfaces, allowing industries to 
interact with the recommendations, provide feedback, and customize their preferences.  
• Performance Metrics: Evaluation metrics, such as precision, recall, and F1 -score, are 
used to assess recommendation quality.  
• Case Studies: Several successful case studies showcase the potential of recommender 
systems in reducing waste, optimizing resource use, and improving the sustainability of 
industrial processes.  
Steps to Advance to TRL 7:  
• TRL 6 - Prototype Testing:  

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 11  
• Prototype Deployment: Conduct field tests and pilot implementations in industrial settings 
to validate system performance, user acceptance, and scalability.  
• Integration with Existing Systems:  Ensure compatibility and integration with existing 
industrial data systems and enterprise resource planning (ERP) platforms.  
• Performance Optimization: Continuously refine machine learning algorithms to improve 
recommendation accuracy and response time.  
• TRL 7 - Full-Scale Deployment:  
• Scalability: Develop the architecture and infrastructure necessary for large -scale 
deployment, accommodating diverse industries and resource types.  
• Interoperability: Establish standardized data formats and interfaces to facilitate cross -
industry collaboration and data sharing.  
• Regulatory Compliance: Ensure compliance with data privacy regulations and industry -
specific standards.  
• User Training and Support:  Provide comprehensive training and support resources to 
help industries maximize the system's benefits.  
• Performance Monitoring: Implement robust monitoring and reporting tools to track the 
environmental and economic impact of symbiotic collaborations.  
Conclusion:  
Recommender systems for industrial symbiosis hold great promise in advancing sustainability and circular 
economy goals. While they are currently at TRL 4-5, a structured approach involving prototype testing (TRL 
6) and full-scale deployment (TRL 7) can enable the technology to be reliably deployed and scaled in real-
world industrial contexts. Advancing the TRL of these systems is contingent on addressing scalability, 
interoperability, regulatory compliance, user support, and performance monitoring challenge s, ultimately 
driving the transition towards more sustainable and circular industrial practices.  
State of the Art in Hubs for Circularity:  
Industrial symbiosis, particularly in the form of Hubs for Circularity, has made significant progress in 
advancing sustainability and circular economy goals.   
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 12  
Industrial symbiosis has evolved from isolated initiatives to well-established collaborative networks. Hubs for 
Circularity bring Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8307660 - 05/12/2023 
together diverse stakeholders, including industries, governments, research institutions, and NGOs, 
fostering stronger cooperation and resource -sharing. Advanced digital technologies and data analytics 
have been integrated into circular hubs. This enables r eal-time resource tracking, demand -supply 
matching, and predictive maintenance, optimizing resource flows and minimizing waste.  
Companies within circular hubs have embraced circular design principles, leading to innovative product 
designs, materials, and production processes. This has resulted in products that are more easily recycled, 
remanufactured, or refurbished. Governments have recognized the importance of circular hubs and have 
introduced supportive policies and incentives. These include tax incentives for circular practices, extended 
producer responsibility (EPR) regulations, and waste reduction targets.  
Circular hubs have advanced in extracting value from waste streams. Technologies for recycling, upcycling, 
and recovering resources from waste have become more sophisticated, reducing environmental impact 
and creating economic opportunities. Circular hubs have extended their influence along supply chains, 
encouraging suppliers to adopt sustainable practices and customers to engage in responsible 
consumption. This holistic approach promotes sustainability throughout the product lifecycle.  
Remaining Challenges and Steps Towards Full-Scale Circular Hubs:  
1. Scaling Up: While circular hubs have demonstrated success in specific regions, scaling up this 
model remains a challenge. Achieving widespread adoption requires overcoming logistical, 
regulatory, and financial barriers.  
2. Standardization and Interoperability:  Establishing common standards for resource exchange 
platforms and data sharing is crucial for seamless collaboration. Ensuring interoperability among 
digital systems is essential to connect various stakeholders effectively.  
3. Behavioral Change: Shifting mindsets and behaviors at all levels of the supply chain and society 
is a complex task. Education, awareness campaigns, and incentives are needed to promote circular 
thinking and practices.  
4. Investment and Funding:  Securing long -term investment and funding for circular hubs is 
essential. Public-private partnerships and innovative financing models are necessary to support 
the transition to circularity.  
5. Regulatory Alignment: Ensuring that regulations support circular economy principles and remove 
obstacles to circular practices is crucial. Regulatory frameworks need to evolve in sync with the 
circular economy's goals.  
6. Measurement and Reporting:  Developing standardized metrics and reporting mechanisms for 
circularity is vital to assess the impact of circular hubs accurately. This will facilitate transparency 
and accountability.  
7. Cross-Sector Collaboration: Encouraging collaboration among industries from different sectors, 
not just within specific hubs, is essential for a holistic circular economy transition.  
In summary, industrial symbiosis and Hubs for Circularity have made significant strides in promoting 
sustainability and circularity. However, achieving full-scale circular hubs requires overcoming challenges 
related to scaling up, standardization, behavioral change, investment, regulatory alignment, measurement, 
and cross-sector collaboration. Continued innovation, cooperation, and strategic planning are essential to 
realizing the full potential of circular hubs in creating a sustainable and circular future.  
  
Objective 2: Ensure resilience and sustainability of H4Cs considering planet, people, and profit   
IS2H4C will adopt circularity principles, safeguarding environmental constraints, social needs, and 
business requirements. IS2H4C integrates bottom-up feedback with top-down coordination mechanisms 
 
7 Bocken, N. M. P ., et al., 2016, Product design and business model strategies for a circular economy. J. Ind. Prod. Eng., 33(5), 308–320.   

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 13  
that connect human needs, inter-organisational collaboration, and (inter-)regional governance. Circularity 
principles will align with the concept of Reduce -Reuse-Recycle in the form of narrowing resource loops 
and closing resource loops8. This results in a reduction of resource (material/water/energy) consumption, 
emissions of waste material/wastewater/waste energy, and GHGs (CO 2, CO, CH 4, NOx, etc.). Also, 
planetary and societal health in H4C is improved via deploying the most innovative resource -efficient 
technologies and enhancing systemic change. IS2H4C assesses the social, economic, and environmental 
impact of introducing innovations through measure metrics and consequential LCA 8. Consequential LCA 
is ideally suited for IS2H4C because it allows studying system expansion and carries out more 
comprehensive results compared to attributional LCA9.  
Specific activities, KPIs and validation means  
  
- Prepare a resilience plan for H4C supported by circularity strategies to enable hub actors to tackle 
shortAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023-term shocks such  
as material and/or energy shortages  
- Design optimized resource flows in H4C considering the Earth's resource capacity & limitations 
imposed by regulations  
- Implementing the objective functions for common good of hubs such as maximum renewable 
energy use, fossil fuel savings, captured carbon, profit, etc., or minimum resource consumption, 
waste discharge, carbon emissions, health impacts, infrastructure cost, etc.   
- Achieve at least 30% carbon, 10% energy, and 20% overall resource (material/water/energy) 
reduction in four demo H4C locations, aligned with the expectations of the Fit-for-55 plan of the 
EC10  
- The analysis of the biogenic CO2 from the wastewater treatment plant to produce bio-fuels.  
 
8 Consequential-LCA (2015). The ISO 14040 standards for consequential LCA. Retrieved April 2023 from www.consequential-lca.org  
9 Weidema B P (2014). Has ISO 14040/44 failed its role as a standard for LCA? J. Ind. Ecol. 18(3):324‑326  
10 EC (2022). Fit for 55 Package. (2023): https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2022/733513/EPRS_BRI(2022)733513_EN.pdf  

 
  
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 14  
KPIs: 1 integrated circular hub management plan based on resource/energy optimisation scenarios 
including a resilience plan based on future projections of supply and demand shocks for all hubs. The 
environmental impacts of the future strategies are described in a four-year period as follows:  
1. Basque Hub: The percentages are calculated in respect to either the given or estimated total 
CO2 production of each industry in the Basque Hub. (1) Petronor’s main contribution to the hub is the 
potential supply of H 2 and O 2 to the rest of the industrial processes. The potential annual carbon 
reduction achieved by circular strategies will be around 5,506 tons (based on 2.9 million m 3 of natural 
gas reduction). (2) Smurfit Kappa: potentially using the paper sludge to produce biomethane could result 
in 37KT of CO2 reduction (8%). Also, by using the paper waste for bio-ethanol production with a potential 
of generating 206l of bioethonal per 1000kg of paper waste and lignin for biofuels production, could 
result in a new and very interesting business for these future bio-refineries. They could supply biofuels 
to other industries and endorse circularity and decorbanisation.(3) Calcinor: Methanation results in a 
CO2 reduction of 9.3 tons of CO2 (1.40%). (4) Sidenor: Using O2 and H2 for reheating the furnaces results 
in 127,567 tons reduction of CO2 (14.79%).  
2. Dutch Hub: (1) Wastewater treatment plant: The expected amount of total avoided CO2 emission 
is 306 tons. It will save energy to treat around 400 million litres of wastewater. Approximately 8,000 tons 
of O 2by-product can be reused thanks to treated water send to the electrolysis reducing energy 
consumption by 18%. Meanwhile, the reuse of waste heat in the offices will avoid 34% of energy waste. 
(2) Solar & wind energy: It will avoid 1,740 tons of CO 2. This benefits the surrounding residential areas 
to reduce their carbon emissions by 65%. (3) Hydrogen fuelling stations: The stations with a capacity of 
200-1,000 kg/day leading to a total carbon reduction of around 19,274 tons (assuming 70kW 
electrolyser). The full-scale implementation of 5MW electrolyser will  generate 2 tons of hydrogen/day 
avoiding around 20,000 tons of CO2/year based on five stations.  
3. German Hub: The implementation plan will contribute to material reduction of 52,500 tons of 
methanol/year and CO 2 reduction of 157,500 tons/year on average, when fully scaled up. Over the 
course of the project, it will lead to an overall hub performance of 210,000 tons of methanol reduction 
and 630,000 tons of CO 2 reduction. Further, 557.8 GWh/year energy input reduction is achieved. For 
long-term implementation, the production of synthetic ethylene, acetic acid and methane can contribute 
further to achieve the resourc e and emission reduction as follows: (1) Methane: 190,000 tons/year in 
total material inputs and 570,000 tons/year in CO 2. (2) Ethylene: 460,000 tons/year in total material 
inputs and 1,380,000 tons/year in CO 2. (3) Acetic acid: 80,000 tons/year in total material inputs and 
240,000 tons/year in CO 2. Additionally, the future expansion of heat pump systems and ethylene 
production will result in annual CO 2 reduction of 570,000 tons under the scenario with the maximum 
capacity. This corresponds to 21% resource reduction, 10% energy reduction and 45.25% CO 2 
reduction.  
4. Turkish Hub: H2 manufacturing unit will generate 750 tons H 2/year with a minimal capacity of 
5MW. When scaling up to the full scale of 20 MW in the future implementation plan, the hydrogen input 
will be 3,000 tons H2/year. 1,000 tons of captured CO2/year and 3,000 tons H2/year produce 1,000 tons 
of e-methanol/year replacing traditional methanol. Traditional methanol production causes 3 kg CO2/kg 
methanol. Therefore, total savings thanks to e-methanol production are 4,000 tons/year (1,000 tons CO2 
reduction thanks to carbon capture and 3,000 tons CO 2 reduction thanks to replacement of traditional 
methanol).  
Around 0.2 kg captured CO 2 is used in production of 1 kg of NIPU and 10 kg NIPU is required for 
production of one fridge, leading to 2 kg CO 2 captured by one fridge. 1,000 tons of captured CO 2/year 
allows production of 5,000 tons of NIPU resulting in production of 500,000 fridges. 1kg of NIPU replaces 
1kg of traditional polyurethane. 1 kg polyurethane production causes 6.3 kg CO2 emissions. Accordingly, 
the total savings thanks to NIPU production are: 32,500 tons/year (1,000 tons CO 2 reduction thanks to 
carbon capture and 5,000*6.3=31,500 tons thanks to polyurethane replacement). Summing up first and 
second scenarios: 35,500 tons of CO 2 reduction, 1,000 tons of methanol reduction, and 5,000 tons of 
polyurethane reduction are achieved. Manisa factory of ARCELIK produces 500,000 fridges/year 
consuming 5,000 ton polyurethane which means that 100% resource saving is achieved. Production of 
1kg traditional methanol and 1 kg traditional polyurethane consume an average of 3 kg and 8 kg natural 
gas, respectively. Accordingly, 9,000 tons natural gas from methanol and 40,000 tons of natural gas from 
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 15  
polyurethane production are saved, with a total of 49,000 tons of natural gas savings.  To accurately 
estimate the potential environmental impacts of H4C, UT team undertook a preliminary evaluation 
analysis. The methodologies of Greenhouse Gases Equivalencies Calculator were used and relevant 
configuration data was retrieved from industrial partners.  
  
For the sake of simplicity, only the approximate end results are mentionedAssociated with document Ref. 
Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 above. The detailed calculations are placed in  
GitHub repository12 as reference materials.  
The scale up computations are provided in the following link: https://github.com/Yifei-Yu-
UTwente/IS2H4C   
Validation: Deliverables and tasks related to hub management plan (WP4), deployment of technologies 
in demo hubs (WP6), and measurement of impacts via the integrated LCA module (WP7).  
  

 
  
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 16  
Objective 3: Facilitate the market penetration of H4C through novel financial schemes and social 
innovation approaches unlocking public and private investment  
IS2H4C includes the two key enablers for the success of the EU Green Deal to unlock non -technical 
aspects of H4C: social innovation (objective 3a) and financial innovation (objective 3b). IS2H4C will 
implement a social innovation action, giving the attention to the local community actors and involving them 
from the beginning at local and EU level. This will safeguard the definition of stakeholder needs, knowledge 
exchange, and definition of strategies to enhance the integrity of H4C. IS2H4C will provide each hub with 
a customized business case comprised of innovative business and financial models for sustainability and 
circularity via distributing investment costs and risks among the involved actors and will ensure the 
replication of these models in diverse geographical contexts. H4C’s implementation and scalability across 
EU are differentiated from existing business models and capitalise on emerging trends and technologies 
in the circularity and ISN settings. This analysis will help to make wellinformed deci sions about business 
models, increasing chances of success on a digital collaboration platform.  
Specific activities, KPIs and validation means  
Specific activities for social innovation (3a)  
- Define a living lab of key regional stakeholders at each hub to analyse the local setting and regional 
actors through the implementation of at least 30 interviews (at least one per key stakeholder group 
per hub) to inclusively address the regulatory, political, ethical, and societal topics  
- Establish expert discussion panels: 4 thematic panels - one per each hub involved and topic: green 
industry, regulatory and political, ethical, and societal  
- Achieve societal engagement and education via considering market needs for businesses, increasing 
user/consumer acceptance of circular products/services, providing skills training for workers, and 
educating all relevant stakeholders in innovative educational/experiential environments  
- Propose a business case  that addresses the user/customer needs, explores new market 
opportunities, increases competitive market advantage of involved parties in a cost-effective manner, 
and ensures consumer acceptance of products/technologies developed within the project  
- Offer skills training for workers in participating companies to accelerate the uptake of the 
products/services/technologies embedded, so that an upscaling can be achieved via EU Social 
Fund plus (ESF+) and a shift in skills development for sustainability/circularity can be achieved by 
EU labour force  
Specific activities for financial innovation (3b)  
- Establish innovative circular business models in which environmental and social externalities are 
accounted  
- Challenge the "coopetition" nature of the IS business models13 where companies need cooperation 
to achieve cost savings (e.g., reduce waste discharge cost) but also have compe tition to pay the 
scant part of additional costs of running IS (so called 3T costs - waste treatment, waste 
transportation, and transaction costs)  
- Propose de-risking strategies  for required financial investments including risk-sharing and 
incentivisation scenarios to reduce financial barriers for IS cases involving establishment and 
integration of infrastructure  
- Support investment plan unlocking the financial resources aligned with Processes4Planet 
(objective#9)  
- Ensure the scalability, commercialisation, and deployment  plans to be supported by funding 
instruments such as Invest EU, Life, etc., via simulating different cash-flow scenarios  
KPIs: 30 stakeholder interviews, 4 thematic panels, 4 business models through True Value 
Methodology14, 4 financial plans  
(one per business model) which will include projections of revenue, expenses (OpEx and CapEx), cash 
flow, and profitability, 4 investment scenario (one per hub) aligned with 4 expansion and scale -up 
strategy reports and 4 societal acceptance events to foster society-government-industry collaboration   
Validation: Investment & financial risk management (WP5) and regulatory, and ethical management 
and societal engagement in surrounding ecosystems (WP3). Both WPs are in tune and solid considering 
the leadership of KPMG as financial expert in the financial sustainabili ty projects as one of the main 
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 17  
consultancies at global level, support of TUDO with their expertise in social innovation and regulatory 
frameworks & UT's vast expertise in circular business models and institutional/human learning.   
  
  
12 https://github.com/Yifei-Yu-UTwente/IS2H4C.git  
13 Yazan, D. M., et al., 2020. Learning strategic cooperative behavior in industrial symbiosis: A game-theoretic approach integrated. Bus. Strat. 
Env., 29(5), 2078–2091.  14 KPMG. (n.d). Valuing your impacts on society. https://assets-kpmg-
com/content/dam/kpmg/ke/pdf/sustainability/KPMG-True-Value-brochure-electronicversion-pdf   
Objective 4: Develop a digital collaboration platform for information-Associated with document Ref. 
Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/20sharing and smart decision-support  23 
The project will implement a user-friendly, scalable, and adaptable (to the needs of different industries and 
regions) digital collaboration platform for H4C (DigitalH4C) consisting of a modular suite of tools, features, 
and data analytics to facilitate the efficient and effective sharing of resources among participating 
organisations. DigitalH4C will allow the participating companies to digitally manage shared infrastructure, 
exchange information with each other regarding resource/waste/energy flows, observe real -time 
operations of energy management within the hubs, matchmake for symbiotic opportunities and engage 
with local communities in surrounding areas thanks to the developed smart decision -support tools to be 
operated within the platform in a cyber -secure environment. IS2H4C will secure the basis for integrated 
management and preservation of confidentiality of sensitive data through a cybersecure -by-design 
approach15. The platform will also ensure the use of digital modelling tools and sensing systems as a basis 
for dynamic resource ma nagement across the implementation of an innovate methodology toolbox to 
evaluate the sustainability impact achieved by the H4C interventions through consequential LCA.  
Specific activities, KPIs and validation means  
- Develop a digital collaboration platform where hub actors can exchange information, monitor real -
time business cases, and explore IS opportunities efficiently  
- Establish smart decision -support tools 16 aligned with user needs to be integrated to the digital 
collaboration platform, namely recommenders for symbiosis matchmaking 17, algorithms for supply 
chain management, and algorithms for centralized and decentralized energy management 18 within 
the hubs  
- Implement consequential LCA in the platform to quantify environmental, economic, and social impact 
of the project actions  
- Ensure that the implementation uses a common semantic for data based on international standard 
models so that interoperability and confidentiality of information exchanges are ensured  
KPIs: (a) 8 smart decision -support modules (2 IS recommenders, 1 agent -based simulation tool, 1 
consequential LCA module, 1 Digital Product Passport framework fed by data retrieved via sensing 
technologies, 1 supply chain management tool 2 energy market management tools) (b) One modular, 
scalable, secure micro-services-based web application that can be interfaced via desktops, tablets 
and smartphone devices, and which is open (Application Programming Interface) for integration with 
third party services (c) System Organisations Control (SOC 2) compliance: fulfilment of criteria for 
managing customer data based on five “trust service principles”: security, availability, processing 
integrity, confidentiality and privacy.  
(d) At least 150 users accessing the platform at M48  
Validation. All the decision-support tools are developed in WP4. Activities related to the development 
of DigitalH4C are performed in WP7, D7.1, 7.2 ,7.3, 7.4 & 7.5. Several partners (IRIS, WORKDECK, 
UT, ICCS) are already experts on designing, building, deploying, and maintaining digital platforms and 

 
  
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 18  
have the expertise to deliver interoperable solutions according to specific criteria and needs and 
supporting the most efficient decision-making needs such as the SHAREBOX platform19.  
  
Objective 5: Achieve a standardized top-down H4C design methodology, applicable as a reference 
regional development model  
IS2H4C will investigate how H4C can be top-down designed in the extended form of eco-industrial parks 
using co-location strategies in a virtual setting and utilize such H4C as interoperable, expandable, and 
interconnected regional development models  in accordance with Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs).  
Specific activities, KPIs and validation means  
- Use existing symbiosis experiences data from all over the world (including public symbioses 
databases such as MAESTRI20) to design virtual H4Cs under the concept of "perfect symbiosis"21 
where no traditional inputs and wastes leak out of the H4Cs as a theoretical optimum state  
- Approximate the four demo H4C locations to this theoretical optimum via using location optimisation 
techniques22, social network analysis, nature-inspired solutions such as food web analysis.23  
- Report the analysis on potential use of existing and to -be-implemented infrastructure (such as 
transportation pathways, natural gas pipelines, or H2 pipelines) as expansion corridors for H4C and 
utilisation of H4C as an interconnected and interregional functional unit for European 
sustainable development  
KPIs: (a) 4 virtual H4C prototypes will be produced with a mix of hypothetical components such as 
process industry companies, service companies, energy/water infrastructure, houses, and living space 
in urban/rural areas. (b) 4 regional  
  
15 Johnsson, D. B., Deogun, D., & Sawano, D., 2019. Secure By Design. Manning Publications. ISBN 9781617294358  
16 Yazan, D. M., et al., 2022. Decision-Support Tools for Smart Transition to Circular Economy. Smart Ind. Better Manag. (Vol. 28), pp. 151-169.   
17 van Capelleveen, G., et al., 2021. Exploring recommendations for circular supply chain management through interactive visualisation. Decis. 
Support Syst., 140, 113431.   
18 Trivella, A. & Mohseni-Taheri, 2022. Meeting Corporate Renewable Power Targets. Manag. Sci. 69, pp. 491-512   
19 A.Spire aisbl. (2018, December 6). SHAREBOX: An Online Platform for Enabling the Next Generation of Industrial Symbiosis [Video]. YouTube.   
20 MAESTRI. (2020). Symbiosis Space: Library of Case Studies & Exchanges Database. Retrieved April 2023  
21 Yazan, D. M., et al., 2017. The design of industrial symbiosis: an input–output approach. J. Clean. Prod., 129, 537–547.   
22 Genc, O., et al., 2020. Circular eco-industrial park design inspired by nature: An integrated non-linear optimization, location, and food web 
analysis. J. Environ. Manage., 270, p.110866.  
23 Genc, O., et al., 2019. A socio-ecological approach to improve industrial zones towards eco-industrial parks. J. Environ. Manage., 250, p.109507.  
development scenarios will be reported building upon virtual H4C prototypes combined with real 
regional settings of the Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
demo hubs. (c) 1 EU level H4C expansion plan, prepared considering the surrounding ecosystems of 
the existing natural gas pipelines, new European H2 backbone, and transportation infrastructure.  
Validation: Tasks planned for virtual H4C development in WP4 are executed by UT, expert in the field 
of design of ISNs, transformation of industrial zones into eco -industrial parks, and use of ISNs as 
regional development models both in urban and rural settings. Each hub representative (TEC, ALMELO, 
PROV, and TUPRAS) will support the deliverables of regional development reports.  
  

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 19  
Objective 6: Maximize wider uptake of IS2H4C’s results during and after the project’s execution  
IS2H4C will adopt a multi-level outreach strategy (details in Section 1.2 -2.2) that will ensure an effective 
exploitation and protection of research outputs in commercial (e.g., patent licensing, trade secret) and non-
commercial activities (e.g., training materi als, policy feedback). To boost all Dissemination, Exploitation 
and Communication (DEC) activities and their impact, an Open Science (OS) approach will crosscut the 
development, balanced with a FAIR data management strategy based on the principle “as open as possible 
and as closed as necessary.” This will enhance the research's impact while protecting the commercial 
interests.  
Specific activities, KPIs and validation means  
- Elaborate exploitation plans for the project’s Key Exploitable Results (KERs), devising the upcoming 
development activities to continue advancing the technology and business readiness level of the 
different innovations and identifying the possible intellectual property (IP) protection options and 
exploitation routes.  
- Expand the H4C to additional parties within the IS2H4C hubs and in new hubs across EU.  
- Actively disseminate the project results for conveying project KERs to targeted audiences and build 
an active R&D community intricately linked to related initiatives. The ultimate purpose is to create 
interactive co -learning spaces for the R&D and business  community through specific webinars, 
conferences, etc.  
- EU Community of Practice of H4Cs to diffuse best practices and achieve knowledge exchange.  
- Cooperate through technical and scientific information exchange with other ongoing and future 
projects working on the issue, so, synergies can be identified and boosted.  
- Communicate with society at large key messages about the project and its objectives, the EU R&D 
funds, and how they contribute to a better and more sustainable EU.   
- Assist learning process: Using online serious games of IS 11 and circular economy transition1213 and 
to-be-developed digitaltwins of four demo H4C of the project in Sustainable and Resilient Circular 
Economy Laboratory (SRC -Lab)26 to educate students and teachers and to train policymakers, 
company managers, and local communities to support learning process on H4Cs in the context of 
EU social innovation.  
- Produce at least 30 scientific papers to be published in open access high-impact peer-reviewed 
journals;   
- Organise at least 10 thematic workshops framed within dissemination & capacity building 
activities;   
- Produce at least 1 guideline supporting the H4C European Community of Practice (ECoP) and  
engage at least 15 new H4C across EU, who also should benefit and multiply the local/regional 
synergies in the co-implementation of the identified innovations and solutions within the next five 
years.  
- Produce at least 1 policy paper highlighting regulatory hurdles and correspondent contingency 
measures  
- Develop 4 digital-twins of demo H4Cs by an online game company and embedded in the SRC-
Lab  
- Using the digital-twins, 8 sessions of game play for company managers and governmental bodies 
and 8 sessions of game play for students in educational settings will take place in the SRC-Lab.   
- Train at least 350 students, 175 scientific assistants in workshops and knowledge-sharing with 15 
new H4C across EU  
- Reach 100+ companies engaged in IS2H4C Hubs and 500+ companies through consortium 
partners, sister projects and advisory board members.  
 
11 Fraccascia, L. et al. (2021) An industrial symbiosis simulation game: Evidence from the circular sustainable business development class. J Ind 
Ecol. 25; 1688– 1706.   
12 University of Twente (2023, April). Minor Circular Economy Transition. Retrieved April 1 2023.   
13 University of Twente. (2023). Sustainable and Resilient Circular Economy Laboratory Homepage. Retrieved April 10, 2023.  
 
  
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 20  
Validation: Dissemination, communication, and exploitation activities performed in WP8, D8.1, D8.2, 
D8.3, D8.4 and D8.5. The leadership of WP8 by EEIP will ensure the technical success of the 
dissemination, communication and exploitation of the results which will be enhance by the network of 
the project’s partners as CHX leading the stakeholder engagement using their network and technical 
partners across the project that are already coordinating and participating in key projects enhancing the 
synergies. UT will use its vast expertise and online infrastructure at the development and execution of 
online games to disseminate learning outcomes.  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 21  
  Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
1.2. METHODOLOGY & OVERALL CONCEPT  #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#  
  
OVERALL CONCEPT  
IS is a symbiotic mechanism 
through  which 
 traditionally fragmented 
industries collaborate based 
on exchange and sharing of 
energy,  water,  by-
products, infrastructure, and 
services. The goal is to 
minimize environmental 
impact and ideally add 
economic and social value. 
IS contributes to the 
backbone of circular 
economy seeking 
opportunities to reduce 
virgin material consumption 
and waste generation. IS2H4C will apply and develop cutting-edge sustainable technologies in four 
demo hubs resulting in H4C  
through the utilisation of IS. This  Figure 2. IS2H4C's layered hub implementation strategy  
process can be elaborated based on (1) three vertical levels, and (2) two horizontal directions. Vertical 
levels: The three vertical levels are micro-level, meso-level and macro-level. First, IS2H4C focuses on the 
symbiotic interactions at the micro level and aims to understand how IS individual behaviours can be 
stimulated by enhancing societal engagement. Second, interorganisational IS networks (ISNs) emerge 
as a systematic performance at a meso -level based on complex individual interactions. Integrating the 
material and value chains among a multiplicity of previously independent actors leads to a complex 
adaptive system. It demands for strong power and careful attention to coordinate such a system from an 
operational perspective. Here, IS2H4C innovates Information Technologies (IT) -based solutions on an 
integrated digital platform to manage IS networks holistically . Third, IS2H4C investigates how 
different ISNs in the demo hubs contribute to the advancement of circularity at a macro level. This relates 
to the future expansion of hubs and entails knowledge generalisation for European policymaking. These 
three levels interact with and influence each other iteratively as H4Cs develop and evolve. Strategical 
coordination power is implemented in a top-down manner while systematic emergence occurs bottom-up 
(Figure 2). Horizontal directions: Two fundamental factors for realizing functional IS exchanges are the 
spatial (geographical) proximity of industrial actors and the temporal availability of exchanged items. For 
example, the utilisation of industrial waste heat is most efficient in proximity due to increasing heat losses 
with longer transmission distances (spatial). The availability of renewable energy such as wind and solar 
is intermittent and needs to be util ized when it is available (temporal). Therefore, symbiotic activities will 
be most successful if spatial and temporal factors are carefully managed. IS2H4C includes all relevant IS 
pathways and provides a comprehensive manual to establish H4C including industrial and urban areas. 
By explicitly considering social engagement and the humancentred nature of H4C, IS2H4C ensures 
benefits for the surrounding household areas and does not stop at the fence of industrial zones. For 
instance, green hydrogen systems can reach far beyond the industrial area to fuel households for multiple 
purposes. In summary, IS2H4C addresses fundamental issues of IS development and engag e diverse 
stakeholders from a broad and multifaceted landscape including industrial partners and households.  
  
METHODOLOGY   
To materialize the vision of a sustainable and resilient Circular Economy based on the concept above, 
IS2H4C has designed a  
48-month work plan composed of 8 Work Packages (WPs), which will allow the consortium to achieve the 
objectives outlined in  

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 22  
Section 1.1. The plan revolves around 4 highly interconnected working phases: (1) Technology 
development for H4C; (2) Sustainability of H4C; (3) Deployment and demonstration and (4) Outreach 
Strategy. These phases are described below followed by a presentation of the four demonstration hubs.   
 
Figure 3. IS2H4C's Methodology  
  
Phase 1: Technology development for H4C (WP2 & WP7)  
The first phase is centred on the physical and digital technologies and their technical aspects to prepare 
for deployment and demonstration in Phase 3. The work is carried out mostly in WP2 and WP7. For 
technologies below TRL7, technology development will be carried out.  
Identification of technologies characteristics (WP2): First, the capabilities of the physical technologies 
available in H4C need to be identified. IS2H4C will catalogue technologies including existing technologies 
at demonstration hubs and candidate technologies for deployment in Phase 3. The latter entails 
technologies that still need to be advanced to TRL7 during the project but also technologies that ar e 
commercially available at TRL7 and above. After the set of technologies is identified, simulation models of 
the technologies will be developed for validation and determination of the techno-economical and physical 
characteristics. These models will further act as basis for preparing surrogate models (simplified models 
focusing on specific characteristics) that can be used in the decision support tools developed in Phase 2.  
Technology development (WP2): Some of the technologies needed for the demonstration at H4C are 
not at TRL 7 yet and as such will be scaled up to this level during the project. The TRL levels of the 11 
process technologies are: one at TRL3, one at TRL4, four at TRL5, one at TRL6, two at TRL7, one at 
TRL8, and one at TRL9. As lower TRLs require more work before demonstration in the field, their further 
development is intensified in WP2.  
Adaption of processes (WP2): IS2H4C investigates potentials for adaptation of physical processes in the 
H4C to increase resource utilisation and/or reduce resource consumption and waste emissions. Adaptation 
and redesign of processes enable the establishment of synergies at an advanced level. IS2H4C will 
analyse the processes at the demonstration hubs to identify opportunities enhancing the level of circularity. 
The partners in WP2 will propose solutions in terms of alternative process (co -) designs. Afterwards, the 
designs are evaluated regarding sustainability and efficiency gains, and promising solutions will be 
demonstrated in Phase 3, WP6.   
DigitalH4C – IT infrastructure (WP7): Apart from the physical technologies, IS2H4C will develop IT 
infrastructure in the form of a digital collaboration platform to facilitate the operational management of the 
hub and interaction of hub participants. It will also support the environmental and economic analysis of the 
H4C in terms of tracking the exchange of resources as well as data analysis and visualisation tools. The 
goal is to develop a user-friendly, scalable, and adaptable digital platform (usable as a web application or 
mobile application) that can be used in different hubs with different industries and stakeholders. Input from 
WP3 regarding the needs of stakeholders will be considered such that citizens are engaged to the hub. 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 23  
State-of-the-art software development techniques will ensure a scalable and secure platform, which 
includes using a microservices architecture (for scalability) and implementing security -by-design. 
Ultimately, the platform will provide a secure basis for hub management while ensuring data protection and 
compliance. IS2H4C will build on previous platforms implemented by the partners (as SHAREBOX, 
Incubis, the BiowasteHub, among others) taking them to the next level in terms of performance and 
functionality, not only providing a user interface and collaboration spaces for hub participants, but also 
including the results from Phase 1 and 2 in the backend. The actual implementation of the outputs from 
Phases 1 and 2 are carried out in Phase 3, while developing the general IT infrastructure is part of Phase 
1.   
  
Phase 2: Sustainability of H4C (WP3, WP4 & WP5)  
To realise the environmental and socio -economic impacts of the  IS2H4C value chain, WPs 3,4 & 5 will 
ensure the sustainability of the H4C concept in three dimensions: societal, environmental & economic. 
IS2H4C will develop models, methods, and guidelines for development and management of H4C. The 
outcome of PhaseAssociated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 2 will support well-informed decision-making, 
design,  
and operation of H4C. Establishing this strong methodological foundation is expected to enhance the 
probability of success beyond the project's completion, particularly for Digital H4C (WP7). IS2H4C will 
provide a methodological basis for extending the hubs to additional parties and guidelines for the design 
of new H4C. For this, IS2H4C approaches the dimensions as follows:    
Societal sustainability (WP3): WP3 identifies relevant stakeholders that are affected by the H4C and their 
needs, including companies, citizens living in the surrounding area of the hub, policy makers and the public. 
WP3 also identifies non -technical (regulatory, ethical, societal) challenges and barriers that arise in 
connection with the establishment of H4C. Relevance will be given to the local community actors through 
social living labs and involving them at local and EU level (desk research, interviews, discussion panels). 
These activities will also provide the opportunity for the definition of needs, knowledge exchange between 
different stakeholders as well as definition of best strategies based on the stakeholders' needs. Apart from 
the stakeholder ana lysis and engagement, WP3 establishes measures for increasing trust among 
stakeholders (through standardisation and policymaking) and analyses the regional/societal impact of the 
H4C (Societal Readiness Level, regional input -output models). The results wil l be collected in a general 
guideline for integrating non-technological aspects into H4C.  
Environmental sustainability (WP4) : WP4 addresses environmental sustainability by establishing a 
digital database of resources and developing methodologies for operating and expanding H4Cs. This 
includes 2 IS recommenders (matchmaking algorithms) for identifying and facilitating industrial symbiosis, 
logistics optimisation models, energy management algorithms including energy market interaction, digital 
product passport for tracing resources, and agent-based simulations for developing hubs bottom-up. The 
environmental impact of the concept is assessed, and expansion scenarios are analysed to provide a basis 
for future plans on adopting H4C as sustainable regional development models.   
Economic sustainability (WP5) : WP5 develops business and valuation models to ensure commercial 
attractiveness of H4C. This includes impact valuation using KPMG's True Value methodology, AI models 
for financial credit risk assessments and valuation of business opportunities, and design of IS impact 
metrics. It proposes financial and business models focused on sustainability and societal impact, enabling 
simulation of scenarios with incentives. The results support a comprehensive financial plan for 
implementing the concept and determining its viability.   
A range of AI methods, including supervised, unsupervised, reinforcement learning, and recommender 
systems, will serve diverse purposes: (1) Enhancing the recommender system algorithm for IS 
collaboration (D4.2); (2) Developing a modeling system that chara cterizes resources, energy flows, and 
IS (D4.1); (3) Evaluating financial investments, credit risks, and the value of sustainable and circular 
business opportunities (D5.3). Importantly, these three groups of AI applications can utilize not only 
individual enterprises but also encompass process/energy technologies and infrastructure within the H4C 
data. Moreover, AI will be used in the DigitalH4C platform to streamline IS identification, coordination, and 
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 24  
evaluation (WP7). Throughout all AI -based methodologies, IS2H4C will align with EU norms concerning 
AI utilization, data protection, and GDPR regulations.141529  
In WP4 Models for H4C development  the project will implement techniques from Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
Operations Research, and Agent-based Simulation for the development of an agent-based simulation tool that enables 
the analysis of future scenarios of hub evolution; the AI will simulate different scenarios and their potential outcomes, 
based on different inputs and assumptions in order to help inform decision making. In addition, in WP5 Business and 
financial models, AI models will be developed capable of assessing financial investment, credit risk evaluation, and 
valuation of sustainable and circular business opportunities, whereby fair and accurate AI frameworks will be used 
that are capable of assessing the risk level of retail and commercial customers in H4C settings and accurately 
predicting the valuation of H4C’s assets. These intelligent components will be deployed in the Digital Collaboration 
Platform in WP7 Digital Collaboration Platform for H4C.  
It will ensure that these developments adhere to legislative requirements of the EC’s Artificial Intelligence Act 
(published on 21 April 2021), which governs the development and use of AI within the EU and outlining rules & 
actions based on the principles of transparency, accountability, and human oversight. We will ensure that our AI 
developments and associated tools are:   
(1) lawful - respecting all applicable laws and regulations  
(2) ethical - respecting ethical principles and values; we will follow the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial 
Intelligence to ensure we deliver trustworthy AI (and covering such issues as data privacy, transparency, 
accountability, and bias)  
(3) robust - both from a technical perspective, while taking into account its social environment and context, as well 
as reliable and explainable. To ensure the reliability, it is important to ensure its accuracy and reproducibility, as 
well as its ability to handle and inform about potential failures, inaccuracies, and errors. This can be achieved 
through testing the AI system with various scenarios to identify and address any weaknesses or vulnerabilities. 
Additionally,  
  
 
14 https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection_en  
15 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-approach-artificial-intelligence   
29 https://gdpr-info.eu/  
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 25  
monitoring the AI system for unexpected behaviour or changes in the problem domain can help to ensure its ongoing 
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 reliability. In some cases, a hybrid approach that combines the strengths 
of AI with human oversight may be necessary to address complex or ambiguous situations. In relation to explainable 
AI, we will explore such strategies as: decision trees or linear regression models; breaking down the model's decision-
making process; explaining th e models limitations; providing context; providing access to the training data, among 
others.  
  
Phase 3: Deployment and demonstration (WP6 & WP7)   
After deployment of the technologies and preparation of the digital collaboration platform, Phase 3 includes 
the actual demonstration in the four demo H4C (WP6) and implementation of the DigitalH4C (WP7). The 
data from the demonstration will be used for analysis and dissemination (WP8) as well as feedback into 
WP2,3,4&5 developed in Phase 1 & 2. The demonstration will support the validation of the IS2H4C’s 
concept including technologies and a suite of tools in the digital collaboration platform. The four H4C are 
in different regions of EU, have different maturity levels of H4C (regarding degree of collaboration, industrial 
sectors, existing infrastructure), and have geographic diversity (in terms of combination of rural, urban, and 
industrial areas). As such, these hubs present unique challenges that can help to aggregate the f indings 
to extend the reach of the hub and further enhance local/regional synergies. These insights will be used in 
Phase 4 for expansion planning and exploitation activities.  
  
Phase 4: Outreach (WP 8)  
The aim of this last phase is to maximise the impact of the IS2H4C results and ensures the achievement 
of the expected outcomes. Methodologies developed in Phase 2 and the data obtained from the 
demonstrations in Phase 3 support exploitation plans in Phase 4.  The associated strategy will consist of 
(further elaborated on Section 2.2):  
Dissemination and communication:  A detailed dissemination and communication strategy will be 
developed targeting specific audiences, including industry stakeholders (Section 2.1). This fosters a 
collaborative innovation ecosystem around the project, enhanced by clustering and cooperation  with 
related projects and sister initiatives. The connection with them will be a key pillar considering the 
participation of key partners in the consortium, such as CIRCE who are coordinators of projects like 
REDOL.   
Expansion: of the H4C to additional parties within the IS2H4C’ hubs as well as in new hubs across the 
EU. The guideline supporting the H4C EU Community of Practice (ECoP) will focus on the engagement of 
at least 15 new H4C across the EU, who also should benefit and multiply the local synergies in the co -
implementation of the identified innovations and solutions within the next five years. The participation of 
Crowdhelix will significantly enhance this specific objective sup ported by their network across the EU 
focused on Impact in Industrial Circularity.  
Exploitation: To ensure the post -project final TRL step towards market deployment, commercialisation 
and industrial uptake of the developed solutions, IS2H4C will define attractive business models and 
feasibility studies for the adoption of IS2H4C’s innovations. The necessary IP provisions will also be 
defined, as well as the post-project exploitation strategy to be followed in terms of technical, financial, and 
legal preparedness.  
Capacity Building: Tailored skills development activities will be organised to foster knowledge transfer, 
including the development of e-learning resources and thematic webinars/workshops. These activities will 
be targeted both at students and working professionals to contr ibute to improve the attractiveness and 
awareness of career opportunities in H4Cs.  
  
Description of the IS2H4C demonstration hubs  
The four demo H4C including their facilities, partners, focus industries and TRLs, and surrounding 
ecosystems are presented below. A flow diagram for each hub is presented to display what processes 
already exist ( BLUE COLOR), which synergies are demonstrated within the project ( GREEN COLOR), 
and which processes/synergies will be studied as hub expansion plans ( ORANGE COLOR).  The flow 
diagrams visualise the demonstrated synergies mentioned in Objective 1 and studied expansion 

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 26  
opportunities. The reader is referred to the workplan, specifically WP2 and WP6, for more details of the 
demonstrated synergies and hub expansion studies.     
 
Description:Industriepark Höchst has a long tradition as one of the largest, well -established sites for the 
chemical and pharmaceutical industry in Europe. In total, 90 companies from the pharmaceutical, 
chemical, biotechnology and services sector are located on its s ite close to the city of Frankfurt. At 
Industriepark Höchst, the existing Process4Sustainability cluster aims to reach CO2 neutrality for individual 
companies located in Industriepark Höchst by further developing and demonstrating CCS, CCU, H 2, bio-
based resources and heat pump technologies to establish PtL (power to liquid), PtG (power to gas), PtX, 
electrolysis of water, H 2 for FC-trains, and CO 2 as raw material for chemicals, amongst other innovation 
ideas. On its way towards climate neutrality and new business models, the hub nowadays integrates 
innovative start-up companies, pilot and demonstration plants for PtG, PtL and power to chemicals (PtC), 
and first-of-its-kind plants for sustainable technologies.   
IS2H4C will use the existing infrastructure (see Fig. 4) chemical production, energy production, wastewater 
treatment and hydrogen production. The flow diagram shows the synergies to be demonstrated stated in 
Objective 1, namely the use of captured CO 2 from energy production and H 2 from electrolysis for e -
methanol production to replace traditional methanol used by the industry partners in the hub.  IS2H4C will 
also study the following possibilities for hub expansion: 1) Use of captured CO2 and H2 for ethylene, acetic 
acid, and methane production. 2) Use of waste heat in district heating systems for urban symbiosis and 
boosting waste heat by heat pumps for high -temperature use in the industry, both replacing the need of 
fossil fuels for heat production. 3) Wa stewater utilisation for hydrogen production using membrane 
distillation and electrolysis (11). 4) Microwave -assisted Hydrothermal Carbonisation based on biogenic 
waste from the chemical industry as input to hydrogen production. Due to the history of the industrial site, 
many established processes already offer a high TRL, such as waste -water management, energy 
efficiencies and shared operations from different companies at the site. H 2 is an intermediate technology 
with TRL6 as of today. New approaches, such as carbon capture not being present at this stage. Overall, 
with this deployment TRL level of the site is expected to go from 5 to 7, by the end of the project.  
IS2H4C partners: From the Process4Sustainability cluster, the following partners will join the IS2H4C 
directly Infraserv Höchst (Service operator of industrial site), CIRCE, AEE and INEGI. The other partners 
BAYER, Celanese, Kuraray, Sanofi support the proposal with expansion strategies.   
    
Basque hub: Basque Industrial Hub for Circularity, Spain   Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 
05/12/2023 
German hub: Industriepark Höchst (Process4Sustainability), Germany 
  
Figure 4. German Hub flow diagram 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/20 
23 
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 27  
 
 Figure 5. Basque hub flow diagram    
  
In the Basque hub, three extra expansion synergies will be studied in order to complete the hub with 
(waste)water use and bioenergy production scenarios (these synergies are shown in red color). These 
technologies will not be deployed but only studied as potential hub expansion scenarios.  
  
Description: The Basque Industrial Hub for circularity (BIH4C) constructs upon the foundations settled to 
speed up the decarbonisation of the industry by 2050 (Basque Government's NZBIS initiative 16  and 
Basque H2 corridor31). The Basque Country, a strong innovator region with a high industrial concentration, 
has already identified a series of symbiosis (image below) between different sectors, that will present a 
relevant consumption, materials and emissions reduction.   
The hub includes steel, cement, lime, oil refining and pulp & paper industries (see Fig. 5) as well as already 
existing technologies for wastewater treatment, waste pyrolysis, electrolysis, e -fuel production in 
transportation. IS2H4C will demonstrate (see Objective 1) using either O 2 resulting from electrolysis for 
oxycombustion or hydrogen in steel production (and evaluate oxycombustion in other industries as 
expansion plan) to reduce fossil fuel consumption. Captured CO 2 will be utilized in lime production 
(demonstrated) as well as cement and oil industry (expansion study). Furthermore, steel slag and CO2 will 
be used in carbonation to produce construction products for the cement industry (demonstrated). In an 
expansion study, IS2H4C will investigate how biocoke and biogas, produced from urban waste in the 
pyrolysis plant, can replace coal-based coke in the cement, lime and stell industry and natural gas in the 
process industries (lime, cement, oil, pulp and paper, foundry and steel), respectively. Finally, the use of 
H2 in these industries is also considered additional hub expansion synergy. The BI H4C starts with TRL5 
(existing H2 pipeline and companies with electrolysers) and will account for a systemic TRL 7 by the end 
of the project. The technologies (CCU, oxycombustion and H2) and suitability of the use and production of 
 
16 Grupo SPRI. (2023, February 7). Net-Zero Basque Industrial Super Cluster - SPRI Group. SPRI. https://www.spri.eus/en/support/net-zero-
basque-industrial-super-cluster/  31 Basque Hydrogen Corridor BH2C (n.d.) About us. Retrieved February 22, 2023, from from 
http://www.bh2c.org/en/about-us   

 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 28  
these circular subproducts and gases, will be validated in real industrial environments (TRL7), and 
accompanied with the potential collaboration and business schemes between these industries, the Hub 
will be able to achieve a systemic higher TRL (TRL7).  
IS2H4C partners: TECNALIA, PETRONOR, NORTEGAS, Smurfit Kappa Nervion, Basque Energy 
Cluster, SIDENOR, SIDENOR I+D SA, LOINTEK, CALCINOR, Consorcio aguas Bilbao, SBS  
  
  
 
Figure 6. Turkish hub flow diagram  
Description: The Turkish hub is an industrialized port area in the Izmir-Manisa area at the Aegean coast 
containing oil and gas (Tüpras) and household appliances companies (Arcelik). IS2H4C will consider the 
existing oil refineries, fridge production facilities and H 2 production from renewable energy (see Fig. 6). 
The demonstration in the project (see Objective 1) includes the utilisation of the produced H2 for e-methanol 
production replacing traditional methanol as input to the oil refineries. Additionally, captured CO 2 will be 
used as input to non-isocyanate polyurethane production which again is used in fridge production instead 
of traditional polyurethane. Possibilities for expansion strategies studied in the Turkish hub include storage 
for O 2 from electrolysis offered to other users and provision of H 2 via a fuel station and H 2 trucks to 
consumers reducing the need for non-renewable resources. TUPRAS, the biggest industrial enterprise in 
Türkiye, aims to install and operate 120 MW electrolyser capacity until 2040 and 1.5 giga -watt (GW) 
electrolyser capacity until 2050 (producing around 135,000 million ton (Mt) green H2 per year). As outlined 
in the recent “Strategic Transformation Plan”, the company is committing to reduce its carbon emissions 
(6 million ton CO 2/ year) gradually, and to becoming carbon neutral by 2050, which requires focusing on 
energy efficiency and expandin g into new areas. Moreover, TUPRAS plans new renewable energy 
investments (solar power plant) to meet the need for clean energy sources for green hydrogen production 
up to 2050’s targets. TUPRAS has four different refineries which are in İzmir, İzmit, Batman and Kırıkkale. 
Refineries have, high purity and good quality hydrogen producer units, consumer units and purge systems. 
Production and consumption units of pure hydrogen through steam methane reforming (99.99 vol.%) and 
hydrogen rich gas (~91 vol.%) exi sts in three refineries (Kırıkkale, İzmir, İzmit) of Tüpraş which are all 
located in Turkey. TUPRAS has a demo scale (TRL6) CC unit in Izmit refinery which has been developed 
and installed in the EU project MOF4AIR. In IS2H4C, the CC unit is moved to Izmir Refinery to capture 
CO2 on site. It has capture capacity of 10-15 kg CO2/h. Water electrolysis at TRL9 will be implemented to 
produce green H 2, which is further used for e -methanol. E-methanol is also an intermediate product for 
NIPU production. Fraunhofer has a TRL8 technology for NIPU production, which will be demonstrated in 
refinery conditions. In total, the NIPU process will be developed from TRL3 to TRL7.  
IS2H4C partners: Tüpras, Arçelik, Fraunhofer   
  
Turkish Hub: Izmir 
- 
Manisa area, Turkey 
  
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/20 
23 
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 29  
Dutch Hub: Almelo and H2Hub Twente  
 
  
Description: H2Hub Twente is a physical place where entrepreneurs, governmental organisations, 
researchers, and knowledge institutions collaborate to develop applications of hydrogen technology. 
Knowledge and experience are gained through research and infrastructure te st projects. Applications 
include setting up (pilot) projects in the field of generation and storage, mobility, hightemperature 
combustion, industrial processes, and applications in the built environment. Almelo Energy is the first of a 
kind Positive Energ y District in Twente, the Netherlands, to lead the energy transitions in the 
neighbourhoods they serve. Positive Energy Districts include the introduction of natural gas free 
neighbourhoods, will allow for local balancing reducing energy distribution over longer distances, facilitate 
peak shaving and load shifting using concepts of demand response and reduced  
  
Figure 7. Dutch hub flow diagram 
  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 30  
curtailment of RES, and district-level self-consumption. The Dutch Hub has existing infrastructure for 
H2 production from solar energy, wastewater treatment, office buildings and a crematory. IS2H4C will 
demonstrate the following synergies (as described in Objective 1): using O 2 from H 2 production in 
wastewater treatment and treated water again as input to the H2 production closing the loop and avoiding 
the use of other water resources (in a region prone to water scarcity), utilizing H2 instead of natural gas in 
the crematory, establishing energy storage for wind energy to be used in green H 2 production, and 
distributing H2 via pipelines to five residential houses for H2 boilers in the village Aadorp substituting natural 
gas for heating purposes. IS2H4C will also explore opportunities for the Dutch hub: 1) Using manure from 
existing cattle farming for biogas production which can replace natural gas in a combined heat and power 
plant (CHP) for electricity and heat distributed in Almelo. 2) Recovery of waste heat from electrolysis for 
space heating in office buildings removing the need for natural gas boilers. 3) Distribution of H 2 via fuel 
stations and truck transportation to consumers and logistics companies replacing fossil fuels. Waste heat 
recovery (from TRL5 to TRL7), oxygen use in waste water treatment (from TRL8 to TRL9), use of water 
from wastewater treatment in electrolysis (from TRL6 to TRL8).  
IS2H4C partners: In the consortium: UT, H2Hub Twente, Solenco Power, Almelo Energie. In the H2Hub: 
Schroder Vastgoed, Powerspex, Cogas, VDL, Gas Unie, Siemens energy, Gemeente Almelo, Coteq, 
Alliander, Sensata Technologies, Ondernemers Bedrijvenpark, Dorpscooperatie Aardorp, DEMCON, 
Remeha, and Province Overijssel.   
  
1.3. RELATED RESEARCH AND INNOVATION ACTIVITIES  
A summary of the key projects in which the partners have participated, and the relevant outputs that will 
be used in the IS2H4C are listed in Table 1. Additionally, IS2H4C will prepare a detailed and well 
provisioned clustering strategy so the research plan is executed in coordination with other projects (those 
funded on the same topic, the ongoing ones, or in complementary topics). Moreover, it will exploit all the 
relevant links of the partners to maximise the outreach to the industry beyond the involved companies, 
thanks to partners participating in similar projects.   
Table 1. Related R&I projects and initiatives  
Project (partners)  Link to the project proposal  
REDOL (2022-2026);  
 (CIRCE, EEIP, ICCS)  
REDOL redesigned 5 value chains (packaging, plastics, textiles, electronic waste, 
construction) resulting in 12 circular products. The processing routes method utilised in 
REDOL will enhance IS2H4C’s logistics.     
SHAREBOX 
(20152019); H2020 
SPIRE  
(IRIS, UT)  
SHAREBOX developed a secure ICT platform for the flexible management of shared 
processes resources that provided plant operations and production managers with the robust 
and reliable information needed in real-time.  
The experience gathered will enhance the development of the digital collaboration platform 
in IS2H4C.  
CORALIS (2020 -
2024); (CIRC, ICCS, 
EEIP)  
Execution of real IS initiatives and the prevention of obstacles faced by these initiatives, 
addressing technical, managerial and economic factors that set the basis for definition of the 
IS readiness level.   
DIGINTRACE 
(20232026); HE 
(ICCS)  
The traceability methodologies & data gathering towards sustainability and circularity 
gathered will be provided to IS2H4C for the development of the digital collaboration 
platform & the traceability of value chains.  
COREALIS (ICCS)  
COREALIS introduces circular economy models into the strategy and operations of ports to 
create efficient connections with the hinterland transport network and enhance decision 
making. The decision -making knowledge gathered will be provided to IS2H4C for the 
development of the digital collaboration platform.    
CIRC4LIFE (ICCS)  
CIRC4LIFE demonstrates an eco -innovative circular economy approach for sustainable 
products and services through their lifecycles. The ICT platform (developed by ICCS) 
facilitates data exchange between stakeholders along the value chain and could be a 
reference for some of the functionalities of the the IS2H4C Digital Platform.   
H4C EUROPE 
(2022- 
2026); HE (CIRCE)  
Provides a community, knowledge platform and exchange structures that will help existing 
and future hubs (such as IS2H4C Hubs) in creation, management, and growth   
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 31  
FLEXINDUSTRIES  
(2022-2026); HE  
(CIRCE)  
Builds a holistic multi -disciplinary and multi -scale approach fostering its 7 multi -sector 
energy intensive industries. The methodology utilised to select the most suitable Energy 
Efficiency Measures could be useful for IS2H4C’s resource and waste management.     
RE4Industry 
(20202023); H2020 
(CIRCE,  
EEIP)  
Supported energy intensive industries in the identification and integration of renewable 
energy solutions through a network of stakeholders and market actors. The logistics behind 
RE4Industry and the methodology to identify solutions could enhance IS2H4C results.   
NEFI (2017-2026) 
(MUL)  
The project’s cluster demonstrates that energy technologies developed in Austria can 
enable 100% renewable energy supply for selected industrial sites and that energy transition 
towards a low -carbon energy system can be reached. MUL can provide useful insi ght to 
optimise green energy technologies and accelerate the transition in the hubs.   
AI-CUBE (2020 -
2023); H2020 (IRIS, 
ZLC)  
Defined a roadmap in AI and use of big data for the process industries, which could be useful 
to optimise data exchange between industries in the IS2H4C hubs.   
FuelSOME (2022-
2026) (AEE)  
Conceptualisation of new multi-fuel supply chain pathways and development of a software-
based modelling and KPI based optimisation of a multi -fuel supply backbone concept to 
ensure sustainable supply pathways for the FuelSOME concept.  
The core concept is to design, synthesise and test the MOF Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/172/2023-
based materials against flue gas compositions of  
MOF4AIR (2019-2023); refinery and waste -to-energy industries for CO 2 capture using adsorption technology on 
real industrial H2020 (TUP) environment (TRL6). Tüpraş will be hosting one of the demonstration units in its 
premises after carrying out necessary infrastructural studies and conduct elaborate performance test studies  in 
2023.  
  
1.4. INTER-DISCIPLINARY APPROACH, SOCIAL SCIENCE AND HUMANITIES  
Addressing the above challenges requires a holistic and interdisciplinary approach. IS2H4C is aware of 
this complex socioecological scenario where these value chains operate. Therefore, IS2H4C engages 
multidisciplinary academic partners, producer and processor companies, as well as experts in technology 
and innovation trends and cross -regional exploitation. The wide variety of profiles involved in the 
consortium and their expertise is framed in  three main areas. (1) Scientific and technical disciplines: 
mathematicians, industrial processes experts, industrial parks managers, technical and life sciences 
experts, environmental scientists, and ICT engineers, brought mainly by the academic and research 
partners as well as industrial partners in IS2H4C. (2) Social science and humanities disciplines:  
sociology, social science and technology studies, economics, and policy studies (TUDO, UT, and KPMG). 
(3) Business disciplines: EEIP , KPMG, CHX and UT address economic and financial aspects of H4Cs, 
such as finance and  investment, human resources, skills and labour market, end -users’ demands and 
behaviours. The IS2H4C’s methodology will foster cross-fertilisation among disciplines, stakeholders, and 
regions, enabling a close interaction between actors throughout the whole innovation process leading to 
multi-actor and interdisciplinary results.  
  
 
17 .6. AN INTEGRATED APPROACH TO DATA MANAGEMENT AND OPEN SCIENCE  
The IS2H4C consortium will systematically follow best practices for Open Science (OS) to improve the 
quality, efficiency, and responsiveness of research. These practices include the FAIR Data Principles  
(Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable data) and the Responsible Research and Innovation 
(RRI) methodologies. IS2H4C will share and transfer results between relevant actors from the point of 
generation, facilitating the availability of research outputs, research continuation and contributing to the 
fulfilment of the project’s objectives. UT, as Data Manager, will elaborate and distribute a comprehensive 
Data Management Plan (DMP) by M6, providing guidelines for data management under the premise of 
“protecting and ensuring that any relevant information that may compromise the added value of exploitable 
results and outcomes will not be disclosed.” This DMP will allow the project partners to manage research 
outputs following the FAIR principles (Article 17 of the HE Model GA) and OS practices while ensuring the 
adequate exploitation of the IP generated and other justified legitimate interests. The DMP will cover the  

 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 32  
1.5. GENDER DIMENSION  
Aligned with the principles of the Processes4Planet, IS2H4C ensures gender equality and diversity by 
integrating sex and gender analysis into research and innovation activities. This analysis will identify 
potential barriers or inequalities towards a successful and inclusive outcome from the following three 
perspectives. (1) From a behavioural perspective , gender norms impact actor's behaviours in the 
industry, which may lead to gender -based differences in decision -making around sustainability and 
circularity. (2) From a representation perspective, a gender analysis can identify potential barriers or 
opportunities for promoting circularity. Understanding these issues help us to analysis the 
underrepresentation of women and gender-specific barriers in accessing funding or training opportunities. 
(3) From a decision-making perspective: Female decision-makers may bring different perspectives on 
issues related to sustainable development, social responsibility, and community engagement, it could 
ensure that there are opportunities for female decision -makers to participate in the governance and 
decision-making processes. IS2H4C actively promotes gender equality and diversity in the industry 
ensuring women and other underrepresented groups have equal opportunities to participate in and benefit 
from circular initiatives. In support of the European Strategy for Gender Equality 2020– 2025, IS2H4C will 
implement a Gender Equality Plan to promote gender equality and adapt spaces for learning to enable 
improvements at an organisational level. The plan will consist of four tasks: (i) Gathering and utilising data 
samples that are balanced in terms of gender and other inclusion considerations (age, disabilities, etc.). 
GDPR and consent will govern data collection and use; (ii) Tracking diversity-related issues by evaluating 
if the H4C establishment benefits all stakeholders, regardless of gender and background and by building 
human-centric AI frameworks that are transparent, reliable, and impartial (WP1); (iii) Offering  inclusi ve 
possibilities for commercialising energy based on ethnicity and race, social class, human physical 
parameters, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, and age; and (iv) Ensuring diversity and 
inclusiveness in the project management and within t he WP teams. IS2H4C contains a diverse group 
committed to inclusive policies. The current members are individuals from different gender, nationalities, 
and ethnicity. Moreover, IS2H4C is committed to promoting diversity in hiring Ph.D. students and 
postdoctoral research and supporting the industrial partners of the consortia in adopting similar strategies. 
Therefore, IS2H4C considers the gender dimension in all tasks related to data collection, hubs 
perspectives evaluation, societal impacts, and market uptake of proposed innovations. Moreover, 
communication, dissemination, and exploitation activities will also be gender -sensitively addressed and 
mainstreamed. To increase the visibility of minorities and provide role models for future generations, efforts 
will be made to encourage balanced participation in every event organized. Likewise, educational materials 
and capacity building initiatives will contribute to reducing the gender gap in industrial sector by providing 
cutting-edge skills increasingly rewarded by the labour market.    
  
complete execution and foreseen tasks of the project and provide recommendations for post -project 
management data strategies according to each partner’s role and type of generated data. By embracing 
OS as a part of its research lifecycle, IS2H4C will improve the reproducibility and transparency of the 
project’s outputs.   
Open Access (OA) to scientific publications ease the access for knowledge -based industry and 
accelerating the innovation pace and delivery time to market. The IS2H4C consortium is committed to 
ensure full and immediate Open Access to peerreviewed scientific publications related to their research 
outputs, according to Article 17 of the HE Model Grant Agreement. The knowledge, outputs, tools, and 
instruments gathered fr om this deployment will be free and available OA for the public (considering IP 
restrictions) following the “as open as possible and as closed as necessary” principle at the latest upon 
and will be deposited in a trusted repository (ZENODO), under the Creative Attribution International Public 
License (CC BY). Likewise, public deliverables will b e made available as soon as approved by the EC. 
Parallelly, the consortium will be encouraged to publish on the Open Research EU (ORE) platform.  
Type of data and research outputs: IS2H4C will generate data and research outputs from technological, 
societal, and financial disciplines Technological data will be associated with the types of technologies 
developed/integrated, main metrics related to their technical development/integration, and  their 
performance/operation capabilities. The societal and financial data will be collected based on the 
engagement and participation in the digital platform, adoption of the use of new technologies or practice 
of industrial symbiosis in any form with the hubs or in their surroundings, and business and financial 
institutions (e.g., collaboration rate to the H4C). A complete definition of the data sets (name, purpose, 
 
Project: 101138473— IS2H4C – Part B – 33  
formats, use of existing data, expected size, utility, etc.) will be provided by M6 and updated during the 
reporting period and whenever significant changes arise.  
Findability of data and research outputs:  Specific metadata templates will be defined to describe, 
discover, and trace existing data collected and/or generated by the project. Specific metadata fiches will 
be made publicly accessible. The metadata will be used to describe datasets, including specific keywords 
to allow for refined search across datasets. The bibliographic metadata will at least include the following: 
(i) the terms “European Union” and “Horizon Europe”, (ii) the IS2H4C, acronym, and grant number, (iii) the 
publication date and length of embargo period if applicable, and (iv) the persistent identifier. The data 
generated during the project will be deposited in ZENODO, a cloud -based repository federated in the 
EOSC and comply with FAIR data principles. It facilitates finding, accessing, re-using, and interoperability 
of data sets. Furthermore, the repository will integrate with data from similar projects (previous and 
ongoing) for easier accessibility, linear, tree, and graph data structures defined by the existing ontologies 
and standards.  
Accessibility of data: Data and research outputs open to the public will be fully and freely accessible, 
according to the FAIR principle, utilising tools such as: open access peer -reviewed journals, scientific 
magazines, on-line platforms, and other digital tools, printed and digital dissemination materials. If parts of 
datasets cannot be shared, the reasons for this will be clearly mentioned (e.g., ethical, rules of personal 
data, intellectual property, commercial, privacy-related, compliance with GDPR).  
Reusability of data: To facilitate the validation of scientific publications, IS2H4C enables the disclosure 
and reusability of the data, acknowledging the convenience of enabling the review, scrutiny, and verification 
from external scientific actors. Creative Common Licensing will be used to protect the ownership of 
datasets. Despite the data openness, an embargo period might be applied to the data if used in Green OA 
journals. The datasets located in ZENODO will have unlimited access, although for some data restrictions 
to the re-use policy may apply. This can be the case for green OA embargo periods or Creative Commons 
licensing restrictions (attribution, prohibition of use for commercial purposes, to use the same license as 
the original).  
Curation and preservation:  The coordination and monitoring of the DMP will be carried out by UT as 
Data Manager, being the specific implementation responsibility of each WP leader. UT will deliver the DMP 
first version by M6 and update it during the project life. UT will produce a code of conduct, and explain it 
in the Kick -off meeting, so all partners are aware of the DMP and the OA practices of the project. An 
analysis on the security levels of the different repositories used by the project will be performed in the DMP , 
to ensure they meet a minimum-security level (from the common project consortium workspace, probably 
Microsoft OneDrive, to the public repositories chosen for making the data available, probably ZENODO).  
Regulatory and Ethical aspects: IS2H4C will adhere to legislative requirements of the General Data 
Protection Regulation. It will also comply with the EC’s Artificial Intelligence Act, which outlines new rules 
& actions aiming to turn EU into the global hub for trustworthy AI, whereby by setti ng the standards, EU 
can pave the way to ethical technology worldwide & remains competitive along the way. Following the 
Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI trustworthy: i) lawful - respecting all applicable laws and regulations, 
ii) ethical - respecting ethical principles and values and iii) robust - from a technical perspective while 
considering its social environment. #@CON-MET-CM@# #@COM-PLE-CP@#  
    
2.  IMPACT    Associated with document Ref. Ares(2023)8308660 - 05/12/2023