4. Starting date 
Unless a specific (fixed) starting date is duly justified and agreed upon during the preparation of the Grant Agreement, the 
project will start on the first day of the month following the entry into force of the Grant Agreement (NB : entry into force = 
signature by the Commission). Please note that if a fixed starting date is used, you will be required to provide a written 
justification. 
5. Duration 
Insert the duration of the project in full months. 
6. Call (part) identifier 
The Call (part) identifier is the reference number given in the call or part of the call you were addressing, as indicated in the 
publication of the call in the Official Journal of the European Union. You have to use the identifier given by the Commission in 
the letter inviting to prepare the grant agreement. 
7. Abstract 
8. Project Entry Month 
The month at which the participant joined the consortium, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all other start dates 
being relative to this start date. 
9. Work Package number 
Work package number: WP1, WP2, WP3, ..., WPn 
10. Lead beneficiary 
This must be one of the beneficiaries in the grant (not a third party) - Number of the beneficiary leading the work in this work 
package 
11. Person-months per work package 
The total number of person-months allocated to each work package. 
12. Start month 
Relative start date for the work in the specific work packages, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all other start 
dates being relative to this start date. 
13. End month 
Relative end date, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all end dates being relative to this start date. 
14. Deliverable number 
Deliverable numbers: D1 - Dn 
15. Type 
Please indicate the type of the deliverable using one of the following codes: 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 50 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
 R Document, report 
DEM Demonstrator, pilot, prototype DEC Websites, 
patent fillings, videos, etc. 
OTHER 
ETHICS Ethics requirement 
 ORDP Open Research Data Pilot 
16. Dissemination level 
Please indicate the dissemination level using one of the following codes: 
 PU Public 
 CO Confidential, only for members of the consortium (including the Commission Services) 
EU-RES Classified Information: RESTREINT UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) 
EU-CON Classified Information: CONFIDENTIEL UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) EU-SEC 
Classified Information: SECRET UE (Commission Decision 2005/444/EC) 
17. Delivery date for Deliverable 
Month in which the deliverables will be available, month 1 marking the start date of the project, and all delivery dates being 
relative to this start date. 
18. Milestone number 
Milestone number:MS1, MS2, ..., MSn 
19. Review number 
Review number: RV1, RV2, ..., RVn 
20. Installation Number 
Number progressively the installations of a same infrastructure. An installation is a part of an infrastructure that could be used 
independently from the rest. 
21. Installation country 
Code of the country where the installation is located or IO if the access provider (the beneficiary or linked third party) is an 
international organization, an ERIC or a similar legal entity. 
22. Type of access 
 VA if virtual access, 
TA-uc if trans-national access with access costs declared on the basis of unit cost, 
TA-ac if trans-national access with access costs declared as actual costs, and 
TA-cb if trans-national access with access costs declared as a combination of actual costs and costs on the basis of unit 
cost. 
23. Access costs 
Cost of the access provided under the project. For virtual access fill only the second column. For trans-national access fill one of 
the two columns or both according to the way access costs are declared. Trans-national access costs on the basis of unit    
4. MEMBERS OF THE CONSORTIUM
4.1 PARTICIPANTS  
  
4.1.1 ASOCIACIÓN CENTRO TECNOLÓGICO CEIT-IK4 (CEIT-IK4)  
  
http://ceit.es/en/   
  
4.1.1.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
Ceit-IK4 is a private multidisciplinary non-profit RTO closely connected to TECNUN, the Faculty of Engineering of the 
University of Navarra (Spain). Its mission is to provide the industry with services through the development of 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 51 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
technical research projects and to form young researchers and PhD students. Ceit -IK4 promotes excellence in 
applied research by publishing non confidential results and participating in scientific and technical forums. This RTO 
also has a comprehensive doctoral teaching program in the industrial area.   
  
Ceit-IK4 has a staff of 249 employees and 51 PhD students and an annual budget over 15,3 M€. It consists of three 
vertical divisions (Materials and Manufacturing, Transport and Energy, Water and Health) and a fourth additional 
horizontal division (ICT).   
  
Ceit-IK4 has been involved in 15 FP6 projects (having the role of coordinator in 2 of them), in 32 FP7 projects (having 
the role of coordinator in 10 of them) and is currently involved in 10 H2020 projects (being the coordinator in one 
of them).   
  
Additionally, Ceit-IK4 is member of the IK4 Alliance, which covers a total of 1,400 people and has a turnover of 
around 100 M€. The IK4 Alliance was formed in 2005 in line with a federal model, whereby its members share 
strategies and combine capacities without giving up their sovereignty. Through a shared strategy, the sum of the 
capacities of the nine RTOs provides the alliance with the flexibility it needs to adapt to the characteristics of any 
company. Today, IK4 is a benchmark on the European scene and is among the continent's premier private, scientific 
and technological corporations. Attention should be drawn to IK4's leading role in the European Union's 7th 
Framework Programme, in which it has participated in over 200 research projects and led 63 of them.  
  
CEIT-IK4 will participate in LASER4SURF project through the Additive Manufacturing and Laser Group of the 
Materials and Manufacturing division. The activity of the Additive Manufacturing and Laser Group focuses, among 
other on:   
 the use of laser systems to process the material surface for a range of applications, including solar cells, 
semiconductor lasers and biomaterials.   
 The development of optical of free space or integrated optical sensors using waveguides and diodes.  
The Data Analysis and Information Management of the Information and Communications Technologies Division of 
CEIT will participate as well on the project, dedicated to transforming data into valuable information through: data 
processing, statistical analysis, determination of probabilistic algorithms, etc…  
  
CEIT-IK4 will be involved in several WPs and tasks of the LASER4SURF project. From the most technical point of view, 
Ceit-IK4 will lead WP4- Modelling for tools for LIPSS processes and parameter selection. The main tasks within this 
WP will rely on the development of a software platform that will enable industrial end -users to select the process 
parameters that give rise to a desired functionality, without a need to deeply understand the LIPSS generation 
process. This duty is absolutely aligned with the expertise and experience of Ceit-IK4, as can be seen in the following 
sections.   
  
In line with this WP4, the team will also be involved in:  
  
 WP2- Design and development of a prototype for controlled LIPSS. The expertise of Ceit-ik4 in the development 
of LIPSS processes for advanced functionalities will be determinant in the definition of the requirements of the 
prototype   
 WP3- Design and development of an in-line monitoring unit.  
 WP5- Integration of the developed tools. As this WP will cover the integration of the modelling tools developed 
in WP 4, Ceit will decisively contribute to define the interfaces between subsystems and to test and optimize the 
interoperability of all of them.  
  
On the other hand, as Coordinator partner of the project, CEIT -IK4 will be in charge of the coordination and 
management of the whole project at its different levels: technical development, IPR management, regulatory issues, 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 52 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
dissemination of the results, e tc. Additionally, Ceit -IK4 will lead WP7 Gathering experience and new scenario 
definition with the aim of maximising the future impact of the project results.  
  
4.1.1.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Dr. Ainara Rodriguez  (female) is a researcher in the Additive Manu facturing and Laser Group of CEIT. She 
received her degree in Telecom Engineering from the University of the Basque Country in 2006 and her PhD 
from the University of Navarra in 2010. Since 2006, her research interests have been focused on laser material 
processing, including ultrafast processes in materials and Laser Interference Lithography. In this last field, she 
took part in the European Project “Development of lithography technology for nanoscale structuring of materials 
using laser beam interference” (EU FP6 ICT), as a result of which 7 scientific papers, 14 conference papers and 3 
patent applications were obtained. She is also a lecturer of Optoelectronics and Optical Communications, 
courses of the degree in Telecom Engineering in the School of Engin eering of the University of Navarra. During 
the last 10 years, she has been involved in 12 national and international research projects covering both basic 
and applied research and is co -author in more than 40 peer -reviewed papers and communications in 
conferences. She is also co-applicant in 3 patents.  
 Dr. Santiago M Olaizola  (male) is a researcher in the Additive Manufacturing and Laser Group of CEIT. He 
received his degree in Engineering in 1996, and PhD in Engineeering in 2000 from the University of Na varra. 
Later he received his PhD in Physics from the University of Sheffield in 2004. Since 2003, he has lead the 
Photonics Team from the Unit of Micosystems. He has focused in the field of micro/nanofabrication using pulsed 
and ultrafast laser sources. In  this area, he has developed a 4 -beam interference tool for industrial laser 
processes and currently he is also involved in the development of robust surface micro/nanofabrication 
processes using ultrafast laser sources. He routinely works in close contact  with local Basque and Spanish 
companies in applications such as metrology, industrial manufacturing (polishing, plastic injection, ...) and 
optical sensors. He has been involved in 25 national and international research projects covering both basic and 
applied research and is co-author in more than 100 peer-reviewed papers and communications in conferences. 
He is also co-applicant in 7 patents.   
 Dr. Mikel Gómez (male) received his MSc in Electrical, Electronic and Control Engineering from Tecnun (School 
of Engineering of the University of Navarra) in 2003. He completed his final degree project at the R&D 
department of the Telecontrol Division of IKUSI. After holding different posts at several industrial companies in 
which he took part in several research projects, in 2011 he completed his MSc in Biomedical Engineering at the 
University of Navarra. In January 2014, he received his PhD in Engineering from the same institution through his 
work on the development and microfabrication of microsensors with integr ated microfluidic structures. 
Currently he is a researcher in the Additive Manufacturing and Laser Group of CEIT and his research interest 
includes laser interference lithography and laser induced surface modifications for industrial applications.  
 Dr. Jesús Gutiérrez-Gutiérrez (male) is an Associate Professor at Tecnun (University of Navarra) and a researcher 
at CEIT. He received his degree in Mathematics from the University of Granada, Spain, in 1999 and his Ph.D. in 
Electronics and Communications from the University of Navarra, Spain, in 2004. His research interests include  
Statistical Signal Processing, Information Theory, and distributed computation in Wireless Sensor Networks. He  
is author of more than 20 scientific publications in international journals and has participated in more than 10 
research projects.  
 Dr. Xabier Insausti (male) received his Telecommunication Engineering degree, MSc. in applied Engineering an 
PhD. in Telecommunications Engineering in 2009, 2011 and 2013 respectively from the University of Navarra. 
He studied at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for the academic year 2008 -2009, where he 
completed his Final project. He received this degree with the h ighest average mark of the class. In 2014 he 
received his MSc. in advanced Mathematics from the UNED. He is currently a lecturer at TECNUN (University of 
Navarra) and a researcher in Information Theory, Coding & Compression Schemes for Communication System s 
and in distributed computation in Wireless Sensor Networks.  
  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 53 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.1.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS  
 M. Martínez-Calderon, M. Manso-Silván, A. Rodríguez, M. Gómez-Aranzadi, J. P. García-Ruiz, S. M. Olaizola, R. J. 
Martín-Palma, “Surface micro- and nano-texturing of stainless steel by femtosecond laser for the control of cell 
migration”, Scientific Reports 6, 36296 (2016)  
 M Martínez -Calderon, A Rodríguez, A Dias -Ponte, MC Morant -Miñana, M Gómez -Aranzadi, SM Olaizola, 
“Femtosecond laser fabrication of hig hly hydrophobic stainless steel surface with hierarchical structures 
fabricated by combining ordered microstructures and LIPSS”, Applied Surface Science 374, 81-89, 2016  
 Ainara Rodríguez, Maria Carmen Morant -Miñana, Antonio Dias -Ponte, Miguel Martínez -Calderón, Mikel 
GómezAranzadi, Santiago M. Olaizola, “ Femtosecond Laser -Induced Periodic Surface Nanostructuring of 
Sputtered Platinum Thin Films”, Applied Surface Science 351, 135-139 (2015)   
 A. Pan, A. Dias, M. Gomez -Aranzadi, S. M. Olaizola, A. Rodriguez,  “Formation of laser-induced periodic surface 
structures on niobium by femtosecond irradiation”, Journal of Applied Physics 115 173101 (2014)  
 X. Insausti, F. Camaro, P. M. Crespo, B. Beferull -Lozano and J. Gutiérrez -Gutiérrez, “Distributed Pseudo-Gossip 
Algorithm and Finite-Length Computational Codes for Efficient In-Network Subspace Projection” in IEEE Journal 
of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 163-174, April 2013.  
  
4.1.1.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
 DELILA: “Development of lithography technology for nanoscale structuring of materials using laser beam 
interference”, EU FP6 IST (2006-2009)   
 LASERHUESO: “Laser fabrication of Surface micro/nanopatterns for the optimization of osteocells regeneration 
potential”, CYCIT 2014 (Spanish Science Foundation)   
 ECOGRAB: Design of a prototype for industrial engraving of diffraction/phase gratings for encoders applications 
using lasers (Spanish Science Foundation 2016-2018)   
 Foundations and Methodologies for Future Communi cation and Sensor Networks (COMONSENS), Spanish 
Ministry of Science and Innovation - CONSOLIDER Project (Top Excellence Programme across all disciplines in 
Spain), PI: P. M. Crespo. Duration: 15/12/2008 - 14/12/2013.  
 Radio Access Techniques for Heterogene ous Wireless Networks (RACHEL), Spanish Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness, PI: P. M. Crespo and J. Gutiérrez-Gutiérrez. Duration: 01/01/2014 - 31/12/2016.  
  
4.1.1.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE  
CeitT-IK4 owns an ultrafast laser mic romachining station for material processing that includes a Ti: Sapphire laser 
system consisting of a mode-locked oscillator and a regenerative amplifier which is used to generate 130 fs pulses 
at a central wavelength of 800 nm, with a 1 kHz repetition rat e. The laser beam is focused on the samples using 
microscope objectives. This objective together with a CCD camera is used for online monitoring of the structuring 
process. A three dimensional translational stage moved the sample under the beam with differ ent scan speeds 
allowing a variable overlap of pulses per spot. This setup has been used for surface functionalization of materials in 
order to produce superhydrophobic surfaces, decorative effects and optical devices.  
  
Additionally, Ceit-IK4 counts on the equipment and facilities for the characterization of micro and nanostructures 
as well as for the characterization of specific functionalities. Some of the most relevant equipments are:  
 SEM scanning electron microscope for the topographic characterisation of the patterned surfaces  AFM Atomic 
Force Microscope for the characterization of the depth of the generated nanopatterns.  
 Optical characterization lab for optical properties determination (reflectivity, absorbance, diffraction)  
 Focused Ion Beam (FI B) and Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) for detailed microstructural 
characterization.  
 Built-in setup for Water Contact Angle measurements  
 Climatic chamber for the characterization of the anticondensation behaviour of surfaces  
  
     
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 54 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.2 LASER ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS SA (LASEA)  
  
  
  
www.lasea.eu   
  
4.1.2.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
Created in 1999, LASEA is a high-tech Belgian SME which has a unique expertise in the design, manufacture and use 
of laser systems for industrial purposes. More specifically, LASEA offers cutting edge laser solutions capable of 
responding to the needs of companies whose production lines include plastic we lding, marking, and surface 
treatments.   
  
Its laser products and services are: expertise and prototype development, OEM systems, laser workstations, turnkey 
machines. Equipped with 18 laser sources (CO2, high power diode lasers, diode pumped solid state  lasers (DPSS) 
and fiber laser in cw, ns, ps and fs ranges), robots (6 -axis and XYZC1C2 tables), as well as various measurements 
systems (pyrometer, power-meter and vision systems). LASEA is able to develop and validate its new process and 
systems before industrial integration.   
  
LASEA is based on the Liège Science Park allowing it to have strong partnership with regional Universities and the 
Space Centre. With presently 40 people, LASEA has manufactured laser production lines all over the world (Europe, 
US, Australia ...). Certified ISO9001:2008, LASEA has 3 patents in the field of laser processing. For example, LASEA 
has developed since 1999 a method for locally removing a coat applied on a translucent or transparent substrate 
(patent EP1263538).  
  
LASEA has already worked in several European Projects like FP6 Naginels, FP7 Sfera, FP7 PMJoin, Era-NET+ Plasma, 
Era-NET+ Sinead and regional projects Ecolas OLED, CZTS and SIMULAS. Currently LASEA is working in FP7 LASHARE, 
H2020 HIPERDIAS, H2020 POLAROLL, EUROSTARS HYIBIRD, MANUNET DE COAT and regional projects MICROLAB, 
GLASSLAS-3D, IMPLANTS-3D and MICROLAS.   
  
LASEA’s activity consists in implementing laser solutions in its laser station range. This range of stations is dedicated 
to particular applications according to the will of th e customer: micromachining, texturing, plastic welding, 
decoating, engraving…. Therefore, the design and development of these stations is fitted to the special solution 
developed by LASEA’s engineers for the customer’s application.  
  
LASEA has years of ex perience in laser processing including laser plastic welding, marking and micromachining. 
Therefore, LASEA will play a key role in the development of LASER4SURF project, contributing in the development 
of the Laser Texturing prototype mainly from the engineering aspects of the technology.  
  
4.1.2.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Ir. Axel Kupisiewicz (m): founded LASEA in 1999. Chief Executive and Managing Director of LASEA. 17 years of 
experience in laser processing including laser plastic welding, marking and surface treatment. Technical manager 
of two European Projects and 3 regional R&D projects. Management of the company that is already exploiting, 
among other, the results of previous developed international projects.   
 Dr. Jose Antonio Ramos de Campos (m) joined LASEA in 2013. Manager of the R&D department of LASEA. Broad 
experience of more than 25 years on lasers materials processing (cutting, welding, marking and micro-marking, 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 55 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
micromachining, cladding, etc.). Participation in various previous research projects, for example: STREP – 
FANTASIA (Flexible and Near-Net-Shape Manufacturing Chains and Repair Techniques for Complex Shaped Aero  
Engine Parts), CRAFT - CUSTOCER (Mass Customisation of Ceramic and Glass Decoration: a Contribution to the 
Future Manufacturing Industries), CRAFT – InART (Innovative Laser Based System and Technologies for In-Situ 
Cleaning of Paiting Artworks), amongst others.   
 Dr. David Bruneel (m) joined LASEA in 2015. Member of the R&D staff of LASEA. A good experience of lasers 
processing (cutting, drilling, milling, marking, trepanning, etc.) and system development with different types of 
lasers (fiber lasers, ns, ps, and fs, using different wavelengths). Experience of several years in the Laboratoire 
Hubert Curien and Fr aunhofer IBMT in developing USP process optimisation and systems’ setups. 3 years of 
experience involved in previous R&D projects targeted at valuable commercially future applications SLIDE 
(Savings at Lubricated Interfaces Emission), OLED, CZTS (CZTS based photovoltaic solar cells).  
  
4.1.2.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS Relevant 
publications:   
 M. Alvarez, A. Henrottin, J.A. Ramos de Campos, P. Guaino, B. Heusdens, “Ablation de couches minces par 
impulsions (ultra-) courtes pour la production de composants photoniques”, Journées Nationales des Procédés 
Laser pour l’Industrie, 2014.   
 Henrottin, M. Alvarez, J.A. Ramos -de-Campos, F.J. Navas, M.A. Jimenez, G. Morales -Cid, “Microtexturation by 
laser for hybrid metal polymer joining”, Journées Nationales des Procédés Laser pour l’Industrie, 2014.   
 “Ultra-short pulse fiber laser parameters optimization for CdTe thin film solar cells processing and fiber laser 
design”, Fiber Laser Applications, OSA, 2011.   
 E. Mottay; A. Kupisiewicz; G. Detroux; X. Costet; A. Simmons; U. Vivarelli; P. Lemaire; J. Lopez, “Industrial 
ultrafast internal engraving laser system for anti-counterfeiting applications”, Proc. SPIE 6881, 2008.   
 B. Neuenschwander, B. Jaeggi, M. Schmid, V. Rouffiange  and P-E. Martin (2012), “Optimization of the volume 
ablation rate for metals at different laser pulse -durations from ps to fs”; Proc. SPIE 8243, Laser Applications in 
Microelectronic and Optoelectronic Manufacturing, 824307  
  
Relevant patents:   
 Kupisiewicz, Axel: “Method for locally removing a coat applied on a translucent or transparent substrate”. 
Wallonia Space Logistics December 11, 2002: EP1263538-A1.   
 Kupisiewicz, Axel, Mottay Eric: “Method for internal laser marking”. Trackinside Société Anonyme,  Kupisiewicz 
Axel, Mottay Eric March 29, 2007: WO/2007/033445.   
 Kupisiewicz, Axel, Mottay Eric: “Method for internal laser marking in transparent materials and device for 
implementing said method”. Laser Engineering Applic, Ks Tech, Amplitude Systems, Cos tet S, Solos 
Identificazione E Protez, Total Brand Security. 2008: EP1926603-A1.   
  
4.1.2.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
Project acronym/description/website  Scope  End Year  
PMJOIN: Development of a direct laser joining of hybrid plastic-metal components 
for industrial applications http://www.pmjoin.eu/  EU-FP7  2016  
LASHARE: Laser equipment assessment for high impact innovation in the 
manufacturing European industry https://www.lashare.eu/  EU-FP7  2017  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 56 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
HYBRID: Development of an innovative laser system, introduced in a laser 
workstation prototype, able to join dissimilar materials of different organic and 
inorganic chemical nature like thermoplastics (or composites) and metals.  
https://www.eurostars-eureka.eu/project/id/9775  
EUROSTARS  2019  
HIPERDIAS: High throughput laser processing of diamond and silicon 
http://www.hiperdias.eu/  
EU-H2020  2019  
PoLaRoll: Polygon scanner based ultra-short pulse laser processing in roll-to-roll 
manufacturing http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/205597_es.html  
EU-H2020  2019  
  
  
4.1.2.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE  
LASEA is equipped with 18 laser sources (CO2, high power diode lasers, diode pumped solid state lasers (DPSS) and 
fiber laser in cw, ns, ps and fs ranges), robots (6 -axis and XYZC1C2 tables), various measurements systems 
(microscopes, pyrometer, power-meter and vision systems). Some of those resources are described below.   
 Kyla software:  LASEA develops software allowing the creation of tridimensional designs with an automatic 
definition of the laser drawing. Importation of dxf (2D) or stl (3D) files is also possible. The structures able to be 
created with the software can be very complex and may also allow the study of the laser parameters of different 
types of materials by the use of matrices of parameters. Its ease of use and the fact that all the laser (power, 
energy, repetition rate,…) and the scanner (trajectories, speed,…) parameters can be managed in one unique 
software allows a high productivity in terms of tests or in terms of production.   
 Femtosecond experimental setups: for high precision applications, LASEA has the possibility to use an innovative 
technology: a laser which has p ulse duration near of 400 femtoseconds (fs). The interaction of these types of 
beams with almost every type of material (even transparent to the wavelength of the laser) is so short that the 
ablation is almost athermal. This allows very precise, selective and very nice quality micro -machining. This 
technology may be used with a lot of different configurations and focalization systems to reach different 
processes.   
 Confocal microscope: LASEA dispose of a high precision confocal for analyzing the laser -material interaction at 
the basically point of view of the pulses, lines drawn or at the higher scale of the channels and surfaces. This is 
particularly interesting in the case of the analysis of the micro -structuration of materials. Its resolution can go 
up to 10nm in the z axis and its resolution in the x and y axis may reach 0.12μm.  
 Low tracking error scanners:  The movement of the laser beam on a piece is obtained by passing through a 
scanner head, which consist in two motors on which are placed coated mirr ors. The reaction time of a servo 
system is never zero (because of inertia) and the real positioning of the mirrors of the scanner has always a delay 
compared to the order. This delay in the case of the scanners dedicated to the applications of laser marki ng in 
the market is often included between 200 and 300μs, which doesn’t allow a precise positioning at high speeds. 
LASEA uses a scanner technology called “Lorentz force” scanners: the performances are increased in the 
objective to reduce the tracking error to 70μs, which allows speeds up to some meters per seconds, depending 
of the application (micro -machining, ablation…). Moreover, these scanners have a low current consumption, 
resulting in a low heating and a low thermal drift: (on 8h) 24μrad compared to most scanners of the market (+/- 
600μrad). This increases a lot the reproducibility and the precision for example in the case of laser 
micromachining.   
 Precision XYZ axis: the field size of the scanners, depending principally of the focal distance and the type of focal 
lens which is used, is limited, most of the time in values near of 50x50mm². Axes allow extending this field. With 
the Kyla software it is possible to cut automatically a dxf file in scanner zones linked one with each other with a 
movement of the axes. A synchronisation between the two types of the movements at the same time is also 
possible. In the x and y axes, a movement of 400mm is allowed at high speeds (up to 2000mm/s); in the z axis 
movement of 300mm is allowed. The resolution of positioning of both axes can be up to 1,5μm, what is perfect 
for laser micromachining, knowing that the “beam tool” itself, characterized among others by its diameter, may 
value about 10-15μm.  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 57 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
  
  
    
4.1.3 MULTITEL ASBL (MULTITEL)  
  
www.multitel.be/photonics   
  
4.1.3.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
MULTITEL is a non-profit organisation private research centre. The activities of MULTITEL include signal processing, 
wireless networks, railway certification, image processing and applied photonics.   
  
The activities of MULTITEL include the following five R&D areas: The activities of MULTITEL include signal processing, 
wireless networks, railway certification, image processing and applied photonics.  
  
Its activities include fibre lasers design and proto typing, laser micro -machining, optical sensors and terahertz 
imaging and spectroscopy.   
  
The activities related to fibre lasers and micromachining include in particular the design and application of ultrafast 
lasers in various materials processing like thin films photovoltaics processing, surfaces texturization, glass refractive 
index modification. Other possible examples of applications are the glass processing (cutting, drilling, surface and 
embedded marking) or the polymer processing (particularly by resonant infrared ablation).  
  
Due to its vast experience in ultrashort pulse lasers, in LASER4SURF project, MULTITEL will be addressing the beam 
shaping issues, in particular, through the leading of WP2. Besides, it will collaborate in the integration of the optical 
module into the processing unit developed in WP5.   
  
4.1.3.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Dr. Hernandez Yves (Male): Dr. Hernandez joined the Applied Photonics Department of Multitel in May 2003. 
He previously worked with Alcatel Optronics in France as responsible of the product development, regarding the 
reliability of Semiconductor Laser Diodes. From 2003, Dr. Hernandez leads the Fiber Laser Group of the Applied 
Photonics Department. Since May 2013, Dr. Hernandez is Head of the Applied Photonics Depart ment. He was 
coordinator of the FP7 Project CHARMING.   
 Dr. Jean-Bernard Lecourt, (Male): Dr. Jean-Bernard Lecourt joined the Applied Photonics Department of Multitel 
in January 2007 after graduating from Université de Rouen (France) with a Ph.D. thesis on Femtosecond Lasers 
based on Saturable Absorbers (Etude et réalisation de lasers à fibre auto -impulsionnels à base d’absorbants 
saturables). At present time Dr. Lecourt is involved on R&D activities on design and prototyping of femtosecond 
fibre lasers and  chirped-pulse amplifiers. Dr. Lecourt will take care of the activities related to ultrashort fibre 
lasers beam shaping and frequency conversion in WP2.  
 Mr. Julien Dupuy, (Male): Ir. Julien Dupuy joined the Applied Photonics Department of Multitel in February 2014. 
He previously worked as an opto-electronics engineer in a french PME specialized in fiber optic system during 8 
years. At present time Mr. Dupuy is in charge of the ultrafast laser micro -machining platform, for research and 
industrial purpose. He is also involved on R&D activities of fiber optics sensors, and prototyping of femtosecond 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 58 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
fibre lasers. Ir. Dupuy will take care of the validation of the optical beam shaping systems in the current 
micromachining MULTITEL platform before integration in LASEA system.  
  
4.1.3.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS  
 A. Bertrand, Y. Hernandez “Exploring new avenues for laser micromachining”, SPIE Newsroom, 10 May 2016, 
DOI: 10.1117/2.1201603.006363  
 Jean-Bernard Lecourt ; Simon Boivinet ; Anthony Bertrand ; Didier Lekime ; Yves Hernandez “High -energy 
picosecond hybrid fiber/crystal laser for thin films solar cells micromachining”, Proc. SPIE 9513, High -Power, 
High-Energy, and High-Intensity Laser Technology II, 951303 (May 12, 2015); doi:10.1117/12.2180234  
 S. Boivinet ; J.-B. Lecourt ; Y. Hernandez ; A. A. Fotiadi ; M. Wuilpart ; P. Mégret “Impact of chromatic dispersion 
and spectral filtering in an all-fiber mode-locked ytterbium laser”, Proc. SPIE 9344, Fiber Lasers XII: Technology, 
Systems, and Applications, 934421 (March 4, 2015); doi:10.1117/12.2078865  
 S. Boivinet, J.-B. Lecourt, Y. Hernandez, A. Fotiadi, P. Mégret “948 kHz repetition rate, picosecond pulse duration, 
all-PM 1.03 μm mode -locked fiber laser based on nonlinear polarization evolution”, Photonics Europe 2014, 
Session 12: Mode-Locked Lasers, paper 9135-55  
 Yves Hernandez, Charles Duterte, Erwin Lotter, Alessio Bosio, Marc Hueske, and Stefano Selleri “Picosecond fiber 
laser applied to solar cells scribing, Anthony Bertrand”, International Laser Applications Symposium (ILAS) 2013,  
  
4.1.3.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
Regarding micromachining, Multitel has worked in process optimization for sol ar cells in the FP7 projects ALPINE, 
IMPROV and LASHARE. In the CORNET project ADOPT, Multitel develops a machining system coupled with online 
monitoring. Multitel coordinated the INTERREG project ECOLASERFACT related to laser micromachining promotion 
in North West Europe.  
 ADOPT “ADaptive laser micro machining of multi -layer surfaces with inline OPTical metrology” (CORNET, 
convention n°1510569)  
 LASHARE “Laser equipment ASsessment for High impAct innovation in the manufactuRing European industry” 
(FP7-2013-NMP-ICT-FOF, Grant Agreement n°609046, www.lashare.eu )  
 ECOLASERFACT “ECO-efficient LASER technology for FACTories of the future” (Interreg IV B NWE, 
www.ecolaserfact.eu)   
ECOLASERFACT aims to transfer to North -West Europe based SMEs the most recently developed laser 
micromanufacturing processes for fast, flexible, high -precision, reduced cost and ecological friendly 
manufacture of goods. ECOLASERFACT aims to federate actors involved in laser micromanufacturing leading to 
an efficient transnational Network or Expertise. With the help and services provided by the Network of Expertise, 
the consortium supports SMEs with the latest laser manufacturing technologies to produce highly functional 
and innovative products by an easy and cost effective access to on-demand processing equipments.   
 ALPINE “Advanced Lasers for Photovoltaic INdustrial processing Enhancement” (FP7-NMP-2008-LARGE-2, Grant 
Agreement n° 229231, www.project-alpine.eu)   
 IMPROV “Innovative Mid -infrared high Power source for resonant ablation of Organic based photovoltaic 
devices” (FP7-ICT-2009-5, Grant Agreement n°257894, www.fp7project-improv.eu ).   
  
4.1.3.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE  
Multitel laser micromachining platform provides infrastructure and technical equipment to serve the objectives of 
the project. It offers the following:   
 Facilities:  
 Two clean rooms  
 Flexible micromachining platform  Lasers available:  
 Amplitude S Pulse/Central wave length 1030nm/Pulse duration 540fs -10ps/Av. Power 3.5W/Pulse energy 
35µJ/Rep rate100kHz max  
 Amplitude S Pulse/1030nm/250ps/3.5W/150µJ/25kHz max  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 59 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
 Amplitude S Pulse/515nm/540fs/1.5W/15µJ/100kHz max  
 Amplitude S Pulse/515nm/250ps/2W/80µJ/25kHz max  
 Amplitude S Pulse/343nm/250ps/500mW/20µJ/25kHz max  
 Amplitude S Pulse/257nm/540fs/300mW/3µJ/100kHz max  
 Amplitude S Pulse/257nm/250ps/300mW/12µJ/25kHz max  
 IPG YLPN-1-4x200/1064nm/8-200ns/20W/1mJ/20kHz-100kHz  
 Multitel 30ps/1064 nm& 532 nm/ 100 µJ / 5W  
 Multitel 1 ps/1030 nm/ 100µJ – burst mode laser  
 Multitel  ns/1040nm/40ns/20W/0.25mJ/80kHz  
 Multitel CW/1064nm/CW/100W  
 Scanners/translation stages available:  
 Three galvanometric heads with mirrors at 355nm, 515nm, and 1030nm  
 Adapted f-theta lenses and microscope objectives  
 Translation stages Aerotech (max speed 3m/s, Travel X 500mm/Y 200mm/Z 35mm, XY resolution 10µm, Z 
resolution 5µm)  
 Means of characterization:  
 Microscope (objectives X5 X10 X20 X100 X150)  
 Optical profilometer (XY resolution 5µm, Z resolution 100nm)  
 Access to Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)  
  
4.1.3.6 OTHER DOCUMENTS  
  
     
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 60 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
  
4.1.4 VISUM LTD. (EX. IRIS ADVANCED ENGINEERGING LIMITED) - VISUM  
  
  
  
www.seeingnewdata.com  
  
4.1.4.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
Visum Ltd.(Ex. IRIS Advanced Engineerging Limited) (VISUM) www.seeingnewdata.com is an optical engineering 
company from Dublin that specializes in the development and commercialization of Near Infrared Spectroscopy 
(NIRS)-based portable and inline analyzers and meas urement systems for process monitoring and quality control 
applications in the food, pharmaceutical and chemical applications. The company was established in 2014 and 
currently employs 9 staff from its facilities in Nexus UCD (technology park at the University College Dublin campus). 
In 2016, the company launched the VISUMPalm (a handheld NIR measurement instrument) and has secured first 
sales. An integration platform (VisumNIR) for the inline version is currently under development in cooperation with 
early adopter clients from the food processing industry (dairy, meat and olive oil) and pharmaceutical industries. 
VISUM Ltd. is an SME Champion -awarded a Phase 1 and a subsequent Phase 2 Grant under H2020’s SME 
Instrument.  
  
The optical engineering and smart systems teams at VISUM Ltd. have specialized expertise in sensor integration, 
optical engineering, chemometrics, data analytics, cloud infrastructures and data management systems.  
  
VISUM will be responsible for the WP3 Design and development of an in-line monitoring unit, which addresses the 
development of the in -line quality control system of the laser texturing prototype. Moreover, will contribute on 
defining the optical technology suitable for nanometric surface features quality control. Developing a f unctional 
prototype suitable for industrial settings use and testing and validating the new nano-metrology prototype surface 
functionalities and performance. Furthermore, transversal contributions will be given to the consortium in terms of 
Exploitation and Dissemination aspects.  
  
4.1.4.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Dr. Timothy Kehoe  (Male) PhD in Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland - developed an IR photometric 
measurement system for thermal diffusivity in anisotropic materials. Masters in Optoelectronic s, Queens 
University Belfast. Designed an Echelle spectrometer while based at Andor Technology Ltd. Worked at Tyndall 
National Institute, Cork, and Catalan Institute of Nanotechnology, Barcelona, developing diffractive optical and 
acousto-optical metrology  techniques for nanotechnology applications, in particular for characterisation of 
nanoscale structures fabricated by nanoimprint lithography and directed self -assembly. Other research 
activities: quantification of ordering in self -assembled structures by image analysis techniques and optical 
sensors using hydrogel materials. Tim is the VISUMPalm Product Manager, as well as the Technical Lead at 
VISUM Ltd. and he brings vast optical integration and device instrumentation expertise.   
 Dr. Severine Philippe (Female) graduated with a 1st class Hons. B.Sc. in Applied Sciences (Physics and Physics 
Technology) from Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland, in 2002 and received her PhD in Physics from Trinity 
College Dublin in 2007, for the study of polarisation effects in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA). She went 
on to work on the development and characterization of low noise SOAs, as well as THz generation by multimode 
lasers and their detection using four wave mixing in SOA, both in the Semiconductor Photo nics Group, Trinity 
College Dublin, and the School of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University. She previously worked as a R&D 
technician for the plastics industry and in quality control for electronic appliances. She joined VISUM in 2014 as 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 61 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
an optic al engineer and is currently involved in projects including various microscopy techniques, planar 
waveguide technologies and MIR spectroscopy.   
 Nikolina Mikulcic  (Female) User Interface Designer. Nikolina comes from web design and development 
background with more than 15 years of experience in this field and she is an expert on UI/UX design strategy 
and front-end development (CSS/HTML). She studied graphic design and she started to learn web design due to 
her deeply interested for digital world. Since join ing VISUM in September 2016, she has been creating a new 
User Interface for the VISUM product lines. Prior to VISUM, she has an extensive experience in the online world, 
having worked in companies such as EuroArt93 – digital agency, BlueBOX IT, Biroval. She also was a founder of 
design studio In Love With Blue and she worked as Project Manager, UI/UX designer and front -end developer. 
She was leader numerous digital projects for different clients as Erste Bank, Unicredit Bank, Telenor Bank, Komb 
Bank, ZAMP etc.  
 Chris Dermody  (Male) Software Developer. Bachelor’s degree in Product Design from Dublin Institute of 
Technology. Chris excels in creative problem -solving, using the latest technologies to transform ideas into real 
opportunities that provide exponential value to business operations. With a keen eye for user experience, Chris 
builds robust, responsive applications that stand the test of time. Since joining VISUM, Chris has been hard at 
work developing both front and backend features that push the VISUM product lines forward. Prior to VISUM, 
Chris enjoyed working across the full spectrum of business, founding startups and overseeing product 
development throughout the lifecycle of many successful businesses.  
 Dr. Idoia Martí Aluja (female) is a Senior Scientist. She received her PhD in Chemistry at the Universitat Rovira i 
Virgili (Spain). Her thesis was focused on the establishment of novel analytical methods for the study of different 
processes by infrared spectroscopy and chemometrics techniques. After her thesis, she expanded her 
knowledge in spectroscopic techniques working as a Technician in the Spectroscopic and Kinetics Unit (SKU) at 
the Institut Català d'Investigació en Química (ICIQ, Spain). She was in charge of the calibration and maintenance 
of the instruments of the unit (UV -Vis, NIR, FTIR, FT -Raman, Circular Dichroism, Fluorescence spectra and 
polarimetry). Moreover, she worked as a PostDoct at the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO, Spain), leading a 
project whose aim was to develop a new and novel infrared instrument based on a high power laser source with 
direct emission in the mid- to long-wave infrared for chemical microspectroscopy of biological samples. She was 
using chemometrics techniques to extract meaningful information from the recorded data. She also worked as 
Material Science Engineer at Zobele Spain, being in charge of the selection, testing and validation the most 
adequate raw materials, with particular focus on the interaction between chemical products (mainly perfumes, 
solvents and detergents) and materials.  
  
4.1.4.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS  
 Development and commercialisation of the VISUM instruments - NIR spectroscopy devices- in-pipe, handheld   
Publication in relation to Innovation Management: O. Mc Nerney, A. Stachowicz, P. Czuprynski, E. Philpott, D. 
Kolman, D. Martin, E. Herrmann (2010). “Strategic Guide to Successful Use and Dissemination of the Results of  
Research and Development Projects” 1st edition, Steinbeis-Edition Stuttgart 2010. ISBN 978-3-941417-27-4  
On 08/02/2016, VISUM was awarded the Seal of Excellence form the European Commission  
  
4.1.4.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
 PREVIEW “PREdictiVe system to recommend Injection mo ld sEtup in Wireless sensor networks”. (Grant 
Agreement number: 636892).   
PREVIEW aims to develop cutting edge wireless technological solutions for injection moulding setup and process 
optimisation using recommended machine parameters to minimise manufact uring downtime. VISUM Ltd. is 
responsible for the development of the Data Acquisition System and in developing the Signal Conditioning, its 
integration with the ARM main board, as well as implementing a prototype.  
 Phase 1 SME Instrument : An IR -spectroscopy-based platform for the rapid integration and customisation of 
affordable, real-time monitoring solutions for the food and pharmaceutical industry (Grant Agreement number: 
684767).  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 62 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
 Phase 2 SME Instrument: Cloud-enabled IR spectroscopy platform for the rapid integration and customisation 
of affordable, real-time chemical monitoring solutions for food and pharmaceutical industries (Grant Agreement 
number: 731043)  
 Development of a portable LIDAR device for the detection of pesticides for the University of Lerida in Spain (B2B 
contract)  
 Development of a NIR device for at-line measurement of quality of oil in industrial frying equipment for bakery 
products (B2B contract).  
  
4.1.4.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE  
VISUM has the following infrastructures that will be used in the project:   
  
Spectroscopic Laboratory: equipped with several instruments, namely, an FTIR -ATR (Interspectrum), two UV -VIS 
(PerkinElmer and Ocean Optics), one Extended -SWIR (StellarNet) and one NIR (Mightex) sp ectrophotometers as 
well as a SWIR Hyperspectral imager (Specim-Xenics). The associated staff are trained and skilled in chemometrics 
modelling by using a commercial suite (SOLO+MIA from Eigenvector) as well as ad hoc non -commercial 
chemometric tools (Matlab and Python toolboxes).   
  
Electronics, mechanical and optical workshops: equipped with up -to-date hardware and tools: signal generators, 
wide band oscilloscopes, PCB design [Altium] and building tools, development kits for programming 
microcontrollers, CNC-milling machines for electronic and mechanical prototyping, and CAD software [SolidWorks], 
among others. ZEEMAX software for the design of optical systems and design setup by means of advanced optical 
components and facilities (optical tables, windows, lenses, lasers and light sources and related “opticalware”).  
  
     
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 63 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.5 CENTRO DE INVESTIGACIÓN COPERATIVA DE ENERGÍAS ALTERNATIVAS FUNDACIÓN (CICe)  
  
www.cicenergigune.com   
  
4.1.5.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
CICe is a non-profit energy research centre based in the Basque Country (Spain), funded in 2011. CICe’s mission is 
to play a leading role on th e international scientific stage focused on basic research in energy related materials 
oriented to storage applications, contributing to industrial competitiveness through: excellent and breakthrough 
research; transfer of technology and knowledge to industry; coordination of basque technology and research efforts 
in energy storage field. CICe plays an important role in the strong Basque Network of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (RVCTI). The centre has the backing of public institutions, administrations and of companies directly 
related to the energy sector. Its objectives are strongly aligned with the Basque Country RIS3 priorities and the 
Energibasque strategy, which identifies storage as the central key to solve the future energy needs.  
  
In the project, besides all the administrative and dissemination and exploitation tasks, CICe will mainly participate 
in WP4 and WP6 with the following tasks:  
 Participation in the elaboration of a database with LIPSS processes and resulting functionalities. The role of CICe 
will be focused on the processes associated to metals typically used in batteries. Moreover, CICe and CEGASA 
(third party) will participate in the definition of the pattern for battery current collector.  
 Fabrication of Li-ion battery electrodes to test the capabilities of current collectors processed by LIPSS. CICe will 
elaborate the electrode formulation with the input provided by CEGASA, electrodes will be casted and 
assembled in half cells and full cells for subsequent electrochemical testing th at will be used to determine the 
improvement obtained after the LIPSS processing. Finally, pouch cells will be assembled to prove the scalability 
of the process.  
 Characterisation of the current collectors and electrodes. Advanced characterisation will be performed on cycled 
electrodes that will help us to determine the influence of the LIPSS processing in the electrochemical 
performance, lifetime and stability of the electrodes. CEGASA will provide valuable input when defining the 
testing protocols and experimental conditions.  
  
4.1.5.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Dr. Miguel Ángel Muñoz  (Male) PhD from Warwick University in 2005. He is now associate researcher at the 
Structure & Surface Analysis Group. His research focuses on the understanding of the mechanisms tha t drive 
surface and interface reactions in electric energy storage components. Miguel Ángel is an experienced scientist 
active in the area of surface/interface characterization (XPS, STM/AFM, AES), thin film and cluster growth under 
UHV conditions.   
 Mr. Aitor Villaverde (Male). He is the Platform Manager for the Dry Room and Prototyping Facility at CICe. Aitor 
has over 10 years experience in industry (GUASCOR FOTON S.L., BATZ cooperative). He began his career in 
renewables energies as a technical electronic engineer in 2004, in Mexico where he collaborated in the design 
and installation of an electronic control system for energy storage in photovoltaic systems. In 2005 Aitor received 
clean room training in California and The Institute of Microelectronic Tec hnology (TiM) at the San Mamés 
Industrial Engineering School.  
 Dr.Laida Otaegui , (Female). PhD in Industrial Engineering from Tecnun, Universidad de Navarra. During her 
undergraduate period, her research was focused in the fabrication and electrochemical/microstructural 
characterization as well as their long-term stability at high temperature and corrosive environments of different 
high temperature energy conversion and storage systems such as Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFC) and High 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 64 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
Temperature Metal-Air Batteries (HTMAB). She is now a post-doc researcher at the Device Engineering Group in 
which she is working in the development of Na-ion battery electrode formulations and battery prototypes.  
  
4.1.5.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS  
 Composition and Evolution of the Solid-Electrolyte Interphase in Na2Ti3O7 Electrodes for Na-Ion Batteries: XPS 
and Auger Parameter Analysis. M.A. Muñoz-Márquez et al. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 7801−7808 (2015). A 
combination of photoemission techniques was used to determine the evolution of the electrode -electrolyte 
interphase in Na -ion batteries which provided new insights on the stability and capacity fade of this type of 
electrodes.  
 Direct observation of electronic conductivity transitions and solid electrolyte interphase stability of Na2Ti3O7 
electrodes for Na -ion batteries. M. Zarrabeitia et al. J.  Power Sources 330, 78 -83 (2016). Impedance 
spectroscopy studies and photoemission techniques were combined to deliver an answer regarding the 
transport properties of promising anodes for Na-ion batteries.  
 Local Structure and Stability of SEI in Graphite and ZFO Electrodes Probed by As K ‑Edge Absorption 
Spectroscopy. S. J. Rezvani et al. J. Phys. Chem. C 120, 4287−4295 (2016). Use of X-ray absorption spectroscopy 
to characterize the evolution of the electrode-electrolyte interphase in Li-ion batteries.  
 Effect of the electrolytic solvent and temperature on aluminium current collector stability: A case of sodium-ion 
battery cathode. L. Otaegui et al. J. Power Sources 297, 168−173 (2015). Differences on the Na -ion battery 
current collector stability related to the use of carbonated and ionic liquid solvents for NaFSI based electrolytes 
studied by means of electrochemical and SEM analysis.  
 Performance and long term stability of a liquid-tin anode metal-air solid electrolyte battery prototype. L. Otaegui 
et al. Electrochimica Acta 214, 192-200 (2016). Development and electrochemical/structural characterization of 
a high temperature liquid -tin anode metal-air solid electrolyte battery using galvanostatic cycling, impedande 
spectroscopy and SEM/EDAX.  
  
4.1.5.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
 MAT4BAT “Advanced materials for batteries” (FP7 -GC.NMP.2013-1, Grant Agreement No. 608931). 
Development of advanced electrode formulations screening a wide variety of binder and stabilizing agents.  
 SIRBATT “Stable Interfaces for Rechargeable Batteries” (FP7-ENERGY-2013-7-3-3, Grant Agreement No. 608502). 
Influence of battery interfaces in the cycle life and safety of Li-ion batteries.  
 LINABATT “Li -ion and Na -ion battery technologies for grid and transport applications.” (Retos Investigación 
MINECO, Grant No. ENE2013-44330-R). Improvement of energy density, safety and cycle life of Li-ion batteries 
and development of new materials.  
 Energigune14 “Development of research activities in electrochemical and thermal energy storage.” (Proyectos 
de Investigación con Alto Potencial Industrial, Grant No. IE14-388). Development of materials and cells for Naion 
battery technology.  
 BATNALAE “Design, fabrication and test of Na-ion batteries for emergency luminary applications.” (Proyectos de 
Investigación Estratégica, Grant No. KK -2016/00098). Development of Na -ion battery prototypes for luminary 
applications.  
  
4.1.5.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE The 
following infrastructures will be used in the project:  
 Dry Room / Prototyping Facility: The dry room at CIC energigune is a 55 m2 laboratory in which humidity and 
temperature conditions are continuously controlled. Humidity levels as low as -60 ºC dew point a t a 21 ºC can 
be reached in this platform. Moreover, the laboratory is fully equipped with the machinery required for different 
levels of battery prototype manufacturing, either coin cells or pouch cells. Due to the moisture sensitivity of 
most of the batt ery components this constitutes the perfect environment to build the cells which will be 
developed in this project.   
 Surface Analysis Platform: This platform integrates state of the arte equipment devoted for advances studies 
on surfaces and interfaces. A  high resolution XPS with 2D detector will allow to perform photoemission 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 65 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
experiments at different X-ray energies while probing diferent surface regions. The system is coupled to a Raman 
spectrometer fitted in a electrochemical cell that enables us to carr y out all characterisation under controlled 
conditions without exposing the battery components to air. This is a very important point since the majority of 
battery systems are moisture sensitive.  
 Electron Microscopy Platform: The scanning electron microscope is also equipped with a transfer system that 
allows sample handling without air exposure. This technique will be used to study the surface morphology of 
the electrodes and, with a special sample holder, cross -sectional studies of the electrode -current collector 
interface.  
  
     
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 66 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.6 FAGOR AUTOMATION S. COOP (FAGOR)  
  
  
www.fagorautomation.com   
  
4.1.6.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
FAGOR AUTOMATION is a company with great experience in the development and manufacturing of products for 
machine automation and control. It excels by its capability to develop software and the versatility of its productive 
process to offer solutions tailored to the needs of their customers. Historically, FAGOR AUTOMATION has focused 
their efforts on the machine-tool sector where we are one of the world leaders. Besides, its wide technical and sales 
network spread out in more than 50 countries through its own branch offices and distributors. FAGOR 
AUTOMATION career has been so successful thanks to our investing efforts in R&D+i (Research, Development and 
innovation) and in infrastructure that made it possib le for us to tackle projects of high strategic relevance. An 
example of this, are the new facilities for photolithography to produce engraved glass that is used in our linear 
feedback systems.  
  
Traditionally, the company has dedicated more than 10% of its turnover to R&D+i; it currently has 85 R&D engineers 
and 6 doctors dedicated to developing new automation and optics technologies integrated into the products 
developed by FAGOR AUTOMATION.  
  
An important part of their product portfolio is the position measuring systems. Fagor Automation has been 
manufacturing high quality linear and rotary encoders using precision optical technology for more than 30 years. 
Over the years Fagor has created, developed and patented systems, components and technologies that allow us to 
offer best quality and features over the complete range of product utilizing innovative production methods.   
  
In order to ensure quality and reliability in all its products Fagor Automation utilizes the most advanced technology 
and testing a nd manufacturing facilities. From centralized computer control temperature monitoring, cleanliness 
and relative humidity control, a must for the feedback system manufacturing process, to laboratories for climate, 
vibration and EMC testing to certify the designs.  
  
Fagor Automation will be one of the end users that will validate the use of the developed laser texturing prototype, 
particularly, for the functionalization of optical encoders. The proposed technology will be an alternative to the 
present photolithography that Fagor is using. During this project Fagor Automation will contribute to stablish an 
adequate target for the technology.  
  
4.1.6.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Dr. Tomás Morlanes (M): He is a Doctor in Physics (by Universidad Complutense de Madrid) s pecialized in the 
optics field. He has always developed his work in the Research & Development department of Fagor. Now he is 
the Optics Technology Manager in Fagor. He works in the field of optical linear and rotary encoders.  
 Mr. Haritz Anduaga , (M): The  academic profile of Haritz Anduaga a Master in Mechanical Engineering by 
Mondragón Unibertsitatea. He began their work in Fagor like technical in the Manufacturing department. Now 
he is the Industrialization Manager of Feedback Systems.  
  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 67 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.6.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS  
In the following links, 2 examples of products that will be obtained using the proposed products can be found:  
http://www.fagorautomation.com/en/product/feedback-systems/linear-and-angular-encoders-for-cnc-
machinesand-high-accuracy-applications/incremental/serie-l/   
  
http://www.fagorautomation.com/en/product/feedback-systems/open-linear-encoders/absolutos/   
  
4.1.6.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
The following project is connected to the subject of LASER4SURF:   
 LASERHUESO: “Laser fabrication of Surface micro/nanopatterns for the optimization of osteocells regeneration 
potential”, CYCIT 2014 (Spanish Science Foundation)   
  
4.1.6.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE  
The following equipment will be used in the project:  
  
Equipment for Product Qualification  
 Climatic Room 1-60ºC  
 2 Humidity and temperature Chambers  
 Induced interference Generator  
 Electrostatic discharge generator  
 Radioelectric perturbations generator/receiver  
 GETEM camera for radioelectric perturbations susceptibility/emission measurements  
  
Equipment for Functional tests of Products   
 Laser precision stations for displacements measurements  
 Confocal Microscope for thin film measurements (down to 15 nm)  
 Digital oscilloscopes  
 Optical Laboratory  
  
4.1.6.6 OTHER DOCUMENTS  
NO  
    
4.1.7 RESCOLL TECHNOLOGY CENTRE OF MATERIALS – RESCOLL  
  
https://rescoll.fr/rescoll/  
  
4.1.7.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
RESCOLL is an innovative SME, best defined as a research company for materials, specialized in composites and 
polymers. RESCOLL’s activities are industrial research and development of innovative products and processes. 
RESCOLL is conducting innovation research in the field of industrial applications of polymers (composites, resins, 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 68 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
adhesives, varnish, coatings, etc.) and related fields: bonded assemblies, materials fire behavior and 
environmentally friendly surface treatments  
  
RESCOLL currently has 80 employees, including PhDs, engineers and technicians with sales of 10 M€ in 2016.  
RESCOLL does more than 25% of its sales in the medical industry.  RESCOLL has been at the origin of more than 40 
patents in the field of polymers and composites.  RESCOLL has ISO 17025 and NADCAP accredited laboratories and 
is specialized in the fields of polymer formulation, vibroacoustic testing, mechanical characterization, 
nondestructive control, fire testing, thermo mecha nical analysis, spectrometry and chromatography and surface 
analysis and accelerated ageing.  
  
RESCOLL also participates in several European projects including project within the scope of FP6 and FP7.  In 
addition, RESCOLL has participated in several Clean Sky and CORAC projects.  
  
RESCOLL also has extensive experience in the development of and testing of medical devices and sol -gel coatings.  
As a result, RESCOLL possesses considerable expertise in the characterization of the electrical properties of suc h 
system, and will use this expertise in the characterization of the insulating materials.  
  
Its technical skills, quality system and the scope of its material means (technologically advanced equipment) make 
RESCOLL one of the state-of-the-art laboratories in the field of materials testing on the European level.  
  
  
4.1.7.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Ing. Florent Deliane: technical manager. He is Head of Surface Technology Materials business unit managing 6 
researchers. Ing. Florent Deliane has more than 10 years  experience in surface technology, coating and sol -gel 
process. He was involved in the management of several partnership project dedicated to optics, corrosion, 
tribology, adhesion, catalysis concerning application in aeronautics, medical device, transport , or energy. 
Patents and product commercialization have been carried out for some of these projects.  
 Etienne Lecomte (male): commercial manager. Mr. Lecomte has over 14 years’ experience dealing with products 
and services destined for the public market and industry.  He currently manages a team of 3 people.  He serves 
for the account manager for large industrial groups such as AIRBUS, SAFRAN, and AREVA.    
 Mrs. Magali Clavé -Henry (female): marketing manager. Magali graduated with an engineering diploma and  a 
specialization in Fine Chemistry from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (Rouen – France) in 2005.  She 
then worked for 3 years in the R&D department of a chemical group based in The Netherlands on the 
development of resins and dispersions for a dhesive applications.  In 2009, she joined a consulting company 
specialized in innovation management. Her areas of expertise include collaborative project development, 
market intelligence and advising innovative companies. She will be joining Rescoll as of the 1st of June 2015 and 
will be in charge of conducting market research and supporting strategic planning.  
  
4.1.7.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS  
RESCOLL provide with services in medical implant design and manufacturing. Therefore, this knowledge can be very 
useful for the project, specially to evaluate the replication potential of LASER4SURF technology in different products 
and/or applications of RESCOLL expertise fields.  
  
4.1.7.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
 H&M is a French national program focused on the development of innovative coatings for hip and knee implants.  
 MED FAB LAB is a French regional project (Aquitaine) for an additive manufacturing platform for medical devices 
and applications.  
  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 69 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.7.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE  
MED FAB LAB medical device additive manufacturing platform. It focuses on implementing additive manufacturing 
techniques for medical applica tions, notably for difficult -to-use materials such as PEEK and materials with 
customized properties.  
  
  
     
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 70 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.8 EUROPEAN SCIENCE COMMUNICATION INSTITUTE (ESCI) GGMBH - ESCI  
  
www.sciencecommunicators.eu   
4.1.8.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE LEGAL ENTITY AND ITS MAIN TASKS  
The European Science Communication Institute (ESCI) is a not-for-profit organisation that empowers scientists and 
engineers, helping them to communicate with a non -expert audience to bridge the gap between science, 
technology and society.   
  
ESCI supports national and international research and innovation initiatives i n communicating effectively and 
leveraging their dissemination potential. In addition to providing up-to-date media training, ESCI has put together 
a compelling set of dissemination tools specifically with different stakeholders and target audiences in mind. Their 
multi-skilled team can ensure that the message not only tells, but sells. The ESCI offer includes: optimising web 
communication, producing state -of-the-art videos, harnessing social media, organising workshops and engaging 
with end-users to maximise outreach and impact of these initiatives.  
  
As a truly European organisation, ESCI draws on key contributors from across the continent. Their senior science 
communicators work in France, Belgium, the UK and Germany. The European Science Communication Institute also 
enjoys close ties with science communication specialists in almost every EU country, which enables it to deliver 
locally adapted solutions in different languages.  
  
ESCI will lead the communication and dissemination in close cooperation with  the exploitation leader. The aim of 
this activity is to identify the communication needs for the specific audiences and find and use the channels of 
communication needed to fulfil this task. The ESCI team has experience in web, social media, print, audio-visual and 
direct 1:1 communication to accomplish a successful mix of communication and dissemination activities. This 
includes also the tracking of this activity to be able to measure the impact of the communication and dissemination 
measures in order to adapt it, if necessary.  
  
At ESCI, we believe that the success of a new technology is not only dependent on the technology itself, but also on 
the way it is communicated and disseminated to the relevant target groups and exploitation channels. For the 
LASER4SURF project, ESCI see plenty of opportunities to use its creativity and expertise to work together with a 
strong consortium for a successful communication, dissemination and exploitation of the project.  
  
4.1.8.2 CV OF THE PERSONS  
 Elmar Bartlmae (male). Mr. Elmar BARTLMAE holds a MSc in Science Communication (1995), Imperial College 
London and a BSc in Physics with Management (1994) from King’s College London. In 2016 he co -founded ESCI 
and became its Managing Director. Elmar has been involved in dif ferent communication and dissemination 
activities in more than 20 European research projects, including in projects with a focus on complex technologies 
(Nano-TV, HIPSTER). Initially, Elmar was responsible for video production activities and later got invo lved all 
other communication activities, including social media, print and web communication and their dissemination. 
Elmar is also an award-winning film producer, specialising in science documentaries. In 2016 his co -production 
The Origami Code on modern mathematics and engineering won the Grand Prix of PARISCIENCE and a Jackson 
Hole Science Media Award.   
 Alec Walker-Love (male). Mr. Alec WALKER -LOVE has received a BA in Politics & Modern Languages from the 
University of Manchester (2003). For the last 15  years, Alec has been managing dissemination and 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 71 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
communication activities of a range of European funded projects including CITyFiED and DIRECTION. Alec is a 
communication professional, recognised for strategic and original thought. He is passionate about t he 
conversations happening inside and outside organisations and connecting them to the goals of the organisation 
or project.  
 Naomi Halbach (female). Ms. Naomi HALBACH holds a BA in Cultural Anthropology/Media Sciences, University 
of Tübingen (2013) and a BSc in Geosciences, University of Bremen (2016). As science media producer, Naomi 
has been responsible for a number of videos and multi -media web stories on European research projects, 
including R2CITIES, MeeFS and HIPSTER. She is also engaged in the publi c relations activities of the Max -
PlanckInstitute of Marine Biology in Bremen.  
  
4.1.8.3 LIST OF RELEVANT PUBLICATIONS  
 Services: CITyFiED (www.cityfied.eu) is a European project on smart cities, that has been running since 2014. 
ESCI experts are responsible for large parts of the communication and dissemination activities, including video 
production, social media and citizen engagement.   
 Services: HIPSTER (www.hipster-project.eu ) is a European innovation project on food processing, that has been 
running since 2015. ESCI experts are managing the communication and dissemination WP, that includes web 
communication, video production, and targeted communication to stakeholders.    
 Publicastions/Services: For R2CITIES (www.r2cities.eu ), a European demonstration project on the renovation 
of bu ildings to a high level of energy efficiency, ESCI experts have implemented a new way of multimedia 
storytelling tool called pageflow. www.science-stories.com/lavatrici .  
 Publications/Services: For the European Research Project MeeFS (www.meefs -retrofitting.eu), ESCI sci ence 
media producers have created the final video on the project. https://t.co/9LF33lOhKD   
 Achievement: The Origami Code is a science documentary produced for 3SAT/Franc e5, which won the most 
prestigious international prizes in science television, including the Grand Prix AST at the PARISCIENCE Film 
Festival 2016, and the Science Media Award of Jackson Hole 2016 in the Category “Innovation”. This popular 
science programme was co-produced by Elmar Bartlmae, co-founder and director or ESCI.  
  
4.1.8.4 LIST OF RELEVANT PREVIOUS PROJECTS  
ESCI experts have designed and implemented several Communication and Dissemination plans for EC -funded 
research and demonstration projects and were also involved in several CSAs. These activities included the design of 
brochures, posters, production of videos and journalistic articles, their dissemination to science media outlets 
(mainly for web and TV), communication training for scientists and also the design and implementation of  strategies 
for social media and/or citizen engagement. For the LASER4SURF project, the following five projects had the most 
similar challenges, in terms of communicating about sophisticated technology projects and ensuring their successful 
exploitation.    
 Nano-TV (www.youris.com/nano/nanotv) – Enhancing public awareness on the results of EUropean research 
actions on nanosciences and nanotechnologies through the profesional use of television media.  
 HIPSTER (www.hipster-project.eu) – Deployment of High PreSsure and TempeRat ure food processing for 
sustainable, safe and nutritious food with fresh-like quality.   
 PIMMS (http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/research/activity/pimms-itn/index.aspx) –  Proton Ionization Molecular 
Mass Spectrometry (Communication Training only)  
 CommFABNet (www.commnet.eu) – Comunication of Food, Fishery, Agriculture and Biotechnologies research 
– a network to support EU-funded research projects  
 DIRECTION (www.direction-fp7.eu) – Demonstration of very low energy new buildings  
  
4.1.8.5 DESCRIPTION OF ANY SIGNIFICANT INFRASTRUCTURE  
No special technical equipment or infrastructure is needed for the proposed activities of ESCI in the LASER4SURF 
project.  
  
  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 72 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
4.1.8.6 OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION  
The European Science Communication Institute was founded in July 2016, and has therefore only  a limited official 
track record of projects or activities to this date. However, the communication experts of ESCI have an impressive 
experience working in similar projects. As communication and dissemination is a people’s business, we have 
included projects and activities in the sections above that ESCI’s founding partners or staff have been responsible 
for.
4.2 THIRD PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROJECT  
For all the subcontract activity foreseen in this project the identification of the respective subcontracts will be done 
on the basis of the best value offer. According to the GA regulation on sub -contracting the criteria used by the 
partners to assess the “best value” of the different potential subcontractors will be done and proposed on the base 
of: market tendering, partners' standard practices, commercial agreements already in place. Whatever will be the 
criteria used by the concerned partner for the respective subcontract, a clear justification of the “best value” will 
be provided to the Commission in advance of the subcontract finalisation.   
  
CEIT  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
NO  
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  NO  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third partie s 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NO  
  
LASEA  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
NO  
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  NO  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NO  
  
MULTITEL  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
NO  
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  NO  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
NO  
  
VISUM  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
NO  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 73 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  YES  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
Description of the third party:  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 74 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
YES/NO 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
VISUM  
IRIS (Innovació i Recerca Industrial i Sostenible, S.L.) will be involved as third party of VISUM.   
  
IRIS is an advanced engineering company that specialises in process monitoring and 
control, and process optimisation. Its commercial division offers advanced monitoring and 
control solutions based on: NIR chemical monitoring (handheld device and in -line 
solutions); hyperspectral imaging solutions for foreign body detection and chemical 
composition analysis; data management solutions for data processing, decision support, 
automation and data analysis (big production data). The research division has three cor e 
research lines: 1. Optical and spectroscopy technologies (e.g. MEMs spectrophotometers, 
fluorescence and Raman) for process monitoring for on-line and PAT applications in food, 
pharmaceuticals and the process industries. 2. Novel processing technologies (ultrasound, 
plasma, microwave…) for process intensification and non -thermal decontamination. 3. 
Sustainable processing technologies: waste valorisation strategies, biocompounds and 
biopackaging for the circular economy   
  
The company was established in 2 007 and currently employs 56 staff with a turnover of 
€3.8M. It is equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry 
laboratory, optics labs (2), and an electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 
9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE-EN-ISO 166002: Management Systems 
R&D&i.   
  
Link of the participant to the third party: VISUM is mainly participated by IRIS  
  
Describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party:  
The involvement of IRIS will allow to increase the level of excellence of the technical work 
planned in the project as IRIS staff are familiar with validation of the monitoring devices 
performance and control systems development.   
  
While VISUM is specialised in optical engineering, IRIS has instruments and specific skills for 
supporting VISUM in the validation of the developed sensors and in creating control 
systems.   
  
Key staff at IRIS who will be involved in carrying out this work:   
 Mr. David Montes Monteserin. (male) BSc in Mechanical Engineering (2011), 
Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona. Prior to joining the Production 
Processes group at IRIS as Mechanical Design Engineer, he gained wide experience in 
product design and developmen t, including dosing systems for the chemical industry 
and both industrial and domestic appliances for the water treatment sector. He has also 
held positions as Engineering Team Manager, applying renewable energies to 
industrial-sized drinking water plants among other projects. He is specialised in design 
for manufacturing and is proficient in SolidWorks, design software which has taught to 
several companies as a freelancer.   
 MSc. Alejandro Rosales  (male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La 
Habana (1986). His background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several 
scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, high vacuum, colorimetry, UV -VIS-
NIRMIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement instruments. He has 
extensive practical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design 
as well as R&D methodology and management. His career has included positions as 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 75 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
YES/NO 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
researcher applications engineer, design engineer, business developer and R&D 
manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR spectroscopy field applied to quality control 
VISUM  
in the agro -food (wine) industry, whereby he developed two new measurement 
instruments for wine analysis. His career as industrial physicist has been focused in 
applying his wide expertise to provide solutions for industrial problems. Since 2011, he 
has been the Technical Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 engineers and researchers 
involved in R&D projects aimed at developing novel high -end solutions for industry. 
Currently, he is the Science & Technology Manager in IRIS.   
 Dr. Laura Rodríguez Turienzo.  (female) B.S in Food Science & Technology (2008) 
Masters in Innovation in Safety & Food Technologies (2010), PhD in Biological Sciences 
(2011), all from University of Santiago de Compostela (USC), Spain. She has participated 
in a number of R&D regionally and nationally funded projects aimed at developing and 
validating new bio-based active edible packaging, physico-chemical characterization of 
novel foods and valorisation of food industry wastes. She is author of several papers in 
peer-reviewed journals and has participated in different national and international 
conferences.    
  
The total estimated budget of the linked third party is 158.875 €.   
  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NO  
  
CICe  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
NO  
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  YES  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
Description of the third party:  
CEGASA Portable Energy (CPE) started working on 28 January 2015 after acquiring several 
production units of CEGASA Group, a company that definitely disappeared in January 2016. 
The new company, CPE, was created with the challenge of becoming a global compa ny 
with a high technological content. For this purpose and from the very beginning, it focused 
on two areas:  
 Production of manganese dioxide with a high level of purity, which allows its application 
in the manufacture of alkaline batteries  
 And the design and manufacture of energy storage systems based on two different 
technologies zinc-air and lithium-ion.  
Furthermore, the area of energy storage systems has reinforced the productive capacity 
of zinc-air batteries that has made the company t he first producer at European level and 
moreover it has implemented an automated production line of Lithium ion batteries which 
together with the technological capability, allows CEGASA to be a leading company in this 
technology in Spain and be at the forefront at European level.  
Besides the productive investments made in 2015, it is planned to develop an ambitious 
investment plan worth 4.5 million euros for the years 2016, 17 and 18. Thanks to this 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 76 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
YES/NO 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
investment effort CEGASA Portable Energy has developed a range of energy storage 
systems based on lithium-ion technology that allows to have applications in:  
 Mobile systems for buses, vans, motorcycles, etc.  
 Stationary systems for residential, UPS, communication stations, industrial 
applications, etc.  
 Large-scale systems as part of smart grids and renewable energy plants.  
CICe  
To achieve these technological developments, CPE in addition to its own resources, usually 
collaborates with technology centres, universities and other companies  
  
Link of the participant to the third party: CIC and CEGASA form part of the same trust.  
  
Describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party:  
The involvement of CEGASA as industrial partner will allow to demonstrate the 
development of the LASER4SURF project. CIC will work on the validation of the 
functionalisation as well as on the necessary study to implement the technology for other 
products like pouch cells.  
Key staff at CEGASA who will be involved in carrying out this work:   
 Dr. Igor Cantero (R&D Manager, m): Ph.D. in Chemistry (University of the Basque 
Country, Spain). Since 2000, he has been responsible for the New Technologies R&D 
Department at CEGASA. Dr. Cantero has authored 8 book chapters and 24 papers 
published in national and international scientific journals. He also holds 5 patents, has 
participated in 35 research projects and gave over 30 conference presentations. As 
responsible of the department, he works in the development of primary lithium, 
lithium-ion, fuel cel l, supercapacitor, rechargeable zinc -air and Li -S or Li -Air 
technologies.  
 Ion Pinedo (Innovation manager, m): Mechanical and Industrial Organisation Engineer 
by the University of Mondragon (Spain). He starts his activities in CEGASA in 1998 in 
different alkaline cell production departments and in 2010 he moved to the New 
Technologies Department. From 2013, he is the responsible of innovation projects. He 
is involved in the final integration (final assembly + Test and Commissioning) of every 
energy storage products (lithium batteries and hydrogen fuel cells). He has supervised 
the entire production chain from the specifications settings to customer’s approval 
such as Abengoa, Repsol, Ingeteam, Jema, Endesa, etc.  
 Fernando Perez (Product Homologation Manager , m): Degree in Chemistry by the 
Autonomous University of Madrid in 1987, also has a Master in Business Administration 
at the University of Kent. He was responsible for product certification and approval 
Karey Plastics SA in 1989 until 1992. In 1993 he joi ned CEGASA being responsible for 
development of the alkaline battery including product qualification and suppliers. Since 
1995, he is a member of EPBA (European Portable Battery Association). In 2010 begins 
its activities in the Department of New Technolog ies focusing on the accreditation of 
suppliers of lithium-ion cells. Currently, he also develops activities of characterization 
and standardization of the product developed in the department and the tasks 
associated with LCA.  
The total estimated budget of the linked third party is 101.125 €.  
  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 77 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
YES/NO 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NO  
  
FAGOR  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
NO  
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  NO  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
FAGOR  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NO  
  
RESCOLL  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
  
The task to be subcontracted are the following:  
RESCOLL will need to subcontract the biological validation of the surface t exturing of 
implants. Specifically related to evaluating the effect of the structuring on the rate of 
biofilm formation, as this is one of the key issues (especially) with dental implants and their 
rejection rate in the body.  
RESCOLL has the rights accreditations to design and develop Medical Devices (ISO 13485) 
and to test them (several tests qualified ISO 17 025 and the capacity to perform most of 
the tests related to the ISO 10993 -17 and -18 (Chemical and physicochemical 
Biocompatibility)), however, th ey don´t the required means to develop in vivo and vitro 
test.  
The estimated amount corresponding to the tasks to be subcontracted is 37.460 €.  The 
test to be perform are the following:  
 In vitro test.   
 In vivo test. In vivo test with little animals to test the subcutaneous screening and the 
implant.  
 In vivo test. In vivo test with big animals (sheep or dogs).  
YES  
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  YES  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
Description of the third party:  
Rescoll Manufacturing will be involved as Third Party of Rescoll.   
  
RESCOLL is a group of companies, concerning this project the important ones are two: 
RESCOLL and RESCOLL MANUFACTURING (Medical Devices Original Manufacturer). 
RESCOLL MANUFACTURING belongs 100% to RESCOLL and both RESCOLL and RESCOLL 
Manufacturing are SMEs (independently and consolidated). RESCOLL Manufacturing is 
80% dedicated to manufacture medical devices (ISO 13 485 for manufacturing activities).  
  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 78 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
YES/NO 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
RESCOLL Manufacturing is an independent, privately owned, for-profit SME specialized in 
the manufacturing of medical devices using traditional methods such as multiaxis milling 
and turning. Originally known as X -Medical, it was purchased by RESCOLL in 2012 and 
rechristened RESCOLL Manufacturing.  
  
RESCOLL Manufacturing currently produces a w ide variety of implantable materials for 
different clients in the orthopedic, spinal, and maxillofacial domains, and works with a 
wide variety of materials.  These materials include titanium alloys, chrome -cobalt alloys, 
surgical stainless steel, and PEEK.  In 2016 RESCOLL manufactured more than 80.000 
implants. Rescoll Manufacturing offers a wide range of services to control and 
manufacture medical devices and instruments. We produce a variety of custom implants 
for orthopaedic, maxillofacial, dental and cardiac fields. Our team's medical knowledge as 
RESCOLL  
well as the understanding of your requirements and expectations allow us to provide a high 
level service conducted in an ISO 13485 certified environment.  
 Spine  
 Knee  
 Hip  
 Maxillofacial  
 Cardiac  
 Dental  
 Ancillary  
Rescoll Manufacturing offers a large integrated and qualified technological range (swiss 
turning machining, 3 - to 5 -axis machining centers, finishing workshop, laser marking, 
metrology laboratory…) allowing us to meet your expectations w ithin very short delays. 
All control and manufacturing stages are conducted in an ISO 13485 certified environment.  
 Swiss Turning  
 Milling  
 Multiaxis Milling / Turning  
 Polishing  
 Laser Marking  
 Cleaning  
 Packaging  
 Metrology  
Rescoll Manufacturing machin es all medical grades of implantable and non -implantable 
medical devices using titanium, stainless steel, steel, cobalt -chrome (phynox…) and 
polymers including Peek, polyethylene, radel and composite including carbon 
fiberreinforced PEEK.  
 Titanium  
 Stainless Steel  
 Steel  
 Refractory  
  
Link of the participant to the third party: RESCOLL Manufacturing belongs 100% to RESCOLL  
  
Describe and justify the foreseen tasks to be performed by the third party:  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 79 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
YES/NO 
  
Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
RESCOLL Manufacturing will be one of end -user test case of the LASER4SURF system, 
particularly on dental implants. It will provide its expertise in medical device design and 
manufacturing.  
Key staff at RESCOLL manufacturing who will be involved in the project:   
 Mr. Fréderic Combarnous  (m), Mana ger of RESCOLL Manufacturing. Mr. Combarnous 
manages a team of twelve highly-skilled specialists in medical device manufacturing, and has 
experience in the organization and execution of multipartner projects through his previous 
experience at RESCOLL.  His  expertise in the domain of multipartner projects and medical 
devices, coupled with the team of technicians under his management, means that RESCOLL 
Manufacturing is ideally equipped to undertake the LASER4SURF project.  
  
The total estimated budget of the linked third party is 25.000 €.  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NO  
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 80 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
  
ESCI  YES/NO  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks of the 
project should not be sub-contracted)  
If yes, please describe and justify the tasks to be subcontracted  
NO  
 Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third parties  NO  
If yes, please describe the third party, the link of the participant to the third party, and describe and justify the foreseen tasks 
to be performed by the third party  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties 
(Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)  
If yes, please describe the third party and their contributions  
NO  
     
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 81 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
5. ETHICS AND SECURITY
5.1 ETHICS  
The following ethics issues have been identified:  
 Environmental protection and safety:  
According to the Ethics Summary Report, during the process of laser tests, the project will cover a representative 
panel of metal materials (Aluminium, Cop per, Titanium and Stainless steel), functionalisation and check thermal 
conductivity. This can raise the health and safety issue in regard to staff.  
  
In This regard, a specific deliverable D9.1 will be prepared and submitted in M6 providing information related to:   
 Further information about the possible harm to the environment and staff caused by the research and state the 
measures that will be taken to mitigate the risks.  
 Confirmation that facilities authorisations have been obtained (e.g . security classification of laboratory), and 
are kept on file.  
 Ensure  that  appropriate  health  and  safety  procedures  conforming  to  relevant 
 local/national guidelines/legislation are followed for staff involved in this project.
5.2 SECURITY  
  
 Activities or results raising security issues NO  
 EU-classified information' as background or results NO  
  
     
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 82 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017 
6. APPENDIX I - FIGURES FROM WORK PACKAGES DESCRIPTION  
  
FIGURES INCLUDED IN WP2  
  
Task 2.2 Preparation of the experimental laboratory set-up and tests  
  
 
FIGURE 13: CURRENT SET-UP FROM MULTITEL TO BE ADAPTED FOR THE PROJECT  
  
Task 2.4 Implementation and test of the optical modules.  
  
 
  
  
Sample under test 
Laser 
 HWP 
 PBS 
Lens 
 SHG  
crystal 
Lens 
Galvanometric 
Head 
DOE 
ra 
me 
Ca 
Beam  
Dump 
Beam  
Dump 
Wedge 
Wedge 
HR  
Mirror 
HR  
Mirror 
DC 
Mirror 
BE 
Beam  
Dump 
Spatial beam shaping module 
Scanning module 
SHG module 
 
768636 Laser4Surf – Part B – Page 83 of 83   
LASER4SURF 
  
 Associated with document Ref. Ares(2017)3062700 - 19/06/2017