4. Deliverables D14.4, D14.7 lead beneficiary changes from SD to Incotec  due to the change No2. 
5. Total budget has been reduced to 12,943,298.75 € while total funding is 11,057,990.38 € due to the 
following reasons: (a) ICCRAM is an 100% funded partner with a person month rate different than 
Vertech's that is a 70% funded partner for the action and (b) The withdrawn partner SD has claimed 
a total of 17,500€ costs and requested a funding of 12,250€ in their financial forms. These amounts 
have been deducted from total budget and funding, respectively.  
6. Partners 5 (AXIA) and 20 (RDC) are declaring unit costs for SME owners/natural persons without a 
salary 
7. The following changes/correction of typos have been made: 
- Partners Vertech and SD have been replaced by ICCRAM and Incotec across the text  
– p. 52: The Technical manager Dr. Vojislav Petrovic Filipovic from AIMEN, has been replaced 
by Dr. Pilar Rey from AIMEN 
[H2020-814552 LightMe – Part B]    [3 of 70] 
 
– p. 59. A total amount of 16.000€ from Equipment cost for ISQ has been shifted to Other good and 
services. The reason is that the cost concerns the maintenance of the ND T equipment (that is a service) 
rather than purchasing of the equipment. 
– p. 127: The profile of SD partners has been replaced by Incotec’s profile 
– p. 142: The profile of Vertech Group has been replaced by ICCRAM’s profile 
– A third party description (SD partners) have been introduced under Incotec. 
References to budget and funding have been removed and kept only in Part A  
102 
28 
February 
2022 
2nd Amendment  
1. End date for the action has been shifted from month 48 to month 54 (6 months extension of project 
duration). This is due to project extension request in order to recover COVID-19 related delays.  
2. The end date of WPs was amended from month 40 to month 46 and from month 48 to month 54 due 
to the change No.1. 
3. The delivery date of deliverables with due date month 38 was amended to month 44, from month 40 
to month 46, from month 42 to month 45 and from month 48 to month 54 due to the change No.1. 
4. Tasks with end date month 40 were shifted to month 46 and tasks with end date month 48 were 
shifted to month 54. 
5. Deliverable 5.1: The deliverable has been shifted from month 30 to month 40. This change is due to 
the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on project activities which led to delays in material 
production. A 10-month extension of the delivery date will allow partners Mgcom/SMW to produce 
the materials and to characterize them more accurately.  
6. Deliverable 5.2: The deliverable has been shifted from month 36 to month 44. This change is due to 
material production delayed in WP5 and PL upgrades which have been impacted by the COVID -
19-related delays. For the same reason, Task 5.2 was shifted from month 36 to month 44. 
7. Deliverable 6.2: The deliverable has been shifted from month 36 to month 42 . This change is due to 
the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on project activities which led to delays in Borealis PL 
upgrades. For the same reason, Task 6.2 was shifted from month 36 to month 42. 
8. Deliverable 9.1: The deliverable has been shifted from month 30 to month 42. This change is due to 
the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on project activities which led to delays in PL upgrades and 
material production. A 12-month extension of the delivery date will allow partners OGI, UBRUN 
and HIdria to produce and characterize products based on Al and Mg composite produced 
materials. For the same reason, Task 9.2 was shifted from month 36 to month 42. 
9. Deliverable 10.1: The deliverable has been shifted from month 36 to month 44. This change is due 
to the delays in the MWAM PL upgrades and delays in material provision from TC2.  For the same 
reason, Task 10.2 was shifted from month 36 to month 44. The deliverable description has been 
changed from “Report on the characterization of Al aerospace drag braces” to “Report on the 
characterization of Ti aerospace actuator support”. This is due to change in material and 
demonstratort for the TC7. This is due to initial FEM analysis made in Al components that showed 
strength values much lower than the values expected to fulfil the structural specifications of the 
component which is currently made out of high strength steel. Along with the aluminum analysis, 
the component was also simulated using a Ti alloys, finding that the plastic deformation and plastic 
strain of the Ti component is a 97% and 90% lower respectively compared to the Al one. The aim 
of the work in WP10 is to achieve similar strength values to those of steel but using a lightweight 
material. For this reason, Al was discarded, and Ti was chosen to pro ceed with the activities. Ti 
offers similar to steel strength values and is also a lightweight material. By adding nanoparticles to 
Ti, more comparable steel resistance is expected. On the other hand, the actuator support is a more 
suitable demonstrator compared to the original drag brace demonstrator. This is because it satisfies 
the customer needs and maximizes the benefits of adopting Additive Manufacturing as the method 
of production. Furthermore, the initial demonstrator no longer satisfies the market demands. For 
this reason, it was decided to use actuator support as the demonstrator of the TC7. Finally, the use 
of reinforced titanium in this test case, covers all the spectra of the lightweight materials, since in 
WP6, an aluminum reinforced part was chosen and this WP covers also the machining of Ti 
reinforced parts. 
10. Deliverable 10.2: The deliverable has been shifted from month 36 to month 44. This change is due 
to the delays in MWAM and Borealis PL upgrades and material provision from TC2.  
11. Deliverable 11.1: The deliverable has been shifted from month 33 to month 42. This change is due 
to the delays in Borealis PL upgrades. For the same reason, Task 11.2 was shifted from month 36 to 
month 42. 
12. Deliverable 11.3: The deliverable has been shifted from month 36 to month 46. This change is due 
to the delays in Borealis PL upgrades. 
13. Task 12.2 was shifted from month 35 to month 44. The Open Call has been impacted by the 
pandemic outbreak with high uncertainty in physical work implementation for external companies 
that led to fewer applications that those expected. Despite the COVID-19 impact on the Open Call 
applications, external companies have approached the consortium partners in order to explore the 
possibility for a deadline extension that could allow more applicants to join the Ecosystem. Thus, 
[H2020-814552 LightMe – Part B]    [4 of 70] 
 
the deadline of the Call has been thus extended to the 31st of December 2021 and the selection of 
the new test cases will be done after the new deadline. 
14. Milestone MS13 “First test of Al/SiC drag brace in the premises of Cosk” has changed to “First test 
of Ti/TiC Actuator Support in the premises of Cosk.”. This is due to the change in No.8. 
15. Partner PoliMi proposes a change in the distribution of the other direct cost category. It now 
includes the development of an anodizing apparatus for the necessary surface treatment of 
lightweight object. The necessity of this apparatus has been identified during the first part of the 
project as many of the produced object need to go through a surface treatment (anodizing) to 
enhance their surface properties (i.e. corrosion resistance). Consequently an amount of money of 
the necessary chemicals have been also included.   
16. In
clusion of SMW as a Benefeciary. SMW Group (a.k.a. «SMW Wheels» or «SMW Aerospace» or 
«SMW») is serves as the manufactur ing company for the technologies developed by with 
MagnesiumCom OU, implementing the IP owned by MagnesiumCom. While the engineering is 
performed by MagnesiumCom, and to some extent jointly with SMW. Whereas SMW has the 
experimental production facility and the laboratory, along with its forging manufacture. Thus, in the 
framework of “LightMe” project, SMW will implement the actual small -scale manufacturing 
activities for manufacturing magnesium -based alloys. SMW works in automotive, aerospace and 
military industries, offering component weight reduction and solving technological problems by 
introducing alloys with higher mechanical properties and per -application oriented coating. SMW 
team of scientists are aware of LightMe project and objectives and can assis t MgCom at WP5, from 
development of the powder to testing and analyzing the results. Both companies operate in the same 
field of work – metallurgy and alloying of lightweight alloys and have worked closely together to 
achieve the same goals in various R&D projects, assisting each other.  
17. Partner 16 (Mgcom) is declaring unit costs for SME owners/natural persons without a salary 
18. Partner 22 (TimeLex) changes its budget by including subcontracting costs.  
19. The following Milestones are changed: 
- MS05. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed. Initially scheduled for M15 it is 
postponed for M40 
- MS06.  Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed. Initially scheduled for M15 it is 
postponed for M42 
- MS09. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed. Initially scheduled for M20 it is 
postponed for M44 
- MS12. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed. Additionally the target of this milestoned 
has changes, as instead of including Graphene particles in the Mg wire, it was decided by the 
technology developers and end users that the inclusion of SiC nanoparticles will have a beneficial 
effect on the properties of the final producs. The new title is: “Mg/SiC wire delivered to AIMEN”. 
Initially scheduled for M28, it is postponed at M44.  
- MS13. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed. Initially scheduled for M 28 it is 
postponed for M44 
- MS15. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed and severely affected. Due to the travel 
restrictions but also to the fact of low to minimum participation in events (i..e conference, fairs) in 
which main dissemination activities have been predicted, the initial target of 50 applications has 
been changed to 15 that is more realistic. Initially scheduled for M30 the milestone is postponed for 
M44 
- MS16. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed and affected. Due to the strict COVID 
restriction in hospitals the accomplishment of demonstration activities in the premises of a hospital 
is impossible. The consortium has decided to carry out demonstration activities in the premises of 
PoliMi and in premises of other partners. Initially scheduled for M35 it is postponed for M46 
- MS17. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone is delayed. Initially scheduled for M35 it is 
postponed for M46 
- MS18. Due to COVID pandemic the milestone will delay. Initially scheduled for M48 it is 
postponed for M54.  
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1. EXCELLENCE ..................................................................................................................................................................... 5
1.0 INTRODUCTION TO THE INDUSTRIAL NEED ......................................................................................................................... 5