4.Tecnoalimenti, 5.Spes Geie, 6.Anecoop, 7.Valencia Region Chamber Of Commerce, 8.Proexport, 
9.Agrofood (Cluster), 10.Spanish Chamber Of Commerce In Belgium, 11.CTNC (Canning Industry 
Research Centre), 12.Romanian Agricultural Cluster (Agrotransilvania), 13.Nestle, 14.Lebanon 
Chamber Of Commerce, 15.Industry And Agriculture Of Beirut And Mount-Lebanon, 16.Chamber Of 
Commerce Of Sousse 
Food 
packaging 
producers 
1. Reepack, 2. Durukan (Tr, Candy), 3. Villani (It, Meat), 4. Agrotransformados (Es, Agrifood), 5. 
Laboratorios Almond (Es, Agrifood), 6. Citromil (Es, Agrifood)., 7. Avient, 8. Eversia, 9. Amcor, 10. 
Gpi General Packaging Industries S.A.R.L. 
Developers of 
sustainable 
packaging 
1. Iata-Csic, 2. Componit Lda, 3. Lappeenranta University (Fi), 4. Tampereen University (Fi), 5. Aitex, 
6. Itene, 7. Vacuumbags 
Packaging 
converters and 
recyclers 
1. Toysal, 2. Anaip Association (Es), 3. Eversia (Es), 4. Propa (It), 5. Gwc (Es), 6. Ecoplastics (Sr), 7. 
Saperatec (De), 8. Fych Technologies (Es), 9. Torwash (Nl), 10. Tomra, 11. Prezero 
Local and 
regional 
authorities 
1.Spain Ecological And Demographic Ministry, 2.Sevilla Region, 3.Portugal Ministry Of Industry, 
4.Comunidad Autónoma De La Región De Murcia Carm (Es), 5.Valencia/Asturias Region And 
Different Municipalities, 6.Brussels Region, 7.Lebanon Ministry Of Industry, 8.Lebanon Ministry Of 
Environment, 9.Anpe-Tunisia 

HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 16 of 45 
 
Other 
1.Fer (Spanish Federation Of Recovery And Recycling), 2.Ivlv (Industry Association For Food 
Technology And Packaging), 3.Proexport, 4.Unc Consumer Association (It), 5.Asociación Española De 
Normalización Une (Es), 6.Wur (Logistic Part), 7.European Community Of Consumers Cooperatives 
(Euro Copp), 8.International Panel Of Experts On Sustainable Food Systems (Ipes Food) 
A final step for the MAGNO Multi-actor approach involves producing  a series of practice abstracts. These will 
provide a concise summary or description of a particular practice or method used in the food packaging industry (further 
details can be found in the communication activities from section 2.2.2). The practice abstracts will include the essential 
features and characteristics of the food packaging practices, clear objectives, exhaustive details of the methods employed, 
and the expected outcomes from those methods applied in different sectors (e.g. recycling, manufacturing and storage). 
1.2.4. Social sciences and humanities dimension  
To ensure the required response from society is achieved regarding the scientific development of this project, MAGNO 
will incorporate social innovation concepts  supported by real end-user/ consumer needs . This scheme allows the 
workforce and society to be part of the project during all phases, impor tantly establishing society as an essential 
protagonist in the European technology transition. MAGNO has been defined as em bracing the social innovation 
paradigm across the project execution to ensure significant adoption and to maximise the end-user/consumer experience. 
The studies of the whole packaging value chain and business (from raw material to end of life) will be based on five 
main ideas: i) involvement of designers and developers with workers and users, ii) mediation and coordination of 
different groups and stakeholders, iii) interdisciplinary, social, and flexible creation process, iv) highlight historical, 
cultural, and organisational pre-conditions of the final products, and v) consideration of the impact on users, environment 
and workforce. Besides the involvement to occur during workshops and design p hases, the social and socio-economic 
benefits of the innovative value chains developed under the scope of MAGNO will be addressed by applying the Social 
LCA methodology (T5.4). This methodology will also assess the social approval (consumers acceptance) of the obtained 
products by key stakeholders along the value chain (WP6). These actions will include health and safety, environmental, 
ecosystems and well-being (WP4). 
1.2.5. Gender dimension 
Gender and sex inclusion in research, knowledge-making and the science value system is a major impediment to scientific 
greatness80. From its inception, MAGNO has sought to improve well-being through solving a global problem, 
enhancing social cohesion and creating new economic models with opportunities for all citizens. This is particularly 
the case for the chemical, materials, manufacturing and food system sectors. D espite the engineering sectors holding 
significant economic impact, its patriarchal culture limits women's economic empowerment, access to opportunities, and 
economic, social, and cultural rights. Demajorovic et al. (2019) 81 view engineering initiatives as a double-edged sword 
that both develops the community and perpetuates inequities. Ignorance to gender issues has disproportionate effects 
on unseen men and women and prevents mitigation efforts. Engineering initiatives are more harmful to women, therefore 
ignoring gender problems hinders sustainable community development82. Yet, the ex-ante gender approach will produce 
fewer discriminating and inclusive programs, promoting social justice in modern society as outlined by the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) strategy. MAGNO will address two primary factors when designing and producing packaging 
after the EC policy review of Gendered Innovations 2: 8How Inclusive Analysis Contributes to Research and Innovation83 
(WP2 to WP5): i) Optimised value chains tools that integrate gender views can drive the circular transformation by 
embracing novel packaging technologies  and environmental and circular economic solutions, and  ii) Intersectional 
gender, age, and socioeconomic approaches to circular transition . Packing materials manufacturers, politicians, and 
academics must comprehend gender and other social, economic, and demographic variables. Consequently, HOLOSS 
during Task 8.4 assesses gender hazards  throughout the project, analysing processes, times, spaces, relations, et c., 
where social vulnerability exists. At the initial stage of the project , a seminar will present guidelines and emphasise 
gender and ethics. Where relevant, the life-cycle sustainability assessment (WP5) will disaggregate findings by sex. To 
meet stakeholder and consumer expectations, Business and Exploitation (WP6), and Dissemination and Communication 
(WP) plans must consider diversity elements (age, sex, gender, ethnicity). Finally, the MAGNO consortium promotes 
leadership by women at all levels. The team will follow Directive 2002/73/EC on gender equality in employment, 
vocational training, promotion and working conditions. Hiring new scholars and scheduling project-related speakers 
will prioritise equality. To highlight our commitment to this issue, MAGNO will have a strong female presence. Females 
will lead four WPs and represent 32% of the project staff.  
 
80 Palmén, R. et al. Evaluation and Program Planning, 2020. 
81 Demajorovic, J. et al. Resources Policy, 2019. 
82 Keenan, JC. et al. Journal of Business Ethics, 135 (4). 2014. 
83 European Commission (EC) - Gendered Innovations 2: Luxembourg, 
2020  
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 17 of 45 
 
1.2.6. Open Science practices 
Horizon Europe aims to fund ground-breaking research with the potential f or significant global impacts. MAGNO 
therefore commits to operating under a global open science approach  with a culture transformation towards greater 
openness, accessibility, re-usability, multidisciplinary, participat ory collaboration, and a methodology motivated by 
creating benefits for society. MAGNO will follow the open science policy  of Horizon Europe as detailed in the 
Programme Regulation (Art. 14 and 39(3))  and further described in the General Model Grant Agreement ( Art. 17 – 
Specific Rules). Figure 18 shows how open access and the specific MAGNO developments will be c overed for 
dissemination and exploitation. By following this approach, MAGNO will make researching processes more efficient, 
transparent, and responsive to societal challenges while making scientific knowledge easily accessible. In terms of Open 
Access in Scientific Publications, MAGNO is aware of its obligation of ensuring o pen access ( free of charge, online 
access for any user ) to all peer-reviewed scientific publications relating to its result s via an OpenAIRE compliant 
repository (i.e. Zenodo) that facilitates the management of the project data according to the FAIR principle.  
All results generated under the MAGNO scope 
will be part of the main elements of open 
access as defined by the European 
Commission: i) right to read, ii) download and 
print, and iii) right to copy, search, crawl, 
distribute, mine or link. All data generated in 
the project (WP3 to WP6), material design, 
circular optimisation, packaging 
production, standardisation, 
characterisation, and consumer acceptance 
results will be available (accessed, mined, 
exploited, reproduced and disseminated) free 
of charge for any user during and at the end of 
the project.  
1.2.7. Research data management and management of other research outputs 
Since the European Commission encourages Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR) research data 
to maximise the integrity and impact of their research investment, MAGNO will ensure that their research outcomes are 
presented in the most easily accessed, understood, exchanged and reused ways. At the same time, the project will ensure 
data security, accessibility and the validation of results (Table 5).  
Consequently, partners will strive to make all their non-sensitive 
data available as green or gold open-access in the form of journal 
publications, magazine articles, etc. Moreover, MAGNO wants to 
ensure that the funding and regulatory body requirements are met, 
and that research data remain accurate, authentic, reliable and 
complete. MAGNO partners will operate with a common data 
management structure across all WPs. Data of prime importance will 
be collected during WP2, and from WP3 to WP6 . A clear and 
common food packaging management structure will be applied to 
clarify: i) what is produced, type of products, amounts, when, what next, ii) what and when is needed (raw materials, 
amounts), and iii) who is accountable for the logistics and business-related matters. These activities will culminate in the 
production of an efficient Data Management Plan (DMP) that is dedicated to t he management life cycle  for the data 
collected, processed and/or generated within MAGNO. The data will always be treated under the criteria <as open as 
possible, as closed as necessary=. The DMP (M6, M12, M36, and M42) will include information presented in Figure 19. 
IDE will be responsible for managing the Data repository and overseeing that the u ploaded data complies with the 
principles defined in the DMP. This DMP will be regularly revised, and will describe the type of research data to be 
generated and which policies apply to the data (e.g. EMMC dataset (material) desc ription)84. In addition, funding and 
legal policies for data management practices such as access, storage and backup will also be determined. Finally, raw data 
and all other data generated during the project will be uploaded in an open repository to contribute to the Open Access of 
scientific data within Horizon Europe (described in section 1.2.6 Open Science). Should personal data be required for any 
research goal, the EC will be duly informed to ensure full compliance with the Ethics regulations in the HE programme. 
 
84 Emmc info data management plan dataset-description  [accessed on February 2023] 
Figure 18 Preliminary dissemination decision in MAGNO project. 
Figure 19 Data Management Plan Check List 
                                                
                                                   
                               
                                                  
                                                    
                                                   
                                               
                                                
                                                      

HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 18 of 45 
 
During project execution, the project data flow will be exclusively held within the limits of the European Union. Therefore, 
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and local regulations will be the only regulations to be considered. 
Table 5 MAGNO FAIR concept 
F 
Findability: Each item deposited will be issued a persistent and unique identifier (DOI ). Project records will be 
identified with metadata to facilitate findability and ensure traceability (id ORCID). 
A 
Accessibility: each item will be granted either open, closed or embargoed access as per t he provisions in the DMP 
and the IP management strategy. Refer to Table 7 where the preliminary decision to disseminate results is presented 
and to section 1.2.6 for Open Access premises. Any reasons for closed data will  be clearly explained and comply 
with the legitimate reasons allowed by the EC.  
I 
Interoperability: data deposited will be described with rich metadata, compliant with DataCite's Metadata Schema85; 
facilitating interoperability; using ontologies, standard character encodin gs (ASCII, UTF-8) and preferably 
uncompressed. Examples of international standards: innovation management (CEN/TS 16555 -1) and reference 
architectures (RAMI 4.0 and IIRA). 
R 
Reusability: MAGNO will share its produced research data, allowing other scientists or researche rs to replicate or 
validate results. Open data deposited will be released with a Creative Com mons Attribution License (CC BY) or 
equivalent. Items deposited will be retained for the repository lifetime ( 20 years). MAGNO partners will clearly 
define which data will retain value after the end of the project. 
 
1.2.8. Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI  
In recent years, AI projects and applications have increased exponentially beco ming one of the EU9s top strategic 
priorities. Approximately 50% of companies are increasing their usage of AI and their dedicated budgets. Moreover, 
52% of companies have at least one-use case applying AI 86. This tendency has also been reflected in European 
programs (FP7, H2020 and Green Deal). However, despite the high potential for AI, there are also risks such as privacy, 
widening socio-economic inequality, malicious use and reduced job opportunities, among others87. Hence, it is crucial to 
assure its proper use keeping in mind its trustworthiness, as recently stated by the European Commission in the Ethics 
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI88. MAGNO will develop AI algorithms in T2.2 to enhance automatic web searches with 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) during WP2, always following the strictest rules regarding AI defined by EC. 
#§CON-MET-CM§# #§COM-PLE-CP§# #§REL-EVA-RE§#  
2. IMPACT #@IMP-ACT-IA@# 
 
2.1. PROJECT’S PATHWAYS TOWARDS IMPACT 
The world9s plastic carbon footprint accounts for 4.5 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions, and it is growing 89. 
Research shows that the global carbon footprint of plastics has double d since 1995, reaching 2 billion tonnes of CO 2 
equivalent (CO2e) in 2015 90. Hence, this section begins to outline how MAGNO will meet the ambitious objective to 
reach the expected outcomes (EO) and reduce the impact of plastic pollution. 
2.1.1. Contribution to the outcomes specified in the topic 
EO1- INCREASED KNOWLEDGE ON THE IMPACTS OF LITTERED PLASTIC FOOD PACKAGING ON 
THE TERRESTRIAL, FRESHWATER AND MARINE ENVIRONMENTS, AND ECOSYSTEMS, 
INCLUDING THE CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION DIMENSIONS. 
It is well known that most plastic packaging materials are discarded the same year they are produced. This short lifespan, 
together with the large volume of packaging material and the low recyclability of plastics in most regions in the world, 
creates a significant solid waste issue. This is particularly true when plasti cs are not properly collected by waste 
management systems and end up in aquatic ecosystems91. Plastic and microplastics are diverse; they come from many 
different product types; incorporate a broad range of sizes, colours, and morphologies; are composed of various polymers; 
and include a broad array of chemical additives. Microplastics can accumulate organic chemicals and trace metals from 
the surrounding environment. They are known to sorb persistent organic pollutants, suc h as polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons, and Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)92. However, their impacts on the terrestrial, freshwater and 
 
85 https://schema.datacite.org/ 
86 Algorithmia, <2021 Enterprise Trends in Machine Learning= 
87 Jhon Zysman et. al. (2020); Governing AI: Understandi ng the Limits, 
Possibility, and Risks of AI in an Era of Intelligent Tools and Systems - 
Berkley University 
88 European Commission: High-Level expert group on artificial intelligence, 
<Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI= 
89 Science Daily. 2 December 2021. Growing carbon foot print for plastics. 
Science Daily. 6 April 2022. Web. 
<https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/12/211202113504.htm> 
90 Growing carbon footprint for plastics Source ETH-Zurich - 
link 
91 B. Geueke et al. Food packaging in the circular ec onomy: overview of 
chemical safety aspects for commonly used materials, J. Clean. Prod. (2018) 
92 Rochman CM. 2015. The complex mixture, fate and toxicity of chemicals 
associated with plastic debris in the marine environment. I n Bergmann M, 
Gutow L, Klages M, eds, Marine Anthropogenic Litter. Sp ringer, Cham, 
Switzerland, pp 117–140. 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 19 of 45 
 
marine environments and ecosystems is still lacking research93. To this end, MAGNO integrates a set of well aligned 
tasks and deliverables to increase knowledge on the impacts of littered plastic food packaging on the terrestrial, 
freshwater and marine environments and ecosystems . In T1.5, four reviews will be created and published as open 
journals to update the current scenarios and trends for plastic packaging. A t least five of the most hazardous chemical 
types and their main uses (printing inks, plastics and coatings) will be evaluated in detail to determine how they pollute 
soil, water and air (SO1.1). It is here that HOLOSS as sustainability and circularity expert will include end of life 
practices to analyse with UOB the health and environmental impacts of plastics in ecosystems (SO1.6). From T1.5, the 
main sources of hazardous chemicals and microplastic generation will be revised . The studies will also be focused on 
reducing harmful health and environmental impacts. The main parameters to be stud ied will include: i) difficulty of 
detection, ii) under-reported polluting polymer sources, iii) ecotoxicity, iv) un known human health effects, and v) 
unknown links to other global environmental issues. Additionally, as stated in SO1.1, a direct link between food actors, 
pollution generation and the way plastics affect human health will be assessed (D4.1) to generate a series of strategies to 
reduce the impacts ( SO1.5). During T3.4, waste management of packaging production, waste material generation, 
process optimisation, overproduction, improved equipment maintenance and minimising downtime will be studied and 
included in D3.2. As part of T4.2, detailed research for different environments will be performed to ident ify negative 
ecosystem impacts and how to prevent them ( D4.1). Finally, T5.4 will perform a LCA on litter impact and GHG 
emissions complemented by other relevant impact categories ( D5.2). All in all, reviews (open journals) and the set of 
deliverables (PU) will produce short and long-term resources to increase the expected knowledge.  
EO2- UPTAKE OF INNOVATIVE BUSINESS STRATEGIES, DESIGN AND PRODUC TION MODELS TO 
PREVENT AND REDUCE THE USE OF PLASTIC FOOD PACKAGING 
MAGNO fully dedicates its second objective (#2) to addressing this EO. This objective is broken down into 6 SO that 
structure the development and validation of the strategies with the respective ambitious KPIs. In WP2, MAGNO creates 
and validates the Digital Twin Ecosystem  as an assistance tool for novel strategies . This strategy is completely 
innovative and represents D2.4 and D2.5. Both deliverables are 
public, where multi-actors will validate results and a workshop will 
be held to present all the findings to the food sector. Subsequently, 
from its disruptive character to the development of the workshop, 
including the validation with multi-stakeholders, the effect in the 
short and long term of this Digital Twin development will be 
illustrated. On the one hand, in a short amount of time it guarantees 
to inform the main actors (workshops and dissemination and 
communication activities – T7.4) while on the other hand, its public 
nature maximises its adoption on a much larger scale. T5.5 and T6.2 
will support the development of the innovative business strategies, 
facilitating the inclusion of success stories in environmental, 
economic, and social matters and their contribution to the 
implementation of the circular economy. T6.4 will increase the 
potential impact by developing and making accessible the MAGNO 
web platform (section 1.1.2 - Ambition: Consumer acceptance) 
for consumer acceptance and citizen tools. Another strategic task 
that MAGNO includes is T6.5 where 6 cases will be identified and studied to demonstrate the feasib ility of using the 
novel approaches developed in the project. 
EO3- ADOPTION OF INCREASINGLY SUSTAINABLE, EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT  FIT-FOR-
PURPOSE PACKAGING SOLUTIONS BY FOOD OPERATORS, AND REDUCTION OF THE  
DEPENDENCY ON FOSSIL-BASED MATERIALS, THUS CONTRIBUTING TO EU CLIMATE ACTION; 
The project activities included in WP3, WP4 and WP5 will cover: i) Packaging manufacturing; ii) Waste management; 
(iii) Packaging usage; and iv) End of life. All the results will feed the Digital Twin to analyse a variety of future European 
scenarios and how different business strategies impact plastic food packaging. P ackaging designs based on edible 
materials, mono-materials, percentage of recycled content, biomimicry soluti ons, reusable packaging, minimalist 
(reduction of material use), compostable/biodegradable packages, and smart packaging solutions including the use of 
sensors, QR codes, labels, and technology will be addressed in T3.2. Manufacturing routes for conventional and new 
packaging products are also addressed in T3.3. Classical manufacture routes such as injection moulding, blow moulding, 
 
93 Helm PA. 2017. Improving microplastics source apportionment: A role for microplastic morphology and taxo nomy? Anal Methods 9:1328–1331. 
Figure 20 Uptake of innovative business strategies, design, and 
production models 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 20 of 45 
 
extrusion, rotational moulding, thermoforming and compression moulding will be assessed. In addition, new routes such 
as additive manufacturing, microwave heating systems, ultrasound, plasma, and laser technol ogy will also be covered. 
Innovations in processes such as the inclusion of industry 4.0/5.0, digital twins, m achine learning aided processes, 
decision support systems, and energy management during production will also be evaluated in order to maximise benefits 
and increase uptake. Overall, the project aims to i) demonstrate the p otential reduction of plastic packaging pollution 
when multi-actor strategies are adopted by showcasing all project results, and ii) create an environment in which 
innovation reaches food operators and society while reducing the dependency on fossil-based materials and contributing 
to EU climate action. 
EO4- INCREASED REUSE AND RECYCLING OF SUSTAINABLE PACKAGING. 
The increase in the reuse and recycling of sustainable plastics is driven by the generation of knowledge (EO1), consumer 
awareness (EO5), the development and adoption of sustainable, effective and efficient fit- for-purpose packaging 
solutions (EO3) while accompanied by a proper strategy of uptake of innovative business strategies (EO2). In this sense, 
all the tasks, tools, instruments and EO mentioned in EO1, EO2, EO3 and EO5 influence the successful achievement 
of EO4. All of this work will be completed under the scope of T3.5, T4.5, and T5.5.  These tasks seek to address 
packaging usage for optimised strategies, waste collection and sorting, chemical and mechanical recycling and 
alternatives. Results will be integrated into the Ecosystem Digital Twin assistance tool for novel strategies. 
EO5- INCREASED CONSUMER ACCEPTANCE OF SUSTAINABLE, EFFICIENT AND FIT-FOR-PURPOSE 
FOOD PACKAGING SOLUTIONS INCLUDING WHERE APPROPRIATE THE NON-USE OF AN Y TYPE 
OF PACKAGING; 
As already stated, the MAGNO project will create a user-friendly inter face web platform (Figure 12) dedicated to 
increase consumer acceptance (Section 1.1.2. – Consumer acceptance). The platform will contain a vast number of 
workshop videos, results of packaging manufacturing ( WP3), packaging usage ( WP4), sustainability assessments 
(WP5), and novel business approaches (WP6-WP7). To maximise consumer engagement, tools such as Marine debris 
tracker, plastic patrol, plastic score and plastic tide will be linked with the MAGNO platform. Additionally, information 
about the sustainability of food packing, including a list of packaging solut ion options, will be presented through four 
workshops (one per stage of the project) ( T6.1.2). The events will encourage consumers to recycle packaging by 
providing clear instructions on the packaging itself and circulating information about local recycling programs. Moreover, 
the LCA (T5.4) will provide a success story in the field and will strongly support not only consumer acceptance of sustainable, 
efficient, and fit-for-purpose food packaging solutions but also further exploitation. Furthermore, the platform will also display 
the outcomes of any possible optimisation generated by the Ecosystem Digital Twin, contr ibuting to the enhancement of the 
EU's standing. 
2.1.2. Contribution to the wider impacts in the destination 
MAGNO will significantly contribute to Destination Impact (DI) of Cluster 6: <Reducing the environmental impact and 
pollution of food systems=. Scientific, societal and economic/technological impacts are describ ed in detail below. 
Additionally, Table 6 presents the relationship between the expected outcomes and the WI. In particular, it highlights 
the main EO that will have an influence on each WI. However, as explained in EO4, MAGNO  has created an 
intrinsically related concept, objectives and WPs that will have a significant impact due to the existing synergies. 
Table 6 Expected outcomes and wider impacts 
WI EO 
Move towards achieving clean, unpolluted surface water and groundwater bodies 
in the EU and Associated Countries … 
EO1 to EO5 
Balance N/P flows within safe ecological boundaries at regional and local level , 
helping restore ecosystems… 
EO1, EO2 
Strengthen circular bio-based systems to operate within planetary boundaries , 
replacing fossil-based systems and …. 
EO4 
Substitute harmful chemicals for safer and more sustainable alternatives, notably by 
boosting innovative biotechnology and other sustainable technologies 
EO1, EO3, EO4 
2.1.3. Contribution to Key Impact Pathways  
MAGNO will contribute towards achieving the expected impact from the Union´ s investments in R&I actions at 
scientific, societal, and technological/economic level. Thus, it supports the realisation of EU objectives and policies. In 
specific, the project will contribute to Horizon Europe Key Impact Pathways as follows:  
 
SCIENTIFIC IMPACT MAGNO represents a forum for fruitful discussions, debates, and scientific efforts to transform 
the gaps and ambitions  identified in Section 1.2, namely circular models for packaging, digital twin and health and 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 21 of 45 
 
environmental impacts. The aim is to produce high-quality new knowledge that goes beyond the state-of-the-art 
(SoA). Additionally, MAGNO will impact beyond the consortium, making these its te chnologies available to EU 
academia, industry, and society, providing knowledge and tools to streamline R&I. The new knowledge beyond the 
SoA will become influential in those disciplines or fields already described (Section 1.2.3) and worldwide through the 
target number of expected publications, conferences, industrial fair/exhibition, innovation radar, etc… as shown in Table 
7 (Section 2.2.1) . To increase its impact, MAGNO will ensure open access  to be more efficient, transparent, and 
responsive to societal challenges aligned with the EC´s goals on open science. Finally, the Dissemination & 
Communication (D&C) plan ( Section 2.2) will release the project results to EU industry and academia. The KPIs in 
Table 7 show the commitment of MAGNO partners to the diffusion of knowledge to engage society in future R&I actions. 
 
SOCIETAL IMPACT MAGNO makes its R&I results work for society by incorporating strategies such as gender in the 
research process, in science knowledge-making, and the science value system (Section 1.2.5). It will also engage citizens 
(consumers) who can be researchers, users, and policymakers in the co-creation of R&I content through T7.1 and D&C 
Plan. The project will increase awareness of the new MAGNO outcomes among all interested parties. It is important to 
remember that MAGNO includes smart solutions using AI. The promotion of digit al tasks is key, as people with high 
levels of digital skills will be more trusting of improving quality of life by boosting social cohesion and, consequently, 
happiness and well-being in the EU. On the other hand, the project will represent a lighthouse project for new 
strategies to prevent and reduce packaging pollution, thereby attracting and retaining EU and global talent. Europe 
will be seen as an attractive option for world-class experts capable of adopting new strategies and business models while 
ensuring the well-being of society. MAGNO also aims to improve the research and innovation culture in EU. In this line, 
MAGNO will create more and better jobs (5-12 jobs per 1 M€ invested in actions aligned with MAGNO, such as, 
new plastic materials and strategies, digital technologies…). In summary, MAGNO will raise the awareness amongst 
citizens (from younger generations to elderly) about the importance of imp lementing new strategies to prevent and 
reduce packaging pollution and introduce policies which support R&I for the green transition.  
 
ECONOMIC/TECHNOLOGICAL IMPACT MAGNO will produce profitable results (Table 8) which are planned to be 
commercialised ( exploitation strategy plan in section 2.2.1 ). The project will offer significant value-creation 
opportunities for sustainable and smart solutions on packaging, create new jobs as mentioned before, and accelerate 
economic growth. Furthermore, MAGNO smart functionalities and AI are in l ine with the Digital targets for 2030 94, 
promoting the digital transformation with 75% up-take by EU companies. On project completion, effort and investment 
will be needed to take project results to TRL9. This typically requires an investment which is at least equal to the budget 
being mobilised for this project ( 4-6M€). EU R&I funding for MAGNO contributes to building better conditions to 
leverage private R&I investment95. In the future, subsequent investments to support growth (i.e., productive capacity 
adaptation) are expected to add 4-5M€. Considering market demand of food packaging, together with the competitiveness 
of MAGNO solutions, relevant investments can be expected from end-users (those producing the system and component) 
to integrate the already developed solutions with participation from the i ndustrial sector capable of exploiting the 
MAGNO solutions (i.e., Ecosystem Digital Twin, Web platform, strategies) . Furthermore, MAGNO will directly 
increase the size of the industry through the number of jobs currently gene rated and will support the reshoring of EU 
industry. 
2.1.4. Requirements and potential barriers 
RISK-AVERSION AND HIGHLY CAPITAL-INTENSIVE TECHNOLOGIES  food packaging manufacturing 
industries are naturally conservative, especially SMEs, and risk averse due to a lack of reliable data on the feasibility and 
efficacy of its untested solutions (e.g., future material design and new packaging products). Consequently, unwillingness 
among companies to adapt new processes and strategies is commonplace and SMEs are the most exposed.  
ACTIONS TO MITIGATE To encourage industries to think about new innovative production methods, MAGNO will 
provide virtual representation of the European packaging value chain for predict ing the future effects when modifying 
our way of designing, producing, using, and recycling food plastic packages (WP2). This will influence decision makers' 
perceptions of uncertainty and partially de-risk the strategies to improve the performance of the packaging sector. Finally, 
the sustainability and circularity tasks (T5.4 and T5.5) will provide a success story in the field and will strongly support 
not only adoption of these strategies but also further exploitation. 
LACK OF STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATIONS  The compliance with existing 
standards and regulations, and especially with new versions or new standards is an obs tacle that can limit the adoption 
 
94 Europe9s Digital Decade: Digital targets for 2030 
95 Ognyanova D (2016): Public Support to private R&D- H ow effective it 
is?, DG RTD Policy Briefs series, forthcoming 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 22 of 45 
 
and performance of the MAGNO developments. Moreover, the regulatory framework needs to provide clear rules and 
responsibilities concerning ownership, competition, technical modalities, and financial conditions96 
ACTIONS TO MITIGATE T4.4 will support operators and SMEs to comply with the EU requirements. All information 
collected is then used to assess the need for new or updated standards and regulations. The sust ainability activities will 
assess this issue by advancing the knowledge in evidence-based policy development and i mplementation Therefore, 
policy makers can use MAGNO outcomes from T4.4 to develop meaningful legislative measures that will truly close the 
gaps in existing legislation. 
MARKET UNCERTAINTY Despite geopolitical events and economic uncertainty, the food plastic packaging market 
remains active. However, customer demands and rationale behind the heterogeneous market is generating difficulty for 
detecting the market potential of alternatives such as recycled plastics and bioplastics production. Novel approaches for 
business may lead to a bottleneck in the supply for certain raw materials and/or an excessively expensive price.  
ACTIONS TO MITIGATE MAGNO has already explored the current market potential (section 2.2) and this w ill be 
continued in T6.2. during the project implementation and at project completion. T5.4 will develop LCA studies, which 
without question, will provide defence instruments by ensuring an environmental and socio-economic level-playing field 
to create a Europe which is innovator, competitive and investor friendly. 
CONSUMER ACCEPTANCE The consumer and public, in general, hold the power to make MAGNO solutions a 
success or a failure. Limited knowledge about plastic food packaging (and its associated impacts) makes society reluctant 
to accept change. For example, consumers especially lack knowledge about the di fferent plastic packaging types and 
their impacts97. Dilkes-Hoffman et al. (2019)98 found that consumers generally have limited knowledge about plastic and 
bioplastic. Therefore, information which is more quality focused and understandable is required. Unfortunately, though, 
such information remains scarce.  
ACTIONS TO MITIGATE MAGNO will develop WP6 which is dedicated to Consumer acceptance. Critical tasks will 
focus on consumer acceptance, e.g., consumer and sustainability improvement by the web  platform for consumer 
acceptance and citizen tools. Additionally, LCA, LCC and S-LCA in T5.4 will assess recyclability, reuse, waste 
reduction, litter impact and GHG emissions to promote circular approaches. A ll these actions will be social influence 
tools to increase their acceptance by highlighting the benefits in terms of safet y and human health risk, job creation 
opportunities and new skills for the new work-force generation. Moreover, the project will provide an extensive 
exploitation plan to disseminate and exploit the MAGNO results produced during b oth the project execution stage and 
at project completion which will help improve the information shared with society. 
 
2.1.5. Scale and significance of the project’s contribution to the expected outcomes and impacts 
 
Scale: Development of  Ecosystem Digital 
Twin to help to define current problems and 
make decisions for future solutions, considering 
sustainability dimensions (business, social, 
environment) and legislation (EO1, EO2 and 
EO4) 
Significance: It is estimated that 95% of the value of plastic 
packaging material is lost to the economy after a short first-use cycle. 
Globally, researchers estimate that the production and incineration of 
plastic pumped more than 850 million tonnes of greenhouse gases  
into the atmosphere in 201999. Plastic represents up to 85% of marine 
debris items  and 72% of drinking water samples show 
microplastics100. 
Scale: Approach to 
improve packaging 
manufacture, use 
end-of-life practices 
(EO1, EO2 and 
EO3) 
Significance: Packaging is one of the main users of virgin materials as 40% of plastics and 50% 
of paper used in the EU is destined for packaging101. As a matter of fact, in 2018, the European 
food sector used more than 1130 billion packaging,  mostly made of plastic. Approximately 
12,000 hazardous chemicals are used in packaging and other forms of food contact materials 
(FCMs)102. In the packaging industry, food packaging accounts for 50% of the plastics derived 
from fossil fuels 103. In order to reach a recycling rate of 50% for plastic packaging waste the 
 
96 EC-Annual Single Market Report. 2021 
97 Boesen, S., Bey, N., Niero, M., 2019. Environmental  Sustainability of 
Liquid Food Packaging : Is there a gap between Danish consumers9 
perception and learnings from life cycle assessment? J. Cl ean. Prod. 210 
(1193–1206), 11. 
98 Dilkes-Hoffman, L., Ashworth, P., Laycock, B., Pratt, S., Lant, P., 2019a. 
Public Attitudes Towards Bioplastics - Knowledge, p erception and end-of-
life management. Resour. Conserv. Recycle. 151, 104479 
99 OCDE. Plastic waste and recycling in the EU: facts and figures. 2021 - link 
100 C. J. Rhodes et al. Plastic pollution and potential solutions. National 
Library of Medicine 2018 - link 
101 EC. European Green Deal: Putting an end to wasteful packaging, boosting 
reuse and recycling. 2022 - link 
102 What the EU can do to reduce single use packaging and plastic pollution 
in food services? SURFRIDER 2022- link 
103 L. K. Ncube et al. Environmental impact of food pac kaging materials. 
National Library of Medicine 2020 - link 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 23 of 45 
 
material and packaging design system must be modified104.  
Scale: MAGNO as 
lighthouse project for 
integrating innovation 
business, sustainability, 
and end of life options in 
order to support a circular 
economy approach (EO4 
and EO5) 
 
Significance: In 2021, the plastics industry which accounts for more than 52,000 companies, 
directly employed more than 1.5 million people  in the European Union, producing 57.2 
million tons of plastic, reaching a positive trade balance of 14.4 billion euros105. The linear 
economy only recycles 2% of plastics globally106. In the EU during 2018, 32,5% of plastic 
waste was recycled, 42.6% ended up in incineration and 24.9% was landfilled. More than 
12 million tons of plastic waste ends up in the ocean each year. Nearly 700 marine species 
are directly threatened by plastic pollution 102. Study shows that human consumption of 
microplastics via take-away food is about 2,977 microplastics per person per year 107. It 
is estimated that human consumption of microplastics via air and commonly consumed food 
ranged from 203 to 332 particles per person  per day . Also, individuals who meet the 
recommended water intake only through bottled sources may be ingesting an  additional 
90,000 microplastics annually, compared to 4,000 microplastics for those consuming only 
tap water108. 
Scale: MAGNO 
platform to 
increase consumer 
acceptance (EO4 
and EO5) 
Significance: On average, each European generates almost 180 kg of packaging waste per year101. 
34% of European consumers identified plastic waste as the biggest environmental problem and 
70% of Europeans say they expect to see a decrease in plastics used for food packaging109. Survey 
shows that 89% say they think about the negative impact of plastic packaging but are not 
sufficiently informed110. 
 
2.2. MEASURES TO MAXIMISE IMPACT – DISSEMINATION, EXPLOITATION AND COMMUNICATION  
#@COM-DIS-VIS-CDV@# 
This section outlines a credible and realistic path to 
deliver MAGNO innovations to all food system multi-
actors and maximise impact  during and after the 
project. The Plan for Exploitation and Dissemination of 
Results (PEDR) including Communications tools is 
drafted at proposal stage by the consortium and will be 
fully developed in WP7. 
2.2.1. Dissemination strategy plan 
The project aims to reach stakeholders from food system 
multi-actor groups: researchers, food business 
operators, food packaging producers, developers of sustainable packaging, packagi ng converters and recyclers, 
consumers, local and regional authorities and other relevant actors. The dissemin ation activities will be reviewed with 
each update of the PEDR and modified if necessary. 
Some foreseen dissemination activities are listed in 
Figure 21. A primary objective of the dissemination 
strategy will be stakeholder engagement . The 
consortium partners will identify and agree on the 
relevant stakeholder groups and individuals and the 
intended level of engagement: information, 
consultation, interaction,  or collaboration . Figure 22 
details the foreseen key messages to transfer to relevant 
stakeholders and the envisaged communication 
channels. MAGNO will encourage disseminating 
research results by participating in a series of events 
 
104 J. F. Lopez-Aguilar et al. A realisctic material flo w… effective 
recyclability. Sustainable Production and Consumption 2022 - link 
105 Plastic – the Facts 2022. Plastic Europe 2022 –link 
106 J. Balwad et. al. Packaging plastic waste management…using Analytical 
Hierarchy Process (AHP). Procedia CIRP 2021- link 
107 F. Du et al. Microplastic in take-out food containers. Journal of Hazardous 
Materials 2020 - link 
108 K. D. Cox et al. Human Consumption of Microplastics.  American 
Chemical Society 2019 - link 
109 Plastic packaging in the food sector. ING Economics D epartment 2019 - 
link 
110 M. W. Macena et al. Plastic Food Packaging: … Recycling. Sustainability 
2021 - link 
Figure 21 Overview of dissemination activities planned within MAGNO 
Figure 22 Key messages to industrial, scientific and public stakeholders 

HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 24 of 45 
 
and publications as described in Table 7. 
Table 7 KPI Scientific results dissemination and targets 
Name  Key performance indicators 
Scientific journals At least 10 publications in one of the following (non-exhaustive) journals: Biomaterials, 
Polymers, Food Packaging and Shelf Life, Food chemistry, Business horizons, Journal of 
Business Research. 
Practice abstracts At least 10 practice abstracts  targeting food multi-actors. Sectors such as agriculture, 
forestry, rural, and related areas will be included. This includes actions to avoid p ollution 
in soils, water and air, as well as different parts of the value chains that r equires practice 
methods (producers, packers, retailer, etc). 
Conferences  At least 12 presentations  in the following (non-exhaustive) international conferences: 
Emerging Food Packaging Technologies Conference (ICEFPT), Food Contact Materials 
and Risk Assessment Conference (ICFCMRA), Food Bioscience Conference (ICFB), Food 
Security and Stability Conference, Paris (ICFSS). 
Industrial Fair/exhibition  At least 3 presentations in the following (non-exhaustive) international fairs/exhibitions: 
EMBAX (International Trade Fair of Packaging, Printing and Reprography), 
COSMOPACK (Exhibition of Creative Packaging), FOODEX (International Exhibit ion 
for the Food and Drink Processing, Packaging, Food Ingredients and Logistics Industries).  
Horizon Results Platform At least 6 results presented during the project execution. 
Horizon Impact Award One application 
Workshops At least 13 workshops with food system multi-actors. These workshops will be targeting 
practice methods that can be a valuable way to share knowledge, develop skills,  and 
promote best practices among participants. 
Innovation Radar At least 6 project results. 
2.2.2. Exploitation strategy plan  
After M5, KERs will be revised and if necessary updated to determine the p roject priorities based on three main 
parameters: i) Degree of innovation, ii) Exploitability, and iii) Impact on the Food system Industry. The sum of the 
three factors will define the importance of each KER and determine the pr oper exploitation strategy for the project and 
specific business strategies for the project partners. Table 8 shows the p reliminary list of the main expected results and 
its corresponding exploitation route.  
Table 8. Overview of main expected project results, owners, type, protection and areas of application 
Partner Expected foreground Type† 
Prot
ectio
n‡ 
Potential market 
All 
Database pre-processed including the whole value chain of 
food packaging  
I.S. L Food business operators, Market 
analysis, designer, producers. 
Practice abstracts and practice methods R O.T Operators, producers, developers 
in food sector 
Contribution to standardisation (either feedback on existing 
standards for their revision or proposals for new standards) 
R O.T. Standardisation communities, 
incl. Manufacturer sector 
IDE 
Ecosystem Digital twin software integrating all modules S L Food multi-actors, researchers, 
and food operators. 
NLP algorithms to automatic extract information from the 
world wide web. S L Researchers and academy  
IRIS, 
IDE 
Web platform for consumer acceptance S O Consumers, associations, policy 
makers.  
†Type: I.S. – Integrated system; R – Result; P – Product; S – Software application; D.M. – Distinct Module 
‡Protection: O – Ownership; P – Patenting; L – Licensing; O.T. – Other protection 
Market analysis and potential of the food packaging industry  
Over the past decade, the global packaging industry has enjoyed steady growth, driven by shifts in choice of substrates, 
expansion of new markets and accommodation of consumers’ demands111. Due to rising environmental concerns and 
growing government regulations regarding the use of plastics, sustainabili ty trends including upcycling and the 
 
111 McKinsey & Company (2019) No ordinary disruption – Winning with new models in packaging 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 25 of 45 
 
introduction of bio-degradable 
plastics will be one of the critical 
packaging market trends during 
the next 5 to 10 years 112,113. The 
global packaging market 
reached 235 billion EUR in 
2023114, with an estimated 4% 
compound annual growth rate 
(CAGR) predicted between 2023-
2027112,113, and 6% CAGR 
between 2024-2030, increasing 
up to 1408 billion EUR by 
2030114. Europe9s Packaging 
market accounts for the third-
largest market share (22%), after 
North-America (28%) and Asia-
Pacific regions (35%) 111,112,114, the 
latter being the largest market for 
packaging in the world as shown in 
Market Share Figure 23. This is 
mainly due to the large and 
growing population in the Asia-
Pacific region, rising consumer spending, and increasing urbanisation114. Nevertheless, Europe’s packaging market is 
highly developed and competitive, with a heavy focus on innovation, sustainability and quality. The food industry is 
an important end-use market for the 
European packaging industry, with an 
emphasis on sustainable packaging 
materials and technologies that may 
improve product shelf life and 
decrease food waste114.  
Regarding materials use, plastics 
account for the majority of food 
packaging materials (37%), 
followed by paper and cardboard 
(34%), and glass (11%). In order to 
reduce the impacts of plastic 
packaging pollution, bioplastics have 
been considered in the last decade as 
alternative feedstocks to fossil fuel-
based plastics due to their similarities 
in physical and chemical properties and lower environmental impact 10. For the next five years, global bioplastics 
production capacity is expected to increase by 300,000 tonnes115 from the current production of 2.2 million tonnes 
in 2022116 (detailed in Figure 24). Polylactic acid (PLA), starch and bio-based po lyethylene (PE) are the most widely 
produced materials (20.7%, 17.9% and 14.8% of bioplastics global production res pectively) used in rigid (35%) and 
flexible (65%) packaging. This production capacity distribution by packaging types correlates with the foreseen CAGR 
for flexible (between 4,5 and 5,5%117,118) and rigid (between 3,3 and 4,7 %119,120) packaging during the next 5 years, 
where recycled and bio-based feedstocks are expected to increase accordingly.  One of the main challenges in this 
green transition is the cost-competitiveness of bioplastics, driven main ly by the cost of raw materials and processes 10, 
however, consumer perception plays a big role as a growth driver in the food p ackaging sector: recyclability, 
 
112 Mordor Intelligence  [accessed on March 2023] 
113 Analysis Technavio  [accessed on March 2023] 
114 Market research future [accessed on March 2023] 
115 Advanced Materials 2030 Initiative (2022) Materials 2030 Roadmap 
116 European-bioplastics [accessed on March 2023] 
117 Markets and Markets [accessed on March 2023] 
118 Globe Newswire [accessed on March 2023] 
119 Mordor Intelligence [accessed on March 2023] 
120 Markets and Markets [accessed on March 2023]  
Figure 24. Global production of bioplastics and packaging market share 
Figure 23. Global food packaging market share 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 26 of 45 
 
biodegradability and health impacts  are among the consumer9s priorities when purchasing sustainable packaging 
goods75,121,122. Furthermore, the perceived sustainability of non-use packaging in baked goods, fruits and vegetables, 
nuts and dried goods have increased in recent years due to the option to buy the product individually and for the desired 
quantity123. Unfortunately, not all consumers are willing to pay more for environmental ly friendly packaging if other 
aspects, such as pricing, packaging design and clear labelling are not correctly addressed. Thus, in addition to technical 
and cost requirements, food tendencies (such as the increase of convenience food consumption) and demographic 
differences must be considered for the full adoption of sustainable packaging products and process es in 
Europe122,123.  
Business model 
The different business 
strategies for MAGNO 
will target the whole 
packaging value 
chain (raw materials, 
design, production, 
usage and end of life), 
and the main market 
segments dedicated 
for the upscale of the 
MAGNO developed 
strategies as shown in 
the different reports. 
All multi-actors will be 
involved to explore the 
complete food system 
and potential 
applications beyond the project´s life. Specific value propositions will be defined based on delivering the value of 
the innovative sustainable products at an appropriate and competitive cost . Figure 25 shows a canvas of the 
sustainable business model using a 3-bottom line (social, economy, and life cycle) approach for measuring performance. 
This scheme considers the needs of multi-actor , gives priority to consumers, and promotes environmental 
stewardship124. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 GWI (2019) Sustainable Packaging Unwrapped 
122 Confente, I. et al. Journal of Business Research, 112, 2020  
123 Otto, S., et al. Journal of Cleaner Production, 298, 126733, 2021 w 
124 Nancy Bocken, Sustainable Business Models, in Decent Work and 
Economic Growth, 2021. 
Figure 25 MAGNO Sustainable Business Model canvas 

HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 27 of 45 
 
2.2.3. Communication activities 
Figure 26 summarises the main communication activities promoting MAGNO. Communi cation activities will include 
practice-oriented elements covering items from clean messages to visual aids, success stories and feedback mechanisms. 
This will promote the EU-wide communication approach, which involves at the sam e time the food-multi-actors 
contacted during MAGNO. 
2.2.4. Strategy for management and protection of intellectual property 
MAGNO will ensure I.P. protection during and after the execution of the project. Every partner involved with I.P. 
protection will identify any necessary IPR during the project execution. Ther efore, no result will be publicly 
disseminated/communicated before being formally evaluated by each partner under the guidance of the DNV and Project 
Coordinator. During the General Assembly, results defined as more generic can  be disseminated to the broader target 
groups and stakeholders. The idea is to make every possible effort to have the I.P. as 8clean9 as possible. In other words, 
the project aims at making the ownership clearly defined. From the beginning of the project, the DNV with the support 
of the consortium partners, will prepare a preliminary list of the results and partners involved as part of the exploitation 
strategies. Hereby, minimising later conflicts is the target from project inception. This list will be revised and updated 
throughout the project, including all the outcomes of the R&D activities. Fur thermore, the exploitation of the results is 
available for each partner unless other conditions are agreed upon by all part ners involved. A list of the relevant 
background I.P. from each partner will be incorporated in the C.A.  The access rights by the other partners in the 
project are also stated in the same document. Table 3, presented previously, shows a brief list of the partners9 background 
(including know-how and expertise), and Table 8 highlighted foreground I.P. 
#§COM-DIS-VIS-CDV§#
Figure 26 MAGNO Communication activities 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic p ackaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 28 of 45 
 
2.3.  SUMMARY – KEY ELEMENT OF THE IMPACT SECTION 
 
 
SPECIFIC NEEDS 
• A sustainable production of food 
packaging, and bio-based materials 
that converts the classical lineal 
approach to circular one. 
• Adequate evaluation of entire food 
packaging value chain to ensure 
environmentally friendly production 
from materials sourcing to End-Of-
Life (recycle & reuse). 
• Novel materials created with bio 
and sustainable sources that possess 
better properties than conventional 
ones. 
• Upgrade production lines (retrofit 
and new disruptive equipment) to 
boost the packaging at European 
level. 
• Circular business implementation to 
reduce environmental impacts, 
ensuring a sustainable economy. 
TARGET GROUPS 
• Raw Material producing industries. 
• SMEs interested in adopting new 
technologies/knowledge. 
• General public, citizens, individuals 
interested in circular economy 
concepts and circular value chains. 
• Scientific community, universities, 
research centers, private sector. 
• Policymakers, regulatory bodies, 
standardisation authorities, 
environmental consultancies 
• Food multi-actors from different 
sections of the value chains  
EXPECTED RESULTS 
• Demonstrate the feasibility of circular approach in 
food packaging system to overcome innovative 
materials, productions, use and end of life. 
• Demonstrate disruptive innovation of business in 
food packaging sector. 
• Boost efficiency and productivity of food 
packaging from design to end of life approaches. 
• Facilitate the communication with consumers by 
carrying out a circular and sustainability business 
assessment of value chains.  
• To create an Ecosystem digital twin able to emulate 
the food packaging value chain under different 
scenarios. 
• To create a web platform for consumer acceptance 
that will be the main flag of the project in 
communication and dissemination activities. 
• To create 10-15 new employees, from which 5 of 
them will be PhD (during project).  
OUTCOMES 
• High use of the scientific discovery published in 
Open Science. 
• A series of practices methods and practice abstract 
for food multi-actors. 
• Better understanding by consumers of the role food 
packaging can play in reaching climate neutrality by 
2030. 
• Exploitation of the final version of the Ecosystem 
Digital Twin and Web application for consumers. 
• High number of SMEs meeting requirements of 
relevant EU legislations. 
• Use of innovative business developed by MAGNO 
strategies. 
• Strategies to improve the whole value chain of food 
packaging by reducing the use of plastic. 
IMPACTS 
• Social:  i) Reduction of the ethical concerns related to the use of food 
packaging. ii) new rules and regulations for production and end of life 
strategies. iii) Consumer acceptance for novel approaches and strategies. 
• Environmental: i) Increase the usability of materials and products after its 
useful life, by including approaches for reuse & recycle ii) Promoting circular 
value chains to enhance the sources of raw materials and closing loops (35% 
of plastic recuperation). iii) Strategies that will reduce pollution (reduction of 
20-30% in CO2 emissions, reduction of micro-plastic 69-81%). 
• Scientific:  i) Increase the reach of bio-based materials; ii) Creating new 
knowledge in production, manufacturing tools and equipment; iii) Generating 
know-how through exploitation and dissemination plan; iv) To create a series 
of events where food multi-actors can be involved (technical and practice 
approaches). 
 
DISS. & EXP. & COMMUNICATION MEASURES 
Exploitation of the new product:  
• Ecosystem digital twin (licenced) 
• Launching a new strategy to reduce pollution from plastics 
• Proposing further research around business enhancement for different 
sectors in food packaging sector 
• Proposing circular approaches to produce, use and recycle food packaging 
(bio content, GHG emissions, energy sources). 
 
Dissemination towards the scientific community and industry: 
• Publications in open access journals and online repositories. 
• Practice abstract to promote practice methods 
• Participation in conferences to disseminate the project outcomes 
• MAGNO web platform for consumer acceptance  
• Wide dissemination of all public reports and publications, including on the 
horizon results platform, the innovation radar, and other EC publications.  
• Final event held jointly with another EU project to disseminate key 
outcomes to stakeholders.  
 
Communication measures: 
Awareness campaign to demonstrate the benefits of using novel (bio-based) 
materials against conventional ones, and circular approaches that can help the 
EU reach climate neutrality by 2030. 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 29 of 45 
 
#§IMP-ACT-IA§# 
3. QUALITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION #@QUA-LIT-QL@# #@WRK-PLA-WP@# 
 
3.1. WORK PLAN AND RESOURCES 
MAGNO is composed of 7 WPs. The 
project plan is shown in Figure 27 and 
Figure 28.  MAGNO Gantt chart . In 
WP1, the general management 
(including technical and financial 
coordination) and project set-up is 
performed to ensure its proper 
execution. During WP2, an informatic 
tool (Ecosystem Digital Twin) will be 
created to support the findings of 
MAGNO. WP3 and WP4 study the 
whole food packaging value chain  to 
obtain the best strategies for improving 
the food system. Within WP5, the sustainability of the food packaging system is evaluated. WP6 is dedicated to market 
and business-related topics , consumer acceptance and in creating the web platform (science citizen tool). Finally, 
dissemination, exploitation and communication activities will be developed in WP7. 
 
Figure 28. MAGNO Gantt chart 
Table 9: List of WPs 
WP. Work Package Title Participant No Lead Participant  PMs Start  End  
1 Set-up of MAGNO for sustainable and smart 
packaging solutions 1 IDE 92 01 42 
2 Ecosystem Digital Twin as an assistance tool 
for novel strategies 1 IDE 69 01 42 
3 Packaging manufacturing practices 4 CETEC 63 01 42 
Figure 27 MAGNO Pert chart 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 30 of 45 
 
4 Packaging usage in the food system 10 UOB 55 01 42 
5 Sustainability and end of life options 2 HOLOSS 70 01 42 
6 Consumer acceptance and Innovative 
Circular Business Model 7 EUPC 62 01 42 
7 Dissemination, Communication and 
Exploitation 5 DNV 82 01 42 
   Total PMs 493   
 
Work package number 1 
Work package title Set-up of MAGNO for sustainable and smart solutions on packaging 
Objectives 
To develop an efficient and comprehensive project structure to manage organisati onal, economic/financial and legal 
matters with the aim of guaranteeing successful project execution (pro ject objectives, costs, timing and quality). To 
develop an efficient and comprehensive project structure for managing organisational and scientific/technical topics. To 
prepare periodic reports on scientific and technical project issues t o the EC, to define the dependencies between all 
working group and the boundary conditions of each activity, and to determine KPI9s to establish the innovation potential 
of new strategies for plastic packaging in the food system. 
Description of work 
Task 1.1 Project Coordination and Management [M01-M42] [Lead: IDE; Participants: All]  
Subtask 1.1.1: Administrative and financial management [M01-M42] [Lead: IDE; Part icipants: All] IDE as 
coordinator will maintain close communication with the EC officer responsible for the project. The Project Coordinator 
will: i) Guarantee that the CA is respected, ii) Monitor project activities according to the work plan, iii) Ensure that all 
deliverables are produced on time, iv) Keep regular communication and exchange with all consortium members, and v) 
Organise and chair the project management meetings. IDE will implement an intranet service (Microsoft teams) to 
facilitate management, support communication tasks and monitor the project activities. A Project Management Plan will 
be prepared, and it will set the basis for the project-role structure, conflict resolution methods, communication procedures 
and reports, WP leaders, project coordinator and the EC officer.  
Subtask 1.1.2: Project monitoring and quality control [M01-M42] [Lead: IDE; Participants: All] IDE will oversee 
defining a management quality strategy. To reduce risks and prepare contingency plans, IDE will create and recommend 
procedures to guarantee high quality from the MAGNO project. In particular, it will include: a proper role structure to 
define actions and measures by partners, management of risks, definition of qua lity conditions during the development 
of materials, set the basis of quality control for reports, deliverables and execution of validation, and definition of IPR by 
partners. IDE in collaboration with FHF will ensure that WP and task leader s receive a clear definition for execution 
steps, responsibilities and obligations (T1.2). Quality control will be conducted by WP leaders twice a year. WP leaders 
will schedule a teleconference call to update project advances, identify possible constraints and update the execution plan. 
Task 1.2: Scientific & Technical Coordination [M01-M42] [Lead: FHF; Participants: A ll] FHF will act as the 
MAGNO scientific and technical coordinator. This task includes monitoring and contr olling the scientific/technical 
development of the project. Supported by IDE, this comprises the co -ordination of technical progress, plus the review 
and approval of technical reports and deliverables. The task covers all the a ctivities to be conducted for; i) software 
development (WP2-Ecosystem Digital Twin and WP6-consumer web platform), ii) for the packaging value chain studies, 
design, production and usage (WP3-WP4), iii) end of life options (WP5), iv) consum er acceptance (WP6) and v) 
innovative businesses (WP6). 
Task 1.3: Working framework, requirements definition and team alignment [M01-M05] [Lead: IDE; Participants: 
All] The objective of this task is to establish an effective working framework that defines a collaborative alliance between 
working groups (also called Integrated Project Delivery), which assigns partner participation and responsibilities for each 
WP and which optimises project results based on quality and time. The first ste p is to define the food packaging value 
chains and the actors involved in each step. This will include researchers, food business operators, food packaging 
producers, developers of sustainable packaging, packaging converters and recyclers, consume rs, and local and regional 
authorities. Subsequently, in order to establish the European and international packagi ng sector scenarios, circular 
schemes, new business ideas and strategies to improve the whole system in the food sector will be required to reach 
MAGNO objectives. For each working group, a flowchart will be created to present team alignment and to describe the 
activities to be performed, as well as the data or materials needed for each task. 
Task 1.4: KPI validation and detailed definition [M01-M05] [Lead: HOLOSS; Participants: All] A set of relevant 
KPI9s will be i dentified to evaluate the impacts caused by the circular approaches and new business strategies for the 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 31 of 45 
 
packaging value chain in the food system. The KPI definitions will include sustainability factors (usage of raw/renewable 
materials, solid waste generation, biomaterials, recycling, and reuse), manufacture (design, new materials, and 
production), and packaging usage (warehouse, packers, retailers, consumers). In addition,  health and environmental 
factors: health and safety of packaging, litter, ecosystem care, and economic fac tors (investment/operating cost) will be 
reviewed and quantified within the KPI9s. The KPI database will be created based on packaging value chain, available 
sources, material databases (e.g., Materials Genome Initiative, AFLOW), and will include related EU projects (T7.6) 
Task 1.5: Updates on current scenarios and current trends for plastic packaging [M01-M12] [Lead: CETEC; 
Participants: ALL] When considering the time lapse from proposal submission to project initiation, CETEC will lead a 
research effort to update the state of art for packaging in the food sy stem. Four reviews will be created and published 
as open journals to set the path for further MAGNO research and form the basis of the future strategies to be created. All 
partners will participate in the reviews with the process being led as fol lows: (CETEC) Design, new materials and 
production of packaging; (DNV) Packaging usage, covering from packers to consumers, inc luding waste management 
and efficient systems for food operators; (HOLOSS) sustainability and circular ity for food packaging, including end of 
life practices and the possibility of avoiding packaging; (UOB) healt h and environmental impacts of plastics in 
ecosystems; and (KVC) business approaches applied to the packaging sector in the food system.  
 
Work package number 2 
Work package title Ecosystem Digital Twin as an assistance tool for novel strategies 
Objectives 
Create a virtual representation of the packaging value chain in Europe that can predict the future effects when modifying 
our way to design, produce, use and recycle food plastic packages. The software created here will act as a digital twin of 
the food packing ecosystem and it will include the data and algorithms based o n AI that can accelerate the knowledge 
generation. The Ecosystem Digital Twin will form the MAGNO baseline for testing strategies to improve the performance 
of the packaging sector. 
Description of work 
Task 2.1: Open science and Data Management Plan [M01-M42] [Lead: IDE; Participants: All] Within this task, a 
Data Management Plan (DMP) will be prepared by M06 and updated (M12, M36, M42). Thi s document will describe 
the data management lifecycle for all data gathered through the AI search  and multi-actor gathered information used in 
the MAGNO digital twin and consumer platform, as well as the result s obtained. The DMP will outline how this data 
will be handled and processed. Additionally, clear guidelines for managing personal  data and compliance with privacy 
regulations (as GPDR) will be provided. 
Task 2.2: Artificial intelligence to support research in packaging sector [M06-M24] [Lead: IDE; Participants: 
FHF, CETEC, DNV, IRIS] Machine learning algorithms, in particular natural language processing (NLP), will be used 
in this task to gain knowledge from an automatic web search on all the topics defined in T1.4 and T1.5. IDE will create 
an NLP algorithm to perform text classification, sentence analyses, entity rec ognitions and data analysis. The main 
activities will be divided in five sections: i) defining libraries to be utilised for the web search e.g. scrapy and selenium, 
ii) define the exact search terms (T1.3 and T1.4) and identify the best NLP  algorithm to be implemented, iii) clean and 
pre-process the data, removing any irrelevant information, iv) create algorithms identified during point ii, then apply NLP 
techniques and extract relevant information, and finally v) analyse results to ensure they meet search criteria and present 
the results. (All web searches will strictly follow Website copyright laws ). The results of this task will be processed for 
use in the digital twin database (T2.4). 
Task 2.3: Scientific search and food actors in the packaging value chain [M01-M24] [Lead: DNV;  Participants: 
ALL] This task is focused on obtaining data from real actors in the food system. To increase knowledge of the packaging 
value chain and feed the databases of T2.4, all the food actors involved in th e packaging value chain (identified in T1.3 
and T1.5) will be contacted. As explained in section 1.2.3, the consortium has considerable experience in the packaging 
sector which provides the MAGNO project with a vast list of contacts. The consortium will contact its distribution list to 
organise bilateral meetings with the aim of receiving relevant data from the se ctor. This includes, but is not limited to, 
contacting researchers, food business operators, food packaging producers, develope rs of sustainable packaging, 
packaging converters and recyclers, consumers, and local and regional authorities (see Table 4 in section 1.2.3). At this 
point, the MAGNO project will also contact all entities closely rela ted to Restore our ocean and waters by 2030, 
Implementation of monitoring systems and Digital Twin Ocean,  via the partners who are already involved in those 
initiatives (as explained in section 1.1)  
Task 2.4: Database creation and data fusion [M13-M24] [Lead: IRIS; Participants: ALL]  Starting from the KPI 
definitions (T1.4) and the knowledge collected from T2.2 and T2.3, a data model will be created which adheres to data 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 32 of 45 
 
management policies, access, sharing, preservation and security principles (FAIR, see section 1.2.7). 
Subtask 2.4.1 Database creation: A data scheme will then be developed as a blueprint to define the general str ucture 
(tables, columns, relationships). It includes metadata, such as data provenance, data format and data quality. The database 
is then populated from project sources such as T1.5, T2.2, T2.3, which thereby ensu res data quality. If necessary, 
commercial databased will be obtained by IDE. 
Subtask 2.4.2 Data fusion and pre-processing: Once the database is integrated (ST2.4.1), the next step is to pre-process 
and clean data. It is here where the data is standardised, any duplications are removed, missing values are filled, and data 
is normalised. Finally, the resulting database will be validated for further implementation in T2.5. 
Task 2.5: Digital twin creation and food multi-actor validation [M13-M31] [Lead: IDE;  Participants: ALL] The 
ecosystem digital twin is created. The activities begin by defining the KPI s from T1.4 to determine which outputs are 
needed and the database is then generated (T2.4). 
Subtask 2.5.1 Creation of Ecosystem Digital Twin: Four steps will be followed: i) Design and customise value chain 
processes. This includes adopting the process mining methodology to extract simul ation models for packaging design, 
production, usage and end of life from ongoing data collection (T2.4), ii) Implem entation of the methodology in the 
Digital twin module (ready to be tested), iii) Development on-the-fly f irst validation methods that provide quantitative 
validation of the extracted models using the reviews generated from T1.5, and iv) Prepare a f inal version ready to be 
integrated and deployed for final validation activities. 
Subtask 2.5.2 Ecosystem Digital Twin validation with multi-actors: KVC will organise a workshop with multi-actors 
(defined in T2.3) to demonstrate that the Digital Twin results fit w ith the status of the food system (Ecosystem Digital 
twin will provide results based on the value chain, type of packaging and country-economy selected). The feedback 
received will be used for fine tuning the programming and improving its results. The final version of the Digital twin will 
be used in the following task (T2.6). 
Task 2.6: Virtual plastic packaging strategies and business validation [M31-M42] [Lead: IDE; Participants: ALL] 
During this task, all the results from WP3, WP4, WP5 and WP6 are tested to select the bes t strategies for the MAGNO 
project. This task will combine the outcomes found in regard to the food packaging value chain (WP3), sustainability 
(WP4-5), recycling, reuse (WP5), pollution, litter (WP4) and business (WP6) to gener ate a series of recommendations 
and strategies that improve the current situation and comply with the 2030 agend a. The outcomes from WP3-WP6 are 
used as inputs in the Ecosystem Digital Twin (T2.5) in order to generate different scenarios and evaluate them. To this 
end, a series of decision-making tools will be utilised to determine the best options (strategies to follow) such as decision 
matrix, Venn diagrams (comparison), pareto charts (frequency of solutions) and radar charts (spider chart to compare 
performance of solutions). Finally, multi-actors will validate results and a workshop will be held to present all the findings 
to the food sector.  
 
Work package number 3 
Work package title Packaging manufacturing practices 
Objectives 
To analyse and determine the best food packaging manufacturing options. This includes the study of different raw 
materials and alternatives to fossil-based materials, design options, production routes and the approaches that exist to 
reduce waste generation during manufacture. By combining these factors, diff erent options (strategies) will be created 
for more efficient and environmentally friendly food packaging manufacturing practices. 
Description of work 
Task 3.1: Raw materials and alternatives to fossil-based materials [M01-M18] [Lead: CETEC; Participants: FHF, 
HOLOSS, DNV, EUPC, PCEU, UOB, INSTM] Different raw materials will be studied and analysed to determine their 
potential for further application. Amongst others, the use of renewable resources such as corn starch, sugarcane or potato 
starch will be considered. This study also includes investigating natural fibres (jute, cotton, and hemp), fungus options 
(Mycelium) and agro-wastes (rice husk, sugarcane bagasse, wheat straw). In addition, alter natives to fossil-based 
materials will be studied. In this regard, material options such as bio- based polyethylene, polylactic acid (PLA), 
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA), bio-based polyesters and cellulose-base material will be examined. Finally, options which 
include glass, paper and metal packages will be assessed. Task results will be used as inputs for T3.2, T3.3 and T3.4. 
Task 3.2: Future material design trends for packaging [M07-M24] [Lead: FHF; Participants: CE TEC, EUPC, 
PCEU] Innovative designs for packaging will be comprehensively investigated during this tas k. The main objective of 
the task is to identify those processes that provide sustainable and eco-friendly packaging solutions. As a minimum, the 
task will cover packaging designs based on edible materials, mono-materials, percentage of recycled content, biomimicry 
solutions, reusable packaging, minimalist (reduction of material use), comp ostable/biodegradable packages, and smart 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 33 of 45 
 
packaging solutions including the use of sensors, QR codes, labels, and technology that can help to reduce waste and 
improve packaging value chain efficiency. Findings will be used to directly feed T3.4. 
Task 3.3: Manufacturing routes for conventional and new packaging products [M13-M30] [Lead: CETE C; 
Participants: FHF, DNV, IDE]  Production paths for novel packaging will be examined. The studies will commen ce 
from the classical manufacture routes such as injection moulding, blow moulding, extrusion, rotational moulding, 
thermoforming and compression moulding. Relatively new manufacturing methods will then be included (additive 
manufacturing, microwave heating systems, ultrasound, plasma, and laser technology) as well as innovations in processes 
like the inclusion of industry 4.0/5.0, digital twins, machine learning aided processes, decision support systems, and 
energy management during production. The results will support T3.4. 
Task 3.4: Waste management of packaging production [M07-M36] [Lead: CETEC; Participants: HOLOSS, FHF, 
EUPC, PCEU, UOB, INSTM, UOS] A holistic approach will be considered to identify the improvements needed during 
packaging production. Concepts such as closed-loop manufacturing systems to reduce waste material generation, process 
optimisation, reduced overproduction, improved equipment maintenance and minimisin g downtime will be studied 
during this task. This work is directly connected with T3.1, T3.2 and T3.3 due to its close relation to raw materials, and 
design of packaging and production respectively. Finally, lean manufacture principles such as continuous improvement 
(Kaizen) and agile methodologies will also be studied. 
Task 3.5: Packaging production for optimised strategies [M25-M42] [Lead: CETEC; Part icipants: HOLOSS, 
FHF, DNV, EUPC, PCEU, UOB, INSTM, UOS] Knowledge of raw material alternatives, design options, production 
and waste reduction measures will be defined in detail within this task. The collect ed information will be combined to 
generate a series of pathways that the packaging industry can follow to improve p ackaging production. All possible 
options will be based on the requirements defined in T1.3 and the analysis will  assign weighted averages to the KPIs 
developed in T1.4. Results will be used as inputs to be tested in T2.6 for determining the final MAGNO project strategies. 
 
 Work package number 4 
Work package title Packaging use in the food system 
Objectives 
To identify and classify the materials used in food packaging sector that can harm human health and environment. The 
pollution (litter) consequences of those packages will be determined. To improve the usage of packaging from the point 
of view of packers, warehouse, and retailers. And finally, to establish de future of standards and legislation for food 
packaging sector. 
Description of work 
Task 4.1: Health and safety issues of the current packaging industry [M01-M24] [Lead: UOB;  Participants: 
HOLOSS, FHF, CETEC, EUPC, INSTM, UOS]  Based on the results from T1.5, the main sources of hazardous 
chemicals and microplastic generation will be identified and classified. To encourage the consumer acceptance activities 
which are planned in WP6, this task is divided into two main activities as follows: 
Subtask 4.1.1 Chemical and microplastics sources : In terms of chemical contamination, sources such as labelling, 
printing inks, coatings, plastics and rubbers will be investigated to determine the types and concentrations of hazardous 
substances. For example, CMRs (carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction), EDC  (endocrine-disrupting 
chemicals), STOT (specific target organ toxicity) and persistence (bio accumulative, mobile) substances will be analysed. 
Special attention will also be given to substances that are known to generate hu man health issues (for eg., bisphenol A 
(BPA), phthalates and styrene). Furthermore, a classification of microplastic s ources will be made depending on the 
degradation over time, abrasion (friction) during transportation, printing/labelling and adhesives. The investigation will 
also focus on Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles that are used fo r water, soda and other beverages, polystyrene 
foam containers, plastic film, plastic pouches, lids and seals, amongst others. 
Subtask 4.1.2 Chemical and microplastics health issues : This task will create a direct link between food actors, 
pollution generation and the way plastics affect human health. The identifi cation of possible chemical and microplastic 
effects from food packing will be studied. This includes involuntary ingestion, mi croplastic accumulation in the body, 
toxicity, hormone disruption, reproductive system problems, cancer, microbial contamination and respiratory problems. 
Task 4.2: Ecosystem impact and litter effects [M01-M24] [Lead: UOB; Participants: FHF, EUPC, PCEU, INSTM] 
Detailed research for different environments will be performed to identify negative ecosystem impacts and how to prevent 
them. Problems such as resource depletion due to fossil fuel usage, habitat dest ruction, deforestation as well as impacts 
on wildlife and biodiversity will be covered in this task. The effects on marine, soil and air pollution (litter) will be studied 
in detail. This also includes the negative effects on marine life, plant growth and soil biodiversity.  
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 34 of 45 
 
Task 4.3: Novel storage solutions for packers, warehouses and retailers [M18-M36] [Lead: DNV; Part icipants: 
FHF, EUPC, PCEU, INSTM]  This task aims to cover the gap which exists in the food packaging value chain after 
production and before the product reaches the consumer. The task is divided in three sections: i) Packers: strategies such 
as on-demand packaging to reduce waste and costs, and customised packaging to impr ove storage and consumer 
experience will be analysed. ii) Warehouses: this research will incorporate the possibility of automation techniques, real-
time monitoring and AI involvement, multi-temperature storage and sustainable energy usage. iii) Retailers: the task will 
focus on food waste reduction by improving the packaging, smart shelves with sensors, and monitoring of inventory. 
Task 4.4: Standard and EU legislations adapted to new times [M18-M36] [Lead: EUPC; P articipants: All] The 
process of generating regulations for food packaging starts with the research and analysis already performed in previous 
activities: types of food packaging (T3.1), their properties (T3.2), the p otential risks they pose to human health (T4.1) 
and the environmental impacts (T4.2). In this sense, MAGNO partners will support operators and SMEs to meet the EU 
requirements. All information collected is then used to assess the need fo r new or updated standards and regulations. 
Once the needs are identified, multi-actors (T2.3) are consulted. The main purpose  is to reach industry associations, 
consumer groups, environmental organisations, and government agencies. Their inp ut is gathered to help shape the 
standards and regulations. Standards and regulations draft is presented to EU authorities at both local and regional level. 
Task 4.5: Packaging usage for optimised strategies [M25-M42] [Lead: UOB; Participants: Al l] Following the 
definition of health and environmental impacts, the improvements for packer, warehouse and retailer systems, as well as 
the definition of novel standards and legislations, all the information is g athered at this time to generate a series of 
roadmaps that the packaging industry can follow to prevent and reduce the use of plastic. All the possible options will be 
based on the requirements from T1.3, and the analysis will be made by assigning weighted averages to the KPIs (T1.4). 
The results will be used as inputs that will be tested in T2.6 to establish the MAGNO project's final strategies. 
 
 Work package number 5 
Work package title Sustainability and end of life options 
Objectives 
To identify the best food packaging system practices available to reduce p ollution and increase the sustainability of the 
sector. To show different end of life alternatives for packaging plastic and define the LCA, LCC and S-LCA of packaging 
within the whole value chain. Finally, to generate novel circular approaches that can act to boost the food system. 
Description of work 
Task 5.1: Packaging waste collection and sorting [M01-M24] [Lead: EUPC; Participants: All] The aim of this task 
is to identify effective ways of collection and sorting packaging waste with the main focus on improving the management 
of waste at a consumer level, including households, businesses, and industries. The activities will look at avoiding landfill 
and incinerator use and promoting recycling as much as possible. The investigation will include waste collection methods 
such as kerbside collection (scheduled for collection), drop-off centres (individual collection) and commercial collection 
services (offered to business and industry). Advanced techniques will also be ass essed: drone-based collection, 
autonomous collection vehicles, community collection drives, reverse vending machines and smart bins with sensors and 
monitoring of residuals. Once the collection phase is covered, the sorti ng options will then be addressed. Both manual 
and automatic sorting will be investigated. Novel techniques such as AI sorting, near- infrared spectroscopy, magnet 
separation, x-ray fluorescence sorting and hyperspectral imaging will all be studied.  
Task 5.2: Mechanical recycling and alternatives [M13-M30] [Lead: CETEC; Participants: HOLOSS, FHF, EUPC, 
DNV] The task starts by identifying the plastics that can be mechanically recycled. A list of materials will be created so 
that the best mechanical recycling practice for each plastic (shredding, gr inding, melting) can be identified. Alternative 
mechanical recycling methods will be included such as solid-state shear milling, high shear processing and micronization. 
Task 5.3: Chemical recycling and sustainability [M13-M30] [Lead: CETEC; Participants: FHF, EUPC, DNV] Just 
like T5.2, the first step is to identify the most suitable materials that  can be processed by chemical methods. Particular 
attention must be paid to the solvents, acids, bases and chemical residues generated by the chemical recycling technique. 
Technologies such as continuous depolymerisation, high pressure hydrogenation, enzymatic hyd rolysis, super critical 
fluid extraction, cold plasma, and microwave/ultrasound enhancement, amongst others will be studied.  
Task 5.4: LCA, LCC and S-LCA of current linear value chain and its transformation  to circular [M13-M42] 
[Lead: HOLOSS; Participants: ALL]  LCA will be assessed mainly on recyclability, reuse, waste reduction, litte r 
impact and GHG emissions, complemented by other relevant impact categor ies. LCC will estimate capital, operational 
costs and cost reductions, and indirect costs related to environmental externalities, as well as the asset's residual value at 
the end of its life. The S-LCA will be conducted for different social indi cators related to impact categories. During the 
HORIZON-CL6-2023-ZEROPOLLUTION-01-7: Strategies to prevent and reduce plastic packaging pollution from the food system. 
              – CONQUERING NEW STRATEGIES TO PREVENT AND REDUCE PACKAGING POLLUTION Page 35 of 45 
 
initial stages, this task will be focused on the current situation (linear  value chain). During later phases, it will include 
relevant industrial data (WP3, WP4 and WP5) for circular approaches. In the latter cas e, data from European and 
international packaging food system scenarios from the Ecosystem Digital Twin (T2.5) will be used. 
Task 5.5: Circular approaches for food packaging value chains [M25-M42] [Lead: HOLOSS; Participants: All] A 
set of circular solutions will be developed after the definition of recycling (T5.1-T5.3), sustainability (T5.4) and different 
value chain stages are defined in WP3 and WP4. These solutions will be used to generate ideas rega rding how future 
food packaging systems should become circular. All the possible circular plans created will be based on the requirements 
from T1.3, and the weighted KPIs (T1.4) will be used to make the analysis. The results will be used as inputs and tested 
in T2.6 to create the final MAGNO project strategies. 
 
Work package number 6 
Work package title Consumer acceptance and Innovative circular business model 
Objectives 
To identify consumer needs and perceptions based on the current food packaging approach. This includes market analysis 
to find opportunities and assure the exploitation of the developed MAGNO project findings, updating the key exploitable 
results, and generating a series of business and exploitation strategies to optimise the food packaging sector. To apply the 
best available strategies to engage consumers in the environmental poll ution quandary and to provide solutions on how 
to decrease and resolve their impacts. To create a web platform adapting citizen science tools. 
Description of work 
Task 6.1: Product quality and consumer perception [M01-M36] [Lead: EUPC; Participants: All]:  
Subtask 6.1.1: Product quality and consumer perception [M01-M24] [Lead: EUPC; Participan ts: All] This task 
will combine qualitative and quantitative methods to better understand the cons umer and to make them aware of the 
current system9s sustainability problems. Activities will be developed as foll ows: i) general survey:  to learn about 
consumer's experience with different types of packaging and how it affects th eir perception of the product. ii) focus 
groups: to gather more detailed information about consumer perceptions of food packaging from different demographic 
groups to get a more representative sample. iii) sensory testing:  perform product evaluations using conventional 
packaging and compare it with the idea of non-use of packaging. iv) study sales data: to determine if there is a correlation 
between the type of packaging used and product sales. v) material studies: to determine the perception of materials used 
in packaging quality. vi) online monitoring: to identify common complaints or issues with their packaging and make the 
necessary changes. The information collected will be used to make informed decisions about packaging design and 
material selection from a consumer9s point of view. 
Subtask 6.1.2: Consumer and sustainability improvement [M13-M36] [Lead: HOLOSS; Participants: All] A series 
of four workshops will be organised to encourage consumers to make more environm entally friendly decisions. The 
purpose of these events is to educate consumers on the importance of sustainabil ity and how their choices can make a 
difference. The consumer will receive clear information about the sustainabili ty of food packing, including a list of 
packaging solution options. The events will encourage consumers to recycle packagi ng by providing clear instructions 
on the packaging itself and circulating information about local recycling programs. Th e four workshops (one per stage 
of the project) will allow the findings to be progressively presented and lead to increased consumer interest. 
Task 6.2: Market and Business Analysis [M07-M36] [Lead: KVC; Participants: All]: 
Subtask 6.2.1: Market Analysis and Circular Business approaches [M07-M36] [Lead: KVC; Partici pants: All] 
Market landscape studies will be implemented for the corresponding res ults (WP3-WP6) and will be analysed in three 
market analysis deliverable reports (at the beginning, in the middle and at the end of the project). A financial projection 
analysis will be performed to evaluate the profitability of the revenue model, to identify the need for future investments, 
and to define the possible cash flow in the food packaging value chain. The Business Model Canvas included in section