3.3 CONSORTIUM AS A WHOLE ................................................................................................................................................ 66
3.4 RESOURCES TO BE COMMITTED ........................................................................................................................................... 68 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
2 
 
1. EXCELLENCE 
17.8 million tonnes of post -consumer plastic packaging were collected in Europe in 2018 . Only 42% of this 
plastic packaging was recycled, while 39.5% was incinerated and 18.5% was landfilled 1. This situation is still far 
from the objective of recycling 55% of plastic  in 2030, as  established in the European Plastics Strategy 2 and 
Directive (European Union, EU) 2018/852 on Packaging and Packaging Waste3. 
The high-performance requirements requested by the industry and consumers mean that currently, 17% of total 
plastic packaging is multi -layer material4, totalling 3.03 Mt/year of plastic . This material is difficult to recycle. In 
sorting plants, current technologies can only identify their superficial layer. Once it has been classified, its 
recyclability relies on expensive, complex methods to delaminate its layers, given that the different nature of the 
polymers makes them incompatible. Due to the high strength adhesive (Adh) used to bond the layers, these 
delamination processes still need to be improved and optimized. As a result, multi-layer packaging are landfilled 
or incin erated. In this context, it is necessary to improve the sorting and recycling processes of currently not 
recovered multi -layer plastic waste from post -consumer and post -industrial sources, such as polyolefin (PO) -
based multi-layers, polyester-based multi-layers (or a combination of both polymers), and metalized multi-layers. 
The MERLIN project has put together a partnership to design cradle -to-cradle solutions to recycle mul ti-layer 
packaging between sorting technology providers  (IRIS, ROVIMATICA), a waste management company  
(FERROVIAL), industry and research experts on delamination and recycling  (ITENE, UNIBO, CEA, IONIQA, 
INDORAMA), small and medium-sized enterprise (SMEs) service providers (PARTICULA-Environmental, economic 
and social assessment; CSCP-social stakeholder engagement, ENCO-communication and business plans), 
packaging industry for flexible (IM2) and rigid (ITC), and a European Packaging Association offering expertise on 
standardization and policies ( EuPC). Each of them support this new ini tiative with previous project results in the 
related areas (see Table 4). 
This 36-month research project will offer innovative systemic solutions for all the processes required to increase 
the quality and rate of recycled multi -layer packaging waste, continuously monitoring the waste, automating 
sorting, chemically delaminating the layers and recovering them for high-performance recycling. These solutions 
 
1 Report on production, demand and waste in Europe (Plastics - the Facts 2019), PlasticsEurope. 
2 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/plastics-strategy-brochure.pdf 
3 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_18_3846   
4 Z. Tartakowski, Recycling of packaging multi -layer films: New materials for technical products. Resour. Conserv. Recy. 55, 167-170 (2010). 
AB: Advisory board 
Adh: Adhesive 
Al: Aluminium 
AO: Antioxidant 
A.I.: Artificial intelligence 
BHET: Bis hydroxyethyl terephthalate 
BLS: Bio-based lipophilic solvents 
CAGR: Compound annual growth 
CEIEC: Circular economy innovation exchange club 
CF: Carbon fibre 
DOA: Description of action 
DOE: Design of experiments 
DMT: Dimethyl terephthalate 
DSC: Differential scanning calorimetry 
DSS: Decision support system 
EB: Executive board 
EC: European commission 
EG: Ethylene glycol 
EM: Exploitation manager 
EOL: End of life 
EPDM: Ethylene propylene diene monomer rubber 
EU: European Union 
EVOH: Ethylene vinyl alcohol 
FTIR: Fourier transform infrared 
FTO: Freedom to operate 
GA: General assembly 
GC-TOF: Gas chromatography/time-of-flight 
GDP: Gross domestic product 
GF: Glass fibre 
HALS: Hindered amine light stabiliser 
HSI: Hyperspectral imaging 
HSP: Hansen solubility parameters 
IC: Innovation committee 
ICP-MS: Inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry 
ICT: Information communication technology 
ILCD: Reference life-cycle data system 
IML: In-mould labelling 
IPR: Intellectual property rights 
IV: Intrinsic Viscosity 
KER: Key Exploitable Results 
LCA: Life cycle assessment 
LCC: Life cycle costing 
LCIA: Life cycle impact assessment 
LIBS: Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy 
MA: Maleic anhydride 
MAg: Maleic anhydride grafting 
MFI: Melt flow index 
MIR: Mid-infrared 
NIR: Near infrared 
NWIP: New work item proposal 
OPP: Oriented polypropylene 
OTR: Oxygen transmission rate 
PA: Polyamide 
PC: Project coordinator 
PE: Polyethylene 
 
PEDR: Plan for the exploitation and 
dissemination of the project results  
PET: Polyethylene terephthalate 
PML: Post mould labelling 
PO: Polyolefin 
PP: Polypropylene 
PU: Polyurethane 
QR: Quick response 
RRI: Responsible research innovation 
R-CNN: Region-based convolutional neural 
networks 
SCF: Supercritical fluid 
SDG: Sustainable development goal 
SEBS: Styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene 
SHS: Switchable hydrophilicity solvents 
SME: Small and mid-size enterprise 
SPD: Safety by process design 
SSP: Solid state polycondensation 
SWIR: Short-wave infrared 
S-LCA: Social life-cycle assessment 
TGA: Thermal gravimetric analysis 
TPA: Terephthalic acid 
UPLC-QTOF: Ultra performance liquid 
chromatography/quadrupole-time-of-flight 
UV: Ultraviolet 
VIS: Visible 
WP: Work package 
WVTR: Water vapour transmission rate 
XRF: X-ray fluorescence 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
3 
will be developed and validated in a real environment to reach TRL 6. This will be complemented with additional 
techniques and tools for circularity design to increase the knowledge and effectiveness in clos ing the European 
multi-layer plastic chain . Finally, cross-cutting activities related to regulation and standardization, safety, 
sustainability, business, training, dissemination, and communication  will help to maximize the impact and 
effectiveness of the project. These actions are aligned with t hose proposed by the European Plastics Strategy 
(“improving waste treatment processes, legislative requirements, and concept of design for recyclability”)  to 
ensure that by 2030 all plastic packaging is designed to be recyclable or reusable and thus decrease the quantity 
of waste generated. 
MERLIN has a relevant environmental, economic, and social impact in Europe. MERLIN will provide solutions to 
potentially recover and recycle the 3.03 Mt/year of multi-layer packaging waste in Europe, reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions and the dependence on imported fossil fuels. It is estimated that the potential annual carbon 
footprint saving that could be achieved by recycling all the multi -layer waste in Europe could reach up to 7.42 Mt 
CO2/year5. In addition, MERLIN has a potential economic impact of €10,605 million/year on the European 
economy, considering that manufactured products based on recycled plastic have an average market price in the 
range of €1.8-5/kg5 and that there is a volume of 3.03 Mt of non-recovered multi-layer plastic packaging. This can 
be translated into the creation of over 47,133 new jobs per year, considering a rate of job creation of 1 job per 
€225,000 of additional turnover6. Thus, MERLIN will contribute to boost the EU market for recycled plastics to 10 
million tonnes of recycled plastic by 2025, as proposed by The Circular Plastics Alliance7.
1.1 Objectives 
The main objective of MERLIN is the development and promotion of disruptive processes for the sorting, 
delamination and recycling of rigid and flexible multi-layer plastic packaging waste from post-consumer and post-
industrial sources to obtain new high-performance packaging solutions (flexible and rigid) for the food packaging 
industry. This w ill retain value in the economy and reduce the consumption of raw materials (e.g., fossil -based 
polymers and metals) a s well as increasing  the quality and rate of recycled materials  from multi-layer packaging 
waste. In addition, MERLIN project commitment will be aligned with the environment protection, the 
development of circular solutions, and the knowledge generation for companies which help the European 
industry with the transition through a Circular Economy. Figure 1 shows the scheme of the project based on the 
specific objectives explained below. 
 
FIGURE 1. SCHEME OF THE MERLIN PROJECT. 
 
 
5 Own calculations for the preliminary Merlin market assessment, based on data taken from PlasticRecyclers. Web: http://www.pla sticsrecyclers.eu/ 
6 https://www.plasticseurope.org/es/resources/publications/1804 -plastics-facts-2019 Sector with a Market value of €360,000 M and 1,600,000 jobs  
7 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/circular -plastics-alliance_en 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
4 
TABLE 1. OBJECTIVES OF THE MERLIN PROJECT. 
Objective 1. Development of Monitoring and SORTING technologies (WP1) for multi-layer post-consumer and post -
industrial packaging waste that can classify rigid and flexible packaging depending on the multi -layer structures (i.e., 
PO-based multi-layer, polyester-based multi-layer, metalized multi-layer films). 
Objective 1.1. To develop an optical system prototype for identifying the different types of multi -layer structure 
polymers based on: Hyperspectral Imaging (HSI) in the Near-Infrared and Short-Wave Infrared (NIR/SWIR), and X-Ray 
Fluorescence (XRF), combining other photon ic techniques for the material combinations under study should they be 
needed (e.g., PET/PE, PET/PP and/or PET/Al/PE). 
KPI: By M18, the material from each main polymer layer must have been identified  by IRIS in at least 75% of the 
complex multi-layers under study. 
Objective 1.2. Adaptation of Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) robots to multi-layer sorting, so that they can be classified into 
rigid packaging, non-metalized flexible films and metalized flexible films from the waste flow. 
KPI: By M16, A.I. adaptation to multi -layer packaging sorting, preliminary tests at laboratory scale  at ROVIMATICA’s 
facilities. By M28, multi -layer waste sorting system tested and validated at FERROVIAL with an efficiency of 80% 
(reduction of rejected materials). 
Objective 2. Development of DELAMINATION processes (WP2) according to the nature of each sorted multi -layer 
structure (rigid and flexible, non-metalized and metalized). 
Objective 2.1. Rigid packaging: develop polyethylene terephthalate (PET) depolymerization via solvolysis processes for 
multi-layer matrices. (i) Studying the influence of a high level of non -PET contaminants or impurities in the reaction 
kinetics. (ii) Quantifying why and when the process might run into obstacles. (iii) Studying the behaviour of the 
contaminants (no n-PET layers) under reaction con ditions. (iv) A p rocess for the purification and recovery of 
polyolefins (POs), polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP), will be developed. 
KPI: By M17, the depolymerization of PET from a multi -layer matrix, and a BHET monomer with a purity of >99% will 
be produced by IONIQA. By M24, PP and PE will be collected after PET depolymerization (by solvolysis) and will be 
cleaned and separated to obtain material with a purity of >95% at IONIQA’s facilities. 
Objective 2.2. Non-metalized flexible packaging: development of a delamination process for different fractions, mainly 
polyesters and POs . Traditional solvents (e.g., methanol, ethanol) and green solvents  (such as CO 2) in supercritical 
conditions, and/or a combination of both, will be used to selectively dissolve (i) the adhesive(s) between layers or (ii) a 
specific layer (s) from this structure. In addition, MERLIN will study the influence of the presence of other internal 
layers in the structure such as primers and/or functional barriers (e.g., Etilen-vinil-alcohol) in the process. 
KPI: By M12, process parameters and interaction between defined variables. By M18, PET/PE will be delaminated with 
70% efficiency at ITENE’s facilities. By M32, the process will have been rescaled in semi -continuous batches with 90% 
delamination efficiency, reaching a purity for each separated polymer of at least 95%. 
Objective 2.3. Metalized flexible packaging: (i) solvent-based process (e.g., with switchable hydrophilicity (SHS) or bio-
based lipophilic solvents (BLS)) for the selective dissolution  of polymers and adhesives under mild conditions 
(temperature below 100  °C and at room pressure). Thus, (ii) separating aluminium (Al) simply via mechanical steps 
(e.g., filtration) , preserving its quality without substantial Al oxidation. (iii) The polymeric fractions  present in the 
structure (mainly PET and P Os) will be tentatively separated and recovered . The recovery of these solubilized 
polymeric layers from solvents (polyester and PO fractions) will be achieved by changing the polarity of the solvent 
phase through the addition of carbon dioxide (CO2) under critical or sub-critical conditions. 
KPI: By M16, process parameters and 50% of PE and 70% Al recovered by UNIBO at lab scale. By M32, UNIBO process 
will achieve 80% of POs and 99% of Al recovered from PO-metalized flexible films. High quality Al (<10-20% of metallic 
Al); low solvent residues (<1%) in the recovered POs and at least 80% of solvent recovered. 
Objective 3. Development of RECYCLING processes (WP3) for the separated fractions and monomers, or prepolymers, 
obtained in objective.2, improving their recovery, processability and properties. 
Objective 3.1. Repolymerization into PET of the monomers and/or prepolymers, after purification, obtained in the PET 
depolymerization via solid state polycondensation ( SSP). MERLIN will achieve the required quality of the final PET 
resin, according to the final needs of the PET pellets during the process . This will be linked to the final specifications 
required for the food packaging applications developed during the project. 
KPI: By M25, INDORAMA will perform the polymerization of PET from monomers and/or prepolymers obtained in the 
project at lab scale, with less than 10-15% deviation respect to standard commercial grade (e.g., Intrinsic viscosity: 0.8 
dL/g, and colour: L (min 78), a- (-3.8 to -0.8) and b (-3.5 to 1). 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
5 
Objective 3.2. Upcycling of PET and PO (PE and PP ) fractions recovered from the delamination processes . Upcycling 
of recovered delaminated polymers will be performed by using compounding and reactive extrusion processes in 
twin-screw extruders: (i) grafting of MA  on delaminated POs from both rigid and flexible packaging  to improve 
PET/PO multi-layer adhesion (ii) increase of the molar mass of recovered PET fraction with chain extenders to 
reach a viscosity suitable for final processing and optimized mechanical properties  and (iii) improvement of 
processability and mechanical properties of the different fractions (delaminated POs and PET) by the addition of 
different additives such as biosourcing fillers, antioxidants or impact modifiers will be done 
KPI: By M32. Maximum deviation of 10 -15% in mechanical properties or processability (intrinsic viscosity/melt flow 
index), obtained by CEA, compared to virgin materials used in the targeted applications (flexible and rigid packaging). 
Objective 4. Development and VALIDATION of recycled PET, PO (PE/PP) -based packaging (WP4) ensuring at least the 
same quality and safety requirements as compared to the value of the initially separated materials.  
Objective 4.1. To develop and validate a new generation of cost-effective and 100% recycled packaging structures for 
both (i) flexible and (ii) rigid packaging  applications within the food sector : (i) flow pack  and (ii) bottles, pots  and 
thermoform trays. These materials will be benchmarked against similar existing virgin -supply solutions in the market 
to ensure value retention. Food contact safety will be assessed in terms of overall and specific migration tests. 
KPI: By M29, flexible and rigid recycled packaging validated  by ITC and IM2. Cost reduction up to 10% (in terms of 
materials and additives), 100% recyclability, food safety assessment and a maximum 10-15% deviation in mechanical 
properties and barrier properties (oxygen transmission rate (OTR), water vapour transmission rate (WVTR)) compared 
to similar benchmark structures. 
Objective 4.2. Demonstrate the circularity of MERLIN‘s processes by reintroducing the developed recycled  multi-layer 
packaging into the loop of the processes developed  during the project . Thus, it will ensure  its recyclability and a 
circular end of life. A design-for-recycling approach will be applied. 
KPI: By M30, design-for-recycling approach in practice and developed packaging will be recycled for a second time  
with the delamination processes developed by IONIQA and ITENE with a maximum deviation of 15-20% respecting the 
quality  in the first loop. 
Objective 5. To assess the environmental, economic, social, legislative and regulatory barriers  (WP5) for the 
implementation of MERLIN processes and products. 
Objective 5.1. A Life-Cycle-Thinking approach will be used for the evaluation and optimization of the environmental, 
economic, social effects of the project across the full supply chain (including design, manufacture, and use of the 
project results) through Life-Cycle Assessment ( LCA), Life-Cycle Costing (LCC) , Social Life-Cycle Assessment (S -LCA), 
eco-efficiency analyses. Safe-by-Process Design principles will include risk and exposure and release assessments. 
KPI: By M20, the interim analysis developed will show preliminary results. By M34, reduced environmental, 
socioeconomic and safety impact of 5-10% will be demonstrated, by PARTICULA with the LCA, LCC and s-LCA analysis. 
Objective 5.2. Policy toolbox with recommendations to support the uptake of the resulting processes (derived from 
results of O5.1), including proposal for improvements of identified European plastic polices of relevance. 
KPI: By M24, EuPC toolbox will be available to policymakers, including an EU dissemination event. 
Objective 5.3. Drafting of new standardization work item proposals ( NWIPs) with the results of the pre -regulatory 
studies, facilitating acceptance and utilization by the market of the project solutions.  In addition, it will include the 
requirements that a delamination process should include to be validated in terms of quality and sustainability. 
KPI: By M24 at least 2 interactions with standardization organizations such as CEN/TC 249/WG 9, ISO/TC 61/SC 14, 
CEN/TC 261 or ISO/TC 122. By M34, regulatory report to foster standardization frameworks. 
Objective 6. To facilitate sharing and learning of good practi ces on increasing circularity (WP6) in post-consumption 
multi-layer packaging amongst value chain stakeholders. 
Objective 6.1. Development of an elaborate Stakeholder Identification and Engagement Plan.  
KPI: By M10 the baseline study of existing barriers and opportunity to increas e reusing and recycling in plastic waste 
chain will be conducted together with the identification of  at least 500 relevant stakeholders and a plan for their 
engagement by CSCP (i.e., inviting them for participation in the Circular Economy and Innovation Exchange Clubs 
(CEIEC) for consultation and knowledge sharing  
Objective 6. 2. Collection and sharing of good practices  containing circular design techniques for ensuring optimal 
sorting and 100% recyclability at the end of life of virgin and recycled multi-layer packaging materials.  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
6 
KPI: By M26 recommendation on guidelines developed and later disseminated to 300 stakeholders.  
Objective 6. 3. Development of a  Decision Support System (DSS)  to inform about the roadmap to follow the best 
processes and techniques for the circular design of new products from multi -layer materials. This will include 
optimized recycling process set -up vs. composition, suitable high f unctional recovery applications and potential 
barriers to be overcome (social, economic, policy, regulation). The specific functions of the DSS will be aligned with 
relevant stakeholders (end users) in order to maximize applicability and therefore acceptance and usage of the tool. 
KPI: By M34 the DSS validated and positively ranked by 100 stakeholders. tool by IRIS 
Objective 6.4. Facilitate information to the consumer regarding the environmental footprint savings and percentage 
of recyclability material used in the multi -layer packaging by means of a quick response (QR)  code label readable by 
smart phone. Post-mould labelling (PML) will ensure cost-effectiveness even in low volume operations (ITC). 
KPI: By M34, an informative label regarding the percentage of recyclable material used in the packaging, emissions 
saved, and proper management of the packaging after use. 
Objective 7.  Ensure understanding, use and replicability of the project  (WP7) results by means of effective 
dissemination, communication, and exploitation activities.  
Objective 7.1. Deliver targeted communication and dissemination campaigns  to generate understanding and uptake 
for the project results, communication tailored to each stakeholder group’s individual needs (consumer, producers, 
retail, recyclers), therefore accelerating the expansion of the circular supply chain across major networks.  
KPI: By M6, communication strategy in place with planned activities and website launched by ENCO. By M36, at least 
1 demo video clip; presentation of the project in at least 10 relevant events. 5 project leaflets; several press releases, 
popular articles, and MERLIN e-newsletter (2/year). At least 8 scientific peer-reviewed open-access articles published.  
Objective 7.2. Development of a methodology for capitalizing results from MERLIN and similar projects. Clustering 
with ongoing and future projects, establishing synergies and sharing communication campaigns. 
KPI: By M36, Clustering with at least 12 projects by the end of the project, leaded by ITENE. 
Objective 7.3.  To develop effective exploitation and business plans to support the adoption of project results 
according to different stakeholder needs. Following the responsible research and innovation  (RRI) approach, the 
project deliverables will be regularly aligned with relevant stakeholders (i.e., via the CEIEC in O6.1 and DSS in O6.2) in 
order to maximize acceptance and uptake of the results by the markets. 
KPI: By M36, Business Plans developed by ENCO for MERLIN solution composed by 18 complementary Key Exploitable 
Results (KER), placed as a reference for a timely transition towards commercialization.
1.2 Relation to the work programme  
MERLIN heralds promising and exciting outcomes that are fully aligned with solving some of our key societal 
challenges from the call Greening the economy in line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , and more 
specifically with the topic SC5-24: Improving the sorting, separation and recycling of composite and multi -layer 
materials. TABLE 2 details the relation of the proposal to the specific scope addressed by this topic. 
TABLE 2. RELATION OF MERLIN WITH THE TOPIC CE-SC5-24-2020. 
Production rejects/existing stock such as material recovered from industrial and municipal landfills. 
MERLIN will increase the quality and recycling rate of the 3.03 Mt of plastics/year from  multi-layer packaging in 
post-consumer waste which is currently incinerated or landfilled in Euro pe1,2,3. The solutions developed in 
MERLIN for sorting, delamination and recovery will be easily extrapolated to post -industrial rejected multi-layer 
packaging material, because of the similar structures and polymers used. 
Develop or improve innovative processes for the sorting, separation, recycling and introduction into manufacturing 
process of multi-layer materials and assess the potential barriers for their implementation. 
MERLIN offers customized solutions for sorting (objective 1), delamination (objective 2), and recycling (objective 3) of 
multi-layer packaging materials according to the complexity of their material composition. Objective 4 supports the 
reintroduction of polymers into the packaging manufacturing processes . Objective 5  will analyse and overcome 
environmental, economic, social, safety (including food contact), legislative and regulatory barriers. Barriers regarding 
acceptability will also be addressed by working with stakeholders (waste managers, sorting techn ology providers, 
recyclers, packaging manufacturers, brand owners, consumers and policy bodies) and by offering solutions to their 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
7 
needs by means of good practices (objective 6.1)  and a DSS (objective 6.2). The assessment of preliminary expected 
barriers that may have an adverse effect on the sustainability of MERLIN is explained in the impact section, Table 7 
Optimize value retention in the economy, rather than downgrading the multi-layer materials. 
MERLIN will optimize value retention in the packaging industry  creating purified and isolated polymers from multi -
layer packaging waste and re-introducing them into the manufacturing of new rigid and flexible packaging (trays, pots, 
bottles, and flow pack). This will be achieved by first increasing the quality and quantity ra tes of multi-layer material 
recovered in the sorting plant, with the implementation of a combination of photonic techniques that exceed the 
limits of current NIR technologies to identify multi -layer structures, coupled with robotic actuators for  faster and  
more selectivity. This sorting will allow reduce the amount of multi -layer waste which is landfilled in EU (1 million 
tonnes/year) and saving a potential of €48.47 million in landfilling taxes. Second, optimizing delamination focused on 
chemical recycling, reaching PET depolymerization for rigid multi-layer film, and separation by selective dissolution of 
target layer for flexible film. Third, thanks to the effective separation of the layers, each non-depolymerized fraction 
will be mechanically recycled (additivation), or repolymerized (depolymerized PET) and recovered in new packaging 
with similar quality as virgin material. Thus, this will replace virgin polymers and preserve the value of each material. 
Provide recommendations for the design of products t hat enables an increase in volume and quality in terms of their 
recycling, including effective identification and management after use (consumer targeted labelling). 
MERLIN’s processes will provide us with information which, after an exhaustive analysis, will be translated in to best 
practices for increas ing recycling rates and future upscaling. Environmental, socio -economic and safety criteria will 
feed the product design and development phase  through a life cycle analysis (LCA)  and Safety by Process Design 
(SPD). Best practices will be disseminated to main stakeholders including training and reinforced with a DSS for 
industry (objective 6.2) and QR labels for consumers (objective 6.3). 
Environmental, social, health and safety legislation, and the cost of the innovative processes implemented should be 
assessed in a holistic way, taking the entire life cycle into account. 
A full LCA study  (including LCC and S -LCA) will be carried out on all the processes and materials produced . Such 
analyses will consider energy demands, CO 2 emissions and impacts in ter ms of landfill waste reduction and reuse of 
the materials for the  good of the  environment, economy and society (objective 5). Health and safety effects  for the 
environment and worker s will also be analysed through risk, exposure, and release assessments  throughout the 
supply chain. Regarding the recycled material developed, food contact safety will be assessed in terms of overall (EN 
1186) and specific (EN 13130) migration tests. 
Potential market impact that the proposed solution s could bring, impacts on current economic actors and consumer 
acceptance and changes of consumer attitude. Quantitative information on the size of the targeted market is 
expected. 
The potential market impact depends on several factors: (i) alignment of the solution with the regulatory framework 
of each member state (e.g., acceptance o f recycled materials in food products) (ii) regulatory incentives to foster 
uptake (e.g., via adjust ment of recycling quota s), (iii) necessary invest ment for implementation by the relevant 
stakeholders (recyclers and producers, addressed via standardization), (iv) end-user acceptance (addressing health 
and food safety issues). Each of the factors is addr essed within MERLIN, following the RRI approach . A ll relevant 
stakeholder groups are involved constantly from the start of the project to maximize acceptance. MERLIN will have a 
clear impact on the European Plastic economy made up of 1.45 million workers, 62,000 companies, with a turnover of 
€350bn, 2.4% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and multiplier effect of 3 in jobs1. A comprehensive market analysis is 
expected to develop the business plans.  MERLIN will contribute with an economy impact of €11,342 million and  the 
generation of 50,409 new jobs as explain in section 2 Impact. . 
Participation of relevant industrial partners (technology providers, end-users, etc.) is important.  
78% of the partners  in MERLIN come from the private sector within the packaging plastic value chain (industrial and 
service providers). IRIS and ROVIMATICA offer monitoring and robotic solutions which will be tested in a sorting plant 
(FERROVIAL). IONIQA and INDORAMA will offer delamination and recycling technologies based on depolymerization 
and repolymerization. IM2 and ITC will act as end users  of the f lexible and rigid packaging. PARTICULA, CSCP and 
ENCO are SMEs providing services for the environment, social innovation, policies, business models and 
dissemination. Finally, the European association EuPC will facilitate access of the project results to its associates in the 
field of packaging convertors , as well as  working on policies and standardization. As an RIA project, the rest of the 
activities will be executed by three experienced research centres (ITENE, CEA and UNIBO). However, it is important to 
note that all the private partners have previous experience in R&D projects, and even dedicate resources to R&D. 
Moreover, all the activities will be guided by an external advisory board composed of key industrial players. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
8 
Activities are expected to reach TRL 5-6 by the end of the project. 
A set of Time-Oriented performance indicators has been defined for each objective to ensure a proper execution and 
interconnection of all the activities . First having results at lab scale under controlled environment, and later, after its 
development and optimization, in real environment. T hus, achieving TRLs 5- 6 in each technology . See Table 3 for 
detailed information. 
Support for the European Strategy for Plastics, EU Green Deal, Sustainable development goals (SDG) and clustering.  
MERLIN‘s objectives have been defined to support the European Strategy for Plastics8 (all plastic packaging should be 
designed to be recyclable by 2030 ), The Circular Plastics Alliance  (boost the EU market for recycled plastics to 10 
million tons of recycled plast ics by 2025 ), the EU Green Deal 9 (climate neutrality and mobilizing industry for a clean 
and circular economy) and SDGs 3, 4, 5, 7, 13 & 19  (more info in section 2.1). Clustering with projects on recyclability 
and packaging will jointly support these targets (objective 7.2, Table 4. ).
1.3  Concept and methodology 
 (a) Concept 
The MERLIN project presents an innovative and 
synergic solution for multi-layer packaging waste 
management. These types of structures are largely 
used with different polymer combinations based on 
product needs. These combinations of structures 
make their detection di fficult in the sorting plant and  
generate problems in direct mechanical recycling, because of low miscibility between different types of polymers, 
that result in materials with low processability and poor mechanical properties. There are some cases where it is 
possible to use compatibilizing agents to improve miscibility between polymers. However, this solution is limited 
to specific cases where there is a polymer contaminated with low amounts of a certain polymer, which is not the 
case of multi -layer packaging, where it exists a huge variety of incompatible polymers and other materials (such 
as Al or paper) present in significant proportions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/plastics-strategy-brochure.pdf 
9 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/european-green-deal-communication_en.pdf 
 Application PE, PP PET EVOH Al Adh 
Cereals Snacks X   
 
X 
 
Processed meat     X   X 
Single dose X 
 
X   X 
Snacks X     X X 
Lid tray X X X 
 
X 
Trays X X X  X 
FIGURE 2. MERLIN PROJECT OVERALL CONCEPT. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
9 
The following technological areas related to packaging end of life will be involved in MERLIN: (i) development of 
technology based on packaging identification and characterization for the sorting of multi -layer packaging, (ii) 
separation and recovery of the constituent multi -layer packaging by delamination and its (iii) recovery and 
reprocessing for recycling of the delaminated fractions, and finally the (iv) production and validation of upcycled 
packaging with the materials developed in the project 
 Sorting. Packaging identification. 
NIR technology is well -known to waste managers, and it is widely used for the identification of mono material 
packaging and monolayer films . However,  multi-layer identification with this technology is limited, mainly 
because of the thickness of the packaging and the composition of the different layers. Due to low penetration 
capability of NIR technology, only the external layer is  clearly identified. Different approaches will be studied in 
MERLIN to develop and/or improve current technology. 
- HSI-NIR/SWIR and/or XRF  technologies are the techniques which  will be use d in order to gain information 
about the  material composition in  multi-layer packaging waste. These photonic techniques  cover a wide 
range of spectra, ranging from visible to 1000 nm in the case of NIR, 1000 to 2500 nm for SWIR, and 0,01 to 
10 nm for XRF . This wide range o f spectra enables the identification of PET, POs , and Al layers in rigid and 
flexible packaging. MERLIN project will be  focused on tailoring a combination of these photonic techniques 
and a computer vision detection system based on a Deep Neural Network, in order to identify the presence of 
multi-layer packaging waste, and the composition of the different layers in the structure. 
- An artificial intelligence (A.I) powered robot will be coupled with the Deep Neural Network developed in 
MERLIN. The use of this type of robotized sorting solution enables to reach an average of 2,000 pics per hour, 
which reduces the operation times in the sorting plant. Also, the combination with the photonic techniques 
and computer vision detection will allow the efficient sort the multi-layer packaging in the waste flow.  
- With the industrial proof of concept in relevant environment  of these developments, MERLIN will obtain a 
new specific stream, which has not previously been segregated at sorting plants, made up of only multi -layer 
structure packaging, preventing valuable material from being rejected or landfilled. 
 Delamination. Separation and recovery. 
Different polymer families have different properties and present low miscibility between them (e.g., PET and PE). 
Delamination is the process used to separate different layers via different routes, depending on the nature of the 
packaging: metalized and non-metalized flexible packaging  and rigid packaging . Within MERLIN, a set of 
separation processes will be used, designed for each type and structure: 
- Depolymerization is based on chemical recycling of polyesters (PET) via catalysed solvolysi s. The 
depolymerization process enables the recovery of the polyester layer from rigid packaging structures, as 
monomers and prepolymers, e.g., terephthalic acid (TPA), ethylene glycol (EG), dimethyl terephthalate (DMT) 
and bis (hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET), and the  PO layers are non -depolymerized. The solvolysis 
processes for PET are based on the reduced chain cleavage  into low molecular-weight products, a reaction 
that could be affected by the presence of other polymers (PE or PP). MERLIN will look into continuous 
removal and process parameters (e.g., stirring speed), if needed, to reduce interferences. 
- Green solvent-based processes will be specifically designed to dissolve the required layer in multi -layer film 
packaging waste, with different approaches . In the case of non -metalized films, where the use of 
polyurethane (PU) adhesives is extended, MERLIN will study the Hansen solubil ity parameters (HSP) , to 
reduce the interaction between layer s and achieve delamination via solvents in supercritical conditions (e.g., 
CO2) in combination with green solvents (i.e., low molecular alcohols and/or aldehydes). After both processes, 
the different polyester and PO fractions in the structures will be tentatively separated and recovered. 
- Solvent-based solutions will be used t o metalized films, which contain an Al functional barrier, and will be 
treated using the dissolution properties of non -polar solvents. Solvents like SHS and biodiesel, whose 
dissolution of PE has already been demonstrated, preserve Al quality (i.e., preventing its oxidation) and 
recover it by changing solvent polarity (e.g., CO2 for SHS and sub/super critical CO2 for biodiesel). 
 Recycling. Recovery and reprocessing of recovered material.  
The different polyester (PET) and PO (PP & PE) fractions present in the structures will be tentatively separated and 
recycled in MERLIN depending on the delamination process employed. 
- Repolymerization. In the repolymerization process, the monomer depolymerized from the PET layer will be 
used as a raw material for the synthesis of new polyesters via solid state polyconden sation (SSP). The 
repolymerization will be achieved by transesterification of TPA with EG, followed by a second stage of SSP. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
10 
- Recovery and processability improvements  will be implemented in MERLIN for the delaminated recovered 
fractions, whose properties a re affected by the delamination processes. MERLIN will apply and optimize the 
processing parameters to improve the quality of the recovered polymers. In addition, specific routes such as 
reactive extrusion of anhydride maleic  and additives such as chain ex tenders, stabilizers, impact modifiers, 
fillers and combinations will be used to improve the processability and properties of the different materials, 
enabling them to reach suitable viscosity and quality for the final processing and application: new rigid  and 
flexible packaging.  
 Validation. Upcycled packaging development. 
The upcyc led and repolymerized fractions will be used for the development and validation of packaging 
demonstrators, including recyclability and food contact evaluations. 
- MERLIN will evaluate the performance of the upcycled materials  by producing different packaging 
prototypes for  both rigid and flexible applications (e.g., bottles, pots , multi-layer trays and films). These 
solutions will be benchmarked against similar existing virgin -supply solutions in the market to ensure high 
performance at lower cost. 
- A risk assessment in food contact of the packaging prototypes developed will also be conducted to study the 
possibility of their use in contact with food. 
- Circularity demonstration : It will be assessed the circularity of the different developments in MERLIN 
through the reintroduction of the packaging demonstrators into the MERLIN project loop. 
 Technology Readiness Level (TRL) 
Each of the technologies developed in MERLIN will be validated/demonstrated in a relevant environment (TRLs 5- 
6) by the end of the project according to Table 3. 
TABLE 3. TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS OF MERLIN’S MAIN INNOVATION. 
Technologies TRL Development in MERLIN Final TRL 
Sorting Identification NIR 5-4 
XRF 4 
NIR is widely used for mono -layer films, but not for multi -layer. MERLIN will 
improve NIR, MIR and LIBS technologies, including the development of the 
HSI version of each technique, as well as their combination, where needed.  
NIR 6 
XRF 6 
Classification 4 
A.I robots for multi -layer material will be integrated in to the identification 
technologies for machine learning techniques, including the design of the 
robot gripper adapted to waste packaging singularities. 
6 
Delamination 
Supercritical 
solvent fluids 3 
Largely used in food and pharma, their use in recycling processes has not 
been developed  implemented at indus trial scale . A  new supercritical 
solvent-based (e.g., CO2, ethanol) process will be developed. 
5 
Supercritical PET 
depolymerization 2 
Chemical recycling of polymers has been demonstrated but not developed 
for multi -layer structures. Optimiz ation of  operational conditions for the 
selective depolymerization process of PET in multi -layer structures, solving 
contaminant interference in the process. 
5 
PET 
depolymerization 3 
Depolymerization of PET is used but still not applied to multi -layer 
structures. Optimizations and reduction of interferences caused by non -PET 
impurities in the reaction kinetics are required. 
6 
Solvent base for 
metalized film 3-4 
SHS (patented 10) and BLS to separate PE from Al at lab scale. Development 
of an optimized process to recover Al non-oxidized, and polymeric layers, 
maximizing the recovery and keeping high quality. 
5 
Valorization/Validation PET 
repolymerization 3 
PET repolymerization follows the same principle as PET polymerization, but 
not applied to monomers from depolymerised multi -layer structures. PET 
obtained from monomers and/or prepolymers purified from multi -layer 
structures. 
6 
Reuse of 
recovered 
fractions 
4 
Optimization of the additivation of the recovered fractions and processing 
parameters in twin -screw extrusion processes using pilot/industrial 
equipment for the improvement of their properties and later production of 
different packaging demonstrators. 
5 
Decision Support 
System 
(DSS) 
4 
The adaptation of A .I.-based tools that are already in place will be adapted 
to set up a DSS system for plastic recycling processes and products based on 
MERLIN data and knowledge advances, aiming to reach relevant waste 
managers and packaging companies. 
6 
 
10 PCT/IB2017/056941: Method for separating and recovering polyethylene and aluminium from a polylaminated material. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
11 
 Related Projects  
MERLIN will establish relationships with ongoing and future to achieve common goals established in the European 
Strategy for Plastics8.  
TABLE 4. MERLIN INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER PROJECTS (ACRONYM LINKED TO WEBSITE; COORDINATORS OF PROJECT UNDERLINED). 
Project and partner  Interaction with MERLIN PROJECT 
PlastiCircle H2002-SC5 
2016 ( ITENE). 
SCALIBUR H2020-SC2 
2018 ( ITENE, IRIS, 
CSCP) 
Direct access (without breaking confidentiality issues) to results regarding sorting technology for 
plastic film. Innovative recovery processes. Engagement methodologies fo r social awareness and 
joint efforts with BIOWASTE CLUB (Scalibur). Design concepts using biomaterials for packaging: 
polylactic acid (PLA), polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) (Scalibur).  
SEALIVE H2002-SC2 
2019 (ITENE)  
Clustering to maximize the impact of both projects’ results on end -of-life solutions and circularity 
techniques: recyclable multi -layer single packaging materials from PHAs, PLA and starch, 
traceability, NIR-based mechanical recycling, controlled biodegradation/composting conditions.  
ENZYCLE BBI 20019 
(ITENE, INDORAMA) 
Study whether a combination of enzymatic treatments (Enzycle) with delamination/recycling 
processes ( MERLIN) would be possible in future projects. Results from PET polymerization 
techniques used by INDORAMA.  
MultiCycle SPIRE 2018 
(IRIS) 
Matchmaking of MERLIN processes with Multicycle such as composition monitoring techniques to 
improve sorting and recycling: plastic -metal laminates, separation of barrier materials, pigments 
and fillers from PET.  
DECOAT NMBP26 
(IRIS)  
Triggerable smart polymer material systems and the corresponding recycling processes for multi -
layer. 
TERMINUS CE-NMBP-
26- 2018 (UNIBO) 
Study the po ssibility of using the in -built Triggered Enzymes used in TERMINUS to Recycle Multi -
layers as an intermediate process for cleaning any potential impurities (e.g., glue) after MERLIN 
delamination processes.  
POLYNSPIRE SPIRE 
2018 (IONIQA, EuPC) 
Energy reduction in recycling processes of polyamide (PA) waste and mixture with POs (PE, PP) for 
packaging applications. Advanced additivities and high -energy irradiation to enhan ce recycled 
plastic quality. EuPC will contact members that already have shown interest in POLYNSPIRE.  
ZRR for Municipal 
Waste EIT Climate 
(FERROVIAL)  
FERROVIAL will inform about the main barriers faced and parameters already optimized using A.I. 
robotic technology applied to municipal waste sorting. This info will be used to adapt the robots to 
the multi material.  
R2PI H2020CIRC-04-
2016 (CSCP) 
The MERLIN Policy toolbox will take into consideration open source methodologies from R2PI 
regarding its Policy Package to support sustainable business models for the circular economy.  
NEW_InnoNet H2020 
Waste-4 2015. (EuPC) 
EuPC will make use of stakeholders working with multi-layer plastics from the networking platform 
developed within the project regarding zero European Waste and interested in  MERLIN’s 
approach. 
I-MECH  H2020-ECSEL 
(ROVIMATICA) 
MERLIN will be supported by the experience reached in intelligent motion control for smart 
mechatronic systems, which will be transferred to robotic systems for sorting plants.  
Clustering with other 
projects in this call 
and others such as BBI 
and BIOTECH 
MERLIN will promote clustering activities with projects about biodegradable multi -layer packaging, 
enzymatic recycling and decontamination technologies (e.g., USABLE PACKAGING 
BBI.2018.SO3.R10, MANDALA BBI.2018.SO3.R10, PLAST2bCLEANED CE -SC5-01-2018). Thus, we will 
join forces working in two different areas: sorting/recycling technologies for current waste flow 
(MERLIN) and new bio-based material (other projects) to ensure that by 2030 all plastic packaging 
is designed to be recyclable or reusable. 
RELICARIO EIT Raw 
Materials 19-2022 CEA 
Development to the demonstration scale of a new technology to recycle CFRPs using 
thermosolvolysis. 
REVALUE EIT 
“RawMaterials”, 2017-
2019 (CEA) 
Manufacturing process scale-up of eco-innovative composite materials, through optimisation of (i) 
carbon fibre recycling from thermoplastic composites, (ii) surface modification of fibres, and (iii) 
thermoplastic compound manufacturing.  
DISPLAY EIT 
“RawMaterials”, 2017-
2020 (CEA)  
Recycling process of thermoplastics from Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipments; and 
valorisation of PC/ABS blends recovered from WEEE 
INN-PRESSME DT-
NMBP-04-2020 (CEA) 
Development of biobased compounds composed of natural fibres, for specific applications, 
including rigid packaging applications . Upgrade of CEA extruders to produce controlled films for 
packaging applications.  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
12 
(b) Methodology 
MERLIN is a 36 -month research and innovation programme divided into two major blocks and eight work 
packages. The first block includes all the research and development activities required to increase the recycling 
rate, including processes technologies and materi al development, and their validation/demonstration in a real 
environment (first at lab scale and later in an industrial scenario). The second block includes the activities needed 
to strengthen the innovation capacity of the project and maximize its impact. 
- BLOCK ONE: development and optimization of the processes to increase the recycling rate.  
This block covers the technical development of the project in 4 work packages (WP1 -WP4), and includes all the 
stages of process development, from the laboratory test to process optimization and scaling up to validation 
level. To achieve this aim, MERLIN has defined a work package for each type of process developed and aligned 
with a specific project objective, which will be led by a partner with expertise and previous results in the area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The project will start (Figure 3) with WP1, led by IRIS,  with the combination of HSI and XRF technologies  to 
identify polymers, performed by IRIS , followed by integration with a computer vision system based on Deep 
Learning, by ROVIMATICA, to enhance detection and couple it to A.I. robotics for handling the sorting process. To 
test the technologies developed in the WP, a specific Design of Experiments (DoE) will be implemented in order to 
identify boundaries and limitations.  The final steps will include the validation of the developed technologies at 
FERROVIAL’s sorting plant. Thus, it will reach TRL 6 (technology demonstrated in relevant environmen t) 
participating in the relevant value chain (technology developers and a sorting plant). 
Then, in WP2, led by ITENE , the activities will be focused on the delamination of the multi -layer packaging 
structures based on the following approaches (Figure 4): 
- PET depolymerization from rigid multi-layer packaging performed by IONIQA. 
- Delamination process based on the use of solvents in supercritical conditions for non-metalized film by ITENE. 
FIGURE 3 SCHEME OF THE POST-CONSUMER WASTE SORTING SYSTEM AND INDUSTRIAL VALIDATION 
FIGURE 4: MERLIN MATERIAL FLOW 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
13 
- Mild conditions for the separation of Al from polymeric fractions in metalized film by UNIBO.  
With these recovered fractions, WP3, led by INDORAMA, will implement the techniques for PET repolymerization 
from the monomers obtained. In parallel, CEA will recover the non -depolymerized fractions (PET, PE, and PP) 
through compounding and reactive extrusion in twin -screw extruders to improve their processability and 
mechanical properties. Thus, the optimal characteristics will be guaranteed for their use in a high -value 
application in WP4. 
The R&D-performing partners in MERLIN will take the main roles in these WPs. 
Finally, WP4, led by ITC,  will demonstrate the efficiency of the previous processes in a real environment. This 
WP will validate the use of the recovered polymer fractions for manufacturing different rigid and flexible 
packaging demonstrators: (i) PET bottles by injection blow -moulding, (ii) polyolefin pots by injection moulding 
and IML, (iii) multi -layer trays by extrusion -thermoforming and (iv) multi -layer flow pack by extrusion -
lamination.  
The industrial packaging partners, ITC and IM2 will play a central role in this WP, suppo rted by ITENE, as 
packaging research centre. ITENE will also perform the food contact assessment analysis and , with the support 
of the partners of the project  will demonstrate the circularity of the overall process developed in the MERLIN 
project, reintroducing the packaging prototypes into the loop. 
With this approach, MERLIN expects to achieve the ambitious goal of reaching TRLs 5 -6 at the end of the 
project. 
- BLOCK TWO: enhancement of the innovation capacity of the project.  
This block is made up of three work packages (WP5 -WP7), which will be executed in parallel with the first block, 
giving and receiving feedback during the entire project.  
First, PARTICULA (in WP5) will carr y out a full environmental, economic , and social assessment of all the 
processes and materials developed during the project . This Life Cycle Thinking approach  will include Life-Cycle 
Assessment (LCA), Life-Cycle Costing (LCC) , Social Life-Cycle Assessment (S -LCA), eco-efficiency analyses. In parallel, 
health and safety (for the worker and environment) will be ensure d by ITENE through Safe-by-Process Design 
principles, including risk and exposure and release assessments . Finally, EuPC will evaluate the current EU policies 
and regulations related to multi-layer packaging, their recycling and upcycling. All these activities will enable us to 
detect and tackle all the potential barriers of the developed processes. 
Stakeholder engagement and creation of knowledge is a key factor in MERLIN. Relevant stakeholders (processors, 
recyclers, policymakers, retailers) will be involved within WP6 in the project from the start, identifying and addressing 
their individual hurdles in several different formats to maximize uptake of the project results.  Thus, within WP6, CSCP 
will create a Circular Economy & Innovation Exchange Club (CEIEC)  and stakeholder consultation workshops. During 
the entire life of the project, technical activities from the block one will be aligned with the main conclusions 
obtained in the CEIEC . As result , a set of good practices will be developed and disseminated in other to exchange 
knowledge among the scientific and industrial community. Oth er tools for facilitate the acquisition of knowledge will 
be the implementation and promotion of a DSS (IRIS, CSCP)  and informative QR codes printed on packaging and 
easily accessible by consumers. All these activities will follow an RRI approach 
Last, in WP7, led by ENCO, will facilitate cross-cutting activities and innovation impacts through a communication, 
dissemination, and exploitation plan.   
All MERLIN’s partners will have relevant participation in this block, which will be supported by experienced SMEs 
and an EU innovation management and assessment association. 
Finally, operability between both blocks will be monitored in  WP8 - MANAGEMENT (led by ITENE) which will 
ensure the proper execution of the project on time. 
 Gender dimension  
MERLIN believes in the methodology for integrating sex and gender into engineering innovation. 1. Evaluating 
Past Innovation Practices; 2. Building the Design Team; 3. Obtaining User Input; 4. Evaluation and Planning. This 
four-step process will lead to new pr oducts, processes, and services and identify new markets and business 
opportunities as well as meeting the needs of complex and diverse user groups. 
A 2014 socio -demographic analysis  show differences in waste management attitudes and behaviour between 
FIGURE 5. MERLIN MATERIAL FLOWS. 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
14 
European women and men and it has also been reported that gender may play a relevant role on the social 
acceptance of waste management costs 11. It is especially relevant that women are still predominantly involved 
both in the purchase and waste sorting of packaging at household level. It is therefore essential to perform an 
analysis so that social innovation initiatives are in line with consumers and to ensure that all actions implemented 
in MERLIN are gender inclusive. In terms of the societal and environmental impacts of the new materials, an SLCA 
and LCA will be performed. SSH research offers unique insights into how consumers ’ environmental values are 
shaped and represented as well as into the symbolism and feelings associated with sustainable and recycled 
packaging debates. A specific focus on gender will be carried out in Task 6 .1 Stakeholder Engagement  when i) 
mapping, ii) analyzing, and iii) engaging stakeholders along MERLIN value chain. 
Gender equality will also be promoted in recruitment following EC guidelines.  The language and design of the 
exchange formats used in MERLIN (including documents, activities, and website) will be gender inclusive. Within 
the consortium, the Innovation Manager will oversee that gender issues are effective within the stakeholders ’ 
engagement and in the execution of the project between the members of the consortium (e.g., no discrimination 
in decision-making). 
Gender balance in the partnership has been considered as explain in section 3.3 consortium as a whole.
1.4 Ambition 
a) Advances of MERLIN beyond the state-of-the-art 
As described above, the MERLIN project aims to develop innovative and systemic solutions for all the processes 
required to increase the quality and rate of recycled multi -layer packaging waste, photonically monitoring the 
waste, applying machine learning and AI algorithms for data colle ction, and robotizing the sorting guided by a 
computer vision system based on Artificial Intelligence , chemically delaminating the layers and upcycling them 
for high-performance applications. The development of these technologies will establish the foundations for the 
future of multi -layer packaging design and waste management, given that this packaging is currently one of the 
most complicated packaging waste areas to manage. As mentioned pre viously, multi-layer packaging waste is a 
challenge. Accordingly, the development and application of the MERLIN project’s technologies bring an 
improvement to the efficient end of life of packaging waste management. 
The MERLIN project’s technologies are de scribed in more detail below with the state -of-the-art of the main 
scientific and technological innovations associated with the management and treatment of multi -layer packaging 
waste: sorting, delamination and recycling that the consortium aims to achieve during MERLIN. 
Innovation in SORTING of post-consumer packaging waste in waste management facilities 
Innovation 1. Monitoring packaging waste composition 
Packaging material recycling from mixed waste plastics is a challenging process combining different s orting steps 
such as screening, wind sifting, NIR sorting, and the removal of metals. Currently, the main purpose is to separate 
the recyclable mono-materials, such as PE, PP and PET for mechanical recycling12. This separation is mainly done 
with rigid packaging since flexible forms, including monolayer films, are difficult to handle by most recycling 
systems13, with a higher operational cost.  Equipment to automatically identify plastics is commercially available 
via spectroscopic identification sy stems including near -infrared, X -ray, colour, laser, and combinations thereof, 
but many recyclers are still sorting plastics by hand which is unreliable and expensive. As a result, most state-of-
the-art devices are used to identify the wanted rigid fraction and the rest, including multi-layer items, is normally 
incinerated or landfilled. Metallic layers present in flexible packaging, mainly Al, are widely used to reduce multi -
layer material permeability to light, water and oxygen. The encapsulated metal com plex molecules are gradually 
released into the environment over the service life of the product or when the plastic waste is discarded either by 
incineration or landfill, reaching the atmosphere or the soil. 
IRIS has experience in developing fast, customiz ed, online photonic -based solutions for plastic processing 
monitoring focusing VIS/NIR spectrometry. These tools have been proven to be precise in identifying its 
composition and traces of unwanted substances. IRIS’ results in the Multicycle project showed  its ability to use 
NIR HSI to identify the different layers in laminated plastic films 14, and pointed to the high potential of combining 
chemometrics with machine learning in improving sorting. 
 
11 Attitudes of Europeans towards Waste Management and Resource Efficiency  Waste Manag. 2014 Dec; 34(12):2434-44. 
12 Coltelli M.B., Aglietto M., (2015) Riutilizzo dei materiali polimeri, Edizioni Nuova Cultura.  
13 Selke, S. E.. Plastics recycling and biodegradable plastics. At: Harper, C. (2006) Handbook of Plastics Technologies.  McGraw-Hill. 
14 Automated monitoring of waste composition and PAT platform for process optimization, article from MultiCycle 1st yearly ne wsletter, November 2019. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
15 
XRF has been identified as a useful technique for plastic recycling because it can detect metal layers and metal 
complexes encapsulated in polymer matrixes, though not chemically bound to the polymer with penetration 
depths beyond 10 mm. 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art 
Innovation 2 Implementation of robotized sorting for waste management 
Robotic solutions are starting to be applied in waste handling sorting plants. In these plants, sensors continuously 
monitor the waste stream. With the help of A.I. recognition, the desired materials are identified through a 
combination of computer vision a nd a photonic system. This information is used by the robotic grippers to pick 
the materials out. However, they still present deficiencies in the recognition of some materials (e.g., multi -layer) 
and in gripping. 
Computer vision has been extensively applie d in waste detection. Waste streams are extremely complex both in 
terms of detection and manipulation. There are virtually infinite types of objects, sizes, shapes, colours, 
brightness, etc. and i tems are often dirty, broken, crushed  or overlapped… In this  case, traditional computer 
vision techniques are not sophisticated enough 15. One of the first initiatives to demonstrate intelligent waste 
classification was based on a classical pattern recognition methodology: the Bayesian framework 16, though this 
methodology was not capable of perfect automation because it required hand extracted features. In another 
area, convolutional neural network architectures made an impressive contribution to object recognition 17. Over 
the last few years, computer vision has  been considered as a tool to support waste sorting, and deep learning 
techniques have reached reasonable results. A method using faster region -based convolutional neural networks 
(R-CNN)18 has been developed to obtain region proposals and object classific ation, categorizing waste into three 
types (landfill, recycling and paper). 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art 
Innovation in DELAMINATION of rigid and flexible (metalized and non-metalized) multi-layer packaging waste 
Innovation 3. Polyester depolymerization for rigid multi-layer delamination 
Depolymerization is the reverse reaction of the polymer formation route, obtaining the original monomers. There 
are different depolymerization routes by solvolysis such as methanolysis, glycolysis and hydrolysis 19, depending 
 
15 The computer vision waste challenge. HR-Recycler https://www.hr-recycler.eu/the-computer-vision-waste-challenge/ 
16 C. Liu, L. Sharan, E. H. Adelson, and R. Rosenholtz, “Exploring features in a bayesian framework for material reco gnition,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2010 
IEEE Conference on IEEE,2010, pp. 239–246. 
17 K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human -level performance on imagenet classification,” in Proceeding s of the IEEE international 
conference on computer vision,2015, pp. 1026–1034 
18 S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R -CNN: Towards Real -Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks, ”IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 6,pp. 1137–1149, 2017,ISSN: 01628828.DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2577031. arXiv: 1506.01497.  
19 Y. Yang et al, Study on methanolytic depolymerization of PET with supercritical methanol for chemical recycling. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 75, 185-191 (2002). 
The innovative combination of NIR HSI and XRF for online monitoring of plastics will enable the identification 
of PE, PP, PET and Al layers in rigid and flexible packaging when they are located with other plastic waste. 
The addition of artificial vision will be used  in MERLIN project as a complementary criterion for defining the 
area, perimeter, colour , or shape, and for separating rigid from flexible packaging using a robotic 
manipulator. All these techniques will be implemented in HSI mode and the combination of the 
compositional information at each detected packaging item level will be mined with artificial intelligence to 
minimize the amount of unknown materials. Both the software and the hardware will be optimized and their 
application extended to the detection of rigid and flexible packaging, integrating artificial vision for object 
compositional information in real time and enabling the monitoring system to work at a waste treatment 
facility. 
Thanks to the combination of the results from photonic monitoring techniques and their integration with 
computer vision based on deep learning for rigid and flexible packaging, MERLIN will improve the parameters 
of A.I. algorithms to recognize multi -layer packaging materials from waste streams. The project will also 
focus on improving the results of the Project ZRR for the Municipal Waste project of the gripping adapted to 
rigid and flexible multi-layer plastics. 
The deep learning algorithms developed in the MERLIN project will be based on multi -layer CNN for object 
detection and in the training phase, an open source database will be created with segmented labelled waste 
images. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
16 
on the chemical agent used in the reactions. In addition, its reactions could be catalysed or not, depending on the 
use of this substances. 
PET is a widely recycled polymer, which can be completely depolymerized into monomers 20. The major PET 
depolymerization method includes solvolysis of the polymeric materials, following different routes, depending on 
the selected reactive agent 21 (Figure 6), such  as glycols ( glycolysis), alcohols such as methanol and ethanol 
(alcoholysis), and water, acid, and alkaline (hydrolysis). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One of the most widely used processes is glycolysis, where ionic liquids, metal salts, and hydrotalcites are used 
as a traditional catalyst. However, they are often difficult to recover and have poor depolymerization kinetics. 
Traditionally, this depolymerization process has not been used for heavily contaminated PET streams, because of 
the lower conversion result, given that products are most ly integrated by oligomers instead of BHET, which are 
difficult to separate from impurities.22,23 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art  
Innovation 4. Supercritical fluids for multi-layer non-metalized film delamination 
Supercritical fluids (SCFs) have become of increasing significance in the last 
few decades, and they are widely used in the industrial field. A SCF has 
intermediate properties between a gas and a liquid. In this state, their 
diffusivities approach those of a gas rather than a liquid, which means that 
they can be easily moved through the material matrixes24. 
Some SCFs, such as Supercritical carbon dioxide (s -CO2) have been 
extensively investigated for applications in solvent -free chemistry processes 
and are common in extraction  processes25, thanks to their miscibility with 
other solvents and the ir combined dissolution effect 26. This fact makes it 
possible to select operational conditions for selective dissolution in 
delamination processes. 
Under the solubility principle “like dissolves like”, the closer the solvent and 
the polymer are in polarity, the easier it is to dissolve the polymer in the 
 
20 A. Carné Sánchez et al, The selective recycling of mixed plastic waste of PLA and PET by control of process conditions. Eur. Polym. J. 47, 1970-1976 (2011). 
21 Leian Bartolome et all, Recent Developments in the Chemical Recycling of PET. 
22 M. Khoonkari, A. Haghighi, Y. Sefidbakht, K. Shekooki, A. Ghaderian, Chemical Recycling of PET Wastes with Different Catalysts. Int. J. Polym. Sci. (2015). 
23 H. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Li, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Glycolysis of poly(ethylene terephthalate) catalyzed by ionic liquids. Eur. Polym. J. 45, 1535-1544 (2009). 
24 Morrell, J.J., Handbook of Environmental Degradation of Materials (2012).  
25 Sami Mukheimer et al, Uses of Carbon Dioxide. 
26 Nikolai et al, Supercritical CO2: Properties and Technological Applications – A Review. 
MERLIN will obtain raw materials (PET monomers)  from rigid multi-layer plastic waste through the 
development of a new depolymerization process  for the PET layer . The new process will overcome the 
limitations of current solvolysis processes , in terms of impurities kinetics interferences, implementing 
process modifications, as pre-treatment and operational parameters modifications, and the steps needed to 
improve depolymerization kinetics and the selectivity for BHET. In addition, smart magnetic materials (SMM) 
will be implemented to improve the depolymerization process results compared with traditional catalysts. To 
overcome the limitation related to the operational cost of the depolymerization process,  MERLIN will 
implement the use of magnetic fluids during glycolysis depolymerization in order to fully and actively recover 
the catalyst used in the process. The recovery of the catalyst will contribute to the development circular and 
cost-effective process, allowing the reuse of the catalyst. Thus, the MERLIN project will obtain new polymers 
using just a fraction of virgin plastic while the rest will be recycled plastic in the form of monomers, reducing 
pollution issues and greenhouse gas emissions. 
FIGURE 6. DIFFERENT SOLVOLYSIS METHODS FOR PET DEPOLYMERIZATION. 
FIGURE 7. HSP AND SPHERE FOR POLYMERS AND SOLVENTS.  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
17 
solvent. In this way, when the interaction between a polymer and a solvent is higher than the cohesion of the 
polymer, it is easily dissolved in the solvent. To determine whether a certain polymer will dissolve in a certain 
solvent, the Hassen Solubility Parameters (HSP)  have been defined , which study the in teraction between 
molecules related to dispersion forces (δ d), intermolecular forces (δ p), and hydrogen bonds (δ h). The HSP study 
will provide the starting conditions for carrying out multi-layer film (non-metalized) delamination. 
Although the use of s -CO2 is known in the industrial sector, its uses are mainly focused on the food sector, 
because of the efficiency of extractions for different substances with different molecular weights, such as 
vegetable, animal and mineral oils, and some substances with higher molecular weight, such as waxes. 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art 
Innovation 5. Solvent-based process for multi-layer metalized film delamination 
Several lab techniques and a fe w pilot plants have been developed for the separation of multi -layer metalized 
films (e.g., separation of PE from aluminium). The developed approaches can be grouped into thermal, 
mechanical and chemical processes. The thermal process involves the application of high temperatures to 
achieve the decomposition of the plastic layer  (and other organic components presents in the packaging waste), 
recovering the metalized layer.  The mechanical technology (often known as mechanical/chemical process) i s 
mainly based on the exfoliation of the multi -layer material with the aid of separating fluids/chemicals such as 
mixtures of water, surfactants and hydro tropes, organic solvents, and acid solutions. Microemulsion ‐based 
technology is an example of this ap proach, developed by Saperatec 27, which uses a combination of surfactants, 
lipophilic solvents, chelating agents and stabilizing agents. One of the few plants developed so far based on this 
technology is a demo plant in China that uses formic acid. Althoug h formic acid is not included in the European 
Candidate List of Substances of Very High Concern 28, it is well known as a corrosive and flammable compound, 
and also as a strong reducing agent. 
The chemical strategy foresees the solubilization of polymeric l ayers and the precipitation of the metal ones, 
followed by polymer recovery by evaporation of the solvent or after the addition of an anti -solvent. The solvents 
can effectively dissolve some of the most common polymers found in multi -layer metalized films. However, there 
are only a few solvents and they are usually “problematic” (e.g., toluene, xylenes). Vegetable oil represents one of 
the most environmentally friendly options, but chloroform or alcohols are needed to remove oily contaminations 
from both polymers and their metal counterparts. 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art 
 
27 https://www.saperatec.de, Patent: US 2013/0319618 A1  
28 http://echa.europa.eu/web/guest/candidate-list-table 
MERLIN aims to use the solvation power of SCFs, which is exponentially proportional to their fluid density 
and can be modified by changing the operational conditions: pressure and/or temperature. In addition, the 
use of co -solvent improves the solvation power of SCFs. MERLIN will study the operational conditions, 
pressure, temperature, contact time, and co -solvents, to maximize the efficiency and selectivity of SCFs for 
delamination. Hence, the delamination process developed will focus on the use of SCFs and co -solvents for 
the degradation and/or dissolution of a target layer with accurate polarity (e.g., EVOH) in the structure of 
flexible multi-layer packaging. 
In this way, the MERLIN project will move forward in the use of supercritical fluids as a solvent, impro ving 
knowledge and developing a new process for recycling and recovery, based on selective dissolution with 
fluids in supercritical conditions. 
MERLIN will dissolve the polymeric layer/s from the metalized films. As an alternative to common solvents, 
green solvents are more expensive but are environmentally friendly. In this project, a comparative study 
between traditional and green solvents, with similar properties, will be carried out. Polymer recovery from 
the solution will be achieved using CO 2. During the MERLIN project, two green solvents will be triall ed: 
Switchable Hydrophilicity Solvents (SHS, mainly lipophilic tertiary and secondary amines) and biodiesel. Both 
of them are characterized by the fact that: i) they can dissolve polymers like PE under mild conditions 
(temperature ≤ 100 °C); ii) they prese rve Al quality (i.e., preventing its oxidation); iii) they can be separated 
from the polymers and recovered by changing the solvent polarity (e.g., adding CO 2 to SHS/H2O mixture, or 
adding sub/super-critical CO2 to solubilize biodiesel. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
18 
Innovation in RECYCLING recovered polymers from delamination and REPOLYMERIZATION of polyesters 
Innovation 6. Polyester Repolymerization from multi-layer waste packaging  
PET repolymerization is used to obtain new raw material from the monomer. PET polymerization is manufactured 
following different routes: (i) a transesterification reaction between dimethyl terephthalate (DMT) and EG, (ii) the 
esterification of terephthalic acid (TPA) with ethylene glycol (EG) and polycondensation of bis (2 -hydroxyl ethyl) 
terephthalate (BHET), (iii) ring-opening polymerization using different catalysts such as antimony trioxide, 
titanium (IV) isopropoxide or dibutyltin oxide, and (iv) finally, the polyaddition reaction, which can also be used to 
obtain PET and other polyesters29.  
After chemical recycling, PET is totally degraded into monomers such as TPA, DMT, BHET, and EG or partially into 
oligomers or other materials30. This repolymerization will follow similar principles to conventional polymerization, 
producing new PET with the same properties as virgin raw materials , but dealing with the possible impurities and 
interferences. 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art 
Innovation 6. Upcycling/reuse of recovered polymers  
Plastics, due to their structure, are susceptible to degradation because of factors such as temperature, radiation, 
and exposure to aggressive media 31. This degradation has negative consequences on their mechanical properties 
and stability. In the case of recycled materials, this effect is greater because they have been subjected to a 
recycling process mainly because of the use that has already been given to the original material. The degradation 
processes and the damage derived from them can be interrupted or repaired in recycled materials by the addition 
of different compounds such as stabilizers, chain extenders , impact modifiers , fillers and other application-
specific additives, by compounding or reactive extrusion processes. 
The use of stabilizers is suitable to avoid degradation from processing in recycled polymers. The most common 
ones are antioxidants and light stabilizers. 
Antioxidants (AOs) (such as phenolic compounds, phosphites and phosphonites 32) are used to reduce the 
thermal-oxidative degradation of plastics due to heat, shear stress or a combination of these factors, among 
others33 and they can be divided into two main categories : primary AOs, which act as radical scavengers, and 
secondary AOs, which act as hydroperoxide scavengers. 
Light stabilizers  (such as benzophenones, benzotriazoles, and salicylates) are used to inhibit polymer photo -
oxidation, which is the combined result o f the action of light and oxygen, causing material cracking and even 
disintegration34. Like autoxidation, this is a free radical process. There are two main types of light stabilizers: 
ultraviolet ( UV) absorbers,  which absorb ultraviolet light and render i t harmless, and hindered amine light 
stabilizers (HALS), which work by terminating photo-oxidation processes. 
Chain extenders (such as anhydrides and organophosphorus) are reactive additives added to the polymer during 
extrusion to increase chain length 35. This results in a reduced melt flow index (MFI) and thus increases viscosity 
and mechanical properties. Chain extenders are normally only effective in polycondensation polymers such as PET 
and PA. 
 
29 Amit A Barot, Tirth M Panchal, Ankit Patel, Chirag M Patel . Archives of Applied Science Research, 2019, 11 (2): 1 
30A. B. Raheem, Z. Zainon Noor, A. Hassan, M. K. Abd Hamid, S. A. Samsudin, A. Hussein Sabeen . Journal of Cleaner Production 225 (2019) 1052e1064  
31 F. Vilaplana and S. Karlsson, “Quality concepts for the improved use of recycled poly meric materials: A review,” Macromol. Mater. Eng., vol. 293, no. 4, pp. 274 –297, 2008 
32 BASF, “Process and Thermal Stabilizers for Specialty Polymers.” [Online]. Available: http://www.plasticadditives.basf.com/ev/internet/plastic -
additives/en_GB/function/conversions:/publish/content/plastic -additives/K_2016/data/Selectionb_Guides_PTS_Polymers_2016_Final.pdf.  
33 R. Fiorio, D. R. D’hooge, K. Ragaert, and L. Cardon, “A statistica l analysis on the effect of antioxidants on the thermal -oxidative stability of commercial massand emulsion -
polymerized ABS,” Polymers (Basel)., vol. 11, no. 1, 2018.  
34 Zweifel, H., Maier, R. D., Schiller, M., & Amos, S. E. (2001).  Plastics additives handbook. 
35 Dimonie, Doina et al. Overview on Mechanical Recycling by Chain Extension of POSTC -PET Bottles. 10.5772/31841. 2012. 
The polymerization of PET from pure substrates (EG and TPA) can be carried out by different methods and 
the result obtained is PET with all the qualities and none of the impurities. The MERLIN project will evaluate 
the behaviour of depolymerized multi-layered PET (made up of other non-PET polymers, like PU) as the input 
for the polymerization processes. MERLIN will address the production of PET and guarantee the safety of 
food packaging products via laboratory tests, using purified PET monomers derived from  depolymerization 
processes. Therefore, MERLIN will develop a process to obtain high quality PET from a non -homogeneous 
waste stream, increasing the recycled plastic content in PET (linked to the EU Single-Use Plastics Directive) by 
looking at multi -layered PET waste streams that are currently being incinerated or going to landfill. This 
could mean a reduction of fossil-based (virgin) raw materials and a move towards a more circular economy. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
19 
Impact modifiers  (such as maleic anhydride (MA) -modified S EBS, EPDM or Ethylene –ethyl acrylate –glycidyl 
methacrylate terpolymer 36) are generally elastomeric compounds (dispersion of a rubber phase within the 
polymeric matrix) used for increasing flexibility and impact strength to meet the physical property requirements 
of rigid parts37. 
Fillers are usually added in order to improve the mechanical properties of final materials. Nowadays, biosourcing 
fillers (e.g., lignocellulose plant fibres as hemp, coco and sisal ), are becoming important in the market to replace 
common fillers such as GF and CF when the application allows this. One of the key issues is to make these polar 
fibres compatible with non-polar matrices such as POs. 
MAg on POs aims to modify their surface tension for improving adhesion/affinity w ith polar polymers as PET and 
fillers3839. Indeed, PET is a polar material with its carboxylic acid and alcohol functions at the end of the chain, for 
example, whereas POs are known for their apolarity.  The intention is to use more environmentally friendly 
adhesives and prevent extra processes such as filler sizing. 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art 
Innovation 7. Recovery of metalized layer 
The recycling of metals without degrading their properties helps to preserve natural resources, as this requires 
less energy to process them than using virgin raw materials, thus emitting fewer harmful gases and saving 
money40. Metalized layers from multi -layer packaging materials can be recovered through thermal and 
mechanical/chemical approaches. Thermal technologies such as incineration, plasma and pyrolysis/microwave -
pyrolysis41 42 aim to generate energy by breaking the chemical bonds of the polymeric fraction (thus no more 
recoverable as “raw material”) and to solely recover metal layers. However, their  quality can be hampered by a 
high level of oxidation (e.g. due to the presence of residual water/developed water during the process) and/or 
char residue (carbonaceous material, highly enriched into inorganic ashes) . In addition, the use of some specific 
chemicals (e.g., strong reducing agents)43 and/or the44 conditions under which these chemicals are used (e.g., high 
temperature) can compromise the quality of metal layers. 
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art 
b) Innovation Potential 
To maximize our innovati on’s commercial potential, beyond the outreach activities, a comprehensive series of 
measures including user-friendly tools to transfer knowledge to industry and consumers, consumer perceptions, 
standardization and regulatory aspects, as well as business p lanning and knowledge/intellectual property rights 
(IPR) management, will be undertaken in WP6 and WP7. The knowledge and IPs generated by the project will be 
 
36 J. Scheirs, Additives for the Modification of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) to Produce Engineering -Grade Polymers. 2004. 
37 J. Markarian, “Impact modifiers: How to make your compound tougher,” Plast. Addit. Compd., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 46–49, 2004. 
38 Alexandre Geissler, Elaboration d’une nouvelle catégorie de surfaces adaptatives sensibles à un stimulus mécanique ; universi té de Haute Alsace - 2009. 
39 Massardier Compatibilité des matières plastiques - Etat de l’art septembre 2001 ; - Laboratoire de Matériaux Macromoléculaires INSA de LYON  
40 An Introduction to Metal Recycling (June 25, 2019), The Balance Small Business. 
41 A. Korkmaz, J. Yanik, M. Brebu and C. Vasile, Waste Manage., 2009, 29, 2836.  
42 J. Haydary, D. Susa and J. Dudáš, Waste Manage., 2013, 33, 1136.  
43 M. Xie, Q. Qiao, Q. Sun and L. Zhang, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2013, 18, 626.  
44 D. Yan, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, Q. Huang, M. Xie and Q. Wang, Waste Manage., 2015, 35, 21.  
Most developments related to recycled plastic upcycling/recovery are focused on virgin plastic or on plastic 
waste from monomaterial structures, and not on delaminated structures. Because of the delamination 
processes, the different fractions obtained (PET from flexible packaging and polyolefins from both flexible 
and rigid packaging)  may experiment higher degradation than the one resul ting from conventional 
mechanical recycling processes. MERLIN will study specific routes and additives such as reactive extrusion 
and additivation in twin -screw extrusion processes to enhance the processability and properties of the 
delaminated recycled fractions so as to obtain structures with a performance that is similar to current 
benchmark solutions. In addition, the use of more environmentally friendly solutions such as bio -sourcing 
fillers and adhesives will be considered to further reduce the carbon footprint of the developed solutions. 
MERLIN will develop a delamination process for metalized multi -layer film which recovers good quality, 
marketable Al, with a minimum percentage of aluminium oxide. As an alternative to processes based on high 
temperature (e.g., pyrolysis) or harsh conditions (e.g., strong alkaline or acidic  reagents), green solvents 
under mild conditions will be applied.  This approach will provide the recovery of not only Al, but also of 
those polymeric layers soluble into the selected solvents (SHS and BLS). 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
20 
exploited by each partner in order to improve their competitiveness. This will differentiate thei r products on the 
market, tapping into increasing market and consumer demand for high -performance environmentally friendly 
packaging compared to their traditional petroleum -derived counterparts and improved EoL options. Freedom to 
operate (FTO) has been gi ven due attention as a vital forerunner for the commercial exploitation of the results, 
and a patent search has been performed around each of our main technologies reflected in the SoA. 
Table 5 reflects the most relevant patents (including some from partners) and highlights the differences with 
MERLIN. The prior art is rich but there is space for further innovations beyond the state-of-the-art which could be 
patented. We expect  to generate at least 4 new patents from the project, especially in the area of sorting and 
delamination. 
TABLE 5. RESULTS OF THE PATENT SEARCH FOCUSED ON THE MAIN INNOVATION AREA TO BE GENERATED IN MERLIN. 
Patent  
(title, reference, status, owner) Relevance to MERLIN Impact on MERLIN 
WO2017037260 - Method and 
device for dismantling multi -
layer systems including at least 
one organic component 
Patented process to delaminate 
multi-layer systems including a 
fluid which causes one of the 
layers to s eparate, and one or 
more non -reactive liquids (mix of 
water and acetone) 
MERLIN will focus on the dissolution or degradation of 
the targeted layer. The developed process will include 
different co -solvent/s with different polarities. The 
patent specified (use o f specific solvents mix) is a 
different process from MERLIN’s, FTO not a risk. 
IT201600114545A1 
Method for separating and 
recovering polyethylene and 
aluminium from a polylaminate 
material 
UNIBO 
The invention is based on the use 
of switchable hydrophilic solvents 
(SHS) for the separation and 
recovery of low -density 
polyethylene (LDPE) and 
aluminium from food packaging 
(polycoupled).  
MERLIN will exploit this technology to recover both 
polymers and  aluminium from metalized flexible 
packaging. The fully sustainable method recovers high 
amounts (> 99% for aluminium and> 80% for 
polyethylene) of the materials and with good quality (≥ 
86% of non-oxidized aluminium). 
KR20170056601A - Polymer 
compositions 
Process for improving properties 
of post-consumer polyethylene by 
the incorporation of inorganic 
fillers such as calcium carbonate, 
clays and talc for the production 
of pipes. 
MERLIN will work on the enhancement of properties of 
post-consumer packaging waste from delaminated 
multi-layer structures to produce rigid and flexible 
packaging (films, trays, bottles and pots). As recovered 
materials may be more degraded due to delamination 
processes, specific routes will be developed, inclu ding 
the use of reactive extrusion, and additives such as 
stabilizers, impact modifiers and fillers.  
KR101518662B1 - Method for 
environmental-friendly 
manufacturing of properties 
reinforcement recycled PP 
using engage and nucleating 
agents 
Improvement of impact 
resistance of recycled PP by using 
thermoplastic PO elastomers and 
inorganic-free nucleating agents 
MERLIN will focus on upcycling recovered fractions 
from multi -layer structures, which may have 
undergone a higher degree of degradation than usual. 
Depending on the target application, studies will look 
into the effect of different additives such as impact 
modifiers, which will be added by compounding. 
WO2014142661A2, magnetic 
fluid, granted 
IONIQA 
The invention relates to the 
catalyst used for PET glycolysis 
that will be used within this 
project.  
Within MERLIN, IONIQA will focus on the recycling of 
rigid multi-layer packaging, which has a higher degree 
of contamination than usual PET feedstocks. This 
catalyst will be tested in the presence of the 
contaminants. The more complex feedstock challenges 
the process, and thus purification and catalyst 
separation might be more complex as well.  
WO2017111602A1, Improved 
capture complex and method of 
degradation of a polymer 
material, granted IONIQA 
See above.  See above. 
WO2017080651A1, PET/PA 
separation process, granted  
IONIQA 
This invention relates to the 
separation of PA/PET by means of 
a pre-treatment step prior to the 
PET depolymerization process.  
IONIQA will focus on the recycling of rigid multi -layer 
packaging, which has a higher degree of contamination 
than usual PET feedstocks. A pre -treatment step might 
be required to purify the PET stream before it enters 
the actual depolymerization vessel.  
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
21 
2. IMPACT
2.1 Expected impacts  
2.1.1 Expected Impacts listed in the topic 
The development of the MERLIN project will have a remarkable impact on different aspects related to 
sustainability developments as  well as on future European legislation and technology developments. MERLIN 
aims to create promising technologies and processes to improve sorting, delamina tion, and recycling, addressing 
all the expected impacts that are included in the topic CE-SC5-24-2020. This impact will be achieved by 
performing research work with the objective of making this concept commercially viable in practice, analysing the 
potentially successful exploitation pathways, and assessing and managing any related risks. Additionally, MERLIN 
will contribute to the achievement of the SDGs as discussed below in each relevant impact point ( Table 6) and 
shown in Figure 8. 
FIGURE 8. MERLIN CONTRIBUTION TO SDGS. 
 
 ITENE 
 
 
TABLE 6. CONTRIBUTION TO THE IMPACTS SET OUT IN THE TOPIC AND TO THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDG). 
Increased yield and quality in the sorting of products made of multi-layer materials. 
MERLIN’s technologies will place the waste treatment sector within the Industry 4.0 framework  with the aim of 
transforming current waste treatment facilities into factories for the production of secondary raw materials. To 
achieve this, it is necessary to equip current sorting processes with new systems that introduce high efficiency 
operations to increase waste recovery, both in terms of quantity and the variety of materials, and also ensuring 
suitable quality for their subsequent recovery.  MERLIN’s sorting technologies, based on photonic and computer 
vision material identification, A.I. robotics, and deep learning algorithms,  will improve the current solutions in the 
recycling industry, through a reliable composition -based classification with chemometrics and machine learning 
model criteria, and a deep learning classifier based on images for types of waste and cost -effective robotic 
solutions for picking. 
Robotic sorting solutions  will increase the cost efficiency of sorting and classification . The latest generation of 
robotic sorting solutions could perform an average of up to 2,000 picks  per hour versus the 800 picks per hour of a 
worker doing it manually 45. Assuming that one tonne of post -consumer packaging waste could contain an average 
of 300,000 package units 46, one tonne would be treated in 150 hours as opposed to 250 hours if it were treated 
only by human. Thus, the use of robotized sorting w ould reduce in an average of 40% the sorting time in sorting 
plants. Moreover, the implementation of robots will reduce workers’ exposure to post -consumer waste in sorting 
plants, avoiding potential health risks. 
In addition, sorting in the specific structure  identification (HIS, NIR/SWIR, XRF)  will increase the quality  of each 
multi-layer sorted flow by 75%, eliminating misunderstandings by workers over materials that are visually similar.  
KPI1: Increase of the purity and sorting efficiency in sorting plants by 75% for each multi-layer stream sorted in the 
project and increasing the purity of other current flows in sorting plants (e.g. HDPE or PET) over 90%. 
Increased recycling of raw materials from products made of multi -layer materials, in terms of volume and/or 
quality. 
Modern economies are highly dependent on plastics in Europe, consuming in the range of 29.1 million tonnes per 
year of plastics and collecting around 17.8 million tonnes per year of post-consumer packaging1. In spite of the high 
variability between EU countries 47, the majority of this packaging waste is incinerated (39,5 %) or  is landfilled 
(18.5%) and only 42% is recycliced1.  
The EU aims to extend the useful life of food to reduce food wasting has increased the use of multi-layer structures 
in the packaging sector, because of the high barrier properties of these structures . Thus, The EU consumption of 
multi-layer packaging structures  is in the range of 3.03 million tonnes per year (17% of total plastic packaging 
 
45 https://www.recyclingtoday.com/article/recycling -robots-ai-sorting/ 
46 Mapping flexible packaging in a Circular Economy [F.I.A.C.E], Ceflex.eu  
47 Plastics – the Facts 2017 An analysis of European plastics productio n, demand and waste data, Plastic Europe report  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
22 
produced)4, with the majority being incinerated (32%) or landfilled  (68%). Indeed, most of the multi -layer food 
packaging are currently very difficult to recycle. In the light of the EU’s policy objective  of achieving a resource -
efficient recycling society, it is hard to accept that we still landfill nearly 40-50% of plastic waste in Europe. 
The total volume of plastic recycled  in Europe stood at 9.46 million tonnes in 2018. PET was the polymer with the 
highest market share, with 33.9% (5.5% growth per year), followed by POs (PE, PP), with a 26.3% market share48. 
MERLIN will focus mainly on the delamination and recovery of these polymers (PET, POs). Recycling 60% of the 
total amount of multi -layer packaging waste, it is mean 1.8 million tonnes , would imply an increase of more than 
10% in total current plastic packaging waste recycl ed, from 9.46 to 11.27 million tonnes. This would contribute to 
reaching the European Plastics Strategy  objective of 55% of packaging recycling in 2030.  In the market, this 
increase would contribute to reaching the expected amount of total recycled plastic to  18.25 million ton nes in 
2030 (considering a 5.2% growth per year)49. 
Considering the global market for recycled plastic  was estimated at €36,5300 million  in 2018 48, the potential 
European market for recycled plastics from multi-layer packaging structures, 1.8 million tonnes, could be estimated 
at €6,173 million in 2018, if they had been recycled. 
With the implementation of the developed technologies in the fields of sorting, delamination, and valorisation, the 
MERLIN project aims to increase the amount of recovered  plastic, suitable for high value -added applications. This 
plastic valorised from multi -layer packaging structures reach a potential market, of  €11,342 million of recycled 
plastic in 2030, reaching 3.51 million of tones of multi-layer packaging recycled (considering an expected 6.5%, and 
5.2% growth per year respectively)24. 
• MERLIN is linked to SDG9  on building resilient infrastructure and promoting inclusive and sustainable 
industrialization. MERLIN will foster innovation within the waste treatment and multi-layer packaging industry 
with a relevant associated economic impact. 
KPI2: Recover with high quality at least 60 % of plastic material from multi-layer packaging structures by combining the 
developed technologies (sorting, delamination, and recycling) 
KPI3: Recycling of 3.51 million tonnes, with a potential market of €11.342 million in 2030 
Reduced use of virgin raw materials. 
The EC’s plastics strategy aims to decouple plastic production from virgin materials, reducing their leakage into the 
environment, improving the economics and uptake of recycling to support the transition from a linear to a circular 
economy model . MERLIN technologies will contribute to increase the recycling of post -consumer plastic waste, 
reaching 60% of multi -layer recycling, which would represent a total of 1.8 Mt/year. This recovered material  (PET 
and POs), could be used as raw material for high -value performance products , such as food contact applications, 
reducing the dependence on non-renewable sources. This reintroduction of polymers into the loop will reduce the 
oil dependence, which will impact positively on the EU’s carbon footprint in plastic production. For virgin PET, the 
average carbon footprint is estimated at 2.86 kg CO 2 eq/kgmaterial, while the use of PET from recycled sources will 
reduce the footprint to 2.45 kg CO2 eq/kgmaterial 50. In the case of virgin POs, the estimated average is 1.9-2.01 kg CO2 
eq/kgmaterial, depending on the type of PO and the quality. Recycled POs, in turn, will save 0.41 kg CO 2 eq/kgmaterial 50. 
The combined technologies developed during the MERLIN project, applicated in an industrial environment,  are 
expected to recover a total of 1.8 Mt/year . The recycling of this material  has the potential to reduce carbon 
footprint by 2.8-4.45 Mt CO2 eq/year. 
• Merlin is linked to SDG3 on ensuring healthy lives and promotin g well-being thanks to CO 2 eq reduction, thus 
reducing disease and the mortality rate caused by bad air quality. 
• Merlin is linked to SDG12 on promoting a sustainable consumption and production, through the design of new 
high-performance packaging solutions from waste. 
• Merlin is linked to SDG13  on combating climate change thanks to the reduction of virgin materials and an 
increase in recycling rates. 
KPI4: Production of  high-added value packaging  prototypes, as food packaging : rigid (thermoformed trays)  and 
flexible(flow pack).  
KPI5: Reduction of, at least, 10-15% of kg CO2 eq by using recovered plastics compared to raw material production. 
Increased knowledge on “circular design” of products currently made of multi-layer materials. 
MERLIN promotes collaboration between all partners and stakeholders throughout the entire value chain and 
 
48 Recycled Plastics Market-To Reach USD 66-74 Billion By 2026 Reports And Data - link 
49  Europe's recycled plastics market 2019 - 2024 - Globe Newswire 
50 Own calculation based on simulation with SimaPro, Ecoinvent, 2016  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
23 
beyond, following an RRI approach. Results include good practices for sorting, designing , and recycling and a DSS 
informing about best processes for  circular design. Dissemination and consultation workshops will increase the 
understanding of the opportunity for the economy and environment of designing for recycling. The project will be 
defined to attract the common goal of stakeholders ( green image, reducing w aste at competitive price ) but also 
their specific interests: waste managers (high quality secondary raw materials), packaging converters (compatibility 
with their packaging lines and client requirements), packaging filling and machinery suppliers (compatibility with 
their industrial lines), brand owners (preventing breakages, spoilage, contamination, increasing shelf -life, safety, 
and informative labelling), consumers (quality, appearance), policymakers (alignment with strategic plans), I.A. and 
robotics industry (exploiting new sectors such as waste management). CSCP will oversee their engagement. Special 
efforts will be made to increase knowledge among EU countries with plastic packaging recycling rates below the 
average in the EU 28 -2 (42%) such as Roman ia, Cyprus, Poland and Bulgaria 1. MERLIN will hold  at least t en 
webinars/workshops and dissemination events involving more than 200 stakeholders. 
• Merlin is linked to SDG4 on ensuring quality lifelong-learning opportunities thanks to the knowledge generated 
among stakeholders.  
• Merlin is linked to SDG5 on achieving gender equality since it will ensure end -user acceptance (addressing 
health and food safety issues) following the RRI approach (including gender aspects). 
• Merlin is linked to SDG17 on the implementation of and partnerships for sustainable development thanks to 
clustering with other projects. 
KPI6: Increase of networking and interaction among stakeholders and standardisation organisation by the participation 
of at least 20-30 stakeholders in each webinar/workshop. 
Increased knowledge of the process’ environmental footprint, including the net effects on greenhouse gas emissions, 
thanks to improved sorting, separation and recycling of multi-layer material. 
The methodology described above will also be used to increase knowledge  about the environmental footprint 
associated with our processes based on quantified data from  the LCA, LCC and S -LCA (objective 5). The MERLIN 
project’s results will include a DSS (objective 6.2), which will facilitate environmental footprint information to 
industry (waste managers, packaging, recyclers, designers) and QR printed labelling ( objective 6.3) to the 
consumers in non-technical language. 
KPI7: Feedback received from 100 stakeholders of the  Good practises developed  and linked with the Decision Support 
System (DSS), fully operative and correctly implemented in the platform. 
Cross-cutting priorities: gender and socio-economic science and humanities 
Socio-economic Science and Humanities (SSH): SSH perspectives are fully embedded in the MERLIN project. SSH 
disciplines represented in the project include sustainability, management, marketing, consumer science, 
psychology and anthropology, represented primarily in the partners ENCO, CSCP, ITENE and EuPC. In particular, 
involvement from SSH experts will be instrumental in ensuring that the outcomes of MERLIN are relevant and can 
reach maximum imp act at societal level. SSH expertise will also be important to organise dissemination activities 
(WP7) and to ensure effective stakeholder engagement (WP6) with particular  consideration to European 
consumers and SMEs. Special efforts will also be made on c apacity building at SME level through technical and 
personal upskilling. 
2.1.2 Other Expected Impacts not listed in the topic 
This section explains the impact of MERLIN in other areas not listed in the topic.  
 Impact on Economy 
Through MERLIN’s project, a systematic and multidisciplinary approach will be developed to increase the rates of 
the recycled material improving the end -of-life of multi-layer packaging. This multidisciplinary approach includes 
the main elements present in the value chain : waste management , recyclers, raw material producers , and 
packaging manufactures. Thus, is expected that MERLIN project impacts affect the complete value chain . To this 
end, quantitative information on the size of the targeted market are shown next.  
Waste management market  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
24 
The European waste management market  was valued at €303 
billion in 2019 and it is expected to reach €484.4 billion in 
202551, with a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 6% due 
to increased environmental concern and rapid industrialization in 
developing countries, with Europe representing a 30% of this 
market, with a value of €102.14 billion in 2019 and €144.88 
billion in 2025. MERLIN will boost this encouragement thanks to 
our impact on policymakers.  This market has traditionally been 
divided into three main parts: municipal waste, industrial waste, 
and hazardous waste. The most important segment is municipal 
waste, which is expected to reach €57.12 billion in Europe by the 
end of 2023, growing by 6.1% over the period timeframe. 52 There is a new niche market focused on digital 
solutions, called Smart Waste Management, which is expected to grow from €0.32 billion in 2019 to €1.73 billion 
by 2025 in Europe, with a CAGR of 25.68%53 (Figure 9). MERLIN will contribute to expand this emerging smart 
waste management sector introducing smart technologies in sorting plants 
Sorting and robotics for waste management  
Over the last few years, the waste management industry has 
started to introduce robots in its recycling processes to improve 
productivity, the recycling capacity and reduce the cost of waste 
recycling policies54. Globally, robotics applied to sorting is expected 
to bring a  CAGR of 16.52%, reaching a total of  €10.82 billion in 
2024 (Figure 10 )55. Geographically, Europe is the fastest growing 
market with a  growing value from €1.74 billion in 2019 to €4.29 
billion in 2025, due to the strong presence of large manufacturers 
of “waste robots ”, such as ZenRobotics (NL) or Sadako 
Technologies (SP). 56 
The take -off of th is sector has been limited by the high initial 
required investment and barriers to find expert technicians. However, lately, the introduction of A.I., machine 
learning and artificial vision have reduced the required investment and the maintenance risks and costs, as well 
as enabling new professionals to be trained in the sector. MERLIN process development in sorting  field will 
combine robotics with these technologies in order to contribute to the market growth and penetration . 
Technology transfer to industry within MERLIN will help waste management companies to gain competitiveness 
and will increase the quality of in all the streams in sorting plants, eliminating misunderstandings over materials. 
Plastic Industry  
The global plastic market was valued at €500.9 billion in 2019 and is 
expected to growth at a CAGR of 3.2% from 2020 to 2027. In Europe, 
production reached almost 62 million tonnes, 17% of the global 
market share , with packaging being the most important se gment 
with 39.9%. In terms of materials, PP is the most important (19.3%), 
followed by PE-LD/PE-LLD (17.5%), PE-HD/PE-MD (12.2%), PVC (10%), 
PUR (7.9%), PET (7.7%), PS/EPS (6.4%) and other plastics representing 
the remaining 19% (Figure 11).1 An emerging market within the plastic 
industry and aligned with  MERLIN is the European recycled plastics 
sector which present a CAGR of 6.4%, and is expected to increase from 
€10.9 billion in 2017 to € 14.9 billion in 2022, due to manufacturers ’ 
preferences in using recycled plastic over virgin plastics.  This is 
especially demanded by  the packaging sector , especially in the PET 57 
and Polyolefine sector, which is the focus of MERLIN. 
 
51 Global Waste Management Market Analysis, PR Newswire – Link  
52 Source: Canadean 
53 Smart waste management market, Mordor Inteligence – Link  
54 Trends that will transform the waste management. Industry outlook in 2020, Lichpinseo – Link  
55 Global Waste Sorting Robots Market Analysis, Market Data Forecast – Link  
56 Waste sorting robots market analysis, Goldstein Research – Link  
57 Recycled plastics market, Markets and Markets – Link  
FIGURE 10. GLOBAL SORTING ROBOTS MARKET GROWTH (2019-
2024). 
FIGURE 9. WASTE MANAGEMENT. SEGMENTATION 
FIGURE 11. PLASTIC INDUSTRY SEGMENTATION. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
25 
Multi-layer Rigid Packaging industry 
In the plastic packaging industry, there is a growing need for materials that can suitably protect products, mainly 
in the food and beverage industry. This has led to the development and growth of barrier packaging in the last 
few years, driven by advanced technology and changes in consumer preferences, and especially the growing 
trend of microwave cooking and ready-to-eat meals. These trends have led the European market to reach a value 
of €2.87 billion in 2018 and are expected to continue to drive it at a rate of 5.4% CAGR to stand at a total of 
€4.24 billion in 2025. In terms of materials, the most widely used are PE, PP, PA and EVOH, with the combination 
of PET and PP accounting for the majority of the market, at the moment.58 
Multi-layer Flexible Packaging industry 
Multi-layer flexible packaging, which includes solutions such as 
bags, pouches, sachets, wrapping films, laminates, liners, and stick 
packs, etc., has grown enormously during the last couple of years 
due to its material efficiency, cost -effectiveness, dura bility, and 
low weight. This is reflected in the European market’s size, which 
was €30.06 billion in 2016 and is expected to reach €40.40 billion 
in 2022, with a CAGR of 5.2%  (Figure 12. Multi-layer Packaging 
Industry.) The drivers that are leading this growth are the need to 
extend the shelf life of products in order to reduce waste and 
facilitate transport, the downsizing of packaging, the rise in 
demand from end users and the technical improvements in global 
manufacturing activities. 59 
In terms of end use, the most important segment is food and beverages. It dominates the market and is expected 
to grow the most in the short term. The food industry is one of the most important markets in the world in terms 
of revenue, reaching a total of €6,543.60 billion in 2020, and it is expected to grow annually by 3.6% in the next 
few years, reaching €7,785 billion in 2025. Other markets that are important for MERLIN are those related to 
mass consumption. For example, the cosmetics industry is expected to grow at a CAGR of 4.3%, reaching €375.59 
billion in 2022 thanks to a preference shift towards natural and organic beauty products. Another major market is 
pharma, which had a value of €1,092.35 billion in 2019, and expects to grow to around €1,180 billion in 2024. 
In tune with the current growth rate of the smart waste management market, our new solutions will meet the 
growing number of plants that are seeking effective solutions aligned with the EU regulatory framework. MERLIN 
represents a very timely  development of new sorting, delaminating and recycling solutions for multi -layer 
packaging based on PET and/or polyolefins, which are cost-efficient and offer high performance to move towards 
‘green’ waste management systems.  
This will result in major business opportunities reinforced by current multi -layer rigid and flexible packaging 
market trends, growth in our target end -use sectors, increased visibility, and policy awareness and support for 
these solutions. Indeed, we intend to tap into the massive EU plastic business.  
As explained in impact -2, it is estimated a total volume of 5.85 Mt of multi-layer plastic packaging  waste 
generated at 2030 . Considering that manufactured products based on recycled plastic have an average market 
price in the range of €1.8-5/kg1, MERLIN has a potential economic impact of €18,903 million/year by 2030 in the 
EU and creating around 84,013 new jobs per year, considering a rate of job creation of 1 job per €225,000 of 
additional turnover6. 
Being more conservative, and considering that MERLIN solutions could recover an average of 60% of the total of 
multi-layer packaging waste generated , 3.51 million tonnes  per year could be recovered , reaching a potential 
economic impact of €11,342 million of recycled plastic in 2030 and creating around 50,409 new jobs. 
 Impact on job creation and worker quality  
MERLIN is aligned with the EU 2020 strategy 2 3 on the creation of growth and jobs, with a high impact in health 
and environment.  As it has been just stated, MERLIN can contribute to the generation o f 50,409 new job  
positions by 2030 . Moreover, MERLIN will contribute to more EU investment in sorting and recycling 
infrastructures, which will create more jobs by encouraging innovations in several sectors (i.e., IoT, Robotics, 
plastic, Packaging, and food). The implementation of automation  in waste sorting will improve the health and 
 
58 Europe represents a 35% of the global market.  Barrier Packaging Market, Globe Newswire – Link  
59 Flexible Plastic Packaging Market, Markets and Markets – Link  
FIGURE 12. MULTI-LAYER PACKAGING INDUSTRY. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
26 
safety conditions of workers in these industries, reducing direct contact with waste, boosting teleoperation, 
collaborative robotics, and digitalization. These workers will be trained to carry out other jobs in  the waste 
treatment facility related to the maintenance and operation of the new technologies, thus promoting their 
professional development. For this reason, most of the job created will be qualified or high -qualified, offering 
better conditions and salaries to workers.  
Finally, within MERLIN consortium, Table 14 from section 2.2, estimates about how partners respectively expect 
to grow their business and create jobs with the new MERLIN solutions. In total, it has been estimated at 67 jobs 
positions. Thus, Europe could get a strong foothold in the market here by being the first -to-market with a strong 
brand that is scientifically backed (as a results of this RIA), with related packaging producers gaining an invaluable 
head start in the global competition race. 
 Impact on health  
The accumulation of plastics waste when 
they are  landfilled generate substances 
with long times of degradation, which 
persist during hundreds of years and  are 
progressively accumulated in the 
environment, being able to become  
introduced in the food chain. These non -
degradable products will be accumulated 
in organism tissues, affecting finally to 
human health. In addition, these products 
have the potential to affect to the 
environment (i.e., soil pollution, ground 
water, seas, global warming, etc.). MERLIN 
will allo w improving the recycling and 
valorization of plastic waste , reducing 
these impacts in the environment  and in 
human heal th. In addition, the sorting 
technologies which will be developed during the project will help to reduce the contact of workers with plastics 
waste, decreasing t he risk to exposure to hazardous or contaminated waste (as postconsumer packaging which 
could be contaminated with COVID-19 from homes). 
As mentioned, besides addressing unmet demands for effective high performing approaches for the sorting, 
separation, recycling of the multi -layer packaging materials highly contributing to the re -introduction into 
manufacturing processes, MERLIN will also contribute to other environmental and socially important impacts 
especially in terms of pollution and consumer health. Incontrovertibly, our quality of life is linked to the quality of 
our environment and measures are needed for lowering the environmental burden of our consumption patterns. 
Our vision is to lead the transition towards a sustainable post -petroleum society in the plastic sector while 
decoupling economic growth from resource depletion and environmental impact, providing different solutions for 
a New Circular Plastics Economy.  According to a report of the Ellen MacArthur foundation 60, only a very low 
amount of plastic materials is recycled (14%) while high amounts end up in landfills (40%). MERLIN solutions will 
increase the quantity of multi -layer plastic waste recycled while boosting and influencing the use of recycled 
materials in value added ap plications, as for food packaging. The demand for our consumer products, MERLIN 
recycled multi-layer packaging, is expected be driven by green- and health- conscious consumers concerned about 
the environment61.  
 Impact on stakeholders and consumer behaviour 
MERLIN will facilitate the cross -sector collaboration among relevant stakeholder, thus functioning as a dialogue 
and knowledge exchange platform. It will seek to promote positive behaviour changes among stakeholders by 
actively involving them in the processes dev eloped within the project, through a number of engagement 
activities. The engagement activities include the creation of a tailored stakeholder engagement plan as well as the 
sharing and exchange of good practices on increasing circularity in post -consumption multi -layer packaging. 
 
60 THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY RETHINKING THE FUTURE OF PLASTICS, Ellen MacArthur foundation, 2016  
61 About 80% of European consumers want to buy products with a minimal  impact on the environment (Eurobarometer survey, EC, 2013).  
FIGURE 13. GLOBAL FLOWS OF PLASTIC MATERIALS. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
27 
Participatory activities include consultations on prioritizing actions for increasing the reuse and recycling of multi -
layer packaging throughout the value chain (e.g. , sorting, recycling, circular product design, etc.) and valida tion 
workshops for evaluating the related good practices (see task 6.2.2). Thus, MERLIN aims to empower 
stakeholders by involving them in the decision -making process for adopting the most suitable solutions for them 
with regard to increasing circular design and the use of packaging in the multi -layer packaging chain. MERLIN will 
contribute to changing stakeholder and consumer behaviour and improve their perceptions of recycled packaging 
by assessing and sharing data on safety, health and the sustainability benefits of recycled packaging.  
MERLIN project will assess the environmental, social and safety benefits by the active involvement of PARTICULA, 
CSCP and ITENE, which will give the alignment of MERLIN to the consumers’ needs and perceptions. CSCP will 
ensure a strong coverage at European level and contribute to encourage the knowledge of the positive benefits of 
recycled multi -layer packaging as well as raising awareness about economic, societal, and environmental 
challenges 
 Impact on innovation capacity and acquisition of new knowledge 
MERLIN will clearly contribute to the innovation capacity of partners and the integration of new knowledge in 
two main areas: (i) sorting, delamination and recycling of rigid and flexible multi-layer plastic packaging waste and 
(ii) developing and validating new high -performance packaging solutions (flexible and rigid) for their sustainable 
introduction on manufacturing processes for the food packaging industry. 
While the generation of new knowledge is positive, it is in its industrial use that innovation capacity is increased, 
and impact is realised. As such, to generate true market -replicable innovation, the MERLIN consortium brings 
together the industry value chain required for market success, and the project includes a number of cross -cutting 
activities, such as environmental, regulatory, safety and techno -economic assessments, as well as business 
planning activities to maximize the post -project exploitation of the results. Working closely with and transferring 
research results to industry , as well as providing informative programmes , are value assets which , when 
combined with the drive of industry will ensure we bridge the innovation gap that frequently prevents industry 
adoption of R&D results and outputs. Effective knowledge transfer from technical partners to end users  
(internally) and third enterprises and end-users (externally) as well as training to consumers will also take place in 
WP6 and WP7. This is a strategic step for the post -project since it will pave the way towards commercialization, 
guaranteeing that sufficient knowledge is assimilated and competencies to exploit results are acquired. 
 Impact on EU policies and strategic initiatives: 
Besides impact on the SDGs listed in the previous section, MERLIN will have a direct impact on the EU Green 
Deal9 and the Circular Economy Package.  
Waste Framework Directive 2008 /98/EC62 encourages recovery over plastic  waste landfilling and incineration. 
This Directive also establishes that preparing for re -use, recycling, and valorization of household plastic shall be 
increased to a Minimum of overall 70% by weight by 2020. MERLIN contributes strongly to the objectives aimed 
at the European Directive since the project is committed to developing solutions enable to improve the recovery 
of plastic waste from one of the stream s unsorted in waste manager facilities, and with deep technical problems 
for its valorization. 
European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy 8, where the roadmap for Europe in the next year, aiming to 
achieve by 2030, a 100% of packaging which must be reusable, recyclable, or compostable, since only 4 2% of 
packaging waste is recycled in Europe 1 (7.5 Mt recycled, 3.3 Mt landfilled, and 7 Mt incinerated). MERLIN project 
solutions will be focused on the development of  innovative solutions which involve all the actors present in the 
packaging waste end-of-life, in order to increase packaging recycling rates and meet the objectives set for 2030. 
Plastics Strategy63 since it will boost the demand for recycled plastics and prevent plastic waste  deposition in our 
environment. The realisation of EU regulations depends on the technological state of the art. N ew regulations 
need new approaches to be realized. The innovative and systematic solution developed in the MERLIN project will 
increase the amount of recycled material available in the market, as well as it s quality, in order to meet the new 
requirement of European plastic industry. These solutions will be validated through the performance of  new 
packaging which meets the market requirements. 
 
62 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32008L0098  
63 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_18_5  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
28 
#EUGreenDeal. The European Green Deal 9 is the EU policy initiative aimed at putting Europe on track to reach 
net-zero global warming emissions by 205064. To achieve climate neutrality, to preserve our natural environment, 
and to strengthen our economic competitiveness, a fully circular economy is required. Today, our economy is still 
mostly linear, with only 12% of secondary materials and resources being brought back into the  economy. There is 
huge potential to be exploited both for businesses and consumers. The  European Green Deal  unquestionably 
focuses on the sectors that use the most resources and where the potential for circularity is high: (i) packaging –
new mandatory requirements for recycled content; (ii) food – new legislative initiative on reuse to replace single-
use packaging; (iii) waste – new regulatory frameworks to turn waste into high -quality secondary resources that 
benefit from a well-functioning market for secondary raw materials. Importantly, in terms of Sustainable Product 
Policy, the EU encourages actions that ensure products are d esigned to last longer, are easier to recycle, and 
incorporate as much recycled material as possible instead of primary raw materials. MERLIN contributes strongly 
to these goals by setting up innovative and systemic solutions for all the processes required  to increase the 
quality and rate of recycled multi -layer packaging waste, photonically monitoring the waste, robotizing sorting, 
chemically delaminating the layers and valorising them for high -performance recycling. The resulting materials 
will guarantee the closure of the European multi -layer plastic chain, as a new generation of cost -effective, 100% 
recycled multi -layer packaging structures for both flexible and rigid applications within food sector will be 
validated. MERLIN’s solutions will positively influence economic growth, decoupling it from resource use.  
Circular Economy Package (CEP). Building on the work done since 2015, the new Plan focuses on the design and 
production of a circular economy, with the aim of ensuring that the resources used are kept in the EU economy 
for as long as possible. MERLIN hinges on the recycling of fossil -based multi-material post-consumer and post -
industrial plastic waste like PET/PE, PET/PP, PET/Al/PE, which is non-biodegradable and currently ha s a very low 
recycling rate (due to difficult recyclability in view of their fouling and /or complex structures). In MERLIN, we 
provide value-added EoL solutions for plastics which are currently landfilled or incinerated. The recycling solutions 
proposed enable MERLIN to implement circular economy principles as a new generation of cost -effective, 100% 
recycled PET/PP and PET/PP multi-layer food packaging structures will be developed, thus closing the loop within 
the multi -layer food packaging sector. Therefore, MERLIN will be a key enabler for implementing the Circular 
Economy Package (CEP). Specifically, MERLIN contributes to the implementation directive on packaging and 
packaging waste, which sets new legally binding targets and fixed deadlines for waste recycling and the reduction 
of landfilling. In fact, the package includes a common EU target for recycling 65% of packaging waste by 2025, and 
70% by 2030. In this context, the plastic sector has a separate target of 50% b y 2025 and 55% by 2030. This 
represents a significant increase over the current target imposed by the Packaging Directive 94/62/EC, which set a 
recycling target of 22.5%.  
 Barriers/obstacles 
Despite the opportunity MERLIN brings and the capabilities of the consortium, there are external factors and 
barriers that may have an adverse effect on the long -term sustainability of the test bed and associated impact 
described above. Table 7 describes these barriers and how we will o vercome them. The technical and 
management risks associated with the workplan are described in section 3.2. 
TABLE 7. EXPECTED BARRIERS THAT MAY HAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ON THE SUSTAINABILITY OF MERLIN. 
Barriers How MERLIN will overcome the barrier 
Acceptance of 
technology by 
the industry 
and products 
by customers 
MERLIN will seek to improve the acceptance of both technologies and new products among 
stakeholders (i.e., industry and consumers) through extensive and transparent dialogue. The ongoing 
stakeholder engagement (WP6) will set the basis for continuous exchange acr oss the multi -layer 
packaging value chain and strengthen stakeholder collaboration in order to return the value to each 
stakeholder group, which is at the very center of Circular Economy. 
Price 
competition 
and market 
The investment needed for transitioning towards the MERLIN multi-layer packaging recycling waste 
could be a barrier for market uptake but we estimate that it will be effectively counterbalanced by 
the gain in terms of avoiding incineration and landfilling taxes (e.g., €200/tonne) and collection fees 
(e.g. 90€/tn 65) despite the high -variability between EU countries , which currently represent an 
economic burden for these non -sustainable EoL options. In Task 7.3  Business Plan and Replicability, 
the market will be analyzed in depth and the price will be properly formulated to be competitive at 
EU level. 
 
64https://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/new_circular_economy_action_plan.pdf  
65 Costs for Municipal Waste Management in the EU , Final Report to Directorate General Environment, European Commission 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
29 
Barriers How MERLIN will overcome the barrier 
Safety and 
regulatory 
issues 
MERLIN will guide industry towards safe and efficient use of the materials and processes, especially 
in waste treatment plants and the packaging industry . The Safe -by-Process-Design concept will be 
implemented, promoting well -balanced strategies that address the proc esses/material design and 
functionality, together with the safety aspects for humans and the environment.  
In addition, materials and articles intended to come into contact with food are regulated at 
European level by the Framework Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004, which provides a harmonized legal 
framework by setting out general principles and safety requirements for all kinds of food contact 
materials (FCM). More specifically, FCMs and articles made out of plastic are covered by Regulation 
(EU) No 10/2011 an d recycled plastics are covered by Regulation (EU) No 282/2008. This legal 
framework sets out rules on composition by establishing a positive list of substances approved for 
use in manufacturing (‘Union list’), laying down restrictions in order to protect consumers’ health (a 
generic overall migration limit that assures the inertia of the materials as well as specific migration 
limits for a list of individual substances to guarantee safety). It also establishes restrictions in that the 
recycling process mus t have been previously evaluated and authorised by EFSA and the EC. 
Compliance with regulatory demands is essential for putting new packaging materials onto the 
market. The possible impact of regulatory requirements will be limited by selecting materials, 
additives and other substances that have been previously approved for such a purpose, and by 
evaluating alternative applications of the developments depending on their characterization and 
food contact compliance, including the possibility of incorporating a functional barrier if necessary. 
Alignment with 
related 
standardization 
MERLIN will interact with standardization committees such as CEN/TC 249/WG 9, ISO/TC 61/SC 14, 
CEN/TC 261 and ISO/TC 122 presenting the project’s results, so they are aligned with them. 
Communication tools and channels will be adapted to the needs of the standardization bodie s to 
facilitate the exchange of information: good practice documentation, webinars, physical workshops, 
and data exchange through the project website. The Spanish Association for Standardization, UNE, is 
the national representative and member of the European (CEN, CENELEC and ETSI), International 
(ISO and IEC) and Panamerican (COPANT) Standards Organizations. UNE has signed a letter of 
support offering to advice when required, attend workshops and support the project dissemination 
(letter included in the annex of the project).
2.2 Measures to maximize impact 
The exploitation and dissemination of the project results is a key commitment for the consortium. Proper 
exploitation and dissemination of the project will ensure that it meets the multiple expected impacts, as 
described in Section 2.1, and more importantly, to transform the results into industrial and commercial solutions. 
In order to optimize the dissemination and exploitation of the results, two specific WPs have been designed: i) 
WP6 - Facilitate sharing and learning of good practices on increasing circ ularity in post -consumption multi-layer 
packaging amongst value chain stakeholders  including activities aimed at engaging potential users. ii) WP7 - 
Cross-cutting activities and Innovation impacts  - focused on business strategy, showcasing the benefits of the 
project to potential users , and therefore facilitating the transfer of experience and knowledge needed to 
replicate the MERLIN approach.  
a) Dissemination and exploitation of results  
DISSEMINATION PLAN 
The goal of dissemination is to spread the non -confidential results generated during the project  to ensure that 
as many relevant audiences as possible have access to them. The aim underpinning the dissemination strategy is 
to contribute to knowledge building  and the advancement of innovation in Europe . In order to safeguard the 
business opportunity, the dissemination activities will be subject to a confidentiality policy. The IPR & Exploitation 
Manager (Ms Simona Mincione from ENCO) will work closely with the project i nnovators to manage the 
identification of non-confidential disclosable information that can be published/disseminated.  
MERLIN approaches both traditional channels,  such as dissemination at conferences, publications in peer -
reviewed and open access journal s, newsletters and online platforms, as well as more vanguard channels, such 
as social media platforms (ResearchGate, Academia.edu, SlideShare), project blogs, etc. In addition, the project 
website will house all the downloadable public deliverables and ou tputs of MERLIN, including the  DSS and a 
compilation of good practices. Users will be able to rank the most interesting good practices, which will be used 
as feedback by MERLIN to emphasize or customize the dissemination of these results. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
30 
Table 8 summarizes our strategic objectives customized to each target group and the tools used to reach them.  
Meanwhile  
Table 9 briefly describe the content of the dissemination plan to be developed in WP7, including the 
relationship between tools, channels, target groups and expected results.  
TABLE 8. OVERVIEW OF THE DISSEMINATION PLAN. 
Target groups  Strategic objective and message Dissemination & Communication tools  
SMEs and waste, 
food & packaging 
industries 
Technological transfer services for the development, 
testing & replication of MERLIN processes.  
To demonstrate the benefits of the new materials and 
recyclability in new rigid and flexible packaging.  
Good practices, DSS, workshops, key 
conferences and fairs, webinars, leaflets 
& newsletters, product portfolio, open 
access publications, social media.  
Experts on plastic 
packaging and 
circularity: academia, 
scientific community  
To engage the scientific community and share the latest 
scientific and industrial progress in multi -layer recycling. 
To contribute to ongoing and future interactions 
between science, industry, and law. 
Scientific open access publications, 
workshops, conference, social media. 
Clustering activities.  
EU and national 
policymakers & 
standardization 
bodies  
To generate interest on and awareness of the limits that 
law places on recycled products. Contribution to 
updating standards according to scientific and industrial 
needs.  
Direct contacts through formal letters 
and meetings; workshops; publications, 
good practices, DSS.  
Partners from other 
related EU projects  
Identification of synergies between projects, improving 
value chain collaboration and sharing results.  
Clustering activities 
Consumers and 
citizens  
To increase understanding and change behaviour 
regarding the responsible use of plastic and recycling. 
Communicate the expected impacts for society, the 
economy and the environment.  
Good practices, QR codes, workshops, 
events, visits to demo sites, social  
campaigns (social networks, videos, etc.),  
 
TABLE 9. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TOOLS, CHANNELS, TARGET GROUPS AND EXPECTED IMPACT. 
Channel Tools Target Groups Expected Impact and Results KPI 
Online 
MERLIN project 
website All stakeholders 
Demonstration of the benefits of 
circularity, improved safety, 
better performance 
Visits > 5000. 50 
references to MERLIN on 
search engines. 200 
external followers on 
social media 
Good Practices/ blog Industry, academia, 
policymakers Demonstration of the benefits of 
circularity, improved safety, 
better performance 
All GP ranked, at least 30 
posts 
DSS 
 Industry, policy At least 150 users (15 per 
10 EU countries) 
E-newsletters Industry, academia, 
policymakers 
Create awareness of new 
technologies and promote the 
impact of the project 
1500 views (500 
subscribers/ downloads 
x3 NW 
Publications Scientific publications 
(peer reviews) Academia, experts Advances beyond the state-of-the-
art and technology performance 12 
Articles in technical 
journals Industry 
Demonstration of the benefits of 
circularity, improved safety, 
better performance 
9 
Articles in socio-
economic journals All stakeholders Create awareness of recycling and 
circularity 9 
Events and training  
Workshops Industry, academia, 
policymakers 
Familiarization with technical 
performance and specifics. 
Sharing results with projects in 
the same call or focused on 
similar topics 
3 
Webinars Industry, academia, 
policymakers 
2 sorting, 
3 recycling/delamination 
1 safety/circularity 
Meetings with 
standardization 
Committees 
Policymakers & 
standardization 
bodies 
Economic, environmental, and legal 
feasibility of solutions 2 
Project conferences Academia and 
industry 
Expand the knowledge gained 
through the project 
2 at EU level (M18 & M36). 
At least 100 attendees 
Trade shows Packaging industry Support for placing the technology/ 
approach onto the market 6 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
31 
 
Events and congresses  
MERLIN’s partners have already identified the most interesting congresses (Table 10) in which  the impact of 
MERLIN and its results could be presented. 
TABLE 10. EVENTS AND CONGRESSES. 
SECTOR  Events to be attended  Purpose of attending it Who When Where 
Recycling 
technologies 
WCEF World Circular Economy Forum, 
European Chemical Recycling Congress, 
International Plastics Processing & 
Recycling, Chemical Recycling Congress 
Present how MERLIN supports the 
circular economy on plastics and 
compare with innovative alternatives 
ITENE 
EuPC 
2022 
2023 
EU 
Robotics Hanover Messe, Advanced factories 
(Spain). Motek Messe (trade fair) 
Present how MERLIN technologies 
has advanced in waste sorting 
  IRIS, 
ROVIMATICA 
2022 
2023 
DE 
SP 
Waste 
Management 
World's trade fair for water, sewage, 
waste and raw material management 
(IFAT). International Solid Waste 
Association World Congress (ISWA) 
Present how MERLIN technologies has 
advanced in waste sorting and how 
they could foster new facility design. 
FERROVIAL 2022 
2023 
DE 
Packaging 
and food  
ICFPPM 2022: International Conference 
on Food Packaging and Packaging 
Materials. Food Processing & Packaging 
Technology Exhibition. INTERPACK; 
European Bioplastics conference 
Present MERLIN innovations in 
recycling multi-layer rigid and flexible 
packaging 
ITENE 
EuPC 
UNIBO 
ITC, EM2 
2022, 
2023 
UK, IT, 
DE 
Polymers Compounding World Expo, ICIS Recycling 
& Sustainability Virtual Festival/ 
Circularity for Polymers: The ICIS 
Recycling Conference 
Present MERLIN results on 
compounding, recycling and recovery 
process development 
ITENE, 
INDORAMA 
IONIQA 
2022, 
2023 
DE, EU 
Innovation 9th International Conference on 
Innovation Management, 
Entrepreneurship and Sustainability 
Showcase how MERLIN manages and 
catch the innovation to be replicated 
beyond the project 
ENCO 2022 
2023 
EU 
Green 
technologies 
International Green Chemistry symposium Present MERLIN innovations in 
recycling multi-layer packaging 
UNIBO 2022, 
2023 
FR 
Publications: In the case of publications, all peer -reviewed scientific publications (papers) related to MERLIN 
results will be open-access, through self-archiving (green open access). When a scientific publication or journal of 
high impact is identified and considered of interest for the project, gold open access will be considered. In that 
case, the publication will be deposited in the repository mentioned in the data management plan, respecting the 
embargo period established by the scientific publication or journal publishers. The MERLIN consortium has 
already outlined a plan for OA publication (Table 11) and has identified journals of high interest for professionals.  
TABLE 11. MERLIN CONSORTIUM PLAN FOR OA PUBLICATIONS. 
Topic When  Who Target Audience Example of Publication 
Robotics and A.I. applied to waste 
management.  
Year 2 IRIS, 
ROVIMATICA, 
FERROVIAL 
Waste managers, 
Waste treatment 
plants 
Journal. Waste Management World, 
InfoEnviro, Plastics & Recycling 
Technology 
Delamination of multi-layer 
structures using solvents 
Year 3 ITENE, 
UNIBO 
Waste treatment 
plants, packaging 
converters, 
recyclers 
Plastics & Recycling Technology, 
Advances in Materials Science and 
Engineering, ACS Sustainable chemistry 
and engineering , The Journal of 
Supercritical Fluids. 
Recyclable packaging made from 
recycled materials from multi-layers 
Year 3 ITENE, ICT, 
IM2, EuPC 
Packaging 
manufactures, 
converters, 
suppliers. 
Food Packaging and Shelf Life, Packaging 
Technology and Science, Packaging 
Europe, Packaging Journal 
Routes valorisation of recycled PET 
and POs. Recycled materials 
compatibility & biosourcing fillers 
modified 
Year 3 CEA Recyclers, 
suppliers’ 
materials, 
Advances in Materials Science and 
Engineering, International Journal of 
Polymer Science ; Composites Science 
and Technology 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
32 
Knowledge and stakeholder participation : To increase the participation of consumers, industry and waste 
management companies during and after the project execution, a technology transfer plan has been developed. 
CSCP will engage consumer representatives for validation workshop. All these stakeholders will be engaged in the 
Circular Economy & Innovation Exchange Club to maximize the impact of the project and allow them to exchange 
with each other and share knowledge (WP6). Technological partners will promote technological webinars for each 
activity in the project. Physical workshops will also take place, especially when the social component and 
stakeholder participation play a major role. However, online workshops will be a back -up option in case of need 
due to current COVID-19 situation. Table 12 shows the main activities to be performed in this plan. 
TABLE 12. KNOWLEDGE PLAN: WORKSHOPS AND WEBINARS TO PROMOTE MERLIN RESULTS. 
Target Audience  Purpose  Result  Medium  Location  Date Partners 
industrial and 
scientific 
community, 
consumer 
representatives 
Engage all the stakeholders exchange information 
and knowledge 
Circular 
Economy & 
Innovation 
Exchange 
Club (CEIEC) 
Brussels M12 CSCP 
facilitate the sharing of 
learning among 
stakeholders 
progress along first 
workshop. exchange 
further impressions 
on the good practices 
M32 
Consumer 
representatives  
Awareness raising to the 
evaluation methodology of 
good practices and increase 
acceptability of innovations 
among consumer 
representatives 
Greater impact of 
MERLIN processes 
(consumers willing to 
use valorised 
products) 
Validation 
workshop  
Online/ 
Brussels 
M26 CSCP 
Waste treatment 
plants 
Present solutions for 
sorting 
Knowledge generated 
and acquired  
Workshop 
And webinar  
Spain 
Online 
M24 
M28 
IRIS 
Rovimatica 
Recyclers. Waste 
valorisation  
Development and 
adoption of roadmap 
towards reinforcing 
recovery, reuse and 
recycling of packaging 
waste 
Stakeholders 
engaged on roadmap 
to adopt circular 
design and business 
models along the 
value chain 
CEIEC / 
Stakeholder 
Consultation 
Workshop 
Online/ 
Brussels 
M16 
& 
M32 
CSCP 
Packaging 
convertors, recyclers 
Promotion and instruction 
to use DSS 
DSS promoted and 
ready to use 
Webminars Online M28 
M32 
IRIS 
Packaging 
convertors, recyclers 
Delamination solutions for 
multi-layer 
Stakeholder trained; 
knowledge shared 
Webminar 
Workshop 
Online 
Italy 
M30 
M32 
ITENE 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
Packaging 
convertors, recyclers 
Recycling and upcycling 
solutions for multi-layer 
Stakeholder trained; 
knowledge shared 
Webminar 
Workshop 
Online 
Netherlands 
M30 
M32 
Indorama 
CEA 
Packaging 
Industry 
Proper use of our 
guidelines. Show benefits 
of using recycled materials 
in multi-layer packaging 
Stakeholders trained.  
Recyclability of multi-
layer demonstrated 
Training 
event 
Spain  
Online 
M30 
 
M32 
ITENE 
ITC, IM2 
EuPC 
Packaging 
convertors, 
recyclers 
Safety and Regulations Stakeholders trained. 
Awareness. 
 
Training 
event 
Online 
The 
Netherlands 
M34 EuPc 
ITENE 
ITC, IM2 
Policy Bodies Contribute to policies 
development 
Technical inputs into 
green policies 
1 webinar 
1 workshop 
Online 
Brussels 
M22 
M34 
EuPC 
Standardization explain procedure for the 
delamination and recycling 
processes to be valid and 
meet standards  
Contribute to new 
standardization 
1 webinar 
1 workshop 
Online 
Brussels 
M22 
M34 
EuPC 
Municipalities, 
citizens, waste 
managers and 
recyclers. 
Awareness, increase 
visibility to citizens, 
demonstrate sorting 
technologies. 
In situ demo about 
benefits of sorting 
technologies 
Visit a waste 
treatment 
plant 
Spain 
(FERRROVIAL 
facilities)  
M30 FERROVIAL 
Other EU project 
participants 
Increase collaboration in 
future projects. Learn.  
Experience and 
knowledge shared.  
Clustering 
workshop 
Brussels M35 ITENE 
All partners 
industrial and 
scientific 
community 
showcase the project 
outputs 
Results of MERLIN 
disseminated 
MERLIN’s 
final event 
Spain M35 ENCO 
All 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
33 
It is important to highlight that  MERLIN will establish synergies and collaboration with other projects (Task 7.4, 
Table 4). Our project dissemination activities will intersect with the dissemination strategies of platforms and 
associations in which the project ’s partner s are taking part such as BBI, SUSCHEM, packaging clusters, A.SPIRE 
(ENCO), SECPHO & EPIC (photonics), the European Technology Platform for Logistics (ALICE), the national 
association for waste treatment (ASPLARSEM), the Spanish packaging Platform (PACKNET), EDANA (non -woven 
association), and COFRAC (French certification body). Standardization committees and similar bodies, such as 
AFNOR, UNE, will be also contacted. 
EXPLOITATION PLAN 
A market-oriented approach will drive MERLIN R&D activities, capitalizing on participating recycling technologies 
(ITENE), sorting and monitoring (IRIS), robotics (ROVIMATICA), waste treatment (FERRO), delamination (UNIBO), 
depolymerization (IONIQA), repol ymerization (INDORAMA), additivation, purification, upcycling (CEA), as well as 
rigid (ITC) and flexible (IM2) packaging end -users expertise. Importantly, the inclusion of ENCO with extensive 
experience in translating R&D output into actual commercialisati on and market penetration, CSCP for effectively 
engaging stakeholders engagement and sharing good practices, PARTICULA for environmental, cost, social 
analysis and EuPC for boosting policies and contributing to standardization  is another important added v alue for 
the consortium and will contribute to ensuring the post -project stage (besides leveraging on Advisory Board 
members’ expertise). In addition, Task 7.2.2 and Task 7.3.1 ensure that sufficient knowledge will be collated to 
steer the research towards  delivering solutions with good market potential. Our intention is to explore all the 
exploitation pathways for the results:  
• Commercial exploitation: a key exploitation route will be the industrial use of the project knowledge for 
innovating waste treatme nt facilities by equipping them with disruptive processes for the sorting, 
delamination and recycling of rigid and flexible multi -layer plastic packaging waste from postconsumer 
and post-industrial sources and obtain new high -performance packaging solutions (flexible and rigid) for 
the food packaging industry to deliver high competitiveness and growth impacts . Creation of a spinoff 
company to exploit the integrated project solution  will be evaluated through a feasibility study, which 
will assess the overall impact. 
• Education and training: the use of the new knowledge generated for upskilling and for enriching curricula 
in European education will have a high impact on raising the European knowledge base to prepare food 
packaging and recycling industry sectors for smooth transition towards the circular economy;  
• Further research: planning future spin-off research and development projects especially in areas that will 
contribute to the transferability of the project results in new applications. 
• Contribution to standards : workshops, good practices and webinars will be tools promoted by EuPC to 
show the project results to standardization bodies and police makers. This, in long term contribut ing 
towards new and/or revised regulations and standards in the field of plastic waste and circularity. 
Initial Exploitation Plan and Business Model Definition for MERLIN Key Exploitable Results (KERs) 
Key exploitable results have been identified  (Table 13), and an initial exploitation strategy has been defined for 
each type of results – out of the exploitation routes available: direct sales, provision of services, licensing  and 
creation of spin-offs.  
TABLE 13. MERLIN KEY EXPLOITABLE RESULTS (KNOWLEDGE, PRODUCTS AND TECHNOLOGIES). 
 Key Exploitable  
Results (KER) WP Owner Type of IPR 
protection Type of exploitation  Target Users/Clients 
KER 1 - Monitoring system 1 IRIS Patent Direct sales Waste treatment plants, 
recyclers 
KER 2 - A.I. based robotic sorting 1 ROVIMATICA Patent  Direct sales and 
engineering services 
Recyclers, packaging 
manufacturers and food 
industry 
KER 3 - Multi-layer plastics 
automated sorting device 1 IRIS 
ROVIMATICA Trade secret Direct sales Waste treatment plants, 
recyclers. 
KER 4 - Improvement of sorting 
plant 1 FERROVIAL Confidential 
know-how Direct use 
Buyers of recycled 
materials: recyclers and 
converters 
KER 5 - Rigid packaging 2 IONIQA Patent and Direct sales and services. Waste treatment plants, 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
34 
 Key Exploitable  
Results (KER) WP Owner Type of IPR 
protection Type of exploitation  Target Users/Clients 
delamination process for 
polyester depolymerization 
proprietary 
know-how 
recyclers, and packaging 
manufacturers 
KER 6 - Green solvent for non-
metalized film delamination 2 ITENE Trade secret  
Creation of Spin off. 
Licensing to interested 
companies 
Waste treatment plants, 
recyclers, and packaging 
manufacturers 
KER 7 - Metalized flexible 
packaging solvent-based 
delamination 
2 UNIBO Patent 
 
Creation of spin-offs. 
Licensing to interested 
companies  
Waste treatment plants, 
Recyclers, and packaging 
manufacturers 
KER 8 - Repolymerization of PET. 
Development of a sustainable 
PET grad 
3 INDORAMA Trade secrets Direct sales 
Industrial companies 
(recyclers, packaging 
manufacturers) 
KER 9 - POs modification to 
improve rPET/rPE or rPET/rPP 
multi-layer adhesion and affinity 
with fillers 
3 CEA Trade Secret 
Patent 
Licensing to interested 
companies. Tech. 
transfer 
Recyclers, compounders 
and packaging 
manufacturers 
KER 10 - Fillers modification to 
improve mechanical properties 3 CEA Conferences 
Licensing to interested 
companies. Tech. 
transfer 
Recyclers, compounders 
and packaging 
manufacturers 
KER 11 - Upcycling of 
delaminated polymers from 
multi-layer structures through 
compounding 
3 ITENE Trade Secret  
Licensing to interested 
companies. Tech. 
transfer 
Recyclers, compounders 
and packaging 
manufacturers 
KER 12 - Recycled flexible 
packaging 4 IM2 Commercial Direct sales Food industry 
KER 13 - Recycled rigid packaging 4 ITC Commercial Direct sales Food industry 
KER 14 - Environmental 
assessment for new innovation 
processes 
5 PARTICULA Confidential 
know-how Consultancy services 
Industrial companies 
throughout the value 
chain 
KER 15 - New knowledge of food 
contact regulations & food 
safety risk assessment  
5 ITENE Confidential 
know-how Consultancy services 
Industrial companies 
throughout the value 
chain 
KER 16 - New knowledge based 
on good practices for circularity 
and Environmental assessment 
6 CSCP Confidential 
know-how Consultancy services 
Industrial companies 
throughout the value 
Chain 
KER 17 - Decision support system 6 IRIS  
Commercial 
Conferences 
Workshops 
Licensing  
Consultancy services 
Waste treatment plants, 
recyclers, and packaging 
manufacturers 
KER 18 - QR code  6 ITC, ITENE Open access Direct sales Food packaging industry 
This preliminary exploitation strategy will be reviewed throughout the project and will evolve into the Plan for the 
Exploitation and Dissemination of the project’s results ( PEDR). The PEDR represent a crucial tool for successful 
exploitation and will be updated on a regular basis. It will include the following aspects: 
- Identification of most promising exploitable results 
- Development of joint business models 
- Market appraisal 
- Evaluation of IPR landscape and definition of an IPR strategy 
- Identification of exploitation interests between partners 
- Exploitation risks and barriers 
Furthermore, business models a nd plans will be developed to support the commercialization of key exploitable 
results. A functional analysis, and a market assessment to identify the value proposition of each results and new 
market opportunities will form the basis for the development of  the Business Model and Plans developed in WP7  
- and which will be part of the PEDR. 
Enhancing innovation capacity of MERLIN´s partners   
Table 14 shows an overview of how each member of the consortium will enhance its  innovation capacity, how 
they will contribute  to the value proposition of the project, and the expected market share generated by 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
35 
MERLIN‘s innovations linked to the current volume of the different SMEs and large industries. In addition, t he 
resulting growth in staff and turnover has also been estimated66:  
TABLE 14. EXPLOITATION INTERESTS AND EXPECTED GROWTH OF MERLIN CONSORTIUM. 
 Enhancing innovation capacity (during the 
project) from existing background  
Value proposition & business model Turnover 
Increase and 
new jobs 
ITENE 
Know-how on delamination processes 
including traditional and green solvents 
(as supercritical CO 2), and a mix of them. 
In addition, ITENE will strengthen its 
relationship with other chemical recycling 
experts. 
It will also develop new knowledge of food 
contact regulations & food safety risk 
assessment 
ITENE’s business model is based on licensing and technology 
transfer to industry of recycling processes and services 
about circularity, food safety and migration analyses. It also 
pursues commercial recovery through the creation of spin -
offs. MERLIN will allow I TENE to provide solutions to the 
recycling industry in advanced recycling projects  and to 
provide services in the area or food contact ). In addition, the 
project will allow ITENE to increase its  participation in 
related R&D projects and will improve its positioning as an 
EU reference partner (promoting further research) 
€1.1 M  3 
jobs (2028) 
€2.4 M 6 
jobs (2030) 
€3.9M 10 
jobs (2033) 
IRIS 
Know-how on monitoring systems based 
on NIR/SWIR HSI and XRF for multi -layer 
plastic recycling by applying innovative 
integration of chemometric and machine 
learning models for identification. 
Integration with robotic solutions for 
automatic sorting in real time.  Application 
of A.I. strategies for the definition of a DSS 
for the plastic material recycl ing 
stakeholders. 
IRIS’ business model will be based on the definition of new 
product lines  for monitoring waste management facilities.  
The know-how of robotic actuator integration will be offered 
as a complementary service for sectors where IRIS is 
currently present/expected to be present in the mid -term. 
The DSS capabilities will be offered as complementary 
capabilities for ICT turnkey solutions development. Possible 
licensing of the specific DSS system if there is any interest 
detected during later stages of the project/post-project. 
€0.5 M 2 
jobs (2028) 
€1.2 M 3 
jobs (2030) 
€3.1 M 9 
jobs (2033) 
ROVIMATICA 
Know-how on deep learning for object 
(waste) detection and classification in real 
time systems to guide a robotic solution. 
Integration with multispectral imaging 
and data fusion.  Know-how on 
development of flexible and robust 
gripping system for waste picking. 
ROVIMATICA’s business is based on the development of 
tailor-made engineering solutions in industrial fields. The 
know-how acquired in r obotics in MERLIN and the 
integration with several visual technologies (NIR/SWIR, HIS, 
deep learning…) will be valuable for future developments. 
The guided -computer vision based on deep learning 
developed in the project could be offered as a product to 
robotic integrators (design of new engineering solutions for 
direct sale or for the provision of services). 
€0.5 M 2 
jobs (2028) 
€0.9 M 4 
jobs (2030) 
€1.5 M 7 
jobs (2033) 
FERROVIAL 
Advanced waste monitoring technolgies 
to identify and sort the different materials 
in the flow waste with the potential to 
become new secondary raw materials. 
The MERLIN results will strength current 
know-how for future waste sorting facility 
design in the framework of 4.0 Industry, 
transforming today ’s isolated facilities 
into connected processes, with the 
upstream collecting process and the 
downstream recycling sector.  
FERROVIAL’s business model is based on the design and 
exploitation of waste treatme nt facilities. FERROVIAL will 
increase their knowledge of new solutions for the 
improvement of material recovery and the optimization of 
health and safety conditions both in new and currently 
operated facilities. In long term, o nce the project is finished 
and technologies are further developed up to TRL9, 
FERROVIAL could implement them in several waste flows of 
the more than 40 sorting facilities it operates nowadays, as 
well as in the design of future contracts  (direct use  of the 
technologies developed).  
€0.4 M 
(2028) 
€2 M 1 job 
(2030) 
€4 M  2 jobs 
(2033) 
 
66 New job figures are calculated based on the assumption that 1 new job will be created for each €230k increase in turnover (ac cording to plastic industry standards in EU). The 
turnover increase is the foreseen increase 5 years post pro ject as a consequence of the exploitation of the project results compared to the current turnover depending on the 
business of each partner based on a progressive market introduction starting by niche products.  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
36 
 Enhancing innovation capacity (during the 
project) from existing background  
Value proposition & business model Turnover 
Increase and 
new jobs 
UNIBO 
• Know-how improvement of the 
delamination process for the recovery of 
polymers and aluminium from flexible 
metalized multi -layer films without 
compromising quality in terms of metal 
oxidation and polymer degradation. 
Process scale -up and development of 
fully sustainable methods with c omplete 
recycling of all employed solvent 
systems. Interaction with the entire 
process value chain. 
UNIBO will pursue commercial recovery through the 
creation of spin -offs, the protection of intellectual property 
developed within the project through patent application s 
and subsequent sale of user licences, the creation of ad -hoc 
services for companies in the sector, also as training 
courses. UNIBO will devote efforts towards non -commercial 
recovery methods through the dissemination of results 
through workshops / conferences / sector fairs, further 
research projects, scientific publications, inclusion of 
research results in university teaching, PhD, seminars, and 
participation in related projects. 
Recruiting of 
new 
researchers 
5 in the 
public 
university 
Long term: 
spin off 
creation 
IONIQA • Process for PET depolymerization from a 
highly contaminated feed (rigid multi -
layer packaging). 
IONIQA’s business model is based on the development of 
licences for the depolymerization technology. MERLIN will 
help IONIQA to strengthen its licensing position by including 
the solution for the specific feedstock (rigid packaging). 
€5-10 M 
increase/year 
20 operators 
By 2030   
INDORAMA 
• Better know -how of depolymerization 
technologies (purification efficiency, 
product yields), relationship between 
input streams (quality of feedstock) and 
output streams (quality of PET 
monomers), behaviour of PET monomers 
during repolymerization trials including 
food safety assessment 
Chemical recycling allows for the recycling of low quality, 
hard to recycle, post -consumer PET to virgin -grade resin. 
INDORAMA will better understand the quality of monomers 
generated by companies specializ ing in depolymerization 
processes. To combine thes e monomers with traditional 
feedstock to make virgin -grade PET with recycle d content 
will exhibit the circularity of PET by generating new products 
from post-consumer waste (direct sale). 
€10-15 M 
increase/year 
30 operators 
By 2030   
CEA  
• Know-how on reactive extrusion process 
based on PE, PP and PET chemical 
modifications with MAg and molar mass 
modification. Background on reinforced 
bio-sourcing fibre composites and their 
processing and sizing development for 
increasing their  thermoplastic 
mechanical properties. 
CEA’s business model is based on the development of 
technology transfer  to industry and the development of 
licences and publications on materials and recycling 
processes. MERLIN will enable CEA to provide solutions to 
the recycling polymers i ndustry and their recovery within 
advanced recycling polymer projects (involved in 4 projects). 
It will enable CEA to be a leading European collaborator in 
its fields of interest. 
€1 M 2jobs 
(2028) 
€3 M 3 job 
(2030) 
€6 M  6 jobs 
(2033) 
CSCP 
CSCP is involved in numerous stakeholder 
engagement action s all over Europe and 
internationally, f acilitating knowledge 
exchange and learning of good practices 
on increasing circularity in post -
consumption multi -layer packaging 
amongst value chain stakeholders. 
CSCP will leverage the results of stakeholder consultation 
and validated technological, social, policy and consumer 
information innovations for further outreach and 
mainstreaming activities in its research and innovation 
projects. Multi-stakeholder and collaborative actions. Scale 
up of innovative circular products, business models and 
policy and behaviour change solutions . Transfer of 
knowledge and mainstreaming solutions in the market 
€3.5 M 
 6 jobs 
(2030) 
PARTICULA Environmental model to estimate the 
environmental impact as a function of 
parameters including supplies, processes 
used, type of raw materials among other.  
PARTICULA envisages increasing the number of consultancy 
contracts, directly related to the sustainability assessments 
of sorting and recycling processes and packaging materials, 
because of MERLIN: minimum of 2 contracts/year, ranging 
between €20k-40k each. 
€1M 3 jobs 
(2028) 
€1.9M 6 
jobs (2030) 
 
ITC 
know-how on making plastic packaging by 
injection process, design. Development of 
packaging, moulds and making process. 
Including eco -design tasks and In -mould 
labelling (IML) processes. 
As a lead ing rigid packaging producer, ITC develop s new 
materials and processes t hat add value to their products. 
Thanks to MERLIN, ITC will be able to offer new sustainable 
products to the market produced  with the new materials 
and processes developed in the project (direct sale). 
€4.5 M 
 9 jobs 
(2030) 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
37 
 Enhancing innovation capacity (during the 
project) from existing background  
Value proposition & business model Turnover 
Increase and 
new jobs 
IM2 
Know how on production of multi-layer 
flexible packaging by extrusion -
lamination. E valuation of material: 
mechanical properties , coefficient of 
friction, heat-sealing strength, etc.    
IM2 will develop new materials and processes that add value 
to their products. Thanks to the  MERLIN project, IM2 will 
offer new sustainable flow-packs to the market produced  
with the new materials and processes developed in the 
project (direct sale).  
€4.5 M 
 9 jobs 
(2030) 
ENCO 
Knowledge in communication, business & 
market analysis. Knowledge in innovation, 
exploitation and IPR management. 
experienced advisor for both private 
companies and public organizations and 
as a facilitator for business, product, 
technology and process innovation in 
different industrial areas. 
MERLIN will contribute to ensure a systematic and 
methodological approach to planning for the important 
post-project stage. At company level, participating in 
MERLIN is a key opportunity for ENCO to use the knowledge 
acquired in the food packaging market from further related 
EU projects – increasing its experience as an IPR and 
Exploitation Manager - as well as in consultancy services, 
helping it to extend its client portfolio at EU level. 
Expected 
Growth: 8% 
Jobs: 2 by 
2024 
 
EuPC 
Know how on EU policies, standards and 
regulations related to multi -layer 
packaging, their recycling and upcycling, 
to identify barriers and propose solutions 
to ensure a circular economy for plastics 
 EuPC and its linked third -party Polymer Comply Europe 
(PCE) envisages increasing the number of consultancy 
contracts, directly related to policies, standards and 
regulations among its associates (packaging convertors) and 
clients. . 
PCE: €1M 3 
jobs (2028) 
€1.9M 6 
jobs 2030 
MERLIN will make sure that the benefits of the demonstrated processes developed within the project will be 
recognized by the community and, as a consequence, the products will be placed on the market by following a 
business strategy dedicated to them. The following CANVAS summarises and gives an integral view of where the 
value is generated and who is going to capitalize it. 
STRATEGY FOR KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION  
The Knowledge Management Strategy is a key component to maximise the impact of the  exploitation and 
dissemination of the project  results, and to avoid potential disputes. Knowledge management encompasses use 
Key partners 
- Waste treatment 
plants 
- Sorting and robotics 
manufacturers 
- Recyclers and 
convertors 
- Delamination and 
recycling experts 
- Business  
- Consumers 
- Plastic, packaging, 
food, cosmetics 
associations  
- Policy Bodies 
 
 
Key Activities 
R&D: optimize & combine 
sorting, delamination & 
recycling technologies 
- Circularity assessment 
- Business models, IPR 
- Stakeholder engagement 
& behaviour 
- Transforming results into 
easily accessible and 
understandable knowledge 
for customers and 
stakeholders 
Unique value  
- Increase the quality and 
rate of recycled multi-
layer packaging 
- Increase knowledge 
and effectiveness in the 
closure of the European 
multi-layer plastic chain 
- Obtain new high-
performance packaging 
solutions (flexible and 
rigid) for the food 
packaging industry 
 
Customer relationships 
- Providing proof of evidence, 
results from pilots/activities 
- Transforming results into easily 
accessible and understandable 
knowledge for customers and 
stakeholders 
- DSS with feedback and ranking 
system from users 
Customer  
INDUSTRY 
- Packaging 
- Plastics 
-Waste 
managers 
-Sorting 
technologies 
- Polymers 
-Equipment 
manufacturers 
 
 
Key resources 
-  Sorting plant 
infrastructure/equipment 
- Recycling/delamination 
equipment 
- Consortium knowledge 
Channels  
- Website 
- DSS and QR codes 
- Workshops, events, fairs, press, 
social media, video 
- Clustering and networking 
Cost structures  
- Personnel costs 
- Infrastructure costs 
- Fungible costs 
- Testing and characterization costs 
 
 
 
Revenue streams  
- Sales of sorting technologies and maintenance services 
- Licences for delamination and recycling processes 
- Waste recovery processes, recycled material sales 
- Implementation in other countries (replication) 
- Consultancy services and training  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
38 
of background information and use and protection  of foreground knowledge generated during the project. Key 
results of the project will be protected by patent application, 
utility model, design rights, tradema rks or through the use of 
tools such as confidentiality agreements and material transfer 
agreements to protect confidential know-how and trade 
secrets. Key results will be reviewed, and the best possible 
type of protection will be chosen in alignment with the 
exploitation route envisaged. A preliminary protection 
strategy is presented in Table 15. 
On a more operational note, for the success  of the MERLIN 
project it is essential that all project partners agree on explicit 
rules concerning IP ownership, access rights  to any 
background and results for the execution of the project, and 
how to handle confidential information before the project 
starts. All these issues will b e regulated in detail within the 
Consortium Agreement (model DESCA Horizon 2020), which 
will have to be signed by all partners before the signature of 
the Grant Agreement. 
The background IPR necessary to carry out the different tasks foreseen in this proje ct have already been 
determined but, as the situation could evolve between the submission of the proposal and the start of the 
project, a final listing of background IPR will be annexed to the consortium agreement to be signed between 
partners. Partners will retain their ownership rights on their background IPR. 
If any background IPR belonging to a partner is necessary for the exploitation of the foreground by other partners 
and clients, ENCO will coordinate the negotiations between these parties.  
The foreground of the project will be subject to the ownership and access rights provided in the H2020 rules.  
The IPR strategy is problem -solving oriented, and a flexible, fast and efficient dispute resolution mechanism will 
be put in place from the start  of the project in order to prevent issues from escalating and blocking the 
innovation dynamics. 
During the entire duration of the project, ENCO will update and implement the IPR strategy of the project and 
provide IPR management and protection services to the consortium members  
The IPR strategy fully considers the open access  requirements of the H2020 programme and policy objectives of 
the EU Commission on Open Science 
How the participants will manage the research data generated and/or collected during the project:  
MERLIN will use and generate relevant data and therefore will develop a data management plan ( task 8.3  in 
WP8). The plan will explain how and whether this data will be used, exploited, or made accessible for verification 
and reuse. Thi s plan will increase MERLIN‘s research efficiency, will save time and resources in the long run and 
will enhance data security and minimize the risk of data loss (see Table 15).  
TABLE 15. KEY INFORMATION ABOUT MERLIN’S RESEARCH DATA MANAGEMENT. 
Type of data 
to be 
generated / 
collected 
WP1: waste characterization and analysis data, material composition. 
WP2: Polymer characterization and properties analysis. 
WP3: Polymer characterization and properties analysis. 
WP4: Product configuration, material composition, conversion processes, packaging characterization, 
circularity, safety and migration data. 
WP5: Safety, regulations, economic and environmental data from industry, migration data. 
WP6-7: Stakeholders contact. Legal, market, administrative data from end users and partners. 
Standards to 
be used 
CEN/TC 17 - Units of measurement; CEN/TC 42 - Certification of products; DIN EN ISO 3251 - content of 
involatile fractions; DIN EN ISO 2431 – flow time; CEN/TC 261 - Packaging, coatings; EN 13430 and CEN/TR 
13688 – Recyclability; CE/1935/2004 and EU/10/2011  (plastic) materials in food contact applications; 
CEN/TC 182 - safety and environmental requirements; ISO 14040 & 14044 standards (ISO 14042, 2000). 
Data 
exploitation. 
Accessibility 
for reuse 
and 
Data that are confidential (such as contact details for stakeholders or confidential information from all the 
partners linked to MERLIN) will be preserved with access restricted only by project partners. All data 
exchange transactions will be made in accor dance with the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
Non-confidential data will be published as part of the different reports foreseen in the project and will be 
deposited in the repository https://zenodo.org . https://dmponline.dcc.ac.uk will be used to create, review, 
FIGURE 14. MERLIN’S PROJECT STRATEGY. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
39 
verification  and share data management plans. 
Data 
preservation 
Making back -ups is essential. Data will be curated and preserved in a special repository allocated to t he 
project, which will be stored in the project coordinator’s servers and accessible only to project partners 
through the private section of the project’s website. 
b) Communication activities 
The main objectives of MERLIN‘s Communication Plan are:  
- to raise awareness among waste treatment plants and packaging companie s about the importance of 
adapting their business models and infrastructure to recyclable multi-layer materials; 
- to push consumers to buy and use packaging from recyclable materials  and manage household waste 
properly; 
- to show benefits that project outcomes will bring to society (citizens, services, employment, economy);  
- to facilitate interaction and information exchange with relevant stakeholders;  
- to pave the post -project commercial uptake of MERLIN‘s solutions by building a community of interest 
around the project.  
An effective communication strategy will be designed to complement and support the dissemination and 
exploitation activities analysed in the previous section. It will serve to maximize the impact of the project, 
familiarizing EU citizens with Horizon 2020 and its impact in strengthening the EU economy and social wellbeing. 
To this end, the communication campaign will be launched by ENCO at the start of the project, including a variety 
of instruments and relations to communicate the project’s story making te chnical innovation more 
understandable to the public. Deep engagement processes and participatory strategies with a social innovation 
approach will be launched by  CSCP. The MERLIN communication campaign will include both a push and pull 
approach, as outlined in Table 16. 
TABLE 16. MERLIN COMMUNICATION TOOLBOX AND APPROACH. 
Approach Tools Target Groups Expected Impact and Results KPI by M36 
Push 
Corporate identity All stakeholders Logo and funding logo usage, layouts 
and guidance for communication 1 logo 
Brochure/leaflets 
Industry, 
academia, 
policymakers 
Create awareness of the new 
technologies and promote the 
impact of the project 
1,300 copies distributed 
(13 partners x 50 copies x 
2 eds.) 
Press releases  All stakeholders Create awareness and promote the 
impact of the project 
1 per year, published by 5 
media. 1,000 views per PR 
Video All stakeholders  Create awareness and promote the 
impact of the project 
1 video (Views, shares, 
likes). 
QR codes Consumers Create awareness of recycling and 
circularity 5 scans 
6-monthly E-
newsletter  All stakeholders Create community sense & give 
visibility to events and activities  300 registered mails 
Pull 
Project website 
Industry, 
policymakers, 
stakeholders 
Create awareness, disseminate 
information about the project. 
30,000 visits and 500 
downloads per public 
deliverable one year after 
the project’s end 
News on social media 
(Twitter, LinkedIn, 
YouTube) 
All stakeholders 
Create awareness of the new 
technologies and promote the 
impact of the project 
36,900 followers/likes 
Project Conferences Academia and 
industry 
Expand the knowledge gained through 
the project 
2 EU level (M18 & M36). 
At least 100 attendees 
External events, 
conferences, and 
networking 
Packaging 
industry 
Support placing the technology/ 
approach in the market 
At least 2 events per 
technological result  
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
40 
3. IMPLEMENTATION
3.1 Work plan — Work packages, deliverables  
The MERLIN Consortium has organized the workload by creating a project divided into two main blocks, which are 
made up eight work packages. 
FIGURE 15. INTERRELATION BETWEEN MERLIN WORK PACKAGES. 
 
A list of the different Work Packages and a detailed description of each one are shown in Table 17.  
TABLE 17. LIST OF WORK PACKAGES. 
WP Work Package Title Name Person 
Months 
Start 
Month 
End 
month 
 1 Automated SORTING system for multi-layer materials sorting IRIS 103.5 01 28 
 2 Development of DELAMINATION processes of each multi-layer structure 
sorted ITENE 125.5 02 32 
 3 Development of RECYCLING processes of the separated fractions and 
monomers INDORAMA 54.5 14 32 
 4 Development and VALIDATION of packaging demonstrators based on 
recycled PET and Polyolefins (PE, PP) ITC 54 24 36 
 5 Assessment of the environmental, economic, social, legislative and 
regulatory barriers of the developed processes PARTICULA 67 10 36 
 6 
Facilitate sharing and learning of good practices on increasing circularity 
in post-consumption multi-layer packaging amongst value chain 
stakeholders 
CSCP 91.5 01 36 
 7 Cross-cutting activities and innovation impacts  ENCO 73 01 36 
 8 Project management ITENE 46.5 01 36 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
41 
Table 18. Chronogram of MERLIN Project.  
 
 
 
 
 
LEAD No WP & Tasks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
IRIS 1 Automated SORTING system for multi-layer materials sorting
FERROVIAL 1.1 Identification and characterization of multi-layer material streams M
IRIS 1.2 Design and calibration of a monitoring system D
ROVIMATICA 1.3 A.I. robot adaptation for multi-layer sorting  D
IRIS 1.4 Integration of monitoring and robotic solutions for sorting M
FERROVIAL 1.5 Industrial proof-of-concept for multi-layer sorting D
ITENE 2 Development of DELAMINATION processes of each multi-layer structure sorted
2.1 Polyester depolymerization for rigid packaging delamination 
2.1.1 New depolymerization process development M
2.1.2 Rigid packaging depolymerization process upscaling M D
2.2 Non-metalized film delamination: Traditional vs green solvents 
2.2.1 New process development for non-metalized film M
2.2.2 Design and development of the upscaled delamination process M D