2.3 Metalized flexible packaging solvent-based delamination with polymer and high-quality aluminium recovery
2.3.1 Solvent-based process development M
2.3.2 UPscaling process M D
ITENE 2.4 Characterization of recovered polymers
INDORAMA 3 Development of RECYCLING processes of the separated fractions and monomers
3.1 Recovery of PET from rigid packaging depolymerization process
3.1.1 Characterization of PET monomers
3.1.2 Repolymerization of monomers into new PET M D
3.2 Recovery of polyolefins from rigid and flexible food packaging delamination processes and of PET from flexible packaging delamination 
process 
3.2.1 Recycled polyolefins (POs) and PET for flexible packaging applications M D
3.2.2 Recycled polyolefins (POs) for rigid packaging applications M D
ITC 4 Development and VALIDATION of packaging demonstrators based on recycled PET and Polyolefins (PE, PP)
4.1 Rigid packaging development 
4.1.1 Injection moulding of polyolefins: cups 
4.1.2 Injection-blow moulding of PET: bottles for food packaging applications 
4.1.3 Extrusion-thermoforming of PET with PO: Multi-layer trays M D
IM2 4.2 Flexible Packaging development M D
ITENE 4.3 Risk assessment in food contact application D
ITENE 4.4 Circularity of MERLIN processes M D
PARTICULA 5 Assessment of the environmental, economic, social, legislative and regulatory barriers of the developed processes
PARTICULA 5.1 Environmental study. Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) D D
PARTICULA 5.2 Economic study. Life Cycle Costing (LCC) D D
PARTICULA 5.3 Societal study. Social Life-Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) D D
ITENE 5.4 Safety by Process Design (SPD) D D,M
EUPC 5.5 Standardisation, Policy & Regulatory framework M D,D M
CSCP 6 Facilitate sharing and learning of good practices on increasing circularity in post-consumption multi-layer packaging amongst value chain 
stakeholders
6.1 Stakeholder Engagement
6.1.1 Value chain mapping and stakeholder identification
6.1.2 Baseline analysis 
6.1.3 Stakeholder engagement plan D
6.2 Good practices containing circular design techniques and validation workshops
6.2.1 Development of a methodology for the identification and collection of good practices 
6.2.2 Evaluation of good practices M D
IRIS 6.3 Decision Support System for multi-layer packaging recycling D M
ITC 6.4 QR code and In-Mould Labelling (IML) printed in recycled packaging D
ENCO 7 Cross-cutting activities and innovation impacts 
ENCO 7.1 Communication and visibility campaign D
7.2 Dissemination and Exploitation 
7.2.1 Dissemination D
7.2.2 Exploitation & IPR management D
7.3 Business Plan and replicability of MERLIN 
7.3.1 Business plan 
7.3.2 Replicability of MERLIN D
ENCO 7.4 Clustering with projects and initiatives M
ITENE 8 Project management
ITENE 8.1 Administrative and financial coordination D D
ITENE 8.2 Day-to-day management D D
ITENE 8.3 Data Management Plan M D D
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
CSCP
CSCP
ENCO
ENCO
IONIQA
ITENE
UNIBO
INDORAMA
CEA
ITC
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
42 
Work package No. 1 Lead beneficiary IRIS Start-End Month M01 – M28 
WP title Automated SORTING system for multi-layer material sorting 
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 5 37 43 17 0 0 1 0 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 
Objectives  
• To develop a monitoring system prototype  for identifying the multi -layer polymer structures based on 
NIR/SWIR-HIS and XRF technologies. 
• To adapt A.I. powered robots  to multi-layer sorting, enabling classification in rigid, non-metalized flexible 
and metalized flexible films from the selected waste flows. 
• To integrate photonic and robotic systems  into real -time multi-layer packaging sorting , testing their 
feasibility in an industrial proof-of-concept at the waste treatment plant. 
Description of work 
Task 1.1 Identification and characterization of multi -layer material streams ( TL: FERROVIAL, Partners: IRIS, 
ROVIMATICA, ITENE, INDORAMA) (M01 – M04) 
An initial identification and quantification of existing multi-layer packaging in municipal waste and its distribution in 
the waste sorting process in FERROVIAL‘s mechanical treatment facilities will be carried out , taking into 
consideration the monitoring  and robotics sorting solution to be tested in task 1.5, with the collaboration of  IRIS 
and ROVIMATICA,  as well as the specifications defined for the WP2 and WP3 recycling processes . The streams’ 
composition, size distribution, density, and material compos ition for the multi -layer waste, and flows, conveyor 
speeds and material distribution, for the sorting process, will be some of the parameters evaluated at this stage. 
Eventually, a selection of at least 3 potential streams will be preselected  for further testing and defining specific 
industrial requirements for the automated sorting unit. 
In addition, FERROVIAL and INDORAMA will take a representative sample of flexible multi -layer packaging waste 
(metalized and non-metalized) and rigid multi-layer packaging, respectively, and ITENE will characterize them using 
Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and Differential S canning Calorimetry (DSC) analysis . These 
materials will be used in WP2 by ITENE, UNIBO and IONIQA to start the development of the delamination 
processes. 
Task 1.2 Design and calibration of a monitoring system (TL: IRIS, Partners: ROVIMATICA, FERROVIAL) (M04 – M18) 
IRIS will design and build a prototype based on two main optical and spectroscopic techniques to correctly monitor 
multi-layer materials. (i) NIR/SWIR-HSI and (ii) XRF systems  will be designed and assembled on a conveyor test 
bench unit including a feeder. Different configuration modes will be tested such as absorption, diffuse reflectance, 
interactance and transflectance. The selected core devices will be acquired using commer cial components that 
have been optimized to identify the main target materials in terms of spectral and dimensional resolution, lighting 
system, scanned size, speed, etc. 
Samples of all multi -layer materials from the 3 preselected flows in task 1.1  will be collected by FERROVIAL and 
supplied together with their offline composition characterization results. Using these reference samples, IRIS will 
develop hybrid models based on chemometric and machine learning principles to provide compositional 
information about the materials. Different frame rates of the cameras, conveyor speed, camera-conveyor distances 
and collection times will be tested to maximize the accuracy of the distinction between different materials. 
Task 1.3 A.I. robot adaptation for multi-layer sorting (TL: ROVIMATICA, Partners: IRIS, FERROVIAL) (M04 – M16) 
This task will have a twofold objective: (i) design of the end effector of the robot to grasp the materials , regardless 
of their morphology, keeping a low working time; and, on the other hand, (ii) a development of the robotic solution 
based on artificial intelligence . Throughout the deep learning implementation, the materials which have been 
sorted by chemometrics and their position will be detected on the conveyor. 
For the object detection , an RGB camera  and external lighting  will be deployed over the conveyor  and 
synchronized, in order to build high accuracy images to detect the materials,  classifying them as rigid or flexible . 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
43 
Regarding the software, a convolutional neural network will be developed  and trained with image  datasets 
acquired during the design stage. 
Regarding the robotic solution, two main actions will be addressed: (i) the calibration of the robot with respect to 
the vision system, and (ii) movement control for picking. 
To develop a robotic solution , ROVIMATICA will design a hardware and software architecture, connecting the 
different modules to each other. An electrical and mechanical design will be used for the turnkey end-effector and 
the overall solution, manufacturing and assembling the end-effector, the power and control boards and the safety 
perimeter protection  in the robotic cell, in order to test the gripping capabilities with respect to variable 
morphological samples and the required modifications.  
On the other hand, the AI vision-based module will be connected to the robotic control in order to keep a common 
reference system for the correct location of the material in the calibrated area of the conveyor belt. 
To ensure the correct implementation in the next tasks, feedback from IRIS and FERROVIAL will be essential, which 
will support ROVIMATICA during this task. 
Task 1.4 Integration of monitoring and robotic solutions for sorting (TL: IRIS, Partners: ROVIMATICA) (M16 – M22) 
Once the monitoring and robotic systems  have been tested and individually optimized, they will be integrated , by 
IRIS and ROVIMATICA, into a single prototype unit at ROVIMATICA’s lab facilities. Data generated by the monitoring 
device will be made available to the robot control system , ensuring that the monitoring unit latencies are 
compatible and that both the computer vision and monitoring data are properly synchronized to sort the multi -
layer materials in real-time at industrially compatible conveyor speeds. 
A calibration of both data processing modules will be designed and developed, in order to maintain the materials’ 
position between the systems, establishing a common reference for the robot. 
Factory Acceptance Tests will be performed to guarantee that the automated sorting system is compliant with the 
industrial requirements set out in task 1.1 with the support of FERROVIAL. Adjustments will be made if needed until 
the prototype passes the tests and is ready for the industrial proof-of-concept testing phase. 
Task 1.5 Industrial proof -of-concept for multi -layer sorting ( TL: FERROVIAL, Partners: IRIS, ROVIMATICA) (M22 – 
M28) 
Once validated, the integrated sorting system comprising the monitoring and robotic solutions will be installed in 
one of FERROVIAL’s mechanical treatment facilities for a test period using real multi-layer material streams directly 
on the premises. Any necessary adaptation of the system to the industrial process will be achieved by the 
installation of a by-pass from the final selected flow conveyor, which will be designed to guarantee proper scale-up. 
Cold and hot commissioning tests will be performed to guarantee reliable operation of the sorting system, with the 
support of IRIS and ROVIMATICA. 
Specific training sessions with FERROVIAL personnel will be carried out to show them how the system works, 
guaranteeing a daily follow up of the sorting performance, evaluating the segregated streams’ purity and mass 
balance. Furthermore, several testing campaigns will be performed to assess the identification and grasping 
efficiency of the sorting system. 
No. Deliverables Responsible Delivery Date 
D1.1 Monitoring system design and characterization model development IRIS M18 
D1.2 Robotic solution for material sorting ROVIMATICA M16 
D1.3 Integrated sorting solution proof-of-concept report FERROVIAL M28 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS1 Characterization of industrial multi-layer material streams FERROVIAL M04 
MS2 Automated sorting system prototype ready for industrial validation IRIS M22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
44 
Work package No. 2 Lead beneficiary ITENE Start-End Month M02 – M32 
WP title Development of DELAMINATION processes of each multi-layer structure sorted 
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 40 0 0 0 38 41 2 2 0.5 0 1 1 0 0 
Objectives  
• Rigid packaging: PET depolymerization via solvolysis processes for multi-layer matrices.  
• Non-metalized flexible packaging: delamination process to separate polyester and PO layers. 
• Metalized flexible packaging  delamination with solvent -based process for the selective dissolution of 
polymers and adhesives, and aluminium recovery. 
Description of work 
Task 2.1 Polyester depolymerization for rigid packaging delamination ( TL: IONIQA, Partners: ITENE, INDORAMA, 
CEA) (M02 – M32) 
In this task, IONIQA will depolymerize PET by means of glycolysis, catalyzed by smart magnetic materials in a highly 
contaminated PET -stream (rigid multi -layer packaging) used as feed. The existing process for PET glycolysis, as  
developed by IONIQA for relatively pure PET flakes from bottle feedstock, forms the basis for the process to be 
developed for rigid multi-layer packaging.  
Subtask 2.1.1. New depolymerization process development (IONIQA) (M02 – M17) 
IONIQA will develop a process for the depolymerization of PET  from rigid multi-layer packaging. Firstly, the main 
focus of the task will be the study of the influence of the non -PET fractions on the different unitary steps of the 
depolymerization process. With t his study, IONIQA will determine whether the reaction or a part of the 
downstream are severely influenced by the non -PET contaminants, meaning it would be necessary to integrate 
other steps into the process parameters, such as pre-treatment, and/or any other adjustments. Hence, IONIQA will 
use the acquired knowledge on the influence of the non -PET fraction  in order to establish the optimal process 
equipment, parameters and conditions to perform the delamination of rigid multi -layer packaging at laboratory 
scale. In addition, IONIQA will develop the recovery of the non -PET fractions after depolymerization to be 
recovered in WP3. 
Subtask 2.1.2. Rigid packaging depolymerization process upscaling (IONIQA, INDORAMA, CEA) (M15 – M32) 
In this second subtask 2.1.2., IONIQA will aim to scale up the process developed during the studies in the previous 
subtask 2.1.1 . In the course of this upscaling process, IONIQA will adapt the process parameters and process 
configuration to a larger scale reactor, around a 1,000 L set-up, analyzing the deviation and modifications needed 
in order to achieve the same purity and delamination efficiency as that achieved at laboratory scale with the 
optimized process. In this upscaled installation, IONIQA will perform pre -treatment and glycolysis of rigid multi -
layer packaging into pure BHET and non -PET fractions after the depolymerization of relatively pure BHET streams, 
and non -PET fractions after depolymerization. These recovered materials will be used by INDORAMA for PET 
repolymerization, and by CEA for polyolefin recovery, respectively, in WP3. 
Task 2.2 Non-metalized film delamination: Traditional vs green solvents (TL: ITENE, Partners: UNIBO, CEA, ITC, IM2) 
(M02 – M32) 
The development of the delamination process leaded by ITENE, for flexible multi -layer film , is focused on the 
separation of the different layers of polyesters and POs. To achieve delamination, traditional solvents (e.g., 
methanol, ethanol) and green solvents (such as CO2) in supercritical conditions (Tc: 37 ˚C and Pc: 73 bar), and/or a 
combination of both, will be used to selectively dissolve the adhesive/ layers. This task will study the interaction 
between the selected polymer and solvent in order to dissolve (i) the adhesive(s) between layers or (ii) a specific 
layer(s) in this structure. This t ask will also study the influence in the process of the presence of other internal 
layers in the structure such as primers, inks, and/or functional barriers (e.g., Etilen -vinil-alcohol). The developed 
process will take place as follows: (i) pre -treatment of packaging waste, (ii) delamination, (iii) solvent and polymer 
separation, (iv) solvent recovery and (v) polymer density separation. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
45 
Subtask 2.2.1 New process development for non-metalized film (ITENE, UNIBO, ITC) (M02 – M18) 
In this task, ITENE will study the delamination of non -metalized flexible packaging waste provided by FERROVIAL. 
This study will include the previous steps  required to pre -treat the packaging waste so as to eliminate 
contaminants such as organic waste, other plastics, paper labels and/or other impurities. 
To develop the delamination process in this task, the Hassen Solubility Parameters (HSP)  of different traditional 
and green solvents (i.e., supercritical dioxide carbon (s -CO2)) will be studied. The HSP study the interaction  
between molecules related to dispersion forces (δ d), intermolecular forces (δp) and hydrogen bond s (δh). The HSP 
study will provide the starting conditions for carrying out multi-layer film (non-metalized) delamination. 
ITENE will design experiments (DOE) in a stirred batch reactor, with around a hundred grams of flexible multi-layer 
film. With this DOE, ITENE will identify the interaction between the process parameters: pressure, temperature, 
solvent/solute rate and the residence time studying selectivity and process yield . UNIBO will support ITENE for the 
identification of most suitable solvent for the process. As a result of this DOE, the delamination process parameters 
will be optimized to cover the complete range of conditions which maximize the delamination of the flexible multi-
layer structure with a versatile process at laboratory scale. Once delaminated, ITENE will work on the separation of 
each fraction recovered (PET and POs) by density and/or cyclone separation. In addition, ITENE will study if the use 
of organic co -solvents (as ethanol) in supercritical conditions degrades the PET layer (supercritical 
depolymerization). 
The process developed for flexible multi -layer films will be tested with the flexible multi -layer labelling that ITC 
uses to produce packaging with In Mould Labelling (IML), in WP4, in order to test the recyclability of this packaging. 
Subtask 2.2.2 Design and development of the upscaled delamination process (ITENE, UNIBO, CEA, ITC, IM2) (M16 – 
M32) 
Using the results from subtask 2.3.1 , ITENE will design a specific bench -scale plant for upscaling the processes 
studied in the previous subtask. This bench-scale plant will integrate the processes needed to pre-treat the flexible 
multi-layer waste, the delamination of layers, and their density separation and recovery. Based on the interaction 
between the studied process parameters, technical specifications such as design temperature and pressure of the 
equipment, flow solvent rate and stirring needs will be defined to operate under the optimal conditions reached in 
the previous task. In addition, the plant will be modified to  the new requirements, increas ing the amount of 
processed material from the hundreds of grams previously described, to kilograms, improv ing the process control 
and adjusting control loops (temperature and pressure). 
In this upscaling process, ITENE will study the best possible configuration, in order to optimize production in terms 
of increas ing productivity and reduc ing operational cost s. ITENE will study different options to upscale the 
delamination stage to increase the amount of material treated per batch by increasing the volume of the reactor, 
or working with reactors in parallel, defining a semi-continuous process.  
To achieve the development of a process with meets with the highest requirement, the feedback from the 
downstream partners would be a relevant part of the task. In order to design a delamination process which allows 
the obtention of recovered materials (PET and POs), which meet the requirement of CEA for valorization, in WP3, 
to achieve the packaging production by ITC and IM2 in WP4. 
Task 2.3 Metalized flexible packaging solvent-based delamination with polymer and high-quality aluminium 
recovery (TL: UNIBO, Partners: ITENE, CEA, ITC, IM2) (M02 – M32) 
The separation of layers in multi -layer metalized packaging materials by UNIBO, will be performed through a 
solvent-based process based on three fundamental steps: 1) dissolution of polymeric layers; 2) separation and 
recovery of aluminium and polymers; 3)  recycling of the solvent. The dissolution of specific polymeric layers and 
adhesives will be achieved by using specific apolar solvents as i) Switchable Hydrophilicity Solvents (SHS, such as 
lipophilic tertiary amines) and ii) Bio -based Lipophilic Solvents (BLS, such as biodiesel), capable of solubilizing non -
polar polymeric compounds at temperatures below 100°C and at room pressure. The recovery of aluminium will be 
achieved by simply physical separation steps (e.g. filtration) preserving its quality with out substantial oxidation. 
The recovery of the dissolved polymers/adhesives will be performed i) by the addition of CO 2 gas, which will totally 
change the polarity of the SHS making it ionic and thus no longer capable of solubilizing lipophilic 
polymers/adhesives, or ii) through supercritical or sub -critical CO 2, which will solubilize BLS but not the 
polymers/adhesives. The recycling of SHS and BLS will be performed in both cases by removing CO 2, thus restoring 
their original nature. 
Subtask 2.3.1. Solvent-based process development (UNIBO, ITENE) (M02 – M17) 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
46 
The solvent-based protocol will be tested by UNIBO on 5L-scale batch reactors designed and set up to separate 
0.1-0.2 kg of metalized flexible packaging material through SHS and BLS. Materials from FERROVIAL made up of  PE, 
aluminium and adhesive, on which SHS and BLS have already proved to be effective at lab scale , will be tested 
together with materials containing PP and PET, to evaluate the dissolution behaviour of these polymers in the 
selected solvents. The process will be optimized in all the three phases: (i) temperature, time, solvent/material 
ratio, material size for the dissolution step; (ii) temperature, CO2 flow and pressure, and reactor geometry for the 
material recovery step; (iii) CO2 flow and pressure for solvent recycling.  
 A mass/energy balance of the recovered materials (polymers and aluminium) and solvents (SHS and BLS), and a 
physicochemical characterization will be performed on the optimized process.  In addition,  ITENE will support 
UNIBO with its previous knowledge in solvent-based processes. 
Subtask 2.3.2. Upscaling process (UNIBO, ITENE, CEA, ITC, IM2) (M16 – M32) 
Using the results from subtask 2.4.1 , UNIBO will scale up the process to kilograms of input material, developing a 
fully automated extraction and separation unit, optimizing solvent recycling to obtain the materials ready for 
recycling in WP3. 
The scale up process will be set up in a batch mode, designing and realizing three main units: i) an extraction unit 
consisting in a thermo -regulated stirred batch reactor for solubilising these polymers (e.g. PE) soluble into SHS or 
BLS; ii) a solid/liquid separator  to recover the Al layers/flakes; iii) a sol id/liquid separator for solvent phase  
regeneration (SHS or BLS ) and recovering the dissolved polymeric layers through the addition of an anti -solvent 
that should change the polarity of the solvent phase itself. 
The recovered materials from the new process developed by UNIBO, should meet the requirements of CEA for 
valorization, in WP3, in order to achieve the packaging production by ITC and IM2 in WP4. 
To design a delamination process which allows the obtention of recovered materials (PET and POs), which meet 
the requirement of CEA for valorization, (WP3) and of ITC and IM2 (WP4) for the packaging production , the 
feedback from the downstream partners would be a relevant part of task. 
Task 2.4 Characterization of recovered polymers (TL: ITENE, Partners: UNIBO, IONIQA, CEA) (M16 – M32) 
The materials provided in task 1.1, and recovered in tasks 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4, will be analysed by the corresponding 
task leader  (IONIQA, UNICO and ITENE) to check their requirements and compare their properties to the virgin 
polymers, after the delamination pilot trial s and their correct separation. This characterization will include water 
content (Karl Fisher Ti tration), bulk density , MFI/IV determination and molar mass and polydispersity index (size 
exclusion chromatography/gel permeation chromatography). 
In addition, thermal properties  will be evaluated by means of DSC and TGA, which will provide quantitative 
thermodynamic and kinetic information about the physical and chemical changes suffered by materials once 
delaminated and their thermal and/or oxidative stabilities as well as their compositional properties. 
The information about polyme r properties will be used as an input before the upcycling process in WP3 and will 
define the activities in order to produce new materials according to market requirements. 
No. Deliverables Responsible Delivery Date 
D2.1 Depolymerization of polyesters for rigid multi-layer packaging delamination IONIQA M32 
D2.2 Delamination process development for non-metalized multi-layer films ITENE M32 
D2.3 Solvent-based delamination process development for metalized flexible 
packaging  UNIBO M32 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS3 Depolymerization process developed for rigid packaging delamination IONIQA M17 
MS4 Depolymerization process upscaled for rigid packaging delamination and 
production of material for WP3 IONIQA M24 
MS5 Delamination process for non -metalized flexible packaging developed for material 
recovery at laboratory scale ITENE M12 
MS6 Delamination process for non -metalized flexible packaging developed for material 
recovery ITENE M18 
MS7 Optimization of solvent-based protocol and quality of the recovered materials UNIBO M16 
MS8 Solvent-based protocol for metalized multi -layer film optimized and upscaled for 
material recovery UNIBO M26 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
47 
Work package No. 3 Lead beneficiary INDORAMA Start-End Month  M14 – M32 
WP title Development of RECYCLING processes for the separated fractions and monomers 
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 5 0 0 0 0 0 15 31 0.5 0 2 1 0 0 
Objectives 
Development of RECYCLING processes for the separated fractions and monomers, or prepolymers, obtained from 
WP2, improving their recovery, processability and properties: 
• Repolymerization into PET from the monomers and/or prepolymers, after purification, obtained in WP2 via 
solid state polycondensation (SSP). 
• Valorisation of the PET, PE and PP recovered fractions for flexible and rigid packaging applications. 
Description of work 
Task 3.1. Recovery of PET from rigid packaging depolymerization process (TL: INDORAMA, Partners: ITENE, IONIQA, 
ITC) (M14 – M32) 
Subtask 3.1.1 Characterization of PET monomers (INDORAMA) (M14 – M22) 
In this subtask, INDORAMA will characterize the monomer products obtained by depolymerization in task 2.1. The 
determination of the PET monomers’ purity after the delamination process  is crucial, in order to evaluate the 
impact on current commercial PET manufacturing processes and  to guarantee that the produced PET packaging 
materials will comply with European food and safety packaging regulations. 
A list of the PET monome r characteristics will be drawn up, to evaluate the quality of the obtained PET monomer: 
colour, presence of trace metals and other components, such as condensation polymers. 
Subtask 3.1.2 Repolymerization of monomers into new PET (INDORAMA, ITENE, ITC) (M21 – M32) 
INDORAMA will use in-house knowledge to repolymerize the PET monomers obtained in WP2 and to assess the 
quality of the final PET resin produced at laboratory level/pilot plant level. In addition, the quality of the  
repolymerized PET from the recovered material will be compared to the respective control samples. 
The characterization of repolymerized PET  will be carried out in terms of intrinsic viscosity (I.V) and colour. The 
value obtained will be compared to a general -purpose commercial grade produced by INDORAMA to check for 
quality control: 
 
FIGURE 16. GENERAL-PURPOSE COMMERCIAL GRADE INDORAMA PET. 
After the evaluation process, INDORAMA will send the repolymerized PET to ITENE and ITC. Trials at pilot plant 
level will subsequently be carried out to manufacture the respective products using this repolymerized PET. 
Task 3.2. Recovery of polyolefins from rigid and flexible food packaging delamination processes and of PET from 
flexible packaging delamination processes (TL: CEA, Partners: ITENE, ITC, IM2) (M14 – M32) 
CEA with the support of ITENE proposes several routes for the mechanical recovery of the remaining different 
recovered polymers (PET delaminated from flexible packaging  and POs delaminated from both rigid and flexible 
packaging), depending on the nature, source, and future applications. Valorisation of polymers delaminated will be 
performed at melting temperature by using compounding and reactive extrusion process es, (i) grafting of MA on 
delaminated POs from both rigid and flexible packaging (ii) increase of the molar mass of recycled PET will be done 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
48 
by reacting the terminal carboxylic and hydroxyl functions of PET with a reagent as chain extender  and (iii) for the 
improvement of processability and mechanical properties of all the different fractions (delaminated POs and PET), 
the addition of different additives such as fillers, antioxidants or impact modifiers will be done. 
Initially, the recovered PE fractions obtained from different sources (flexible and rigid packaging) will be recovered 
separately and, if relevant, both fractions may be mixed , if necessary, as they will probably be the same type of PE 
(LDPE). 
Subtask 3.2.1. Recycled polyolefins ( POs) and PET for flexible packaging applications (CEA, ITENE, IM2 ) (M14  – 
M32) 
In this task, CEA will study different approaches to reuse the fractions recovered in WP2. 
- Route 1: Due to the poor properties of the P Os and PET recovered from delamination processes, CEA, with the 
support of ITENE, will add specific additives such as antioxidants, chain extenders , impact modifiers or fillers  to 
them, depending on the recovered polymer properties, in order to increase their stability and mechanical 
properties and to cater for a wide range of flexible packaging applications. To accomplish this task, the different 
additives will be added to the recycled polymers by compounding or reactive extrusion processes using twin-screw 
extruders. The selection of fillers will be conducted according to their morphology, processability and matrix 
affinity. Due to the polarity difference between the PO (non-polar) and the filler (polar), which is linked to their low 
affinity, a specific route such as MAg (route 2) and/or sizing will be developed.  
- Route 2:  PE recovered from multi-layer packaging structures will be chemically modified  by CEA to improve 
rPET/rPE multi-layer adhesion and affinity with fillers  (if needed). The aim is to use more environmentally friendly 
adhesives and prevent extra processes such as filler sizing. MAg will be performed by reactive extrusion. The 
influence of the MAg rate on surface tension and on PET affinity will be studied. 
In addition, during this task, CEA, with the support of ITENE, will perform the following characterization: 
- Thermal properties of rPET and rPE: TGA and DSC  
- Rheological behaviour will be studied by rheological tests and melt flow index (MFI)  in the case of PE and 
intrinsic viscosity (IV) in the case of PET.  
- Mechanical properties will be tested for tensile strength (ISO 527) . Specimens in the shape of film will be 
produced by extrusion.  
- To evaluate the maleic anhydride grafting (MAg), FTIR will be used and the surface tension modification  
will be characterized by the drop angle test.  
On the other hand,  to evaluate the modification of the molar mass  of the recycled polymers , gel permeation 
chromatography (GPC) will be carried out by CEA with the support of ITENE. 
Subtask 3.2.2. Recycled polyolefins (POs) for rigid packaging applications (CEA, ITENE, ITC) (M14 – M32) 
To enhance the performance of the POs recovered from rigid packaging, CEA, with the support of ITENE, will 
evaluate, following a similar approach than in subtask 3.2.1  but adapted to the recovered POs and application 
targeted, the use of specific additives such as antioxidants, impact modifiers and fillers by means of compounding 
processes.  
Likewise, the recovered PE will be chemically modified by CEA by maleic anhydride grafting to improve its adhesion 
to PET to produce multi-layer trays. A similar approach to the one used in subtask 3.2.1 will be performed. 
Then, the valorised materials will be characterized by CEA, with the support of ITENE, according to the following 
techniques: 
- The thermal properties of the recycled polyolefins will be studied by TGA and DSC 
- Rheological behaviour will be studied by rheological tests and melt flow index (MFI).  
- Mechanical properties will be tested for tensile strength (ISO 527), impact (Charpy ISO 179 or Izod ISO 180) 
and bending (ISO 178). Specimens will be produced by the injection process.  
- FTIR will be used to assess the PO modification and the surface tension modification will be characterized 
by the drop angle test. 
The most promising formulations  in each subtask will be scaled up and produced in suf ficient quantities  
(approximately 30-35 kg of each fraction ) to be sent to ITC, IM2 and ITENE  for the development of the different 
packaging demonstrators in WP4. 
No. Deliverables Responsible Delivery Date 
D3.1  Repolymerization of PET monomers from rigid multi -layer packaging INDORAMA M32 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
49 
delamination 
D3.2 Development of formulations for the recovery of POs and PET for flexible 
packaging applications CEA M32 
D3.3 Development of formulations for the recovery of POs for rigid packaging 
applications CEA M32 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS9 Repolymerization process developed for monomers from a rigid packaging 
delamination process INDORAMA M25 
MS10 Optimized reactive extrusion process for Maleic Anhydride grafting for 
packaging applications CEA M24 
MS11 Optimized biosourcing fillers treatment for improving compatibility in  
recovered polyolefins (PE, PP) for rigid packaging applications CEA M24 
 
Work package No. 4 Lead beneficiary ITC Start-End Month  M24 – M36 
WP title Development and VALIDATION of packaging demonstrators based on recycled PET and 
Polyolefins (PE, PP) 
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 21 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 0.5 0 14 10.5 0 0 
Objectives  
• To develop and validate a new generation of cost -effective and 100% recycled packaging structures for 
both flexible and rigid applications in the food sector. 
• Assessment of food contact safety in terms of overall (based on EN 1186) and specific (based on EN 13130) 
migration tests. 
• To demonstrate the circularity of MERLIN’s processes, reintroducing the developed recycled packaging into 
the loop and ensuring its recyclability at its end of life. 
Description of work 
Task 4.1 Rigid packaging development (TL: ITC, Partners: ITENE) (M24 – M34) 
The materials recycled in WP3 from rigid packaging, repolymerized PET and upcycled POs (PP, PE), will be used for 
the production of the rigid packaging demonstrators indicated below. 
Subtask 4.1.1 Injection moulding of polyolefins: cups (ITC, ITENE) (M24 – M34) 
Using the upcycled POs (PP, PE) with the properties achieved during the recycling processes in WP2 & WP3, trials 
to produce monomaterial packaging cups by injection moulding will be performed  by ITC. ITC will use prototype 
moulds and machinery at pilot pla nt scale. The packaging cups produced by ITC will be tested with the support of 
ITENE according to the following methods and compared with benchmark solutions:  
- Mechanical properties: compression and drop impact resistance. 
- Barrier properties: oxygen and water vapour permeability (ASTM D2684). 
This new packaging will also incorporate the project logo and QR  by IML, to include the information related to the 
project.  
Subtask 4.1.2 Injection-blow moulding of PET: bottles for food packaging applications (ITC, ITENE) (M25 – M34) 
Bottles will be produced by injection-blow moulding  using the repolymerized PET  developed in WP3 at ITC’s 
facilities. The bottles produced will be characterized, with the support of ITENE, according to the following 
properties and compared with benchmark solutions: 
- Mechanical properties: compression test and drop impact resistance 
- Barrier properties: oxygen and water vapour permeability (ASTM D2684) 
Subtask 4.1.3 Extrusion-thermoforming of PET with PO: Multi-layer trays (ITENE) (M25 – M34) 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
50 
The first pilot scale trials will be carried out at ITENE to obtain multi-layer sheets  by co-extrusion/extrusion 
lamination processes with a total thickness ranging from 0.5 to 0.9 mm. The multi-layer sheets will be based on the 
upcycled POs and repolymerized PET from WP3. In addition, to ensure proper adhesion between layers, a tie layer 
may be considered. The multi-layer sheets produced will be evaluated based on the following methods: 
- Mechanical properties : tensile testing (ISO 527), impact resistance by the free -falling dart method (ISO 7765 -
1:2005), flexural stiffness (ISO 178) 
- Barrier properties: oxygen and water vapour permeability (ASTM D2684) 
The most promising multi -layer sheets  will be used for tray production  by thermoforming . These trays will be 
characterized and compared to similar benchmark solutions: 
- Mechanical properties: compression and drop test (internal method) 
- Optical properties: colour (CIELab coordinates), gloss and opacity. 
Task 4.2 Flexible Packaging development (TL: IM2, Partners: ITENE) (M24 – M34) 
The upcycled POs (PP, PE) and the upcycled PET from flexible packaging will be used by IM2 to produce multi-layer 
flexible packaging demonstrators  (flow-pack) by extrusion-lamination processes. To ensure proper adhesion 
between the PET and PO layer the use of adhesives will be considered.  
The structures obtained will be evaluated, with the support of  ITENE, in terms of mechanical properties and 
compared with current benchmark solutions: 
- Tensile testing (ISO 527:2019) 
- Coefficient of friction (ASTM D1894) 
- Heat-sealing strength (ASTM F88) 
- Flex cracking (Gelbo test), condition D (ASTM F392) 
- Barrier properties: oxygen permeability (ASTM D3985-05) and water vapour permeability (ASTM F1249-13) 
The most promising multi-layer structure will be used by IM2 to produce flow-pack demonstrators. 
Task 4.3 Risk assessment in food contact application (TL: ITENE) (M28 – M36) 
The project developments will be subjected to migration tests with appropriate food simulants at ITENE’s facilities 
to evaluate the interest and possibility of use in contact with food,  should the results meet the compliance 
requirements established in the European Regulation.  
The main objective will be to identify the contaminants that migrate from the packaging into the food simulants 
and to evaluate the risk to consumer health due to their presence and concentration level. 
On one hand, overall migration tests (based on EN 1186) will be performed to study the materials’ inertia, while 
specific migration  tests (based on EN 13130 ) will be performed to study the materials’ safety by analysing the 
presence of manufacturing additives in the migration extracts that are subject to restrictions, such as metals, 
primary aromatic amines, and NIAS (non-intentionally added substances).  
To this end, chemical analyses will be performed using different chromatographic techniques coupled with high 
resolution mass spectrometry (Gas Chromatography Time -Of-Flight (GC -TOF) and Ultra Performance Liquid 
Chromatography/Quadrupole-Time-Of-Flight (UPLC-QTOF), for volatiles, semi -volatiles and non-volatiles, including 
primary aromatic amines) and Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP -MS) for metals. These analyses 
will be carried out by ITENE, according to the information and materials used when developing the packaging.  
Finally, a risk assessment of the substances identified in the migration extracts will be performed by revising the 
available toxicological information, in order to conclude whether the presence of contaminants at the detected 
concentration level endangers consumers’ health. 
Task 4.4 Circularity of MERLIN processes ( TL: ITENE, Partners: IRIS, ROVIMATICA, FERROVIAL, UNIBO, CEA, IONIQA, 
INDORAMA, ITC, IM2) (M28 – M36) 
This task will assess the circularity of the different developments in MERLIN. To do so, the different demonstrators 
previously produced in tasks 4.1 and 4.2 will be reintroduced  into the MERLIN project loop. Firstly, the different 
multi-layer packaging  samples developed will be tested with the solutions  developed by IRIS, ROVIMATICA, and 
FERROVIAL in WP1. In addition, some samples will be shredded and subjected to the corresponding delamination 
process developed in WP2, depending on the type of  packaging structure (UNIBO, IONIQA, ITENE). Once 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
51 
delaminated or depolymerized (in the case of PET from rigid packaging),  the material obtained will be compared 
with the  obtained in the first loop (WP2), in terms of properties and degradation. With this assessment will be 
demonstrated the circularity of the solution developed and the viability of keeping the material in the loop by CEA, 
INDORAMA, ITC, ITENE and IM2. 
No. Deliverables Responsible Delivery Date 
D4.1 Manufacturing of rigid packaging demonstrators: polyolefin cups, PET bottles 
and multi-layer trays ITC M34 
D4.2 Production of flexible packaging demonstrators IM2 M34 
D4.3 Risk assessment and food contact compliance with the different demonstrators 
produced ITENE M36 
D4.4 Evaluation of the circularity of the materials developed ITENE M36 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS12 First batch of rigid packaging demonstrators ITC M29 
MS13 First batch of flexible packaging demonstrators IM2 M29 
MS14 Circularity assessment of MERLIN processes ITENE M30 
 
Work package No. 5 Lead beneficiary PARTICULA Start-End Month  M10 – M36 
WP title Assessment of the environmental, economic, social, legislative and regulatory barriers of the 
developed processes 
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 14 1 1 1 2 1 1.5 1 2.5 30 0.5 0.5 0 11 
Objectives 
• To evaluate the total environmental impacts and hot spots associated with the novel production pathways 
by life-cycle assessment (LCA). 
• To evaluate the total economic costs and hot spots associated with the novel production pathways by life-
cycle costing (LCC) assessment. 
• To evaluate the total social impacts associated with the novel production processes by social life-cycle 
assessment (S-LCA). 
• To evaluate the total health and safety impacts for the environment and workers associated with the novel 
production processes by safety by process design (SPD). 
Description of work 
Task 5.1. Environmental study. Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) (TL: PARTICULA, Partners: All partners) (M10 – M36) 
In this task, PARTICULA, with the support of all partners, will perform t he environmental study, based on ISO LCA  
standards 14040:2006  and 14044:2006 and on the four steps that comprise every LCA : (i) Goal and scope 
definition: this will define the intended objectives, depth, breadth and stakeholders of the LCA. (ii) Life cycle 
inventory: this will collect and compute the input/output data. Methodologies will be identified for the review of 
the data quality and reliability. (iii) Life cycle impact assessment (LCIA): this will translate the input and output data 
into impact indicator results. These activities will include the  selection of  impact categories , classification, and 
characterization. (iv) Life cycle interpretation: this will evaluate and interpret the impact assessment  results in line 
with the stated goals and objectives of the LCA. 
In order to assess and evaluate the environmental impact, the functional unit for which the impact is to be 
calculated must be determined before the necessary calculations can be performed. As a full cradle-to-grave LCA, a 
wide range of impact categories will be considered following the provisions of the  International Reference Life-
Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook  for consequential analysis (EN 16760). The LCA will be carried out using the 
Simapro 8 ® software. After checking the sensitivity an d reliability of the study, relevant conclusions and 
recommendations will be drawn and they will be made available as a decision-support instrument. 
Task 5.2. Economic study. Life-Cycle Costing (LCC) (TL: PARTICULA, Partners: All partners) (M15 – M36) 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
52 
The objective of this task will be to determine the costs associated with the entire project life cycle for enhanced 
economic feasibility. The Life-Cycle Costing (LCC) will be performed in parallel with task 5.1, based on the functional 
unit, reference scenarios and input and output data gathered from the partners involved. Consequently, the same 
system boundaries of LCA will apply in the LCC. The material and energetic input and output data will be converted 
to a monetary value to facilitate the calculation of total costs or benefits, identification of hot spots throughout the 
production processes , and the evaluation of economic competitiveness  related to the considered reference 
scenarios. SETAC guidelines on LCC will be consid ered for a consistent cost approach including the effects of 
discount rates for the costs not covered in the current time period. The cost savings thanks to the reduced amount 
of waste and fewer transport and storage constraints will also be explored. 
Task 5.3. Societal study. Social Life-Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) (TL: PARTICULA, Partners: All partners) (M15 – M36) 
A Social Life-Cycle Assessment (S-LCA) is an analysis of the ways the project could affect human well-being. As such, 
an S -LCA will be performed by PARTICULA, to assess the social and sociological aspects of new processes  and 
products, and their actual and potential impacts throughout their life cycle. The assessment will adapt the UNEP 
Guidelines for Social Life-Cycle Assessment of Products (2009) which correspond to ISO 14040 and 14044 standards 
for Life-Cycle Assessment. Indicators (e.g., number of jobs created) will be identified and linked to impact 
categories (e.g., local employment), and then related to key stakeholders to identify hotspots (i.e., the presence of 
risky practices or outcomes that might negatively impact groups of  stakeholders). PARTICULA will lead the S -LCA 
work, with the contributions being made by all the partners. 
Task 5.4. Safety by Process Design (SPD) (TL: ITENE, Partners: All partners) (M13 – M36) 
The aim of this task is to ensure a high level of protection of human life and the environment regarding multi-layer 
packaging delamination and recycling processes . In order to achieve this objective, ITENE will apply a safety by 
process design methodology that will be implemented throughout the project. This will contemplate and anticipate 
the prevention of potential  negative impacts that could be generated in the delamination and recycling processes 
of multi-layer packaging. These impacts include the exposure of workers  handling the materials, harmful particles 
in the mechanical processes, and the reduction of occupational exposure to potentially harmful particles (additives 
and other reagents) during the prototype production stages. In addition, it will facilitate the anticipation and 
mitigation of environmental impacts associated with undesirable emissions and releases of contaminating material 
during recycling. 
This task will consist of three stages: (i) developing and improving protocols and methodologies and the correct risk 
management measures to ensure safe handling of materials, considering their potential from a life-cycle 
perspective, (ii) using thematic research, development and innovation  to overcome challenges where safer 
alternatives have been difficult to fi nd, and (iii) creating an environment  that enables the concept through 
knowledge exchange, education, and supply chain cooperation.  
Task 5.5: Standardization, Policy & Regulatory framework (TL: EuPC, Partners: All partners) (M10 – M36) 
The aim of this task is to evaluate the current EU policies and regulations  related to multi -layer packaging, their 
recycling and upcycling. It will consider the sustainability of the processes and packaging products throughout their 
life cycle with a view  to proposing the incorporation/modification  of these policies to ensure that they take into 
account environmental, social and economic considerations in line with the outcomes of the previous tasks. 
The relevant standardization and certification landscape for MERLIN will be continually assessed at international , 
EU and national level . The MERLIN findings will be captured by EuPC to drive the evolution of different standards 
(e.g., recycling, upcycling, circularity, and recycled content), certification (e.g., sustainable sourcing for food contact 
materials) and labelling schemes . An in -depth exchange will be established with the relevant standardization 
bodies, technical committees (such as CEN/TC 249 - Plastics), and other relevant in dependent bodies. EuPC will 
curate the provision of policy recommendations regarding resource efficiency improvement s, waste management, 
recycling and EoL scenarios tuned for specific applications, which could be used by standardization bodies in 
reflections about new/ improved standards.  
In terms of safety, in lin e with task 4.3 (food contact)  and 5.4 (Safety by Process Design) , our safe by design  
approach will consider safe by process design and food contact legislation  from the project outset and we will also 
perform migration tests on the primary and secondary materials in the project. Incentives such as the fast track 
approval of recycled materials  with demonstrated reduced environmental impacts will also be assessed  as well as 
proposals for related financial support. The outcome of the evaluation of the project results , especially in terms of 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
53 
recyclability, biodegradation tests and LCA , will also be used in position papers  addressed to relevant actors 
identified in WP 6. New incentive schemes, such as supporting the repositioning of recycled materials on the 
market (and therefore the economic viability of their actual recycling) that account for the real environmental cost 
of using non -recyclable materials in the tax sy stems, and ecolabels demonstrating circularity and recyclability , will 
also be proposed and pushed at EU and national level. 
No. Deliverables Responsible Delivery Date 
D5.1 Preliminary LCA report with baseline scenario and final report . Environmental 
recommendation resulting from LCA analysis. PARTICULA M20, M34 
D5.2 Preliminary LCC report (economic study) with baseline scenario and final report . 
Economic recommendation resulting from LCC analysis. PARTICULA M20, M34 
D5.3 Preliminary S-LCA report (social study) with baseline scenario and final report . 
Social recommendation resulting from S-LCA analysis. PARTICULA M20, M34 
D5.4 Preliminary Safety study report with baseline scenario and final report, including 
Safety by Process Design (SPD)  ITENE M20, M34 
D5.5 Policy recommendations toolbox for policymakers EuPC M30 
D5.6 Regulatory report to foster standardization frameworks EuPC M30 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS15 Regulations, safety, and environmental analysis completed PARTICULA M34 
MS16 Interaction with at least 2 standardization organizations  PARTICULA M24, M34  
 
Work package No. 6 Lead beneficiary CSCP Start-End Month  M01 – M36 
WP title Facilitate sharing and learning of good practices on increasing circularity in post-consumption 
multi-layer packaging amongst value chain stakeholders 
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 10 14 4 3 4 4 3 3 33 1 3 1.5 6 2 
Objectives  
• To facilitate sharing and learning of good practices on increasing circularity in post-consumption multi-layer 
packaging amongst value chain stakeholders. 
• To share and validate good practices containing circular design techniques and validation workshops. 
• To draw relevant guidelines and policy recommendations based on the selected good practices 
• To develop a Decision Support System capable of providing relevant insights on recyclability strategies for 
multi-layer waste and of enhancing the use of recycled materials for sustainable packaging designs. 
• To f acilitate information to the consumer regarding the environmental footprint savings and the 
percentage of recycled material used in the multi-layer packaging by means of a quick response (QR) code 
label which can be read by smartphone s. In-Mould Labelling (IML)  will ensure cost effectiveness even in 
low volume operations. 
Description of work 
Task 6.1 Stakeholder Engagement (TL: CSCP, Partners: All partners) (M01 – M36) 
Subtask 6.1.1 Value chain mapping and stakeholder identification. (CSCP, All partners) [M01 – M36] 
This task aims first  to map the multi-layer packaging plastic waste value chain (from recovering raw material from 
post-consumer and post -industrial waste, through to production, distribution, trade and consumption). Relevant 
stakeholders e.g., waste managers, packaging converters, packaging filling and machinery suppliers, brand owners, 
consumers, policymakers, I.A. and the robotics industry, will be identified at the following partners ’ national and 
European levels through: (i) desktop research, (ii) recommendations from partners/partner’s internal networks, (iii) 
recommendations from sector associations e.g., European Plastics Converters (EuPC). 
The stakeholder mapping  will include researching and depicting  the main challenges (barriers) facing 
representative stakeholders in the value chain and their motivations regarding the increasing circularity of plastics 
in the value chain (e.g. economic, social, health and safety as well as environmental). CSCP will research and draw 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
54 
different types of persona  profiles related to plastic waste recycling tailored to national and EU level s, which will 
provide the basis for engagement with stakeholders in subsequent project activities. 
The outcome will be the personas of central actors combined with a detailed analysis of their operational settings, 
relationships, interests, and motivations  for increasing the rate of multi -layer packaging recycling. Additional 
information will be collected by interviewing representatives of the persona profiles developed.  
Subtask 6.1.2. Baseline analysis (CSCP, All partners) [M01 – M10] 
In this task, to increase circularity in the plastic waste value chain , CSCP will conduct a baseline analysis of existing 
barriers and opportunities  (social, economic, political, environmental ). Data such as current collection, sorting, 
recovery, and derivation of new products from plastic waste as well as consumer acceptance of new products will 
be collected with the support of all partners. This information will help identify gaps and inconveniences in 
increasing circularity in multi -layer packaging. The baseline analysis will also serve as a benchmark to assess and 
compare developments and improvements during the project’s lifetime and, th ereby, help evaluate MERLIN’s 
success and impacts in the partner countries. 
Subtask 6.1.3 Stakeholder engagement plan (CSCP, All partners) [M01 – M36] 
The CSCP will seek to bring stakeholders together in one place (e.g., Circular Economy Innovation Exchange Club  
(CEIEC)) to improve knowledge on how to increase the rate of reuse and recycling of plastic waste  using circular 
design techniques  and co -create and prioritize solutions that maximize benefits  (e.g., better sorting, innovative 
recycling technology, the introduction of recyclable packaging for brands, higher consumer acceptance and the 
preference for recyclable packaging solutions). 
The stakeholders will be engaged from each partner country with the support of local partners (Spain, Italy, France, 
Germany, The Netherlands  and Croatia). The CEIEC will function as an eco-system for information exchange  and 
shared knowledge. Stakeholders will be introduced to and will be able  to share good practices  in order to drive 
cooperation among actors throughout the value chain and define the priorities  that need to be addressed to 
increase the reuse and recycling of packaging waste at EU level . The CEIEC will be used as a continuous 
consultation process to in crease iteration between MERLIN WPs. The CEIEC will help generate expert inputs  and 
validate the sustainability impacts of MERLIN-generated innovations (e.g., sorting, delamination, recycling and new 
products derived in WPs 1 -4). These insights will be fed into WPs 1 -4 for further development of MERLIN 
innovations. Furthermore, the CEIEC will provide constant innovation by serving as a testing platform for policy, 
product, process, and social innovation throughout the MERLIN project lifespan. 
Two stakeholder consultation workshops will be organized at EU level. The first will be held in the first year of the 
project to engage all the stakeholders to exchange information and knowledge. The second workshop will aim to 
facilitate the sharing of learning among stakeholders as the way to progress along the roadmap d rawn up in the 
first workshop. Stakeholders will also be able to exchange further impressions on the good practices created by the 
MERLIN project (Task 6.2). 
Task 6.2 Good practices containing circular design techniques and validation workshops (TL: CSCP, Partners: All 
Partners) (M06 – M36) 
The main aim of this task is to identify and collect good practices  concerning circular design to improve the 
recycling of plastic waste and promote its reuse. Good practices  here are understood as the key learning and 
solutions adopted by the industry, political actors, waste management services, etc. to address the recyclability and 
circularity of plastic packaging , and to provide stakeholders with suitable solutions , building on already existing 
good practices and good practices that emerge from the project’s processes. 
Subtask 6.2.1 Development of  a methodology for the identification and collection of good practices (CSCP, All 
partners) (M06 – M20) 
This task will start with the development of a standardized template in the form of a questionnaire to define the 
criteria for the selection of good practices, able to: 
• Demonstrate a potential positive impact on environmental sustainability or on proxy indicators. 
• Provide relevant information  in relation to their feasibility (e.g., legislation, infrastructure that needs to be 
implemented, acceptability, monitoring capacity). 
• Provide relevant information in relation to contextual factors as identified in the baseline analysis from task 6.1. 
The list of the defined selection criteria will lead to the development of a short template for promis ing practice 
descriptions. All partners will engage in the identification of existing promising practices that support circular 
design techniques. A questionnaire will be designed and circulated to collect additional information on case studies 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
55 
from relevant networks of experts . In addition, the template will be reviewed  during the project  to include the 
good practices  resulting from the processes developed  in MERLIN. On a technical level, the good practices will 
serve as a way forward in terms o f enhancing circularity within waste management systems. At consumer level, 
they should serve as a means of raising awareness on circular design issues and the socio -economic and 
environmental impacts of recycled materials, always with re gard to consumers’ concerns about health and safety 
when using such materials. 
Subtask 6.2.2 Evaluation of good practices (CSCP, All partners) (M20 – M36) 
To evaluate the good practices, the CSCP will use 2 main sets of indicators. The first set will aim to assess the good 
practices in terms of quantitative data  (e.g., the quantity and quality of waste available for recycling, the  
percentage of materials being reintroduced in to the loop, the  percentage reduction in raw materials after the 
implementation of the recycling processes, the readiness of methods for uptake by cities or regions, etc.). The 
second set of indicators will be comprised of indicators measuring the socio-economic impact of the practices , 
namely the feasibility of implementation, upscale potential, social perception, etc. 
Matching the baseline analysis conducted in Subtask 6.1.1  with suitable good practices will serve as the 
cornerstone for the development of an elaborate , comprehensive “good practice database” which can then be 
adapted to a set of guidelines that will facilitate the exchange of knowledge in terms of both technical know -how 
and social innovation among the stakeholders. Feedback collected during disseminatio n events (subtask 7.2.1) , 
such as further good practices submitted by stakeholders within the CEIEC ecosystem, can then be included in the 
database. The CSCP will draw up relevant policy recommendations b ased on the guidelines that are put together 
from th e collected good practices , the results of task 5.5  regarding EU policies  and regulations , and the 
development of standards for certification and labelling schemes. To disseminate the knowledge, the CSCP will 
organize validation workshops to assess the evaluation methodology of the good practices. The CSCP will invite 
consumer health protection experts ( NGOs) to participate in the validation workshop . T he NGOs and other 
consumer representatives will ensure that MERLIN’s solutions are valid ated from a consumer perspective with 
respect to health and safety issues. Following the validation workshop, the CSCP will also plan a follow -up event 
(physical meetings and/or webinars) to familiarize stakeholders identified in subtask 6.1.3  with innovat ive 
processes developed within MERLIN and classified as good practices. All CEIEC engagement activities and workshop 
participation will be designed to be gender inclusive, and gender balance will be sought throughout the project 
Task 6.3 Decision Support System for multi-layer packaging recycling (TL: IRIS, Partners: CSCP, ENCO) (M12 – M34) 
In this task, IRIS, with the support of the CSCP and ENCO, will create a web-based Decision Support System (DSS) to 
provide key information for waste managers and packaging industry representatives. The tool will be hosted on the 
project website’s domain  and will be compatible with different platforms (e.g., computer, tablet, mobile phone ). 
The data required to develop the DSS will be based on WPs 1-5 process performance, bibliographic data from other 
reference separation and recycling processes, and the good practice recommendation repository from task 6.2. 
The DSS will assess input waste characterizations for providing the most suitable separation and recycling strategy 
to meet the criteria pre-established by the user  (e.g., production yield of certain materials, production capacity, 
sustainability, technological r eadiness level). Furthermore, a comparison between recycled and non-recycled 
materials will be offered to packaging companies to check the feasibility of integrating new sustainable materials 
into new designs.  
Task 6.4 QR code and In -Mould Labelling (IML) printed in recycled packaging (TL: ITENE, Partners: ITC, IM2, CSCP, 
ENCO) (M12 – M34) 
To engage the packaging end -users and disseminate the processes and technological challenges addressed during 
MERLIN in order to  manufacture packaging with a high content of recycled material, a QR-code will be designed 
especially for the project in this task by ITENE. The QR code could be read via any app available on iOS and Android 
devices and will give access to the project website, where the data collected about the production of the packaging 
will be summarized, e.g.: material origin (virgin or recycled), the processes used for its recovery, eq -CO2 reduction 
calculated in WP 5, etc. The QR code created will be included on the rigid pot created by ITC during WP4, using In-
Mould-Labelling (IML) technologies to integrate it with the manufactured packaging. 
No. Deliverables  Responsible Delivery Date 
D6.1 Stakeholder engagement plan CSCP M10 
D6.2 Guidelines on increasing the recyclability and circularity of plastic packaging: 
Learnings from collected good practices. 
CSCP M32 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
56 
D6.3 Decision Support System for multi-layer packaging recycling IRIS M30 
D6.4 Development and Integration of the QR code into the Merlin project packaging  ITENE M34 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS17 Validation of evaluation methodology of the good practices CSCP M26 
MS18 Good Practices and DSS ranked with positive feedback by at least 50 
stakeholders 
IRIS M34 
 
Work package No. 7 Lead beneficiary ENCO Start-End Month  M01 – M36 
WP title Cross-cutting activities and innovation impacts  
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 9 2 3 3 3 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 34 3 
Objectives  
• To deliver targeted communication and dissemination campaigns  to generate understanding and uptake 
for the project results , communication tailored to each stakeholder group’s individual needs, accelerating 
the expansion of the circular supply chain across major networks.  
• To maximize the impact of the project results by clustering with ongoing and future projects , detecting 
synergies and sharing communication campaigns.  
• To support the adoption of project results by setting up effective business and social innovation scenarios 
while eliciting acceptance of the results by the markets. 
Description of work 
Task 7.1 Communication and visibility campaign (TL: ENCO, Partners: All partners) (M01 – M36) 
An effective communication strategy will be established to generate and promote common understanding of the 
main messages to be distributed to the target audience (large companies and SMEs, scientific community, clusters, 
end-users, policymakers and finally the general public ). This will be designed as a branding campaign where 
storytelling will be accurately designed on top of agreed key messages and conve yed through specific channels. 
Messages will be created following a multifactorial approach. Appropriate measures include graphic identity (M1) 
original and creative graphics (logo, GIFs, icon imagery)  to enable the public to identify the project easily. T he 
project website (M2) will present the project brand and circulate relevant information about MERLIN, infographics, 
project news, educational materials, videoclips, etc. It will follow up the development of the project and spread the 
non-confidential scientific results. It will also host the MERLIN Green Open Access Channel  where the project’s 
public reports, deliverables and publications will be made available to its aud ience. There will be a project 
roadshow of events, scheduling an agenda of EU events such as trade fairs, exhibitions, and networking events, and 
the organization of dedicated MERLIN events: (i) Mainstream media  (MSM) campaign (M1) pushing briefings and 
press releases to key media contacts (TV, radio, and written press)  and social media campaign  (M2) (Twitter 
&LinkedIn) to engage audiences in a two -way dialogue. (ii) Digital & printed material  (M2), project flyers, posters, 
gadgets will be distributed at ev ents attended to support project communication and branding actions . (iii) E -
newsletter, a 6-monthly newsletter will be transmitted to the project audiences, featuring news, interviews with 
project partners, and information on the project, upcoming events/ conferences attended/organized by partners. 
Communication will also be streamlined through Horizon2020 channels and Advisory Board Members’ networks to 
maximize impacts and coverage. 
Task 7.2 Dissemination and exploitation (TL: ENCO, Partners: All partners) (M01 – M36) 
This task establishes a PEDR to boost the impacts of MERLIN. The PEDR will detail how each of the KER will be used 
in post -project commercial/non -commercial direct/indirect exploitation activities. Gender factors will be 
contemplated in all stages of task 7.2. 
Subtask 7.2.1 Dissemination (ENCO, All partners) (M01 – M36) 
All non-confidential information and knowledge generated within the project will be properly disseminated. This 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
57 
includes (pre-selected channels in  
Table 9): 8 Scientific publications  (articles in scientific magazines, at least 4; posters in conferences, at least 4): 
MERLIN partners will publish the results, mainly related to sorting technologies, delamination processes, recycling, 
circular design of packaging materials, chemicals (acc ording to the IPR protection strategy and to the GA and the 
CA) in the scientific literature, dedicated journals and magazines. (Pre -selected scientific Journals in Table 
11)Attending at least 8 scientific conferences : in which MERLIN’s results will be presented in a number of relevant 
international scientific forums. Three workshop demonstration activities  for industrial and stakeholder 
professionals. Activities and partial results of the project will be showcased to the industry (potential new clients 
and value chain stakeholders) directly with the idea of involving them, obtaining the necessary feedback a nd 
engaging them in the technology and the soundness of the concept. Two research webinar series  oriented to 
technicians and professionals. They will be articulated with technical partners, coordinated by  Jose L. Diéguez 
García (ITENE) and will gather rese archers from academia and industry related to the sectors interconnected to 
MERLIN. Two round tables  with a stakeholder panel to open debate and obtain feedback. The objective is to 
discuss project results and receive external inputs. MERLIN’s final event (M35) will be organized to showcase the 
project outputs. Keynote speakers will be invited to attract a larger audience and the industrial and scientific 
community. 
Subtask 7.2.2 Exploitation & IPR management (ENCO, All partners) (M18 – M36) 
This task intends: i) to capture and effectively manage the Intellectual Property (IP) used in the MERLIN project and 
generated by it; and ii) to set up measures and paths for and effective and fair commercial/non -commercial 
exploitation of the MERLIN KERs. The IP & Exploitation Manager ( Ms Simona Mincione ) will work closely with the 
knowledge owners to assist them in complying with the IPR rules, negotiating any agreements that might be 
necessary. Thus, knowledge and data will be screened first in terms of sensitivity and novelty. The following actions 
will be covered: identification of  own background and third parties’ background (aligned with the Consortium 
Agreement); determination of the ownership of KERs: who owns what?;  definition of transfers  and conditions for 
exploitation (access rights, NDAs, etc); evaluation of the best procedure to protect  new knowledge and data 
(Patent filings). Other alternatives will be evaluated to protect the results that are not patentable (trademarks, 
utility models, etc); evaluation and mapping of different exploitation models for each KER to support the transition 
to the post -project phase to advance the TRLs and reach the market (spin -off creation, launch of a PhD thesis, 
further new research projects etc.). The results from this task will complete and feed T7.3 to establish the entire 
business plan for the MERLIN project. 
Task 7.3 Business Plan and replicability of MERLIN (TL: ENCO, Partners: All partners) (M18 – M36) 
Subtask 7.3.1. Business plan (ENCO, All partners) (M18 – M36) 
This task aims to draft a Business Plan to demonstrate the commercial potential of MERLIN´s KERs and describe 
how this potential will be realised. This strategic document will be alive and will be updated throughout the project. 
The MERLIN Business Plan will include: i) Definition and detailed description of the solution/s (related to main KERs) 
and the problem/s they solve; ii) Target market & segments; iii) Competition (main players, the competition it aims 
to supplant, market share…) and positioning (how  MERLIN innovations are strengths and opportunities for the 
project’s partners); iv) Identification of regulations and standards that apply to the KERs, including potential 
barriers; v) Outline of potential business model(s) together with possible entry pr ice(s) and costs; vi) Exploitation 
overview (timescale; sales growth; market share) & financial projections (presenting a draft ‘profit and loss’ sheet, 
identifying capital costs; recurring costs; gross and net revenues; break-even point). 
Subtask 7.3.2. Replicability of MERLIN (ENCO, All partners) (M18 – M36) 
This task aims to secure the replicability of MERLIN beyond the project boundaries, making results repeatable and 
operational in other multi -layer sorting and recycling systems across the EU. A campaign to replicate the project 
innovation will be designed and implemented to obtain maximum impact through geographical expansion. A set of 
replication measures will be put in place, specifically: i) creating a database of stakeholders from T6.2 which will be 
critical to the success of the project’s replication and the swift uptake of the results of MERLIN’s RIA in the post -
project phase; ii) providing a practical and easy -to-use tool – the ”MERLIN Business Case Toolkit” – complemented 
by package leaflets (instructions on “how to” adopt innovation); iii) liaising with companies, trade associations and 
chambers of commerce. This will be facilitated by the dissemination action oriented to this target group. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
58 
Task 7.4 Clustering with other projects and initiatives (TL: ITENE, Partners: ENCO, CSCP) (M01 – M36) 
To ensure the success and sustainability of the project’s results, it will be of utmost importance to create synergies 
with already existing projects and pilot lines in the field of multi-layer sorting and recycling. MERLIN will collaborate 
proactively with other projects. Some of them have already been identified (Table 4), others will be selected during 
the execution of the project. Thus, MERLIN will set up different joint activities (workshops, joint presence at events 
and trade fairs, collaboratively written scientific journal articles and conference papers, collaborati ve exploitation 
strategy) to define an effective way to collaborate. A workshop in design thinking or a world café format is planned 
in the frame of an international platform. As the project coordinator, ITENE will study, with the assigned project 
officer, the possibility of attending the kick-off meetings of other related projects funded within the same topic and 
proposing the exchange of advisory board members between the projects. 
CSCP will support this task facilitating contacts from the stakeholder eng agement activities they carry out in other 
projects in which MERLIN can strengthen collaboration 
No. Deliverables Responsible Delivery Date 
D7.1 Communication Plan ENCO M06 
D7.2 Preliminary Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of the project results 
(PEDR) 
ENCO M12 
D7.3 Final Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of the project results (PEDR)  ENCO M36 
D7.4 Business Planning and Replicability Action ENCO M36 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS19 Successful exploitation & business planning ENCO M36 
 
Work package No. 8 Lead beneficiary ITENE Start-End Month  M01 – M36 
WP title Project management 
Participant No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Short name  
ITENE 
IRIS 
ROVIMATICA 
FERROVIAL 
UNIBO 
IONIQA 
INDORAMA 
CEA 
CSCP 
PARTICULA 
ITC 
IM2 
ENCO 
EuPC 
Person month 22 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1.5 1.5 2 1.5 
Objectives  
The aim of WP8 is the coordination and management of the project covering technical, administrative, ethical, and 
financial issues. The specific targets are:  
• To coordinate the implementation of MERLIN, assuring the best organization and leadership to deli ver the 
expected results within the project time frame and budget.  
• To monitor the tasks according to timing and resource limitations.  
• Smooth communication with the consortium, external stakeholders and the assigned European Officers.  
• Mitigation and contingency plans to avoid and/or overcome the potential risks of the project execution. 
• To analyze the main elements of the data management policy. 
Description of work 
Task 8.1 Administrative and financial coordination (TL: ITENE, Partners: All partners) (M01 – M36) 
ITENE will manage the project between the consortium and the European Commission (EC). The key activities, as 
described in the Grant Agreement, include: 
- Ensuring the action/project is properly implemented. 
- Acting as the liaison for all communications between the beneficiaries and the Commission. 
- Requesting and reviewing any documents or information required by the Commission and verifying their 
completeness and correctness before passing them on to the Commission. 
- Submitting the deliverables and reports to the Commission. 
- Ensuring that all payments are made to the other beneficiaries without unjustified delay. 
- Informing the Commission of the amounts paid to each beneficiary, when required under the Grant 
Agreement or requested by the Commission. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
59 
Task 8.2 Day-to-day management (ITENE, Partners: All partners) (M01 – M36) 
ITENE will manage the project within the consortium, i.e., ITENE will take care of all the management tasks not 
mentioned in the Grant Agreement Article 41.2(b). These tasks include: 
- Ensuring compliance with project planning and appropriate quality of activities, including effective 
coordination, communication, reporting and decision -making within the consortium at project and work 
package levels. This includes e.g., the project handbook, updating the internal website, etc. 
- Risk management, i.e., preparing the risk management plan and managing the risks throughout the 
project’s duration. 
- Organizing consortium meetings (General Assembly) as well as other meetings (e.g., cross-WP meetings), if 
necessary. 
- Drafting and submission of reports. 
ITENE will also be responsible for the scientific and technological coordination of the project, whilst the work 
package leaders will coordinate the work carried out in the individual work packages, supported by all the partners 
where necessary. All the partners have experience in managing and participating in complex collaboration projects, 
as well as the internal resources needed. 
Task 8.3 Data Management Plan (ITENE, Partners: All partners) (M01 – M36) 
To analyze the main elements of the data management policy concerning the datasets generated by the project. 
The DMP will be established at the start of MERLIN and then evolve during the lifespan of the project. Data 
management will be a fixed agenda item at all management meetings. The DMP will consider all the data the 
project will generate and use and will detail whether and how it will be used, exploited or made accessible for 
verification and reuse; how and under what conditions it will be curated, pre served and shared; and how it will be 
interoperable with regard to specific quality standards. 
No. Deliverables Responsible Delivery Date 
D8.1 Governance structure, communication flow and methods  ITENE M03 
D8.2 Management and Technical Reports, updated each 6 months ITENE M06, M36 
D8.3 Risk assessment and contingency and mitigation plans  ITENE M18, M36 
D8.4 Data management plan (initial, final) ITENE M06, M36 
No. Milestone name Responsible Delivery Date 
MS20 Kick-off meeting  ITENE M01 
TABLE 19. LIST OF DELIVERABLES. 
No. Deliverable name WP  Responsible Type  Level Date 
D1.1 Monitoring system design and characterization model 
development  1 IRIS R CO M18 
D1.2 Robotic solution for material sorting 1 ROVIMATICA R CO M16 
D1.3 Integrated sorting solution proof-of-concept report 1 IRIS R CO M28 
D2.1 Depolymerization of polyesters for rigid multi-layer packaging 
delamination 2 IONIQA R CO M32 
D2.2 Delamination process development for non-metalized multi-layer 
films 2 ITENE R CO M32 
D2.3 Solvent-based delamination process development for metalized 
flexible packaging  2 UNIBO R CO M32 
D3.1 Repolymerization of PET monomers from rigid multi-layer 
packaging delamination 3 INDORAMA R CO M32 
D3.2 Development of formulations for the recovery of POs and PET for 
flexible packaging applications 3 CEA R CO M32 
D3.3 Development of formulations for the recovery of POs for rigid 
packaging applications 3 CEA R CO M32 
D4.1 Manufacturing of rigid packaging demonstrators: polyolefin cups, 
PET bottles and multi-layer trays 4 ITC R CO M34 
D4.2 Production of flexible packaging demonstrators 4 IM2 R CO M34 
D4.3 Risk assessment and food contact compliance with the different 
demonstrators produced 4 ITENE R CO M36 
D4.4 Evaluation of the circularity of the materials developed 4 ITENE R CO M36 
D5.1 Preliminary LCA report with baseline scenario and final report. 5 PARTICULA R PU M20, 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
60 
No. Deliverable name WP  Responsible Type  Level Date 
Environmental recommendation resulting from LCA analysis updated 
in M34 
D5.2 
Preliminary LCC report (economic study) with baseline scenario 
and final report. Economic recommendation resulting from LCC 
analysis 
5 PARTICULA R PU 
D5.3 Preliminary S-LCA report (social study) with baseline scenario and 
final report. Social recommendation resulting from S-LCA analysis. 5 PARTICULA R PU M20, 
updated 
in M34 D5.4 Preliminary Safety study report with baseline scenario and final 
report, including Safety by Process Design (SPD)  5 ITENE R PU 
D5.5 Policy recommendations toolbox for policymakers 5 EuPC R PU M30 
D5.6 Regulatory report to foster standardization frameworks 5 EuPC R PU M30 
D6.1 Stakeholder engagement plan 6 CSCP R PU M10 
D6.2 Guidelines on increasing the recyclability and circularity of plastic 
packaging: Learnings from collected good practices. 6 CSCP R PU M32 
D6.3 Decision Support System for multi-layer packaging recycling 6 IRIS R/DEM PU M30 
D6.4 Development and Integration of the QR code into the Merlin 
project packaging 6 ITENE DEM  M34 
D7.1 Communication Plan 7 ENCO R PU M06 
D7.2 Preliminary Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of the 
project results (PEDR) 7 ENCO R CO M12 
D7.3 Final Plan for the Exploitation and Dissemination of the project 
results (PEDR) 7 ENCO R CO M36 
D7.4 Business Planning and Replicability Action  7 ENCO R CO M36 
D8.1 Governance structure, communication flow and methods  8 ITENE R CO M03 
D8.2 Management and Technical Reports, updated each 6 months 8 ITENE R CI M6,M36 
D8.3 Risk assessment and contingency and mitigation plans  8 ITENE R CO M18, M36 
D8.4 Data management plan (initial, final) 8 ITENE R CI M06, M36
3.2 Management structure, milestones, and procedures  
3.2.1 Project Management Structure  
The management structure of MERLIN (Figure 17) is designed to achieve a clear definition of roles of each 
consortium member and to facilitate internal communication, monitoring of progress and an efficient use of 
project resources. This s tructure involves The Project Coordinator  (PC), the technical manager (TM), the General 
Assembly, the executive board, the innovation committee, The Advisory Board, and The Work Package Leaders 
and Task leaders. 
 
FIGURE 17. PROJECT MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
61 
PROJECT COORDINATOR (PC). The PC will chair the meetings of the General Assembly. He will be responsible for 
the day to day running of the project, and for ensuring that the work programme adheres to its schedule, fulfils its 
objectives, and that the project meets the needs and expectations of all the partners. He will manage the project 
in accordance with the description of action, consortium agreement and the project budget. He must identify any 
potential risks in the implementation of the project and putting in place immediate solutions in consultation with 
the relevant  project management body. The PC must also  ensure that the procedures put in place for overall 
quality assurance are optimal and complied with by project partners. PC will be supported by the  scientific and 
technical leader and, together with the Steering Committee, directly coordinate the work of  all Work Packages 
leaders. The PC must have a general overview of the entire project and be able to ensure compliance by all 
partners to project plans and agreements. The PC will be assisted in day -to-day management by a Management 
Support Team (formed by  colleagues from the same institution).  This Team will prepare and distribute the 
agenda and minutes of meetings of the various management bodies and will collate and transmit all reports 
required for delivery to the Commission. 
Mr. César Aliaga (ITENE) has been appointed to this position. Cesar is the Head of the Sustainability Department 
of ITENE. His main duties matches the skills needed to act as PC : (1) Direction of R&D project on packaging and 
sustainability, (2) Definition of the lines of research of the department, (3) Definition of the strategy in Circular 
Economy, (4) Development of new R&D projects on Circular Economy with companies, (5) Coordination of the 
European project PLASTICIRCLE (€7,7M; 20 partners), (6) Coordination of the Euro pean project SCALIBUR (€12M; 
21 partners), (7) Leader of the Advanced Leadership Foundation in Circular Economy and (8) Member of the 
Standardization technical Committee 323 of Circular Economy of UNE. 
The Management support team will be led by Ms. Rebeca Aguado (ITENE) with years of experience in H2020 
projects regarding financial, administrative aspects and a having in these projects a direct relationship with the 
financial project officers.  
General Assembly (GA). The GA is made up of one representative from each consortium member and represents 
the highest decision-making body of the Consortium. The GA  will decide and approve all matters of policy or any 
action that may have a substantive impact on the implementation of the project. The roles and procedu res of the 
GA are: 
- To meet once a year to receive and review project reports and approve major decisions made by the EB and 
PC. It may also meet in extraordinary sessions if needed. 
- Meetings of the GA will be convened by the appointed Chairperson, who will  take and distribute minutes of 
the meeting. Proceedings of the GA will also be included in progress reports to the Commission. 
- Meetings will be chaired by the Chairperson appointed by consensus or a vote, if required. The Chairperson 
will be assisted by a Vice Chairperson, who will also be appointed by the GA. 
- A majority of members attending is required to form a quorum. However, three -quarters (10 out of 14) of 
the membership (including voting by correspondence) will be required for a decision to be binding. 
- Key decisions of the GA will be endorsed and approved, as far as possible, by consensus or, if necessary, by a 
vote. Each attending participating member will have one vote. Should there be a tie in the votes, the 
Chairperson will cast a deciding vote, although each member has the right to submit an alternative position 
or in the case of a grievance to seek redress through procedures laid down in the Consortium Agreement 
(CA). 
Executive Board (EB). The EB will be the main functional body of the consortiu m and will oversee and control all 
aspects of the project’s implementation, including quality control of project outputs and dealing with critical risks 
at system and strategic levels. It will be composed of a scientific/technical representative from each consortium 
member and chaired by the scientific and technical manager (STM). The roles and procedures of the EB are the 
following: 
• Reviewing the progress made by each of the work packages and agreeing on the action plans for the next 
period. It will also receive and review the reports from the PC and the Innovation Manager. 
• The Committee will meet every three months. Meetings can take the form of video conferencing or other 
forms of electronic meeting although one physical meeting must be held at least every six months. Some of 
the physical meetings will be timed to coincide with General Assembly meetings to reduce travel time and 
costs. 
• All EB decisions will be made as far as possible by consensus or, if necessary, by a simple majority vote. Voting 
by proxy or by correspondence will be accepted. The PC will have the casting vote in the event of a tie in 
votes. A quorum of half of the EB members will be required for a decision to be binding. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
62 
• Minutes will be taken by the Coordinator’s management team and distributed to all partners, including those 
who are not members of the Committee. 
Mr. Jose L. Dieguez García (ITENE) has been appointed to scientific and technical leader. He has experience in the 
development of processes within the chemical and petrochemical industry, participating in process development 
projects from laboratory scale to pilot plant, performing basic research, optimizati on, simulation, and process 
scaling tasks. Further, he has expertise in Project Management and execution in different areas of industry, 
specifically, he has focused in the development of processes in the area of waste management and recycling, 
leading the development of advanced processes and technologies for plastic packaging recycling. 
Innovation Committee (IC)  
The Innovation Committee (IC) is responsible for identifying and managing innovation from the project. A key goal 
will be to ensure that the project results are effectively protected and exploited to the full for future industrial 
growth and competitiveness. The IC consists of a qualified representative from each beneficiary.  
The IC assumes the important role of Innovation Management in the project, and as such will manage the 
implementation of the innovation cycle, and the feedback linkages to the develop ment work. It will evaluate the 
knowledge as it is generated in line with its market impacts. It will also ensure that the project results are 
effectively protected and exploited to the full for future industrial growth and competitiveness. Key strategic 
issues, such as IPR protection mechanisms, IPR sharing and routes to exploitation will be discussed extensively 
during the IC meetings. The IC will also ensure that Business and Exploitation Plans are further developed based 
on the draft in Section 2.2.  
Innovation Manager (IM). The IM will ensure that the project results are protected and shared equitably to 
participants in terms of access. The IM will be guided by a jointly agreed Plan for Dissemination and Exploitation, 
which will be drawn up by the Consortium. The IM will also be guided by the procedures established in both the 
Grant Agreement and the Consortium Agreement for Background and Fore ground as well as access rights for 
third parties and the IPR strategy. The IM will help drive (and manage) innovation within the project via a 
“commercial pull”, in liaison with the members of the Advisory Board. The IM will also be responsible for relaying 
user feedback to the consortium to improve the user interface and user experience.  
The IM will be supported by the social responsible manager, ensuring that the project follow a RRI approach  and 
having key responsibility in the tasks regarding stakehol der engagement. IM will also act as will also act as 
Communication & Dissemination Manager. 
MS Simona Mincione (ENCO) has been appointed to this position. She will provide advice without any risk of 
conflict of interests. She has years of experience in communication, dissemination, legal aspects, compliance and 
IPR and unprotected innovation strategy. 
Ms. Rosa Strube (CSCP) has been appointed as social responsible manager due to her expertise lies in the field of 
sustainable consumption and lifestyles, behaviour change, policy instruments for sustainable consumption and 
production 
Work Package Leaders (WP Leaders). The WP leaders are experts in the relevant subject areas of the project and 
will form the cornerstones on which the implementation of project tasks will revolve. WP Leaders will ensure that 
the project implementation is b ased on agreed work plans and that Milestones are achieved in accordance with 
the Description of Action (DOA). Any deviations from or major changes to the work plans in the DOA will require 
prior approval from the EB and, in some cases, the approval of the  EC Project Officer. WP Leaders will collect and 
collate contributions from various Task Managers and prepare reports to be presented at EB meetings. They will 
also undertake a detailed risk analysis of tasks in their WP and alert the Coordinator to any po tential risks and 
contingency plans for averting them. 
Within work packages, each partner institution will appoint a Task Manager for each task they are involved in. 
Task Managers will have direct responsibility for Deliverables under their Task, report to their respective WP 
Leaders and follow the plans proposed by them. They will also have to report and discuss any technical problems 
with the WP Leader to find appropriate solutions. 
There are eight WP leaders in this structure. Each WP  and task  leader has been chosen for their previous 
experience in their respective sectors.  
Advisory Board (AB). The AB will serve as a conduit for linkages with the bio-based industries. Members of the AB 
will be selected representatives from the target sector of  the project (packaging, recyclers, convertors, etc.). The 
AB will also include recognised experts that can advise on the scientific and technological aspects of the project to 
ensure that the results are of the highest scientific quality. Members of the A B will be identified during the Kick -
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
63 
off meeting and the AB will be form alized by M6 of the project and updated if required with new members each 
year. First candidates will be those that already have sign a letter of support (see annex). For now, MERLIN 
consortium has commonly agree that Mohammad HAYATIFAR, PhD, Secretary General from Chemical Recycling 
Europe will act as first member of the advisory board ( letter of commitment attached as an annex). AB will be 
formed by three additional members during the first year of the project. However, candidatures will be open each 
six months.  
It is foreseen that the AB will meet at the same time as the GA meetings are held, although it will retain 
continuous dialogue through videoconferencing and exchange  of correspondence. The AB will select its own 
Chairperson and meetings will be convened and recorded by the Coordinator. 
MERLIN will arrange clustering activities, during and after the project, with related projects and OITB, whose main 
representatives will be invited to be part of the AB.  
Appropriateness to the complexity and scale of the project  
This organizational structure and decision-making committees are considered appropriate for the management of 
MERLIN, in view of the size and geographic disparity of the consortium, as well as the research ambition and 
expected innovation impact of the pro ject results. In short, they will have the authority to make decision to 
ensure: 
1. Effective management of the day -to-day running of the project and its resources and appropriate interfacing 
with the EC (Project Coordinator);  
2. Strategic management of the project (General Assembly); 
3. Sound management of the overall research and development work and its potential risks (Executive Board);  
4. Coherent and timely management of the innovation cycle of the project towards success in market -oriented 
outputs (Innovation Committee).  
3.2.1 Management, monitoring, reporting and meetings.  
Specially relevant during COVID situation, MERLIN will use on -line Project Management Tools that facilitate 
project planning, monitoring, and information collection and reporting , thus, ensuring that project information is 
always up-to-date, and can be reported in a timely and consistent manner.  The respective tools will also feed the 
Periodic Reporting to the EC. Project information flow will be channelled through: (i) mainstream electronic 
communication (e.g. emails, phone, Skype, internal web-site, etc.); (ii) bi-annually scheduled, and if necessary, ad-
hoc GA meetings; (iii) ad -hoc virtual or physical technical meetings; (iv) internal semester progress reporting 
(from partners to PC); (iv) project co -creation workshops and events; and (v) preparation context for the official 
reporting to the EC 
Consortium meetings: Six consortium meetings are scheduled every six months. These meetings will constitute 
major milestones for planning, exchanging information among partners, assessing project progress and success 
(financial and technical) and for taking majo r decisions about project execution. (A) 1st Kick -off Meeting (M1): to 
detail project planning, work allocation and initiate project activities, (B) 2 nd – 5th Meeting (every six months): 
progress review and planning for next period, (C) Final ( 6th) Meeting (close to the end of the project). 
Preparations for the final event and project review. For reasons of cost -efficiency, consortium meetings will 
coincide, when possible, with the project planned events (workshops, stakeholder events, info days, e tc.) or 
review meetings. Minutes of all meetings will be kept and circulated to all partners, followed by Action Lists. The 
Partners will have a week upon receipt of the minutes to comment on them, otherwise they will be considered as 
approved.  
Financial management and procedures : The  Financial Tools used on the project will comprise a set of linked 
spreadsheets which present only the essential information for partner and Coordinator inputs, specifically to 
reduce the financial administrative complexity fo r all project members. The primary financial information will be 
extracted from the agreed EC contract following successful contact negotiations. Periodic entries are essential, 
and Project Manager will ensure that (a) annually, the personnel costs and ove rheads must be updated and (b) 
monthly the partners must enter their hours and expenses on a simple form. Apart from that, ICT tools will be the 
day-to-day mechanisms for project communication, either internally or externally. These tools include electroni c 
facilities such as email distribution lists, a collaborative weblog, a wiki site for transparent cooperation and a 
documentation management system for version tracking of documents and updates by project participants. 
Public Reports and selected Technical Reports will be made available on the project site. 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
64 
TABLE 20. LIST OF MEETINGS. 
MEETING WHEN WHO WHAT 
Project Kick -
off 
Project start -
up(face-to-face) 
All project 
representatives 
To discuss the work plan, the structure of the project organization, the 
flows of information and to promote creativity and cooperation 
WP Meetings Three-monthly 
(telecom) WPLs, TLs, STM To focus the work within the WP. Minutes will be recorded by the TC and 
distributed to all participants. 
General 
Assembly 
(GA) 
Six-monthly 
(face-to-face) 
PC, STM, all 
project 
representatives 
To control the whole project commitment to the final objectives, costs and 
deadlines. Review of achieved and up -coming milestones and risk 
elements. Minutes will be distributed to all participants. 
Scientific & 
Technical  
Six-monthly 
(face-to-face) 
STM, WPLs, and 
additional staff if 
necessary 
To coordinate and monitor the work of the different WPs, discussing the 
project work progress and coordination, outstanding actions and ad-hoc 
issues. Minutes will be distributed to all participants. 
IPR & 
Exploitation 
Six-monthly 
(face-to-face) 
IM, project 
representatives 
To coordinate and control the exploitation, dissemination and 
communication activities. Implementing Business cases & plans. Minutes 
will be distributed. 
3.2.2 Milestones and procedures for monitoring progress status 
A list of important milestones has been identified to implement MERLIN and these will be monitored by the 
corresponding WP leaders and project coordinator. Milestone assessment will be reviewed on the date they are 
reached, and a report will be issued. Should a milestone not be reached on the expected date, the impact of this 
milestone in the WP and on the course of MERLIN will be assessed. All these issues will be reviewed by the EB 
and will subsequently be reported to the GA. 
TABLE 21. LIST OF MILESTONES. 
Miles.  Milestone name Related date Means of verification 
MS1 Characterization of industrial multi -
layer material streams WP1 M04 
At least 2 preselected streams are fully 
characterized, and WP1 -3 process designs can 
start. 
MS2 Automated sorting system prototype 
ready for industrial validation WP1 M22 
The automated sorting system passes the FAT 
tests and is ready to be validated at 
FERROVIAL’s facilities. 
MS3 Depolymerization process developed 
for rigid packaging delamination WP2 M17 
Process for delamination of multi-layer rigid 
packaging achieved in controlled environment 
at lab scale 
MS4 
Depolymerization process upscaled 
for rigid packaging delamination and 
production of material for WP3 
WP2 M24 
At least 80 kg of PET monomers obtained from 
the depolymerization of rigid multi -layer 
packaging in pilot facilities. 
MS5 
Delamination process for non -
metalized flexible packaging 
developed for material recover y at 
laboratory scale 
WP2 M12 
Definition of the HSP, best operational 
condition, and parameters optimization for the 
delamination non-metalized flexible multi-layer 
at lab scale. 
MS6 
Delamination process for non -
metalized flexible packaging 
developed for material recovery 
WP2 M18 
At least 2 5 kg of PET and P Os substrates 
recovered from the delamination of non -
metalized flexible multi-layer packaging in pilot 
facilities 
MS7 
Optimization of solvent -based 
protocol and quality of the 
recovered materials 
WP2 M16 
Completed analysis of the best operational 
condition and solvent for the recovery of 
substrates from metalized flexible multi -layer 
from delamination process 
MS8 
Solvent-based protocol for metalized 
multi-layer film optimized and 
upscaled for material recovery 
WP2 M26 
At least 20 kg of PET, POs , and no oxi dised Al 
substrates recovered from the solvent-based 
delamination of metalized flexible multi-layer 
MS9 
Repolymerization process developed 
for monomers from a rigid packaging 
delamination process 
WP3 M25 Report and samples produced 
MS10 
Optimized reactive extrusion process 
for Maleic Anhydride grafting  for 
packaging applications 
WP3 M24 
Definition of the best operational condition s to 
be used for the grafting of maleic anhydride on 
PE for multi-layer packaging application 
MS11 
Optimized biosourcing fillers 
treatment for improving 
compatibility in recovered 
polyolefins (PE, PP) for rigid 
packaging applications 
WP3 M24 
Definition of the best operational condition s to 
improve the compatibility of the fillers with the 
recovered POs for rigid packaging applications 
MS12 First batch of rigid packaging 
demonstrators WP4 M29 First samples produced 
MS13 First batch of flexible packaging 
demonstrators WP4 M29 First samples produced 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
65 
Miles.  Milestone name Related date Means of verification 
MS14 Circularity assessment  of MERLIN 
processes WP4 M30 
Report and samples produced from 
delamination, 
depolymerization/repolymerization, upcycling 
and demonstrators 
MS15 Regulations, safety, and 
environmental analysis completed WP5 M34 Final evaluation report published 
MS16 Interaction with at least 2 
standardization organizations  WP5 M24, 
M34 
Inputs and feedback from 2 standardization 
organization about MERLIN s processes 
development 
MS17 Validation of evaluation 
methodology of the good practices WP6 M26 Report with the conclusion of the feedback 
recieved 
MS18 
Good Practices and DSS ranked with 
positive feedback by at least 50 
stakeholders 
WP6 M34 
The list of good practices and the DSS digital 
tool are available for the stakeholders to test 
and provide feedback. 
MS19 Successful exploitation & business 
planning WP7 M36 
Final Joint Ownership Agreements and 
business plan including a roadmap for 
commercialization of project KERs. D7.2, D.7.3, 
and D7.4 achieved and continuous reporting 
on participant portal. 
MS20 Kick-off meeting  WP8 M01 Meeting minutes approved by partners 
3.2.3 Critical risks for implementation and risk management  
As part of the project management, risks assessment is an essential task. Therefore, it will be part of the internal 
reports and will be discussed in all meetings to analyse the potential risks and to manage them. MERLIN will 
use the following strategies to mitigate these possible risks: 
TABLE 22. CRITICAL RISKS FOR IMPLEMENTATION. 
Description of risk (indicate level 
of likelihood: Low/Medium/High) WP Proposed risk mitigation measures 
Variability of the real flows is not fully 
represented in the pre -selected multi -layer 
material samples.  
(Probability: Medium/Impact: Medium) 
WP1 
The inherent flexibility of the solutions proposed for material 
modelling, including chemometrics and machine learning approaches, 
as well as the adaptability of the robotic manipulator will facilitate 
adaptations during the validation period of T1.5 , which  duration 
overcome possible divergences during the industrial validation. 
Feeding condition under laboratory setups 
significantly differs from industrial flows 
(Probability: Medium/Impact: Medium) 
WP1 
Selection and adapt ation of  the lab scale feeder to the actual 
industrial flow overlaps and flux of material. Specific physical barriers 
will be designed and included if the material distribution on the 
conveyor is not considered be suitable for the proper sorting. 
Application of a  by-pass configuration limits 
the validation results’ representativeness 
(Probability: Medium/Impact: Medium) 
WP1 
The by -pass configuration will be tested under different operating 
conditions, aiming to improve performance during the validation 
periods to maximize the representativeness of the results obtained 
for actual industrial integration.  
Residues of solvents (SHS or BLS) 
contaminating impurities ( polymer, Al . 
adhesives, inks or any other internal layer) 
(Probability: Medium / Impact: Medium) 
WP2 
Modification and adaptation of post -treatment of the recovered 
polymers, implementing more treatment steps with solvents and/or 
surfactants, and temperature to remove the impurities. 
Low efficiency on multi-layer film separation 
(Probability: Medium / Impact: Medium) WP2 Recalculation of HSP in order to readjust the operating conditions in 
the reactor (temperature, pressure and solvent combinations). 
Low Purity, low quality and /or high quantity 
of other recovered materials (PE, PET) from 
WP2 
(Probability: Low; Impact: Medium) 
WP3 
Re-evaluation of the delamination processes (WP2),  development of 
the recycling process with the low purity /quality materials, and/or 
adjustment of the recycling protocol at the end of the project when 
the purity achieved will be optimum. 
Unsuccessful repolymerization trial and 
depletion/consumption of PET monomers 
(Probability: Low/ Impact: Medium) 
WP3 Inclusion of back -up quantity of PET monomers that need to be 
produced (WP2). 
Poor performance (mechanical, barrier, 
sealing) and/or poor processability (e.g., 
inadequate MFI) than expected of the 
recycled materials or packaging 
demonstrators for the target applications 
(Probability: Medium/ Impact: Medium) 
WP3 
WP4 
Selection of alternative approaches such as optimization/re-
evaluation of the delamination processes  (WP2), re-evaluation of the 
additives and routes used  (WP3), the incorporation of a certain 
amount of virgin materials or additional layers (suitable for MERLIN 
depolymerization processes ) (WP4), and/or proposal of alternative 
packaging applications. 
Packaging demonstrators not suitable for 
food contact application (e.g., rest of WP4 Evaluation of alternative packaging applications or the incorporation 
of functional barriers , and/or the use of  alternative solvents for the 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
66 
Description of risk (indicate level 
of likelihood: Low/Medium/High) WP Proposed risk mitigation measures 
solvent from delamination processes) 
(Probability: Medium /Impact: High) 
delamination processes (WP2). 
Lack of data from the partners  
(Probability: Low/ Impact: Medium) WP5 
A bibliographic search will be conducted in order to obtain the 
missing data (scientific papers/reports with similar processes) and 
carry out a proper environmental and safety assessment. 
The price of some inputs/outputs are not 
found (Probability: Low / Impact: Low) WP5 An estimate based on data from other countries will be made so as 
not to strongly influence the results. 
Barriers for the uptake of the generated 
good practices in terms of social acceptance  
(Probability: Low / Impact: Low) 
WP6 
Stakeholders will be supported by a transparent and open 
stakeholder engagement process in the early identification of 
barriers. Co -creation of the collaborative activities within the CEIEC 
will assist in overcoming potential implementation problems.  
Lack of interest in the workshops and 
supporting tools  
(Probability: Low / Impact: low) 
WP6
WP7 
Thorough redefinition of the target sectors to be approached and the 
message to be conveyed. Employing behaviour change methods will 
help mitigate this risk. 
Market acceptance  
(Probability: Low / Impact: High)  WP7 
Market analysis performed on defining the main drivers that will be 
leveraged to increase the likelihood of company and consumer 
acceptance. Complementary dissemination and communication 
activities will be tailored to maximize acceptance. (WP7). 
Confrontation among partners over IPR 
issues. (Probability: Low / Impact: High) WP7 IPR rules will be implemented at project stage . Before that,  all the 
partners will have signed the Consortium Agreement addressing IPR. 
Poor WP operation and communication 
leading to delayed/failed objectives 
(Probability: Low / Impact: Low) 
WP8 
Regular meetings will be held to enhance sound communications 
tools and development of a tracking process among partners. 
Preparation of implementation plans for the WPs will be carried out. 
Should this not prove successful, the project management 
procedures will be re-assessed. 
Partners with unique know -how or roles 
within the project leave or under -perform. 
(Probability: Low / Impact: Medium-High) 
WP8 
Seek early EB decisions to re -allocate internal/external partners or 
invite external entities through official search tools. The Consortium 
Agreement will describe the terms and conditions required to accept 
a new partner in the consortium and its role in the project.
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
Bringing together public and private organisations across Europe and involving cooperation among actors in the 
multi-layer plastic packaging waste supply chain, from producer to final consumer, and from research to policy 
makers is key for the interdisciplinary approach needed for Circular Economy based project. The MERLIN 
consortium involves all these actors, which is a key factor to meet the projec t’s objectives and its subsequent 
implementation at EU level. Thus, a consortium formed by 14 partners including industries, service providers 
research institutes and an European association , with significant policy outreach capacity , representing seven EU 
states has been created (Spain, Germany, Italy, Belgium, The Netherlands, France, and Croatia). See Figure 18.  
 
FIGURE 18. MERLIN CONSORTIUM. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
67 
The MERLIN project has put together a partnership formed by 2 RTDs, 1 University, 7 SMEs, 3 LE  and one EU 
association. Each participant brings specific infrastructure, technologies, and skills (including humanities) required 
for optimal execution of the project  as a whole.  ITENE has been chosen as the coordinator due to its experience 
as a participant and coordinator of more than 80 European projects. 
SORTING SECTOR. IRIS and ROVIMATICA  are two Spanish SMEs offering innovative solutions for waste 
monitoring (mainly based on XRF and NIR/SWIR -HIS) and sorting (A.I. and robotics), respectively .  Being an ICT 
expert, IRIS will be also working in the development of a DSS to support the technology transfer to industry. These 
activities will be supervised by FERROVIAL, a Spanish waste management company, demonstrat ing that these 
solutions are facing industry demands and demonstrating its adequacy in a real waste treatment plant.  
These three partners are in the same country (Spain) to facilitate the logistics needed to carry out the actions.  
DELAMINATION AND RECYCLING  SECTOR. One clean -tech SME, one LE , two research institutes and one 
university will be working in the delamination and recycling processes, as explained next.  
IONIQA and INDORAMA are two key industrial players on chemistry. IONIQA is a clean-tech company, specialized 
in creating value out  of PET waste by using its proprietary circular technology.  They will be working on PET 
polymerization. Meanwhile, INDORAMA is world-class chemicals large company with a global integrated leader in 
PET. Thus, they will be working on PET repolymerization. Both companies have previously collaborated and are 
located in the same country (The Netherlands) in order to minimize the flow of materials among countries.   
ITENE, UNIBO and CEA  are three highly experienced research institut es/university in the field of  recycling 
technologies. ITENE and UNIBO will offer its large infrastructure for delamination processes.  ITENE will be using 
solvents in supercritical conditions  and UNIBO will work with  mild conditions for the separation of Al from 
polymeric fractions. CEA will offer its research infrastructure for compounding and reactive extrusion in twin -
screw extruders. 
Moreover, ITENE , as k ey player in the packaging sector, will be working on safety aspects regarding food 
contact/migrations and safety by process design. Moreover, ITENE will support the packaging industrial partners 
as explained next.  
PACKAGING SECTOR. ITC and IM2 are two industrial key players on packaging manufacturing. ITC works with rigid 
packaging, meanwhile IM2 is specialized on flexible ones. In order to reach a bigger amount of industry at EU 
level, EuPC is an pan European association  with significant polic y outreach capacity  that will facilitate access of 
the project results to its associates in the field of packaging convertors, as well as working on policies and 
standardization 
SERVICE PROVIDERS ON INNOVATION. Three additional SMEs will contribute to exchange the innovation capacity 
of the project . PARTICULA will ensure the sustainability of the project through LCA analysis. CSCP will offer its 
extensive and demonstrated knowledge on stakeholder engagement and development of good practices. Finally, 
ENCO will lead the exploitation, dissemination, and communication plan.  
Other relevant aspects considered when forming MERLIN consortium are the following: 
As a condition to generate growth, this is an industry-oriented project. 78% of the partners in MERLIN come from 
the private sector within the  packaging plastic value chain . The industry participants have been instrumental in 
helping to shape this proposal, and MERLIN is considered a highly strategic for assisting them in gaining a 
competitive edge and in being a pioneering group in driving forward Circular Economy. Each industry participant 
will grow their businesses and improve their competitiveness in line with their position on the value chain. 
The consortium will draw on the voluntary and objective advice, expertise , and support of External Advisory 
Board, in order to complement the consortium’s industrial and technical insight in relevant fields.  
Finally, in rela tion to the gender dimension of our consortium , our team of researchers, technologists, 
industrialists, business experts, and policy influencers has a good participation of females  (50% of the consortium 
members are females) . A number of the key management  and decision -making positions within the project 
organisational structure have been assigned to highly qualified women and most of the work packages will be led 
by women; who cover all relevant technical areas needed in MERLIN (Detailed information can be found in the 
description of each partner in sec tion 4). Some example of female are listed next : MS Simona Mincione (IPR & 
Exploitation Manager) supported by Ms. Rosa Strube (RRI approach), Rebeca Aguado (financial manager), Simona 
Neri and Elisabet Gonzalez (sorting and robotic sector, frequently predominated by men ); Chiara Ascione, Grazia 
Maria Mensitieri ; Silvia Oliver ; Rosa Valero , María Jordá (Packaging sector); Simone Maccaferri , Paola Galletti , 
Chiara Samorì , Marianne Gravendeel (delamination and recycling technologies);  Cristina Fedato, Dimitra 
Ioannidou, Maria Estela Izquierdo (social innovation, policies, regulation).  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
68
3.4 Resources to be committed 
TABLE 23. MERLIN BUDGET. 
WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 Total
Person-months per WP 104 126 55 54 67 92 73 47 616
Personnel costs 431.000 555.239 371.150 239.358 308.263 520.052 351.087 216.327 2.992.476
Travel costs 0 0 0 0 5.000 0 54.250 138.300 197.550
Equipment (amortisation only)17.500 28.258 81.747 0 0 0 0 0 127.505
Consumables 44.800 0 0 10.000 9.000 0 2.000 0 65.800
Other direct costs 136.600 228.000 17.600 5.500 3.000 25.000 51.500 10.450 477.650
Subcontracting 10.000 60.000 20.000 0 0 10.000 0 0 100.000
Total direct costs 639.900 871.498 490.496 254.858 325.263 555.052 458.837 365.077 3.960.981
Indirect costs 157.475 202.874 117.624 63.715 81.316 136.263 114.709 91.269 965.245
Total budget 797.375 1.074.372 608.121 318.573 406.578 691.315 573.546 456.346 4.926.225
Requested EC funding 797.375 1.074.372 608.121 318.573 406.578 691.315 573.546 456.346 4.926.225
% WP BUDGET 16,19% 21,81% 12,34% 6,47% 8,25% 14,03% 11,64% 9,26%
 
The MERLIN project is distributed in eight work packages with a total budget of 
€4.926.225. There are no major differences in resources between WPS. 
Although WP1 and specially WP2 are a bit higher in terms of PMs and other 
costs. WP1 includes consumables and prototyp es for the sorting plant. 
Meanwhile WP2 requires greater efforts since it include three different 
delamination processes at industrial and lab scenario with a higher amount of 
other direct costs (€230 k). Moreover, WP2 includes minor participation of main 
entities responsible for processes in WP3 and WP4 to obtain feedback from 
these processes. The leadership of these work packages has been agreed by the 
consortium according to the degree of expertise and nature of the tasks. WP1 -
IRIS; WP2 -ITENE; WP3 -INDORAMA, WP4 -ITC; WP5 -PARTICULA; WP6 CSCP, 
WP7-ENCO, WP8-ITENE. 
In relation to the project budget, it has been built using a bottom -up 
methodology, whereby it is based on actual costs for staff, equipment 
depreciation and other goods and services. There is a logical budget 
distribution among the partners according their role and cost of living 
of the country (see Figure 20). Each partner has mobilized the necessary 
staff/person months (Table 24) and infrastructure to get the job done in 
a competitive timeframe. A total of 6 15.5 person -months has been 
estimated for this 3-year project. Budget-wise, ITENE has the maximum 
number of person months as it is the coordinator of the project  (WP8), 
leads WP2 and leads other relevant tasks in other WPs regarding food 
safety (migrations), the development of flexible and rigid packaging 
prototypes at lab scale (WP4), safety by process design (WP5),  and will 
have a relevant effort in outreach campaign  special within the Spanish 
Multi-layer Packaging sector (WP6 -7). The packaging industry (ITC and IM2) have a lower amount of PM since 
they have a minor participation as validator of the material recovered during the project. ITC will act as WP leader 
(supported by ITENE) and will also develop an IML labelling (being its PMs a bit higher than IM2). 
EuPC will lead a task on policies and standardization and support the 
dissemination/communication campaign among its associated. Around 45% of its 
activity will be performed by its linked third party (100% subsidiary of EuPC) named 
Polymer Comply Europe (PCE) . As explained in section 4, €50,000  has been 
reallocated to this party, which represents 8 PMS). 
Minimal subcontracting costs (€ 100,000) have been budgeted for specific analysis 
and renting. T he consortium has the internal resources and knowledge to perform 
the main work. Detailed information of subcontracting is explained in sectio n 4 for 
partners: FERROVIAL, CEA, IONIQA and CSCP . The ‘Other direct cost’ items are 
provided in Table 25.  
Although the project is coordinated by an RTD, MERLIN is led by the private sector with 7 8% participation, with 
FIGURE 20. BUDGET ALLOCATION BY PARTNER. 
 FIGURE 19. BUDGET ALLOCATION BY WP. 
FIGURE 21. BUDGET ALLOCATION BY 
COST TYPE. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
69 
strong representation from the industrial and services sector. Most of the WPs are led by the private sector, 
which has a majority in the decision-making mechanisms. There is sufficient budget for mobility of developers and 
industrialists between sites which is important for knowledge exchange and building scientific excellence among 
multidisciplinary and international teams, as well as for practical on -site installation work and verification of the 
demonstrators. The SMEs and industry  partners occupy a sufficient portion of the budget, ensuring a practical 
research-industry partnership for highly competitive impact. There is also an appropriate budget allocated to 
communication, dissemination, training knowledge management and business planning activities for impact. 
TABLE 24.  SUMMARY OF STAFF EFFORTS. 
No. Participant Short 
Name 
WP1 WP2 WP3 WP4 WP5 WP6 WP7 WP8 Total 
PMs 
1 ITENE 5,0 40,0 5,0 21,0 14,0 10,0 9,0 22,0 126 
2 IRIS 37,0 0,0 0,0 1,0 1,0 14,0 2,0 2,0 57 
3 ROVIMATICA 43,0 0,0 0,0 1,0 1,0 4,0 3,0 2,0 54 
4 FERROVIAL 17,0 0,0 0,0 2,0 1,0 3,0 3,0 2,0 28 
5 UNIBO 0,0 38,0 0,0 1,0 2,0 4,0 3,0 2,0 50,0 
6 IONIQA 0,0 41,0 0,0 1,0 1,0 4,0 3,0 2,0 52 
7 INDORAMA 1,0 2,0 15,0 1,0 1,5 3,0 2,0 2,0 27,5 
8 CEA  0,0 2,0 31,0 1,0 1,0 3,0 2,0 2,0 42 
9 CSCP 0,5 0,5 0,5 0,5 2,5 33,0 3,0 2,0 42,5 
10 PARTICULA 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 30,0 1,0 2,0 2,0 35 
11 ITC 0,0 1,0 2,0 14,0 0,5 3,0 2,0 1,5 24 
12 IM2 0,0 1,0 1,0 10,5 0,5 1,5 2,0 1,5 18 
13 ENCO 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 6,0 34,0 2,0 42 
14 EuPC 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 11 2 3 1,5 17,5 
Total Person months 103,5 125,5 54,5 54 67 91,5 73 46,5 615,5 
TABLE 25. ‘OTHER DIRECT COST’ ITEMS. 
1. ITENE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  17,000 6 technical meeting 2 persons (12x1,000€) + 4 meetings for dissemination workshops, 1 person (4x1x1,000€) 
Other 
costs and 
services  
65,700 WP1: Lab consumables, reactants, vials, filters (1.6K). WP2: consumables; reactants and gases; vials, septums and 
filters. Sensor, controllers, and valves. Material/prototyping for scaling-up process (mechanical/electric components). 
(38K). WP3: Chemical and reactants, additives for plastic processing, filters (4.6K). WP4: Reactive and consumables for 
food safety and migration analysis (5.5K). WP5: Chemical and consumables for safety assessment (3K). WP7: 
Conference, publication fees, IPR costs (10,000 €), catering workshop for clustering (1k). WP8: SFS audit costs (3k) 
Total €82,700 
2. IRIS  Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  17,250 Travel costs to project meetings (7 meeting in 3 years with 2 person, average 750€ per meeting), travel cost for testing 
and commissioning of the monitoring system (3 trips with 2 person, average 750€ per trip). Travel costs for 3 
dissemination events (average 750€ per trip) 
Other 
costs and 
services 
88,000 WP1: Cost of components for monitoring system NIR HSI components (30k), XRF components (20k), cost of sorting 
prototype feeder, conveyor and control system (30k€). WP7: Cost of dissemination materials/events (5k). WP8: costs 
for financial audits (SFS costs, 3k). WP8: financial audits (3k) 
Total €105,250 
3. ROVIMAT Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  12,000 6 technical meeting 2 persons ,2 per year(6x2x1,750= 9k) + Travel costs for 3 dissemination events (average 750€ per 
trip) + national trips to FERROVIAL’s facilities (750€) 
Equipment  8,500 WP1: Depreciation of A.I. software 
Other  44,800 WP1: RGB Linear camera + linear light + power/control boards + cables + lens + materials for gripping + auxiliar 
structure + enclosure + protections + Manufacturing and assembling of the conveyor belt 
Total 65,300 
4. FERROV. Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  8,400 6 technical meeting 1 person ,2 per year(6x1k) + national trip (400) + 2 dissemination trips (2k) 
Equipment 9,000 WP1: air compressor (amortization)  
Other 
costs and 
services 
55,000 WP1: Integration of the detection and sorting prototype to FERROVIAL Mechanical waste treatment facility: safety 
enclosure for the robotic arm; conveyor, hoppers  and structure installation; installation of frames for the detection 
system; crane and hoist renting for equipment installation (50k) + Material transportation for partner's tests (5k) 
Total 72,400 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
70 
5. UNIBO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  12,000 Travel costs to project meetings (6 meeting in 3 years with 2 person, average 750€ per meeting). Travel costs for 4 
dissemination events (average 750€ per trip) 
Equipment  24,000 Wp2: autoclaves and apparatus for extraction  
Other  49,000 WP2: lab consumables, chemical compounds, gas and vials for analytical instrumentation, small glassware apparatus 
adaptation(36k). WP7-8: pen-access and publications, conference fees, project meeting costs  
Total 85,000 
6. IONIQA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  12,000 Travel costs to project meetings (6 meeting in 3 years with 2 person, average 750€ per meeting). Travel costs for 4 
dissemination events (average 750€ per trip) 
Other 
costs  
148,000 WP2: consumables (incl., analysis outsourcing, lab) and tasks and materials needed for the adaptation of equipment 
(prototyping) of depolymerization activities  
Total 160,000  
7. INDORA. Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  12,000 Travel costs to project meetings (6 meeting in 3 years with 2 person, average 750€ per meeting). Travel costs for 4 
dissemination events (average 750€ per trip) 
Equipment  20,000 WP3: Usage of pilot plant facility 
Other  20,000 WP2: Sourcing of PET trays, shipment costs, lab tests, cleaning and sorting tests (6k). WP3: laboratory chemicals (14k) 
Total 52,000  
8. CEA Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  10,500 6 projects meeting 1-2 person.  
LRI costs  67,069 WP2-3 Mechanical, rheological, microscopic, surface tension, characterization. CEA formally applied in 2014 for the 
large research infrastructure (LRI) scheme (GA Art 6.2.D.4). DTNM "Engineering" rate platform to meet its aims. 
Other  1,450 WP8: Audit cost 
Total 77,955  
12. IM2 Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  10,000 6 technical meeting 1 person ,2 per year(6x1k) + 4 dissemination trips (2k) 
Other  7,000 WP4: consumables for test validations (5k). WP7: dissemination costs (2k) 
Total 17,000 
13 ENCO Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  36,000 6 meetings (2 persons, 1200 € for each person/meeting). 9 events (2 persons, 1200 € each person)  
Other  25,000 WP7: Printing dissemination materials, Final event support services, Project website, graphic identity, SEO optimization 
TOTAL 61,000 
14 EuPC Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  14,000 project meetings (6 meetings, 2 persons, 9k). 4 dissemination events (3k). National trips (2k).  
Total 14,000 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
1  
Section 4: Members of the consortium 
 
 
 
Increasing the quality and rate of MultilayER packaging recycLINg waste 
 
List of participants 
 Short name Participant organisation name Role Country 
1 C ITENE Instituto tecnológico del embalaje, 
transporte y logística 
RTO - Recycling technologies SP 
2 IRIS IRIS technology solutions, sociedad 
limitada 
SME - Sorting and monitoring tech. SP 
3 ROVIMATICA Rovimatica SL Spain SME - Robotic solutions SP 
4 FERROVIAL Ferrovial Servicios SA LE - Waste treatment plant SP 
5 UNIBO Alma Mater Studiorum - Universita di 
Bologna 
HSE - Solvent based delamination IT 
6 IONIQA Ioniqa Technologies BV LE - Depolymerization NL 
7 INDORAMA Indorama Ventures Europe BV LE - Repolymerization NL 
8 CEA  Commissariat à l’énergie atomique et aux 
énergies alternatives 
RTO - Additivation, purification, 
upcycling  
FR 
9 CSCP Collaborating Centre on Sustainable 
Consumption and production GGMBH 
SME - Stakeholders engagement, 
awareness, good practices.  
DE 
10 PARTICULA Particula Group SME - Environmental, cost, social 
analysis 
HR 
11 ITC ITC packaging, S.L.U Spain LE - Rigid packaging manufacturer SP 
12 IM2 ICIMENDUE srl SME - Flexible packaging 
manufacturer 
IT 
13 ENCO ENCO SRL SME - Exploitation and dissemination IT 
14 EuPC European Plastics Converters Association - Policies, standardization BE 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
2  
4.1. Participants (applicants) 
Participant No 1 
 
Participant legal name Instituto Tecnológico del Embalaje, 
Transporte y Logística  
Short name ITENE 
Website www.itene.com  
Organisation type Non-profit RTO 
Country Spain 
Description of the legal entity 
ITENE is the specialist Technological Centre in R&D in packaging, logistics, transport and mobility. Its mission is to 
generate scientific and technological knowledge and adding value to companies through the implementation of 
R+D+I in these areas. ITENE provides business solutions with an integrated view of t he supply chain, from raw 
materials, design and development of packaging and packaging systems, optimisation of the movement and 
distribution of goods, until the products reach the consumer and are ultimately managed as residues, all within a 
framework of sustainable performance. The centre has advanced facilities and a multidisciplinary team of 
researchers and technicians with proven and constantly evolving technologies for novel solutions. 
ITENE was founded in 1994 and currently employs 153 persons. Located in Valencia, Spain, the centre has 
7,105m2 of facilities covering laboratories and experimentation infrastructures equipped with the most modern 
technology. 
ITENE research area covers: 
• Sustainability (Recycling technologies, Waste valorisation, environmental impact, Carbon Footprint) 
• New Advanced Materials (Development strategies to obtain new packaging materials with better 
properties) 
• Functional surfaces and Intelligent Packaging 
• Food safety and Active Packaging   
• Packaging Technologies (vacuum, modified atmosphere, etc.) 
• Packaging Engineering (Transport simulation technologies) 
• Transport and Logistics (route optimization, distribution modelling, urban mobility) 
• Electronics, Robotics and Industry 4.0 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Leadership of WP8 - Project 
management 
ITENE has participated in 39 projects from FP6 and FP7 and is involved in 2 8 
H2020 projects (most of them under execution). Being coordinator of 7 H2020, 
6 FP7 and technical manager of additional seven projects. 
Leadership of WP2  - 
Development of 
DELAMINATION processes of 
each multilayer structure 
sorted 
ITENE will lead the WP and the task regarding delamination using green 
solvents and supercritical CO 2. The sustainability department has relevant 
experience on chemical and mechanical processes to recycle postindustrial and 
post consume plastics  
Participation in WP3  - 
Development of RECYCLING 
processes of the separated 
fractions and monomers   
The New Advanced Materials of ITENE will support task leaders in activities 
regarding additives and formulation in plastics.  
Active participation in WP4 - 
Development and 
VALIDATION of packaging 
demonstrators based on 
recycled PET and Polyolefins 
(PE, PP) 
ITENE will support the leadership of the test cases regarding flexible and rigid 
packaging. ITENE has relevant experiences on technological transfer solutions 
working closely with industry form packaging sector. Our Food safety 
department has relevant experience on food Contact issues (participating in 
technical committees, both Spanish and European, related to Food Contact 
Materials Regulations). Moreover, will lead the task regarding circularity of the 
processes.  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
3  
Active participation in WP5 
Assessment of the 
environmental, economic, 
social, legislative and 
regulatory barriers of the 
developed processes 
ITENE will lead the health and safety impact of the project though a safety by 
process design analysis . the Nanosa fety research group participates of the 
most important network of scientists related to the evaluation of the risk 
posed by the use of emerging chemicals, including the European NanoSafety 
Cluster and the Communities of Research in Nanosafety (CoRs) workin g 
groups. 
Active participation in WP6 - 
Increasement of knowledge 
within stakeholders by means 
of Good Practices and 
learning experience 
ITENE will translate results of the delamination process into knowledge in order 
that CSCP can convert it into good practices. Moreover, will design and print a 
QR code in order to facilitate information of the recycling processes used in the 
manufacturing process to the consumers.  
Participation in WP7 - Cross-
cutting activities and 
Innovation impacts 
ITENE has years of experience working closely with industrial players regarding 
marketing and communication strategy. ITENE will lead the networking and 
clustering with ingoing projects.  
CVs of the team involved 
 
Jose L. Diéguez García ( male): Chemical Engineer (Higher Technical School of 
Engineering of Seville), Expert Degree in Renewable Energy and Energetic 
Efficiency (IMF Business School), and currently studying an International 
Master’s Degree in Engineering and Business of Oil&Gas (International 
University Isabel I). He has 4 years of experience in processes and engineering 
development in a pilot plant environment. He is currently working at ITENE as 
Project Manager as part of the Sustainability Department. He has participated in 
several projects regarding plastics recycling process development, from 
laboratory to pilot plant, and in Research and development of new and cost -
effective chemical and mechanical processes to recycle postindustrial and post 
consume plastics. 
 
Cesar Aliaga (male). Head of the Sustainability Department of ITENE (Packaging, 
Transport and Logistics Research Centre). Main tasks: (1) Direction of R&D 
project on packaging and sustainability, (2) Definition of the lines of research of 
the department, (3) Def inition of the strategy in Circular Economy, (4) 
Development of new R&D projects on Circular Economy with companies, (5) 
Coordination of the European project PLASTICIRCLE (€7,7M; 20 partners), (6) 
Coordination of the European project SCALIBUR (€12M; 21 partners), (7) Leader 
of the Advanced Leadership Foundation in Circular Economy and (8) Member of 
the Standardization technical Committee 323 of Circular Economy of UNE.  
 
Dr María Jordá (female) - Chemical Engineering by the “Universidad Politecnica 
de Val encia” (UPV). She is PhD in Materials Science by the University of 
Alicante. She is author of 4 articles and a patent. She has an experience of more 
than 10 years in the development and characterization of materials. Currently, 
she is working in the depart ment of new materials development as a project 
manager, dealing with the development of tailored additives and nanoparticles 
applied to packaging.  
 
Ms. Arantxa Ballesteros (F). MSc Degree in Environmental science and master’s 
degree in environmental Toxicology (UVEG), and Packaging Technologies 
(ITENE). Since 2016 has been involved as researcher in the Safety Division of 
ITENE, working in different I+D+i projects related with the hazard profiling of 
emerging con taminants and microorganism following in vitro and in silico 
approaches under different FP7, LIFE+ and national projects and has 
contributed to several international workshops and conferences with oral talks 
and posters. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
4  
 
Ms. Rebeca Aguado (female) has a degree on Business Management and 
Administration. She works as European Projects Manager (administrative and 
financial) for R&D Projects. Rebeca is in charge of the Coordination of European 
Funded Projects belonging to 7FP,  Horizon 2020 and LIFE projects and has 
relevant experience with management and follow -up of the administrative and 
financial side of the projects as well as a financial coordinator in projects like 
PLASTICIRCLE, SCALIBUR. She is familiar with projects fro m negotiation until 
final report process. Some of her taks are validation of partners eligibility, 
Consortium Agreements, management of amendments, financial Reports, etc. 
 
Fuencis Rausell (female) is Head of Corporate Communications at ITENE, where 
she oversees coordinating and implementing the communications strategy, 
including the dissemination of the European projects in which this research 
center takes part. She holds a Degree in Journ alism (2002-2007) and a two-year 
Master’s Degree in Strategic Communication (2013 -2015), as well as two 
graduate diplomas in International Relations and a higher programme in digital 
marketing. She worked in Chile as a correspondent for the Efe internation al 
news agency (2008-2013). In 2013, she joined the Public Information Unit at the 
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the leading 
United Nations organization in that region. After moving to Spain, in March 
2018 she joined ITENE´s Communications Department. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
1. Gallur et al,  "Nanostructured biodegradable thermoplastic blends based on poly (L -D-lactic acid) and a 
poly (L -lactic acid -b-Ɛ-caprolactone) diblock copolymer Macromolecular Rapid Communication 
submitted December 2015). 
2. Leon J., Aliaga C., Boulougouris G., Hortal M., M arti, J.L. (2014). Quantifying GHG emissions savings 
potential in magazine paper production: a case study on supercalendered and lightweight coated papers. 
Journal of Cleaner Production. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.03.008.  
3. Echeverria, Coro & Aragón-Gutiérrez, Alejandro & Fernández -García, Marta & Muñoz -Bonilla, 
Alexandra & López, Daniel . (2019). Thermoresponsive Poly (N -Isopropylacrylamide-co-
Dimethylaminoethyl Methacrylate) Microgel Aqueous Dispersions with Potential Antimicrobial 
Properties. Polymers. 11. 606. 10.3390/polym11040606.  
4. Dobon A., Cordero P., Kreft F., Østergaard S.R., Antvorskov H., Robertsson M., Smolander M., Hortal 
M. The sustainability of communicative packaging concepts in the food supply chain. A case study: part 
2. Life c ycle costing and sustainability assessment. International Journal of LCA. Volume 16, Number 6, 
537-547, DOI: 10.1007/s11367-011-0291-9. 
Patent: EP13382126 . Composition for the Preparation of a Nanostructured Biodegradable Polymeric. 
Material, the Material Obtained and its Applications. Inventors: Ana Guadalupe Galet Domingo, Maria Jorda 
Beneyto, Mercedes Hortal Ramos, Miriam Gallur Blanca, Natalia Ortuño, Susana Aucejo Romero.  
Relevant previous projects or activities  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website 
Funded 
by Title Start – 
End date 
862910 SEALIVE H2020 
BG-06  
Strategies of circular Economy and Advanced bio -
based solutions to keep our Lands and seas alive 
from plastics contamination. Coordinated by ITENE. 
2019-
2023 
887913 ENZYCLE H2020 
BBI 
Microbial ENZYmes for treatment of non -recyCLEd 
plastic fractions. Coordinated by ITENE. 
2020-
2024 
730292 PLASTICIRCLE 
http://plasticircle.eu 
H2020 
CIRC-01 
Improvement of the plastic packaging waste chain 
from a circular economy approach.  Coordinated by 
ITENE. 
2017- 
2021 
817788 SCALIBUR 
www.scalibur.eu/ 
H2020 
SFS-25 
Scalable technologies for bio -urban waste recovery. 
Coordinated by ITENE. 
2018-
2022 
730456 ECOBULK 
www.ecobulk.eu 
H2020 
CIRC-01 
Circular Process for Eco -Designed Bulky Products 
and Internal Car Parts.  
2017- 
2021 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
5  
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
ITENE uses 7,000 square metres of its installations as laboratories and experimentation facilities, equipped with 
the latest technology for research and testing, and product and services development. R&D activities are carried 
out in the following laboratories: Nano Additives and Nano Clay Pilot Plant, Nano Safety Laboratory, Chemical 
Laboratory, Packaging Manufacturing Pilot Plant, Packaging Pilot Plant, Microbiology Laboratory, Packaging 
Evaluation Laboratory, Transport Simulation Centre, RFID Pilot Plant, and Ink formulation laboratory. 
Main equipment to be used in the project are described next: 
1. Recycling laboratory:  
• High-pressure plant for s -CO2 and solvents applications, with 4,5 l/h cooled head membrane 
pump, and reaction system of 1 liter including a heating system to 150 ˚C and a recover system 
for solvents recovery and purification 
2. Processing laboratory:  
• Mini-extruder DSM Xplore (15 cm 3/batch), twin screw extruder Brabender DSE (up to 2 kg/h) 
and twin screw extruder Coperion ZsK ( 5-100 kg/h) for the upcycling of the recycled PET, PP and 
PE fractions 
• Mini-injector DSM and injection moulding machine Battenfeld will be used for the production of 
testing specimens 
• Cast co-extruder Dr. Collin consisting of 3 extruders and up to 5 layers  (35 kg/h per extruder) to 
produce the multilayer rigid structure from recycled materials  
• Thermoforming machine Formech to obtain the multilayer trays     
 
ITENE 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
6  
 
Participant No 2 
 
Participant legal name IRIS Technology Solutions S.L  
Short name IRIS 
Website www.iris-eng.com 
Organisation type SME 
Country Spain 
Description of the legal entity 
IRIS (www.iris -eng.com) is an advanced engineering company that was established in Barcelona in 2007 and 
specialises in the manufacture and integration of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) -based real -time quality 
monitoring solutions for the process industries and IoT systems for smart manufacturing, predominantly targeted 
at the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries. In particular, our product line comprises proprietary state -
of-the-art IR analysers for at-line and in-line process monitoring.  
On the one hand, our solutions are based on the latest developments in photonics -in the fields of MEMs Near 
Infrared Spectroscopy, Hyperspectral Imaging, and Raman. On the other hand, we leverage ICTs, whereby we 
apply Machine learning, Artificial Intellig ence and Data Mining techniques for predictive and active control, as 
well as for decision support systems. In addition to photonics -based analysers, we also work with IoT sensors for 
enabling equipment and machinery for smart manufacturing and transitioni ng industry to the Industry4.0 
paradigm. Our solutions are cloud-based for mobility, remote monitoring and multi-site applications.  
Our Innovation Division which is governed by an Innovation Committee comprising Senior Management, and an 
Innovation Unit f or managing and executing the companies innovation roadmap, has 3 core strategic lines, for 
shaping the Factory of the Future: 
1. New optical photonics-based technologies and PAT systems for production process optimisation 
2. ICTs (Artificial intelligence / machine learning, IOT & cloud platforms) 
3. Circular and Bio-based Economy: digitalization and waste valorisation 
In addition to running an internal R&D programme, as well as carrying our various joint private projects with 
industry partners, our Innovation Division is highly experienced in working in collaborative R&D projects in H2020 
(both as coordinators of >30 FP7 and H2020 projects and partners), and principally in the SPIRE, FoF, and BBI 
programmes. The company was established in 2007 and currently employs 60+ staff with a turnover of € 5 M. It is 
equipped with engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 
166002: Management Systems R&D&i. We are also certified by the local (Catalonian) government as a provider of 
technological R&D services (Tecnio Certification). IRIS is a member of the following sectorial networks: SPIRE, SPIE 
and SECPHO, in addition to r egional industrial collectives such as Smart Space (association of companies and 
organisations that specialise in the ‘smartification’ of industry). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
7  
  
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Leadership in WP1 - Automated 
SORTING system for multilayer 
materials sorting 
IRIS will lead WP1  dedicated to Automated sorting systems for multilayer 
materials being responsible of the design and development of monitoring 
solutions mainly based on XR F and NIR/SWIR-HSI (task 1.2). The above system 
will be then integrated in robotic solutions (task 1.4).  
Leadership in Task 6.3  – 
Decision Support System for 
Multilayer packaging recycling 
IRIS will be also in charge of the development of a DSS to assess input waste 
characterization and define the best separation and recycling strategy. 
Participation in WP7 - Cross-
cutting activities and Innovation 
impacts 
IRIS will actively participate to dissemination and communication activities 
involving the most important stakeholders that can contribute to the 
implementation of circular economy in the multilayer materials sector. IRIS will 
boost the uptake of the techn ologies developed in the project contributing to 
the exploitation strategy.  
Participation in WP8 - Project 
management 
IRIS will participate to the Project management activities, coordinating 
economical resources, personnel and providing the reports as fo reseen from 
the DOA. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
IGNACIO MONTERO CASTRO (M) is a Project and Innovation Manager at IRIS 
since 2018. Chemical  Engineer graduate from the University of Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain, and holds a Mast in Process Engineering from Polytechnic 
University of Catalonia, Spain. Ignacio comes from background in process 
control and industrial safety, developing applied research in self -optimizing 
control strategies for industrial facilities and environmental risk analysis for the 
Catalan department Industry. He spent almost three years on the Circular 
Economy unit of LEITAT Technological Centr e working as R&D engineer and 
Technical Project Manager. During this period, he was responsible  of 
management, execution and proposa l writing of Public Funded Research 
Projects under the different financial International, National and Regional 
schemes: H2020, CIEN, LIFE. Since joining IRIS, he has been providing business 
management services to support the award, coordination and implementation 
of EU funded projects on Applied Photonics, ICT & Digitalisation and Circular & 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
8  
Bio-economy sector. 
 
Dr. SIMONA NERI (F) , PhD in Supramolecular Chemistry from the University of 
Padua focused on gold nanoparticles used as sensors and bio -catalysts. Master 
degree in Organic Chemistry and Bachelor degree in “Packaging Science and 
Technology” from the University of Parma. After her job experiences as 
packaging technologist in Lind&Sprüngli, Procter&Gamble and GlaxoSmithKline 
Simona moved to the University of Padua as researcher in the field of 
nanotechnology and to VillaPharma Eurofins as synthetic chemist. In 2017 she 
moved to Barcelona as project manager in Fira Barcelona 
(LifeScience&Chemistry departmen t) coordinating the main stakeholders 
playing a role in the scientific tradeshows. After joining Iris, she has been 
involved in the management of European funded projects on biobased 
materials for packaging and healthcare and on waste valorization both as 
Partner and Coordinator. 
 
DIANA GALILEA (F) , Senior Programmer. Bachelor’s degree in Industrial  
Engineering with specialty in Industrial electronics from the Universidad of La  
Rioja. Her professional background comprises technical experience in the areas 
of embedded microcontrollers programming for wireless communications  
working with different range of sensors. Software expertise including Matlab,  
Visual Studio, Autocad, Protel DXP. Programming skills including C++, C#,.NET 
among others. Experience in developing software for chemometric  analysis, 
translating chemometric algorithms from researchers’ source code,  such as R 
or Matlab to C++ or C# in order to integrate it with a user interface  that carries 
out the analysis, and controls the system. She a lso has been  working in 
monitoring systems where information about sensors and actuators  are 
displayed on the user interface. 
 
DR. DAVID NETTLETON (M) , Senior data scientist. Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence 
from the Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In 
Computer Software and Systems Design from the University of Newcastle upon 
Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from t he University of 
Wolverhampton, U.K. Has over 20 years experience of applying data mining 
algorithms (including neural networks, rule induction) and statistical 
techniques (including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity 
of data analysis and modeling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, 
fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online user web search 
behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted 
research and lectured at two universities. H e has published a diversity of 
articles in specialized data analysis journals/congresses and three books. He 
has participated in several competitive multi-partner research projects and has 
a European patent application for a graph matching algorithm. His I T Industrial 
experience includes project management, consultancy, programming and 
analysis, database development and business startups. He has developed 
software with a diversity of programming languages, (including Java, C++ and 
COBOL/CICS/DB2), database systems (such as Oracle, Ingres, MySQL) and data 
mining systems (IBM Intelligent Miner, Clementine, Weka).  
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
9  
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
1. Sensing Technology. Chapter 6. Resource Efficiency of Processing Plants. Monitoring and Improvement.   
A. Rosales, O. Mc Nerney. Edited by Stefan Krämer and Sebastian Engell. Wiley -Vch. Print ISBN: 978 -3-
527-34074-3. 
2. Determination and Quantification of the Distribution of CN -NL Nanoparticles Encapsulating Glycyrrhetic 
Acid on Novel Textile Surfaces with Hyperspectral Imaging  Kudirat A. Obisesan, Simona Neri , Elodie 
Bugnicourt Inmaculada Campos y Laura Ro driguez-Turienzo J. Funct. Biomater.  2020, 11 (2), 
32; https://doi.org/10.3390/jfb11020032 - 20 May 2020. 
3. Taran Skjerdal, Andras Gefferth, Miroslav Spajic, Edurne Gaston Estanga , et al. , “The STARTEC Decision 
Support Tool for Better Tradeoffs between Food Safety, Quality, Nutrition, and Costs in Production of 
Advanced Ready-to-Eat Foods,” BioMed Research International, vol. 2017, Article ID 6353510, 13 pages, 
2017. doi:10.1155/2017/6353510. 
4. Towards Automatic Calibration of In-Line Machine Processes, 18th International Conference on Industrial 
Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, D.F. Nettleton, E. Bugnicourt, C. Wasiak, A. Rosales, 
London, UK, July 28-29, 2016. 
5. Conference ICIEMPM 2016: Towards Automatic Calibration of In -Line Machine Processes, 18th 
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Manufacturing Process Modeling, Nettleton, D.F. 
Bugnicourt, E., Wasiak, C., Rosales, A., London, United Kingdom, July 28-29, 2016.  
Patent:  
-DEVICE FOR DETECTING FOREIGN MATTER IN AN EDIBLE SUBSTANCE OR IN A CONTAINER CONTAINING THE 
EDIBLE SUBSTANCE AND METHOD EMPLOYING THE DEVICE, Application EP19382101, 14/02/2019, Alejandro 
Rosales, Adrián Manotas, Joan Puig. 
-AN INTEGRATED OPTICAL SYSTEM FOR THE EXAMINATION OF SAMPLE MATERIALS, EU Patent Application 
EP18198458, 03/10/2018, Rosales Alejandro, Kehoe Timothy, Garrick Meabh. 
Relevant previous projects or activities  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website 
Funded 
by Title 
Start – 
End 
date 
820695 
MULTICYCLE 
http://multicycle-
project.eu/ 
 
H2020-
NMBP-
SPIRE  
Advanced and sustainable recycling processes and 
value chains for plastic -based multi-materials. 
Development of HSI based solutions for detection 
of composition of multilayers materials. 
Development of a decision support tool for the 
definition of the best chemical recycling process. 
Coordinated by IRIS. 
2018-
2021 
821136 REMADYL 
 http://www.remadyl.eu/ 
H2020-
SC5 
Removal of Legacy Substances from 
polyvinylchloride (PVC) via a continuous and 
sustainable extrusion process Photonic solutions 
for detection of heavy metals and plasticizers in 
recycled PVS. 
2019-
2023 
818087 
 
ROSSINI 
https://www.rossini-
project.com/  
H2020 
CIRC-01 
RObot enhanced SenSing, INtelligence and 
actuation to Improve job quality in manufacturing. 
Integration of monitoring solutions into robotics 
for collaborative applications. 
2018- 
2022 
817788 SCALIBUR 
www.scalibur.eu/ 
H2020 
SFS-25 
Scalable technologies for bio -urban waste 
recovery. 
2018-
2022 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
10  
730456 ECOBULK 
www.ecobulk.eu  
H2020 
CIRC-01 
Circular Process for Eco -Designed Bulky Products 
and Internal Car Parts.  
2017- 
2021 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
IRIS has a matrix of multidisciplinary knowledge groups in the company with strong expertise in data science, 
biopolymers, chemometry, spectroscopy, among others. 
With its team and resources, including electronics engineers, mechatronics, mechanical, optical engineers, 
industrial design engineers, system engineering, application programming and web development etc. the group 
can carry out full system design and engineering, including electronic design (PCB) and assembly, firmw are and 
software development, electrical harnesses and interconnections, mechanical design for enclosure and prototype 
integration, as well as installation, validation and industrialisation of prototypes and equipment in food and 
pharma production plants. As such they have recently delivered advanced plastic sorting devices. In addition to 
this broad cross -disciplinary engineering team, IRIS’ research team consists of material scientists and physicists, 
among other, who have the expertise to validate the technologies developed. 
IRIS has significant expertise in the use of such co -creation methods as Quality Function Deployment (a very 
useful framework for translating often subjective client quality criteria into objective information ones that can be 
quantified and measured and subsequently used to design and manufacture the product), Kano (for prioritising 
the spoken and unspoken customer wants and needs and translating then into technical characteristics and 
specifications), scoping sessions, Design Thinkin g, among others. In addition, IRIS uses agile methodologies, such 
as KANBAN for managing development task implementation. 
 
IRIS 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third 
parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third 
parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
11  
 
 
Participant No 3 
 
Participant legal name ROVIMATICA S.L. 
Short name ROVIMATICA 
Website www.rovimatica.com 
Organisation type SME 
Country Spain 
Description of the legal entity 
ROVIMATICA is a technological SME based in the south of Spain experts in tailor made engineering solutions. The 
headquarters of the company is in Cordoba with another office in the Aerospace Technology Park (Aeropolis) in 
Seville. ROVIMATICA has a current workforce of 41 professionals approx. The expertise of ROVIMATICA is based 
on: 
o Customised turnkey industrial services in robotics (standard, collaborative and sensitive). 
o computer vision systems (2D, 3D, hyperspectral and Artificial Intelligence for image processing). 
o mechatronics, monitoring, pneumatics. 
o automation and control (factories and industrial plants, nationally and internationally). 
o machinery and special solutions, automation of vehicles (urban, agricultural and industrial ones). 
o development of R&D projects for his clients. 
o industrial maintenance and training. 
The company operates in most of the sectors from manufacturing, assembling, environment, water, aeronautic, 
automotive, metal, energy to agricultural implementing disruptive solutions. We have develop ed high -tech 
projects around the world in countries such as Portugal, UK, Norway, Spain, United Arab Emirates, Russia, USA, 
China, Egypt, Algeria, Morocco, South Africa, Panama, Uruguay, etc. 
ROVIMATICA works for high quality standards companies, such as: 
▪ Automotive sector: Valeo, Renault, Ford, Nissan, Jaguar. 
▪ Aerospace sector: Airbus, Altran, Aciturri, Sofitec, Elimco Aerospace, Alter Technology Group TUV Nord, 
GMV. 
▪ Energy/Water sector: Repsol, Schott, ABB, Abengoa, Schneider Electric, Siemens, Degremont,  Ferrovial, 
Acciona. 
▪ Manufacturing sector: Syngenta, Coemac Corporation, Mondragon Group, Suntory, Thielmann Portinox. 
▪ Agri-food sector: Mahou-San Miguel Group, Hojiblanca, Verdifresh, Ines Rosales. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Active participation in WP1 - 
Automated SORTING system for 
multilayer materials sorting  
ROVIMATICA will lead the tasks related to the A .I. robotic adaption for the 
multilayer sorting, throughout the design and development of a vision-guided 
robot based on artificial intelligence. 
On the other hand, ROVI MATICA will lead the integration of the modules in a 
lab environment, and finally, ROVI MATICA will support the integration in the 
FERROVIAL facilities. 
Finally, ROVI MATICA will collaborate with the WP1 partners in the tasks 
related to characterisation and synchronization of image sensors. 
Minor participation in WP5  - 
Assessment of the 
ROVIMATICA will collaborate in the task related to the analysis of 
recommendations in A.I. robotic multilayer sorting. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
12  
environmental, economic, social, 
legislative and normative barriers 
of the developed processes   
Minor participation in WP6  - 
Increasement of knowledge 
within stakeholders by means of 
Good Practices and learning 
experience  
ROVIMATICA will support the activities related to the A .I. robotic multilayer 
sorting as good practices. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
Mr. Fernando Palacios  (male) is the Managing Director of ROVIMATICA. 
Industrial automation and electronics MSc 2000, he is the Technical Director 
in ROVIMATICA. He has developed his professional career in the Industrial 
sector, mainly developing tailor made solutions. He is specialized in 
automation, robotics and computer vision systems, mechatronic s, 
instrumentation and electrical systems. He has been the responsible of the 
engineering department of ROVIMATICA since 2007. He has led robotic and 
vision-based projects. 
 
Mr. Patricio Alemany (male) is the Project Manager of the project. Industrial 
Management Engineering MSc 2001, Industrial Engineering MSc 2000, 
Chartered Civil Engineer 2005. He is the Innovation Director at ROVIMATICA 
and the R&D Project Manager since 2007. As a Project Manager, he is leading 
RD projects: 
- 4 European projects (I-MECH, PRYSTINE, AFARCLOUD, KITT4SME) 
- 1 OPENCALL (RIMA-AERODEFECTSCAN). 
- 4 National projects (SCARLET, DREAM, VIRTUAL DRONEBOX, 
TANDEM). 
 
Mr. José Antonio Sánchez (male) is a Telecommunication Engineering MSc 
2009. He is a senior computer vision engineer at ROVIMATICA. He has over 8 
years of experience developing cutting-edge image processing technologies in 
R&D projects. With respect to the machine -learning techniques, he was 
involved developing the obstacle detection for the navigation in unmann ed 
military vehicles. Moreover, he was involved leading developing an aerospace 
wires automated defect detection, which inspects the stripping and crimping 
processes based on AdaBoost (Viola Jones algorithms). Regarding the deep 
learning algorithms, more s pecific, convolutional neural network (CNN) 
processes, he is involved developing projects, such as: a non -conformity 
closures detection, throughout the inspection of the top, bottom and the 
lateral surface, and a pork loin sorting machine based on the fat marbling 
level. And finally, he was involved developing an automated drone counter of 
pallets based on YOLO in the logistics sector. José Antonio has worked in the 
development of machine vision solutions. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
1. AEESD project (National Research Project led by ROVIMATICA) (2014-2015) 
Technical demonstrator for a label inspector through artificial vision covering 360 ˚ for any kind of bottle and 
label (size, colour, etc.). 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
13  
 
 
2. ROVIMATICA already has a utility model (Utility Model number: ES 1 169 308 U) for the industry sector. 
ROVIMATICA mainly is contracted by his clients to develop new cutting-edge solutions from a variety of sector 
where some of the high-tech solutions has been patented by the clients. For ROVIMATICA own developments, 
the company evaluates the new innovations carried out in the different projects to analyse if it is feasible to 
protect them and apply all the time his IIPR strategy. 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project 
ID 
Project Acronym 
& website Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
737453 I-MECH 
https://www.i-mech.eu/ 
H2020-ECSEL-
2016-1-RIA-two-
stage 
Intelligent Motion Control Platform  for 
Smart Mechatronic Systems 
2017-
2020  
 
783190 
PRYSTINE 
https://prystine.eu/ 
H2020-ECSEL-
2017-2-RIA-two-
stage 
Programmable Systems for Intelligence 
in Automobiles 
2018-
2021 
 
783221 
AFARCLOUD 
http://www.afarcloud.eu/ 
H2020-ECSEL-
2017-2-RIA-two-
stage 
Aggregate Farming in the Cloud 2018-
2021 
EXP 
00110869 
/ ITC-
20181021 
SCARLET 
National Funding 
(FEDER 
INNTERCONECTA 
2018) 
Development of innovative automated 
workshop robots and cobots for 
automation of process of logistics in the 
electrical workshop 
2018-
2020 
EXP 
00111109 
/ ITC-
20181133 
DREAM 
National Funding 
(FEDER 
INNTERCONECTA 
2018) 
Drones to increase efficiency, safety and 
environmental protection in 
maintenance infrastructure 
2018-
2021 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
ROVIMATICA has two offices, the headquarters, in Cordoba, is divided in 120 m 2 for offices, 80 m 2 for training 
courses and 150 m2 for the development of projects. 
 
 
 
On the other hand, the other workshop is located in Seville, in the Aerospace Technology Park of Andalusia, 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
14  
Aerópolis, wh ere the development environments of the Innovation Department are housed and allowing the 
integration and testing activities takes place. In this case, the offices area has 46 m 2 and the development area 
has 87 m2. 
In both workshops, they are equipped with  different types of cameras (2d monochrome, 2D colour, 3D sensor, 
thermal, etc.), lenses, filters, lightning (diffuse lights, direct lights, etc.) image processing units with GPU boards 
for high-performance processing, PLC controllers, actuators, etc. More over, technicians have a huge diversity of 
tools and instruments. 
 
Regarding the software development environment at ROVIMATICA include: 
• SolidWorks. 
• See Electrical. 
• Database development: SQL Server, MySQL. 
• HALCON R11, R12 and R13 for image processing. 
• OpenCV open-source library. 
• TensorFlow, Keras, Caffe (open-source artificial intelligence libraries). 
 
ROVIMATICA maintains an integrated quality, health and safety and environmental management system, based 
on: 
• UNE-EN-ISO 9001:2008 
• UNE-EN-ISO-14001:2004 
 
ROVIMATICA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
15  
Participant No 4 
 
Participant legal name Ferrovial Servicios S.A. 
Short name FERROVIAL 
Website www.ferrovialservicios.com 
Organisation type Large company 
Country Spain 
Description of the legal entity 
FERROVIAL is an international benchmark in the maintenance and operation of public and private infrastructure for 
transport, environment, industry, natural resources (oil, gas and mining) and utilities (water and electricity), and in 
the provision of facility management services.  
With a solid international presence in stable regions such as the UK, Spain, the United States and Chile with a 
workforce of more than 71.800, FERROVIAL Services provides end -to-end solutions for infrastructure and cities to 
improve their efficiency, functionality and sustainability. 
FERROVIAL has a broad range of specialised services and distinctive capabilities and a clear focus on operational 
excellence. We undertake the most complex and innovative projects, thanks to the technical and h uman 
capabilities of our teams, a stable local presence and an extensive portfolio of solutions as it endorses its more than 
30 years’ experience in many of the sectors and markets in which it operates, from urban mobility, education, 
health and defense, t hrough the circular economy and the extraction and processing of natural resources such as 
mining and oil & gas. 
FERROVIAL Services offers diverse  environmental services  that encompass all phases in the waste management 
value chain: from waste collection to treatment and recovery. It provides the public administration and the private 
sector comprehensive specialized services related to consultancy, design, and operations management, with full 
market knowledge. FERROVIAL Services applies the principles of a circular economy and its own model for 
innovation, which have enabled clients to make environmental management solutions more social, efficient and 
sustainable.  
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Active participation in WP1  - 
Automated SORTING system 
for multilayer materials 
sorting 
FERROVIAL will lead the activities related to the demonstration of the developed 
technology under real environment conditions. 
Once the detection system and the A.I. robotic solution for multilayer sorting have 
been integrated and proved at ROVIMATICA facilities under laboratory conditions, 
FERROVIAL will be in charge of the adaptation of the technology at its facilities 
and will lead the development of the testing tasks. 
Additionally, FERROVIAL will collaborate with WP2 and WP3 partners in the tasks 
related to characterisation and provision of multilayer waste. 
Minor participation in WP6 -
Increasement of knowledge 
within stakeholders by means 
of Good Practices and learning 
experience 
FERROVIAL will make available its expertise and know -how in waste recycling so 
that CSCP can convert it into good practices to enhance recyclability strategies for 
multilayer waste and increase the use of recycled material s for sustainable 
packaging designs. 
Participation in WP7 - Cross-
cutting activities and 
Innovation impacts 
 
 
 
FERROVIAL will contribute to the dissemination and exploitation of results through 
presentation of results in different international events, article publication in 
environmental platforms and magazines, etc. 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
16  
CVs of the team involved 
 
Jaume Cabré (male). Technical agricultural Engineer with a professional career 
related since the beginning to waste management and landfilling, being one of his 
first positions at FERROVIAL (former Cespa) as manager of the Can Mata landfill in 
Barcelona. After some years he became Director of the Technical Treatment Office 
to later get a position as Environmental Innovation Manager of FERROVIAL 
Services. His current position as Manager of th e Environmental Engineering and 
Innovation Area at FERROVIAL Services endorses a strategic vision of the 
application of the MERLIN technologies thus participating partially in all the tasks 
of FERROVIAL Servicios in the project. 
 
Jordi Vidal ( male). Senior technician at the mechanical waste treatment 
department in the Environmental Engineering and Innovation Area. He has broad 
and proven experience in the development and full -scale app lication of 
mechanical and pneumatic solutions for the automatio n of waste sorting 
processes and facilities. His deep knowledge of new technologies such as virtual 
and augmented reality, 3D printing, A.I . and robotics is being a key factor in de 
evolution of the design of waste selection systems. This know -how will be made 
available for the MERLIN project, mainly in the development of WP1. 
 
Elena Jiménez (female). Engineer in horticulture and gardening and Environmental 
Management and Agronomy Engineer. She is a professional with broad experience 
in consulting and environmental management as well as in research and 
development projects, due to her former position a s Innovation Responsible in 
Cespa (now FERROVIAL Services). Currently holds de position of Head of Solution 
Development at the Environmental Engineering and Innovation Area. Her 
extensive experience in the analysis of the business potential of innovative 
solutions in the waste field will be key in the development of WP1 and WP6. 
 
Elísabet González ( female). Industrial Engineer and Master Degree in 
Environmental Management. Currently Head of Innovation at the Environmental 
Engineering and Innovation Area and she is in charge of the development of the 
environmental innovation project portfolio in FERROVIAL Services. She has large 
and demonstrated experience in the coordination, technical and economic 
management of national and international innovation projects with potential 
application to the waste treatment business. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
1. B. Riesco Garcia, C. Fernández González, L. Saralegui Gómez, E. González Prieto, B. Montes Parra. ‘The 
solution for a safe&automatic municipal waste sorting: the smart autonomous robot with artificial 
intelligence’ (Heraklion 2019, 7th International Conference on Sustainable Solid Waste Management). 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
RDECR 18-
1-0004 WISE ACCIÓ Waste Identification and Sorting Expertise 
in municipal solid waste facilities 
2018-
2020 
338-ZRR ZRR for waste EIT Climate KIC ZRR for Municipal Waste 2018-
2019 
720777 
VOLATILE 
http://www.volatile-
h2020.eu/theproject.html 
UE-H2020 
Biowaste derived volatile fatty acid 
platform for biopolymers, bioactive 
compounds and chemical building blocks 
2016-
2020 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
17  
RTC-2017-
6377-5 BIOMAT-RECOVER  Spanish 
Government 
"Development of a selective biorecovery 
strategy for critical raw materials present 
in electrical waste and electronics for 
application in pigment manufacturing 
2018-
2021 
IDI-
20151257 R3BORN CDTI Development of an innovative system of 
compatibility and recycling of plastic waste 
2015-
2018 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
FERROVIAL currently operates 36 municipal waste and light packaging sorting plants in Europe. In 2018, these 
facilities received more than 3.3 Mt of waste and achieved an average of 32% valorization ratio, what allowed the 
company to save almost 481,000 teq of CO2. 
 
Automated municipal sorting facility. Densimetric (ballistic separators) and material separation  (NIR separators) stages. 
FERROVIAL will select one of the sorting facilities that currently operates to demonstrate the identification and 
sorting technology developed at MERLIN in a real environment. 
 
FERROVIAL 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
YES 
€60.000 will be used for material characterization (waste). 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
18  
Participant No 5 
 
Participant legal name Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di 
Bologna 
Short name UNIBO 
Website www.unibo.it 
Organisation type RES 
Country Italy 
Description of the legal entity 
The Alma Mater Studiorum, the oldest university in the Western world, paves the way for innovation through an 
increasingly rich programme catalogue, cutting -edge research and a constant and increasingly broad international 
perspective. Since its origins in 1088, Alma Mater has been student-centred hosting prominent figures from science 
and the arts. Based in five campuses (Bologna, Cesena, Forlì, Ravenna, Rimini), with a branch in Buenos Aires, it 
offers a teaching catalogue diversified and tailored to the needs of present -day society: over 200 degree 
programmes among its 32 Departments and 11 Schools are offered to over 81,000 students. 5,000 graduates are 
enrolled in PhDs and 3rd cycle programmes. As a comprehensive research university, Alma Mater invests in the 
multidisciplinary cross-cultural approach and in the inseparable connection between research and teaching. One 
of the most active universities leading and participating in European research and academic cooperation projects, 
Bologna has formed knowledge alliances with industry and public/private organizations . It is a hub of 
international networks. Beyond its close European links, it enjoys multiple connections with America, Africa, Asia 
and Australia. Research and Innovation are a priority of the Un iversity mission. With regard to Innovation, UNIBO 
filed 86 new patent applications in 2017, of which 25 are new registrations, thereby giving rise to an active patent 
portfolio of over 370 patents related to more than 140 inventions. It also has an active  portfolio of more than 20 
patented plant varieties, 80% of which are increased in value through active licenses with geographic coverage in 
countries in different parts of the world. UNIBO set up or accredited 27 spin -off companies up to 2017 and can also 
count Almacube, as business incubator that managed 15 incubated companies in 2017. With regard to the 
capability of attracting funding  for research and innovation, UNIBO is very active both at National and European 
level in all the research areas. Activit ies related to competitive funding programs are supported by the Research 
and Third Mission Division, with more than 10 years experience and about 50 people assisting the research groups 
in the whole project lifecycle. A Research Development Office deals w ith the UNIBO strategic positioning at local, 
national and international level, through integrated networking and lobby activities in each specific research area. 
While the Programs&Projects Office supports the UNIBO researchers from the proposal submissio n to the 
implementation phase of the projects with technical, legal, financial and administrative expertise. These Offices 
strictly cooperate between each other and in strictly connection with the Knowledge Transfer Office, for the 
Innovation Management ex pertise and the IP protection and exploitation, and the take up and commercialization 
of project results. Thanks to its scientific excellence and a central Project Management support working closely, 
UNIBO has gained a considerable experience in Internatio nal and European research projects, successfully 
participated in FP7: with 274 projects funded in 2007 -2013 (58 of them as coordinator) and 87,8 M€ of funding, 
UNIBO is the second Italian university for the attractiveness of European funding for research, 37st in the European 
ranking of institutions of higher education. In Global Rankings UNIBO occupies the top 10 national rank in major 
league tables such as QS World University Rankings, THE World University Rankings, ARWU World University 
Rankings. In 2017 it ranked 29 in the GreenMetric World University Rankings measuring the university’s vision and 
policy for sustainability.  In Horizon 2020, UNIBO is so far involved in 278 funded projects (75 as coordinator), with 
more than 115 M€ of funding.  
UNIBO is also partner of the EIT Knowledge & Innovation Communities (“EIT DIGITAL”, “Climate KIC”, “EIT Raw 
Materials”) and many of the most important EU initiatives related to the Horizon 2020 framework program (i.e. , 
ETPs, EIPs, JPIs, PPP SPIRE, Water Europe, the European Climate Research Alliance).   
In the framework of Societal Challenge 5, UNIBO is participating in 11 projects (of which 3 as coordinator) with a 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
19  
total EU contribution of over 5 M €. 
The UNIBO research groups participating in MERLIN belong to the Department of Chemistry “G. Ciamician” and 
operates in the Ravenna Campus in the Environmental Sciences Lab “R. Sartori”. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Leadership in Task 2. 3 - 
Metalized flexible packaging 
solvent-based delamination 
with polymer and high-quality  
UNIBO researchers are experienced in the use of alternative solvents for 
extraction and synthesis. Specifically they developed a patented process to 
separate PE and Alum inum in multilayer packaging using switchable solvents. : 
aluminium recovery : (i) solvent -based process  (ii) separating aluminum (iii)  
recovery 
Participation in WP5, 6, 7 
UNIBO will also participates in all the activities regarding creation of knowledge, 
stakeholder engagement, workshops, communication and dissemination in those 
areas related delamination and recycling of multilayer. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
Paola Galletti (PhD, female) is associate professor in organic Chemistry . Author of 
about 110 articles in international peer reviewed journals (over 2200 citations, h -
index 28) and 4 patents, her research activity takes into consideration various 
aspects of organic chemistry, among which sustainable chemistry, in particular 
synthesis, extraction and use of compounds from renewable sources and waste in 
environmentally friendly solvents.  She is scientific leader of the UO Renewable 
Sources and Sustainability of CIRI FRAME (Renewable sources, environment, sea 
and energy) and part of  the Strategic Research Board on Biobased Industries at 
the University of Bologna She has been involved in several projects at industrial 
participation (OPOS Biochimica, Ribbon, Sigma -Tau, Italcementi, Valagro, METCO, 
Tetra Pak, Micoperi Blue Growth, CP Es senze) and has been involved in several 
projects at industrial participation and leader of national and international 
scientific projects (2014 -2016 PROBIOPOL, Italian Flagship Project Future Factory 
as unit coordinator, 2016 Climate KIC Pathfinder Project  Biograppa and 2017 
Climate KIC Accelerator B -PLAS project as coordinator and 2018 -2021Climate KIC 
B-PLAS DEMO, Bioplastics from sludge as participant). 
 
Chiara Samorì (PhD, female) is Assistant Professor in Organic Chemistry. Author of 
52 articles in international peer reviewed journals (1566 citations, h-index 20) and 
two patents, her research activity covers various aspects of sustainable chemistry, 
in particular green extraction protocols of natural compounds (lipids, 
polysaccharides, bi opolymers) by using environmentally friendly solvents and 
exploitation of biomolecules for biomaterials formulation. She partecipated to 
several national and international scientific projects (2014 -2016 PROBIOPOL, 
Italian Flagship Project Future Factory, 2 016 Climate KIC Pathfinder Project 
Biograppa and 2017 Climate KIC Accelerator B-PLAS project and 2018-2021Climate 
KIC B -PLAS DEMO, Bioplastics from sludge), and has been involved in several 
projects at industrial participation (Valagro, METCO, Tetra Pak, M icoperi Blue 
Growth, ENI). 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
20  
 
Emilio Tagliavini (male) is Full Professor in organic Chemistry.  He has been 
Director of the Interdepartmental Centre for Industrial Research “Energy and 
Environment” and actually he is member of the Senate of the University of 
Bologna. His research interests are in green organic chemistry, synthesis and 
catalysis, renewable sources, alternative green solvents, asymmetric catalysis and 
in the chemistry of organic atmospheric aerosols. He is co -author of about 110 
peer-reviewed papers (H index = 36). He has been scientific leader and 
participants in in several projects at industrial participation (Italcementi, Valagro, 
METCO, Tetra Pak, Micoperi Blue Growth) and participants and leader of national 
and international scientific projects. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
Patent “Metodo per separare e recuperare polietilene e alluminio da un materiale poliaccoppiato” (method for 
separating and recovering polyethylene and aluminum from a multilayer material) Emilio Tagliavini, Paola Galletti, 
Chiara Samorì, Danilo Malferrari, IT201600114545A1, PCT extended.  
5 recent publications related to the proposal 
1. Samorì C. , Pezzolesi L. , Galletti P. , Semeraro M, Tagliavini  E. Extraction and milking of astaxanthin from 
Haematococcus pluvialis cultures. Green Chem., 2019, 21, 3621-3628. 
2. C. Samorì, D. Cespi, P. Blair, P. Galletti, D. Malferrari, F. Passarini, I. Vassura, E Tagliavini, “Application of 
switchable hydrophilicity solvents for recycling multilayer packaging materials” Green Chemistry, 2017, 19, 1714 - 
1720. 
3. Tommasi E., Cravotto G., Galletti P., Grillo G., Mazzotti M., Sacchetti G., Samorì C., Tabasso S., Tacchini 
M.,Tagliavini E. Enhanced and selective lipid extraction from the microalga P. tricornutum by dimethyl carbonate 
and supercritical CO2 using Deep Eutectic Solvents and microwaves as pretreatment. ACS Sustainable Chemistry and 
Engineering 2017, 5, 8316-8322. 
4. Samorì C., López Barreiro D., Vet R., Pezzolesi L., Brilman D. W. F., Galletti P., Tagliavini E. Effective lipid extraction 
from algae cultures using switchable solvents. Green Chemistry, 2013,15, 353-356. 
1. 5. Samorì, C., Torri, C., Samorì, G., Fabbri, D., Galletti, P., Guerrini, F., Pistocchi, R., Tagliavini, E. Extraction of 
hydrocarbons from microalga Botryococcus braunii with switchable solvents Bioresource Technology, 2010, 101, 
3274-3279. 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
1.3.1 
Pathfinde
r 
BIOGrapPA Climate 
KIC-EIT Bioplastics from the grapes wastes to the package 2016 
1.3.3 
Accelrato
r 
B-PLAS accelerator Climate 
KIC-EIT Bioplastics from sludge 2017 
TSS2018B
_3310-
BPLAS_A 
B-PLAS DEMO Climate 
KIC-EIT 
Industrial demonstration of sludge to bioplastic 
pathway 
2018-
2021 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
CHNSO elemental analyzer (ThermoFisher), gas chromatography -mass spectrometry (GC-MS, Agilent), ion 
chromatography (IC), atomic spectrometry (Perkin -Elmer, GF/F -AAS), NMR Spectroscopy (Varian INOVA), high 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
21  
pressure liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS Agilent and Waters). 
The UNIBO Partner (Green Chemistry Lab) in the pr oject is affiliated to Dept. of Chemistry “Ciamician”  of Bologna 
University and operates at the Ravenna Campus.  
The Ravenna laboratory covers approximately 250 sq.m. and is equipped with ventilated Hood, reactors and all 
proper facilities necessary to modern organic chemistry and analysis. 
 
UNIBO 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
Participant No 6 
 
Participant legal name Ioniqa Technologies B.V.  
Short name IONIQA 
Website www.ioniqa.com 
Organisation type Technology provider 
Country The Netherlands 
Description of the legal entity 
IONIQA is a clean -tech company, specialized in creating value out of PET waste by using its proprietary circular 
technology. 
With a cost - effective process, IONIQA is able to close the loop for plastics, starting with PET plastics. This award 
winning innovation transforms all types and colors of PET waste into valuable resources for ‘virgin - quality’ new 
PET. Upcycling processes for other types of plastics are being researched and expected to be launched in the near 
future. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Develop the depolymerisation 
process for PET feed with 
large number of contaminants 
(rigid multilayer packaging).  
The to be developed process is an extension of the existing depolymerisation 
process for relatively pure PET (from bottle flake feedstock). 
Scale-up the developed 
depolymerization process and 
provide the recovered 
materials to WP3. 
This scale -up will be conducted in I ONIQA’s 1000 L pilot facility at Plant One 
(Rotterdam), which has been extensively operated for relatively pure PET (from 
bottle flake feedstock) to provide recovered materials to partners at 50 -500 kg 
scale.  
CVs of the team involved 
 
Marianne studied Chemical Engineering at Delft University of Technology, after 
which she directly joined IONIQA Technologies as a Research Chemist. During her 
studies, her interest in sustainability, recycling and the energy transition 
continuously increased. This was the main reason for courses she followed, her 
thesis project and why started her career at IONIQA. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
22  
 
Jeroen is CFO at IONIQA and has held various positions (Finance Director, 
CFO/COO, General Manager, Country Manager, Auditor) at a number of multi-
national companies such as Christies, Crown, Ernst & Young, Energis, Global One). 
He is a qualified Chartered Accountant (RA) and ISO 9001 Auditor. 
 
André is Chief Scientist at IONIQA and combines this with a full professor position 
at Delft University of Technology in the field of Process Technology and Principle 
Technologist position at Cosun.  He has held various positions in industry (DSM, 
Corbion) and academia (University Twente, Eindhoven University of Technology). 
Main responsibility at IONIQA is directing the R&D program. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
Youtube.com // IONIQA Circular PET – plastics (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wrhf_SZrEKk) 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
- PolyInspire EU Demonstration of innovative technologies towards a 
more efficient and sustainable plastic recycling. 
2018 -
2022 
- CHILL OP Zuid, 
NLD Circular Polymer Project.   
March 
2019- 
March 
2020 
- TSE NLD Catalyst-assisted chemical delamination. Jan – June 
2020 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
 
 
IONIQA’s current process for the depolymerization of relatively pure PET feedstocks. 
 
IONIQA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
YES 
Rent of a plant for carrying put the pilots , among others, the operators. For the project, 
IONIQA will provide INDORAMA with 80 kg of BHET. This amount can only be made on pilot 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
23  
scale. The budgeted costs for these runs are €60.000.  
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
Participant No 7 
 
Participant legal name Indorama Ventures Europe B.V. 
Short name INDORAMA 
Website www.indoramaventures.com/en 
Organisation type Large 
Country The Netherlands 
Description of the legal entity 
INDORAMA Ventures Public Company (IVL) is a global chemical manufacturing company, headquartered in Thailand 
with 16,000 employees in 29 countries and > 100 operational sites.  
IVL is the largest producer of Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) globally: 
- In excess of 4.0 million tonnes of production 
- In excess of 1.0 million tonnes capacity in Europe 
Sustainability performance 
IVL is a large recycler of PET Post Consumer Packaging: 
- Five locations globally of which three are in Europe 
- European capacity for recycling post-consumer PET bottles and polyesters is in excess of 100,000 tonnes 
As the largest producer of 100% recyclable PET in the world, we intend to ensure all aspects of the circular 
economy come to fruition, reducing waste found in the environme nt. By 2025, IVL is targeting to establish a 
substantial footprint in this direction across all the regions where it is present. The company is listed in the Dow 
Jones Sustainability Index (DJSI). 
The Rotterdam location produces PTA and PET and serves many customers active in the packaging industry. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Provision of post -consumer 
PET trays  
IVL is a large recycler of PET Post Consumer Packaging and has built a professional 
network to look at the sourcing of relevant PET waste streams for this project. 
Characterization of PET 
monomers  
Indorama has in -house knowledge regarding the quality assessment of PET 
building blocks for polymerization purposes. 
Repolymerization into PET Indorama is the largest producer of Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) globally. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
Ashwin Briedjlal (M) – Development Engineer 
Qualification: Degree in Life Sciences and Technology with a specialization in 
Green Chemistry and Industrial Sustainability (Delft University of Technology, 
MSc). 
Currently Ashwin Briedjlal works as a Development Engineer within INDORAMA 
for 6  years. On a daily basis working on topics related to sustainability such as 
product/technology innovation, lif e cycle analysis and carbon footprint 
calculations, recycling, and optimization of the current PET production process.  
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
24  
 
Wout Fornara (M) – Operations Services Manager . Qualification: Degree in 
Chemistry (Radboud University, MSc); Member of  Management team with 
responsibility for HSEQ, Process Technology and  Laboratory within INDORAMA 
Rotterdam for almost 11 years. Degree in Chemistry (Radboud University, MSc). 
Currently Wout Fornara acts as a Member of Management team with 
responsibility for HSEQ, Process Technology (both PET and PTA) and Laboratory 
within Indorama Ventures Europe B.V. for almost 11 years. Almost 5 years of 
experience in ex -pat assignments as si te manager in two European countries, 
Germany and Italy. Execution of union negotiations for site closure (Germany) and 
downsizing at a site (Italy). Experience with due diligence in M&A. Covered broad 
scope of chemical processes (coating resins, adhesive resins, terephthalic acid and 
polymer production). Executed projects succesfully as Six Sigma belt and also in 
roles as Six Sigma champion. Acting as technical representative for the company 
on REACH and for various other product stewardship matters in ind ustry 
associations. Broad experience with certification of quality, safety and 
environmental systems. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
Not applicable as this is a new field of (commercial) research. 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project ID Project Acronym Funded by Title date 
887913 ENZYCLE H2020 BBI Microbial ENZYmes for treatment of non -recyCLEd 
plastic fractions.  
2020-
2024 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
INDORAMA research laboratories and pilot plant facilities will be utilized for (re)polymerization trials and PET -
monomer/PET characterization. 
 
INDORAMA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International parties 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
25  
Participant No 8 
 
Participant legal name Commissariat à l’énergie atomique et 
aux énergies alternatives 
Short name CEA 
Website www.cea.fr 
Organisation type Research Technology Organisation 
Country France 
Description of the legal entity 
The French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission is a public body established in October 1945. As 
leader in research, development and innovation, the CEA is active in four main areas: low-carbon energies, defence 
and security, information technologies and health technologies. In each of these fields, the CEA maintains a cross -
disciplinary culture of engineers and researchers, building on the synergies between fundamental and technological 
research. As a prominent player in the European Research Area, with an internationally acknowledged level of 
expertise in its core competencies, CEA is engaged in collaborative projects w ith leading academic and industrial 
partners from around the world. Within CEA, the Technological Research Division boasts three operational 
institutes providing innovative research to improve industrial competitiveness through technology transfer: CEA -
Leti, focused on microelectronics, information & healthcare technologies, CEA -Liten centred on new energy 
technologies and CEA-List dedicated to technologies for digital systems. 
The Novel Materials Technologies department is focused on a Circular economy app roach for the sustainable 
growth of materials with new properties and components with improved functionalities.  
Three strategic axes Materials Chemistry, Structural Electronics and Additive Manufacturing processes are settled 
in order to tackle materials’ and processes innovation driven by three main pillars:  
1) Safer materials , with the aim to developing smart and safer by design materials with an environmental and 
societal concern, oriented to air treatment, catalysts development, nanoparticles release, VOC.  
2) Smart materials and components , focusing on materials modelling, novel smart materials with new properties 
and improved functionalities, new components, Energy and resources efficiency: net shape Processes, substitution, 
recycling and Embedded electronics and  
3) Sustainable materials components and processes, targeting higher life time products, validation of recycled raw 
materials, fundamental understanding of materials, structure and their properties and Eco -design - Recyclable by 
Design processes. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Polymers valorization of 
flexible food packaging from 
delamination process 
Thanks to scientific knowledge, background of many years and process tools for 
processing and shaping functional polymers, advanced polymers and second life 
polymers. 
Recycled materials 
characterisation 
Thanks to state of the art characterisation tools, including those necessary for the 
characterisation of thermoplastics and virgin or recycled composites. Mechanical, 
rheological, thermal, microscopic, surface tension, etc. characterisation... 
CVs of the team involved 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
26  
 
Thomas Pietri (m, Ing), Graduated in 2006 in materials science (University of Saint 
Etienne, FR) Research Engineer at CEA since 2006 he works as Project Manager in 
the field of development and characterisation of polymer composites for 
extrusion, injection and 3D additive manufacturing processes. Since 2015 he’s 
involved on the circular valorisation of second life products. He’s involved in 
different projects as industrial projects (in field of aeronautics, cables, sailing 
industry, automobile, etc.), European projects (FFP, H2020, EIT -KICs), national 
projects (ANR, Carnot, FUI). 
 
Sébastien ROLERE [M, Dr.] graduated in 2012 in materials science (University of 
Toulouse III, FR). He then received his PhD in polymer physical chemistry and 
processing, at University of Montpellier (FR) in 2015, focusing on the relationship 
between microstructure and rheological properties of elastomers, for th e 
automotive industry. During a first postdoctoral fellowship (2015 -2016), he 
worked with Airbus on the development of new thermosetting resins for the 
aircraft industry. Then, after a second postdoctoral fellowship with Arkema (2017 -
2018), focused on the development of a reactive extrusion process for biosourced 
thermoplastic polymers, he joined in 2018 the CEA research centre of Grenoble, 
France, as a specialist in polymer science. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
DD15742 Matériau composite thermiquement conducteur et procédé d'élaboration d'un matériau composite 
thermiquement conducteur. 
DD17238 Bâche à vide pour un procédé d'infusion de matériaux composite comprenant un fluoroélastomère. 
DD18258 Bâche à vide bicouche pour un procédé d'infusion de matériaux composite. 
DD20409 Procédé de fabrication de nanocomposites à haute conductivité thermique à base de nanotubes de 
nitrure de bore. 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
16270 DISPLAY 
EIT Raw 
Materials 
(Upscaling) 
Upscale of Material Recovery from Display 
Applications and Printed Circuit Boards 
April 
2017 to 
Dec 2019 
16211 REVALUE EIT Raw 
Materials REcycled carbon fibres for high VALUE composites 
Jul 2017 
to dec 
2020 
- RECYF Climate 
KIC  RECYcled of PVDF from water filtration membranes 
Oct 2017 
to dec 
2018 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
➢ 3 Corotative twin screws extrudors 
• Thermoelectron (D=16mm, L/D=40))  
• Brabender 
• Thermofisher TSE24MC (D=24mm, L/D=40) 
➢ Filament maker – Extrudor from 3Devo 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
27  
• Injection moulding machine 
• Injection – 350PLUS from Battenfeld  
• Bi-injection – Select 150/260 150T from Billion 
• Micro injection - Micropower 15 from Battenfeld 
➢ Additive manufacturing (AM) 
• Fused deposition modeling (fdm) – HYREL Hydra 430  
• StereoLithography Apparatus (SLA) – Prodways M120 
• MultiJet Fusion – HP MJF4210   
          
  
       AM-fdm – HYDRA 430                         filament rextrudor 3DEVO            Select 150/260 150T from Billion 
 
CEA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
YES 
CEA will subcontract the following test: Test - mass - chemical characteristic and Regarding Gel 
permeation chromatography (GPC). €10,000 each. Total= €20,000 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
28  
 
Participant No 9 
 
Participant legal name Collaborating Centre on Sustainable 
Production & Consumption 
Short name CSCP 
Website www.scp-centre.org 
Organisation type Research Organization 
Country Germany 
Description of the legal entity 
The Collaborating Centre on Sustainable Consumption and Production (CSCP) gGmbH is a Think and Do tank that 
works with businesses, policy makers, partner organizations and civil society toward a sustainable planet. The 
United Nations Environment Program (U NEP) and the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Energy and Environment 
jointly founded us in 2005. As a non -for-profit, we focus on the promotion of sustainable patters of consumption 
and production (SCP). The CSCP adopts a holistic approach to foster SCP involving all actor groups and stakeholders. 
It has expertise in the areas of Products and Services, Cities & Infrastructure, Policy, Lifestyles & Behaviour and 
Business & Entrepreneurship. Within these areas, it provides both ‘think’ and ‘do’ services in co llaboration with its 
partner organizations across the globe. The CSCP specializes in discovering, developing and replicating sustainable 
practices in the above topic areas in order to achieve a resilient and sustainable future for all. The CSCP has 
successfully acquired and implemented a range of EU funded projects including the projects funded under EU’s 7th 
Framework of Programme (FP 7) and Horizon 2020. In these, it has provided expertise on stakeholder mapping, 
outreach, dialogue, policy advice, sector sustainability roadmap development and translating sustainability in areas 
such as food and agriculture, Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), housing, mobility and health.  
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Leadership of WP6 on 
Stakeholder engagement and 
knowledge exchange how to 
increase reuse of plastic 
packaging waste    
CSCP will lead WP 6. CSCP has led a number of projects in which it has led 
stakeholder engagement processes. In a variety of FP7 and Horizon 2020 projects, 
CSCP has guided stakeholder consultations and developed joint strategies and 
actions for sustainability challenges. An example of stakeholder outreach activities 
is CSCP’s project Scalibur 1. In Scalibur project, CSCP engages  stakeholders (e.g. , 
actors in the bio -waste value chain) towards increasing recycling urban biowaste 
by transforming it into usable biomaterials, such as bioplastics and biopesticides. 
In addition, CSCP is experienced in facilitating knowledge of circular  economy 
approaches (e.g., policy and business model innovations) in Plastics, Textiles and 
Electronics and other sectors. An example is CSCP’ Route-2-Pi project 2. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
1 https://www.scp-centre.org/our-work/scalibur/ 
2 https://www.scp-centre.org/r2pi_approaches/ 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
29  
 
Cristina Fedato (female). Cristina is the Team Leader of the Sustainable 
Infrastructure, Products and Services Team at the CSCP. She is the Project Director 
of national and international projects like Valumics (European project on food 
value chains) and Sc alibur (Circular Economy in Bio -waste Value Chain). She has 
over 18 years of experience in the fields of Corporate Sustainability and Social 
Responsibility, Sustainable Procurement and Sustainable Supply Chains. Cristina is 
a mechanical engineer and holds an MBA, with special training for participant -
centred learning from Harvard Business School. She developed and implemented 
projects for many national and multinational companies from a variety of 
industries, including agribusiness, chemical, construction, cosmetics, energy, 
finance, food, health services, logistics, metal and mining, textile, waste 
management. She is currently leading Consumer Insight Action Panel funded by 
Sitra and Deutsche Bundesstiftung Umwelt. The project seeks to support the 
transition to the circular economy by generating, applying and testing consumer 
behavioural insights in circular strategies. 
 
Rosa Strube (female). Rosa is the Team Leader of the Sustainable Lifestyes team at 
the CSCP. Rosa’s expertise lies in the field of sustainable consumption and 
lifestyles, behaviour change, policy instruments for sustainable consumption and 
production and ICT. She was Project Manager of several EU -funded projects like 
the ongoing  INHERIT project and CATALYST in the past. Rosa holds a M Sc 
in Environmental Policy and Regulation from the London School of Economics (UK) 
and a MA in Politics, International Law and History from the University of Bonn, 
Germany. 
 
Ahmad-ur-Rehman Hafiz (male). Ahmad’s focus at the CSCP lies in the areas of 
Sustainable Public Procurement (SPP), Sustainable Supply Chains, Energy and 
Resource Efficiency Investment as well as Stakeholder Dialogues and Engagement. 
Ahmad has been managing projects dealing with improving environmental and 
social impacts of textiles, leather and automotive industries. He has been 
delivering European such as multi -stakeholder hubs for exchange on sustainable 
and fair criteria for products procured in the public and private sectors. 
 
Carina Diedrich (female). Carina is Project Manager in CSCP's Sustainable 
Infrastructure, Products and Services Team. Carina is experienced in the 
management of national and international research projects in the fields of 
environmental politics and sustai nable food production and consumption. 
Furthermore, she is interested in corporate social responsibility and the influence 
of civil society in shaping and promoting sustainable lifestyles.  
 
Dimitra Ioannidou (female). Dimitra works as a consultant for the Sustainable 
Infrastructure, Products and Services team. Her expertise lies in sustainable value 
chains and stakeholder engagement. She is currently involved in the SCALIBUR 
project, working on urban biowaste recycling. Dimitra holds a MSc. in 
Environmental Sciences from the University of Freiburg. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
• Diedrich, A. -C., Ioannidou, D., Grossi, F., Dieguez, J. -L., Díaz, L., Gonzalez Perez, R., 2019. Stakeholder 
engagement plan per pilot municipality and identification of current best practices. Germany and Spain. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
30  
SCALIBUR Deliverable 2.1. 
• Staatsen, B., Strube, R., Guillen -Hanson, G. et. al. (2017): “Exploring triple -win solutions for living, moving 
and consuming that encourage behaviour change, protect the environment, promote health and health 
equity”, Brussels 2017.  
• Anggraeni, K., Tun çer, B. (2013). Sustainable Supply Chain Initiatives: Strategies and Lessons Learnt from 
the SWITCH-Asia Programme - Scaling-up Study 2013. Prepared by the SWITCH-Asia Network Facility.   
• Van Beers D., Hafiz A., Grossi F., Kuhndt M. (2014). Discussion docume nt on sectoral dialogue events on 
behalf of European greenXpo project. 
• Hafiz A., Van Beers D. (2013). International Review of Good Practices and EU and Japanese Standards / 
Regulations. SWITCH Asia Project on Greening Supply Chains in the Thai Auto and Aut omotive Parts 
Industries. 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
730378  
R2pi 
http://www.r2pipro
ject.eu/  
H2020 Transition from Linear to Circular:  Policy and 
Innovation 
2019-
2022 
817788 
SCALIBUR 
http://www.scalibur
.eu/ 
H2020 Scalable Technologies for Bio -Urban Biowaste 
Recovery 
2018-
2022 
263962 
SPREAD 
https://www.sustai
nable-lifestyles.eu/ 
FP7 Sustainable Lifestyles 2050 2011-
2012 
10044147
5  
REIF 
https://ki-reif.de/   BMWi Resource-Efficient, Economic and Intelligent 
Foodchain (REIF) 
2020-
2022 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
- 
 
CSCP 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
YES 
Below are the tasks CSCP will sub-contract and justifications: 
1. Expert validation of MERLIN’s evaluation methodology of good practices: Consumer 
health protection experts (N GOs) will be engaged as expert to the workshops (Workshops 
in sub -task 6.2.2) for validating health and safety indicators of MERLIN innovations (i.e., 
recycled materials) for consumers and end -users. This will ensure independent evaluation 
of good practices especially from consumer health perspective.  
2. Live streaming of workshops: Expertise of professional Live -streaming solution provider 
will be needed to allow professional and reliable online access of participants to workshops 
in WP 6 not able to join physical workshop due to Pandemic. 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
31  
 
Participant No 10 
 
Participant legal name Particula Group d.o.o. 
Short name PARTICULA 
Website www.particula-group.com 
Organisation type SME 
Country Croatia 
Description of the legal entity 
PARTICULA Group d.o.o. is a research and technology company dedicated to development of Circular bio 
economy solutions. The company specializes in integration of sustainable technological innovations into the 
business models and manufacturing process with the goal to develop high end products with positive 
environmental impact. 
PARTICULA works on both research and development projects to develop own product lines to design innovative 
products. 
Company key sustainability focus areas are sustainable biomass cultivation process, state of the art proprietary 
technology and cutting-edge circular bio based products. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Particula Group will lead WP 5 
- Assessment of the 
environmental, economic, 
social, legislative and 
normative barriers of the 
developed processes and 
focus on LCA, SLCA and LCC 
implementation 
The staff of PARTICULA has over 10 years of experience on international  
cooperation, performing the sustainability assessments. The company is based 
in Rijeka, Croatia. PARTICULA contributes with the UNEP/SETAC Life Cycle  
initiative, the World Resources Forum and other relevant organizations in the 
field of sustainability. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
Nikolina Zic (F): MSc Degree in Biology 
Ms. Zic is a head of sustainability projects implementation unit at PARTICULA. 
She has large experience in LCA implementation in the field of bio polymers. 
She is working as a researcher on the novel plastics for 5 years. She has a high 
expertise in bio based plastics materials and packaging technologies.  
 
Luka Dobrović (M): Msc in Environmental Economics and MBA 
Luka Dobrović, CEO of PARTICULA is a researcher with more than 15 years of 
experience in internation al business development and EU funded projects. He 
has extensive experience in prototyping and new products and technologies 
development. 
He is responsible for the Coordination of EU Funded Projects with relevant 
experience both in management and financial points of the projects. 
 
Ana Poropat (F): Msc in Environmental Agronomy 
Ms. Poropat is sustainability projects engineer at PARTICULA. She has strong 
experience in sustainability studies implementation in the field of bio plastics. 
She has been working as a researcher on the recycled plastics for 3 years.  
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
32  
1. Dobrović, Slaven et. Al. 
Nanosilver in the glass of water - a comprehensive identification of disinfection by-products and assessment of 
mutagenicity of disinfected drinking water in the presence of nanosilver // 2011 NOM Conference Proceedings-
Fourth IWA Specialty Conference on Natural Organic Matter 
Costa Mesa, California, USA, 2011 
2. Dobrović, Slaven et. Al. 
Analysis of the supply of island Lastovo with potable water using LCA methodology // 5. Croatian Water 
Conference with International Participation - Croatian Waters Against the Challenge of Climate Change 
Relevant previous projects or activities  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website 
Funded 
by Title Start – 
End date 
776714 
C-SERVEES 
https://c-
serveesproject.eu/ 
H2020-
CIRC-
2017 
C-SERVEES project: ACTIVATING CIRCULAR SERVICES 
IN THE ELECTRIC AND ELECTRONIC SECTOR 
2018-
2022 
776816 
PROJECT Ô 
http://eu-project-
o.eu/ 
H2020-
CIRC-
2017 
PROJECT Ô: DEMONSTRATION OF PLANNING AND 
TECHNOLOGY TOOLS FOR A CIRCULAR, INTEGRATED 
AND SYMBIOTIC USE OF WATER 
2018-
2022 
792236 
BIOBRIDGES 
https://www.biobri
dges-project.eu/ 
H2020-
BBI-2017 
BIOBRIDGES project: BRIDGING CONSUMERS, 
BRANDS AND BIO BASED INDUSTRY TO IMPROVE 
THE MARKET OF SUSTAINABLE BIOBASED PRODUCTS 
2018- 
2020 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
PARTICULA evaluates the potential environmental impact and performs costs assessments of products and 
services, by means of different methodologies and tools. For instance, using the software SimaPro® 8 (PRé 
Consultants) and own databases. This analytical tool is in accordance with ISO 14040 & 14044 standards (ISO 
14042, 2000). 
 
PARTICULA 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain  tasks (please note that core tasks of 
the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third 
parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third 
parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International 
Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
33  
Participant No 11 
 
Participant legal name ITC PACKAGING, S.L.U  
Short name ITC 
Website www.itc-packaging.com  
Organisation type Large enterprise 
Country Spain 
Description of the legal entity 
ITC PACKAGING, S.L.U. originated from the company "Industrias Técnicas del Cable, S.L., (ITC)", constituted on 13 
January 1989, taking over the activities of the company MINISON, S.L., founded in 1971. Since its inception, it has 
been involved in the manuf acture and sale of plastic injection packaging intended for food products and 
chemicals.   
ITC is the 3rd national plastic packaging operator in Spain, ranking first in markets such as ice cream. It ranks 
among the top 20 in Europe. Its global turnover increased in recent years from €12 million to above €45 million, 
with 2015 turnover rising over 15% compared to 2014. It exported 26% of production in 2015. 
In April 2016, 3 of the companies by ITC business group, were brought under a single corporate structure (ITC 
PACKAGING, S.L.U). As a result of this merger, turnover increased, group synergies wer e enhanced, further 
increasing the solvency of all companies involved. The group became a leading strategic group on the European 
level for the manufacture of plastic food packaging. 
In the field of thermoplastics injection, this company was a pioneer in o btaining certification for its management 
system under the BRC/IoP (food packaging and other packaging materials) standard, certified by the British 
certification entity EFSIS. 
ITC has two production centres. The main company headquarters is located in the town of Ibi (Alicante), with 
facilities sized over 10,000m2, and there is a production centre in Sopelana (Vizcaya). It has 12 logistics platforms, 
8 in the province of Alicante, with which it supplies to other platforms and covers the central and southern 
peninsula; 1 in Sopelana, from which it covers the northern half of the peninsula; 1 in France; 1 in the UK and 1 in 
Italy. 
Along 2017, the company will be expanding its faciliti es for management and R&D&I by creating its own R&D 
Technology Centre, equipped with extensive facilities for research and innovation on over 2,500m 2. These new 
facilities will allow the company greater flexibility in testing the injection pilot plant, whi ch will be provided with 
three injection machines, an in -house workshop for the development of prototype moulds, and laboratories for 
undertaking new R&D, with greater flexibility and independence. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Leadership in WP4 - 
Development and 
VALIDATION of packaging 
demonstrators based on 
recycled PET and Polyolefins 
(PE, PP) 
ITC has a large know -how about the processing of plastic materials in order to 
produce rigid packaging. The expertise by their staff along all the process, 
between the design of the packs, design and development of injection and blow 
mould, and the implantation of new producin g processes will be applied into 
MERLIN project. 
Participation in  WP2- 
Development of 
DELAMINATION processes of 
each multilayer structure 
sorted and WP3  - 
Development of RECYCLING 
processes of the separated 
fractions and monomers 
The Chemical Engineers of ITC has a large knowledge and experience about  
multilayer IML and plastic materials, than will be very important in for 
development of delamination processes, contributing with the needs of the 
packs, materials and IML labels to use in real conditions. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
34  
Participation in WP6 - 
Increasement of knowledge 
within stakeholders by means 
of Good Practices and learning 
experience 
ITC will contribute with its expertise in plastic materials and multilayer labels 
and packs, helping to the consortia to the design of good practices 
Participation in WP7 - Cross-
cutting activities and 
Innovation impacts 
Dissemination about the project and their results will be done in publications 
and the events ITC will attend along the project. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
Antonio Martínez (male). He is in charge of Corporate R&D and IPR 
Management. Since 1999 He is working as an Electrical Engineer, and project 
manager in R&D projects, related with industrial processes, and the develop of 
innovative plastic packaging.  
 
Almudena Cacheiro (female) . She is a Chemical Engineer that is working in 
quality and laboratory department. She has more than 10 years of experience 
in the development of new plastics and plastic packaging.  
 
Silvia Oliver (female).  She is a Chemical Engineer and expert in plastic 
materials. She´s worked in many R&D projects for developing new plastic packs, 
IML labels and advanced plastic materials.  
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
ITC is working in a specific research line for developing innovative sustainable packaging, that help to the food 
industry to reduce the environment impact without affect the food preservation. ITC offer different 
technological solutions with high barrier properties in their LongLife Q collection and bioplastics. 
Relevant previous projects or activities  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website 
Funded 
by Title Start – 
End date 
RTC-
2016-
5352-2 
COAT4PACK 
Economy 
and 
Competiti
veness 
Ministry 
Development of barrier coatings to lighten up 
structures on flexible packaging for food 
2016-
2019 
IMIDTA/2
016/226 IMLPack IVACE Innovative IML labels for packaging 2016-
2017 
IDI-
20170883 TECFOOD CDTI- 
CIEN New healthy technological food for new social needs 
2018-
2021 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
35  
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the 
proposed work 
The company's technological and industrial capabilities are the key factors in achieving its historical success on 
the market. The company has the late st technology to achieve high quality and the added value it gives to its 
products. It also commands its own design and engineering team, which is responsible for ensuring that 
customer needs are fully met, using the most advanced designs, while continuing to be effective and efficient. 
The engineers and technicians in the company's R&D department use the latest advances in tools for graphic 
design, calculation of forces and resistance, simulation, CAD/CAM, etc., which in addition to modern injection, 
co-injection and IML insertion technology, allows the company to develop innovative, advanced plastic 
containers, which provide significant added value to the products they contain, both in terms of conservation 
and presentation and functionality. 
Over its history, the ITC group has participated in the development of more than 15 new inventions protected 
under patent, both domestically and internationally, with products related to plastic containers and toy 
manufacturing, either via direct application through the companies or one of its legal representatives. 
 
ITC 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third 
parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third 
parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
36  
 
Participant No 12 
 
Participant legal name ICIMENDUE srl 
Short name IM2 
Website www.icimen.com 
Organisation type SME 
Country Italy  
Description of the legal entity 
IM2 represents a benchmark in the flexible packaging industry since the late 19 century, employing a wide range of 
materials such as paper, cellulose films, conventional plastic films and other advanced technological solutions. 
Nowadays, the rotogravure and fl exographic printing, together with the modern equipment and metallization 
facility allows Icimendue to print and produce many types of laminate film structures for all kinds of market sectors. 
The current capacity allows the Company to print any type of fl exible film with an overlapping up to 11 colours, by 
coupling in line and off line in order to achieve different typologies of multilayers for the most varied market 
requirements.  
Recently, important investment programs for the expansion of production capacity have been launched. In order to 
be in the forefront of the latest technology and innovation, Icimendue closed partnerships with several research 
entities: “Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II”, “Università degli Studi di Salerno”, “Seconda U niversità di 
Napoli”, and several CNR Institutes.  
IM2 pays great attention to market requirements in terms of hygiene, safety and environmental regulations: ISO 
9001 and ISO 14001 certifications were obtained in 2002 and BRC/IOP certification was obtained in 2009. 
Icimendue is also engaged in continuous and systematic respect of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and 
environmental requirements. In 2009, as evidence of the environmental commitment, became operational a new 
plant for solvent recovery , which allows to minimize solvent emissions and retrieve a considerable percentage of 
the solvent used in the printing process. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Active participation in WP4 - 
Development and 
VALIDATION of packaging 
demonstrators based on 
recycled PET and Polyolefins 
(PE, PP) 
IM2 will have a minor partipation in all the activities regarding  Cross-cutting 
activities and Innovation impacts  and  Increasement of knowledge within 
stakeholders by means of Good Practices and learning experience  related to 
flexible packaging. 
  
CVs of the team involved 
 
Ms CHIARA ASCIONE (F) , PhD, has a PhD in Industrial Product and Process 
Engineering, focused on the improvement of barrier properties of plastic 
packaging, completed at the University of Naples Federico II. Before moving in 
Icimendue, she worked for two years at CNR -IPCB as research fellow. Currently, 
she is R&D Manager Junior in Icimendue and works on the design of novel 
packaging laminates, investigating new recyclable and/or biodegradable materials 
and validating their fundamental properties (thermal, mechanical, barrier). She 
manages the scientific projects in Icimendue. 
 
Mr. VINCENZO SCOGNAMIGLIO (M) is graduated in Chem ical Materials and 
Production Engineering in University of Naples “Federico II” and he is R&D 
Manager Senior in Icimendue. He has a broad experience in scientific project 
management since 2009. His work is mainly focused on the feasibility of novel 
packaging laminates on the industrial scale, as he is an expert of rotogravure 
printing, inks and adhesives. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
37  
 
Ms. GRAZIA MARIA MENSITIERI (F) is graduated in Economics and Business at 
University of Naples “Federico II ”. She is a Manager and the Chief Administrative 
Officer of Mensitieri Group.  
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
1) “Safety issues of a diathermic oil used in the packaging industry” -Sanchirico R., Di Sarli V., D’Anna A., Di 
Benedetto A., Berardini F., Mensitieri M. 
2) “Catalytic combustion of wate stream coming from the solvent recovery stage of a packaging industry”- Landi G., 
Di Sarli V., Di Benedetto A., Berardini F., Mensitieri M. 
3) “Artificial olfaction tools for fast and reliable assessment of volatile compounds emissions from biodegradable 
films”- Miglietta M. L., Massera E., De Vito S., Scognamiglio V., Mensitieri M., Di Francia G.  
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project ID Project Acronym 
& website Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
GA no 
745586 
BIOBARR   
www.biobarr.eu   BBI-JU New Bio -based Food Packaging Materials with 
Enhanced Barrier Properties 
01.06.201
7- 
31.05.202
1 
CUP - 
B63D180
00530007 
PERSIA 
https://www.icimen.
com/ricerca-
sviluppo/persia/  
ERDF  
Campania 
2019 
Innovative packaging based on antimicrobial 
peptides for food safety 
01/11/20
18-
30/09/20
20 
CTN01-
00230-
218064 
Safe&Smart 
https://www.icimen.
com/ricerca-
sviluppo/safesmart/  
ESF Italy  
New enabling technologies for food safety and 
integrity of agri-food chains in a global scenario 
01/09/20
13- 
31/01/20
19 
PON03_P
E-00180-1 
M2Q 
http://www.labm2q.
it/ 
ERDF Italy  
Public Private R&D Laboratory in agro-food sector 01.11.201
3-
30.09.201
7 
CDS00047
5 
E.So.Pack. 
https://www.icimen.
com/ricerca-
sviluppo/esopack/  
ERDF  
Campania 
High Sustainability Structures for the PACKaging of 
food products 
01/10/20
18-
31/03/20
21 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
IM2 has two well -equipped laboratories, one concerning the quality control and one concerning the research and 
development of novel packaging structures. The laboratories’ facilities are focused on the concerning the chemical -
physical properties characterization of flexible films and evaluation of the quality of printing.  
R&D Lab Facilities: FT-IR, Permeabilimeters for oxygen and water vapor, DSC, Dynamometer, water contact angle. 
Quality Control Lab Facilities : Gas Chromatographers, Gas Chromatographer -Mass Spectrometer, cold- and heat-
sealing machines, Coefficient of friction tester, colorimeters. 
Production Site Facilities : 3 rotogravure machines, 2 laminating machines, 6 slitting machines, 1 metallization 
plant. 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
38  
 
IM2 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
Participant No 13 
 
Participant legal name ENCO SRL 
Short name ENCO 
Website www.enco-consulting.it 
Organisation type SME 
Country Italy  
Description of the legal entity 
ENCO is an innovation and research -consulting firm based in Naples, active since 1987. Originally specialized in 
business consulting and industrial engineering, it has expanded its range of activities becoming an experienced 
advisor for both private business and public authorities and opened two new offices in Rio de Janeiro and Brussels. 
The company participates in national and international R&D&I projects as a facilitator for business, product, 
technology and process innovation in different industrial are as, including circular economy, packaging, agro -food 
sector and logistics. The company has a long track record participating in EU -funded projects as WP leader, task 
leader and project coordinator. The company is specialized, inter alia, in two main fields:  
• Development of market analysis, business plan and exploitation plans: studies (elaborated at European and 
international scale) for innovative products, technical solutions and systems are focused on market trends, market 
profitability and distribution  channels. ENCO conducts market surveys with potential customers, Desk analysis, 
SWOT analysis, identification of economic, legislative and behavioral barriers, customer segments analysis and 
competitor analysis, market feasibility studies and Risk analysis. Moreover, ENCO develops innovation and business 
strategies, quantitative assessment of pricing and cost-benefit analysis, identifying Capital and Operational Costs. 
• Communication and dissemination strategies: developing action plans for dissemination and communication 
activities; identifying target stakeholders, tools and actions to be implemented; developing tailor made campaign to 
raise audience’s awareness on the project rationale, activities and results; identifying and selecting events, 
workshops and meetings; organizing information and dissemination events; producing publications, newsletters, 
brochures, leaflets, promotional and marketing materials; setting up and managing project websites, and 
participating in relevant events and exploiting institutional communication channels; building a broader community 
around the project topics. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
39  
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
Communication and 
Dissemination 
ENCO has been successfully running the communication campaign of other H2020 
projects in food and packaging sector. ENCO has expertise in designing accurate 
and project -specific communication action and in guiding innovators in 
disseminate the project results in open access journals and scientific events.  
 
Business Planning,  
Exploitation and IPR 
Management 
ENCO is expert in the development of business plans and exploitation strategies in 
order to lay down the basis for the swift market update of the new technologies 
and products developed in MERLIN. ENCO experience will also guarantee the 
adequate management of the knowledge generated during the MERLIN project.  
 
Clustering and Replicability  
ENCO counts on a wide experience in building new consortia, in creating and 
enlarging its networks and establishing synergies with other projects, initiatives, 
stakeholders and associations across the EU. 
 
CVs of the team involved 
 
Ms. SIMONA MINCIONE (F).  Project Manager, since 2014. She holds a Master 
degree in International Relations and European Studies. She got the certificate in 
EU Funding and EU Project Design & Management in 2012 and WIPO certificate 
for IPR Management. She is currently IPR & Exploi tation Manager of SHEALTHY 
project (H2020 -SFS GA no 817936) and SUREFISH (H2020 -PRIMA GA no 1933) 
where she is responsible for ensuring the project results are protected and that 
the knowledge management procedures are implemented. She has extensive 
experience in the management of Horizon 2020 EU funded projects, in particular 
in agro-food and packaging sectors. She is also trainer in EU Project Management 
at MandS (UNISAPIENZA, Rome).  
 
Dr. Ing. MARCO DE LA FELD (M). Senior Project Manager, since 2008. He 
graduated in Mechanical Engineering in 2003 and obtained a Research Doctorate 
in “Engineering of Materials and Production” in 2006. He is the Project 
Coordinator of SHEALTHY (H2020 - GA 817936) and co -coordinate SUREFISH 
(H2020-PRIMA GA no 1933). H e was PC for SMART GROUND (H2020 -GA 641988), 
IP & Exploitation Manager of RECOVER (H2020 - GA 887648) and of SaltGae 
(H2020-GA 689785), IPR Manager of BIONTOP (H2020- GA 837761). Mr. de la Feld 
has several experiences as EU Project trainer and has led sever al capacity building 
workshops. 
 
Mr. GIUSEPPE SALVIO (M). Junior Project Manager, since 2019. He holds a Master 
degree in Law and he got the Master Executive in EU Project Management 
certificate in 2019. He has good skills in the management, planning and execution 
of communication, dissemination and exploitation activities, besides assisting and 
managing activities of EU -funded project as BIOnTop (H2020 -BBI GA 837761) and 
RECOVER (H2020-BBI GA 887648). He is currently assisting the SHEALTHY (H 2020- 
GA 817936) IPR & Exploitation Manager. 
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
1) de la Feld M. (ENCO), Mincione S. (ENCO), (2018) FOODIE (Farm -Oriented Open Data in Europe) digital platform 
for agriculture business, WICaNeM 2018, 13th Wageningen International Conference on Chain and Network 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
40  
Management;  
2) Charvát, K., Kepka, de la Feld M. (ENCO), Mincione S. (ENCO), (2015) POMODORE – Smart Agri Food Project, ISAF 
2015;  
3) de la Feld, M. (2012). Real time monitoring of temperature in the agro -food logistic chain (ENBED project). 
Presentation at CIBUS – Parma Exhibition Center;  
4) Mincione, S., (2014). FOODIE-Farm Oriented Open Data, Tavoli Tematici per Expo 2015, 14 July 2014;  
5) Rossetti, P., Dino, G. A., de la Feld, M., Pizza A., (2016). SMART GROUND: SMART data platform to enhance 
accessibility of da ta in the EU on SecoNDary Raw Materials, Geophysical Research Abstracts Vol. 18, EGU2016 -
5881-1, 2016 EGU General Assembly 2016. 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project 
ID 
Project 
Acronym Funded by Title Start – 
End date 
GA 
817936 SHEALTHY H2020 
Non-Thermal physical technologies to preserve fresh 
and minimally processed fruit and vegetables. ENCO 
is the project coordinator and the dissemination, 
exploitation and IPR manager.  
01.05.201
9-
30.04.202
3 
GA 
887648 RECOVER BBI-JU 
Development of innovative biotic symbiosis for 
plastic biodegradation and synthesis to solve their 
end of life challenges in the agriculture and food 
industries. ENCO is the project exploitation and IPR 
manager. 
01.06.202
0-
31.05.202
4 
GA 
837761 BIOnTOP BBI-JU 
Novel packaging films and textiles with tailored end 
of life and performance based on bio -based 
copolymers and coatings. ENCO is the dissemination 
and IPR manager. 
01.06.201
9-
31.05.202
3 
GA 1933 SUREFISH PRIMA 
Fostering Mediterranean fish ensuring traceability 
and authenticity.  ENCO is the project coordinator 
and dissemination, exploitation and IPR manager. 
01.03.202
0-
28.02.202
3 
GAP 
10100085
2 
CO-FRESH H2020 
Co-creating sustainable and competitive fruits and 
vegetables’ value chains in Europe.   ENCO leads the 
business planning. 
GAP 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
As a leading business consultant with extensive experience in business planning and development, communication, 
dissemination and exploitation of the project results, ENCO possesses the suitable human resource and operational 
capacity for the tasks to be fulfilled within the project. 
 
ENCO 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core 
tasks of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked 
third parties? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by 
third parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by 
International Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
41  
Participant No 14 
 
Participant legal name European Plastics Converters 
Short name EuPC 
Website www.plasticsconverters.eu 
Organisation type Non – profit 
Country  Belgium 
Description of the legal entity 
European Plastics Converters (EuPC) is the leading EU -level trade association, based in Brussels, representing 
European plastics converting companies. Plastics converters use plastics raw materials and recycled polymers to 
manufacture new products. EuPC to tals about 45 national associations, as well as European plastics converting 
industry associations, and represents more than 50.000 companies, producing over 50 million tons of plastic 
products every year. More than 1.6 million people are working in about 50.000 companies (mainly small and 
medium sized companies in the converting sector) to create a turnover in excess of 280 billion € per year.  
 
EuPC main objective is to defend and promote the European plastics converting industries interests by:  
 
-  Voicing industry opinion to European and international institutions, and NGOs;  
-  Maintaining relationships with corresponding European and global organisations;  
- Conducting surveys, studies and research projects covering all areas of the plastics processing industry. 
Main tasks in the project How the entity skills match the main tasks 
 
Communication and  
Dissemination 
EuPC has been successfully running the communication and dissemination 
activities for other H2020, FP7 and Erasmus+ projects. EuPC has expertise in 
creating communication strategies, developing project websites, designing 
brochures and banners, organizing surveys and workshops, etc.  
Standardisation, Policy & 
Regulatory framework 
EuPC’s position and expertise in EU regulation and policy will provide a unique 
opportunity to evaluate the current EU policies, standards and regulations related 
to multilayer packaging, their recycling and upcycling, to identify policy barriers 
and propose solutions to ensure a circular economy for plastics. 
CVs of the team involved 
 
Ms. Maria Estela Izquierdo (F) , EU Projects Executive and A&T Division Manager 
at EuPC. She holds a Master’s degree in Chemical Engineering, Master in 
Sustainability and CSR, and Master in Industrial Ecology and Energy Efficiency. She 
was the project coordinator of Polymark (FP7) and is responsible of the 
communication and di ssemination of DEMETO and polynSPIRE projects (H2020 -
Spire). In addition, she was a task leader for communication and dissemination 
activities in the following FP7 projects: Slipsafe, NanoOnSpect, Plast4future and 
Placard. Ms Izquierdo is as well the Execu tive Secretary at ECP4 - The European 
Composites, Plastics and Polymer Processing Platform, an industry driven 
collaboration that unites the top -level European research institutions, regional 
plastic clusters, and EU -level industrial organisations of plast ics and composites 
converters. 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
42  
 
Mr. Mohammad Hayatifar (M) , Technical Projects Manager at EuPC. He holds a 
PhD in Polymer Chemistry and Master in Organic Chemistry. He is involved in 
different technical and regulatory projects with the aim of improving s afety, 
quality and recyclability of plastics. In addition, he is currently is a task leader for 
polynSPIRE (H2020 -Spire) project. Before joining EuPC, he worked several years 
both in industry and academia where he has had the chance to accumulate a 
wide-range of experience in different domains of the plastic world such as 
research, technical and regulatory. He has also published more than 30 papers in 
peer reviewed international journals. 
 
Mr Marjan Ranogajec (M) , Project Officer at EuPC. He is actively involved in 
communication and dissemination activities of DEMETO and polynSPIRE projects 
(H2020-Spire), and is a task leader for UPSKILL project (Erasmus +). In addition, 
Marjan is a European Coordinator for MORE p latform (Monitoring Recyclates for 
Europe). Before joining EuPC, he worked as a consultant for public funding 
pursuits in area of aerospace, renewable energy, paints and coatings, and in 
academia as a Research Associate on a number of European and national  projects 
in the area of Biotechnology and Public sector analysis. Marjan holds a Master 
degree in Public Policy from the Hertie School of Governance in Berlin, Germany 
and a Graduate degree in Technology from the University of Novi Sad, Serbia.  
Relevant publications and/or products, services… 
1. EuPC and 4 other partners published the "Plastics Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda in a Circular 
Economy" on the 6th of December 2018. The document was developed in cooperation with SusChem, the 
European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry; CEFIC, the European Chemical Industry Council; 
PlasticsEurope; and ECP4, the European Composites, Plastics and Polymer Processing Platform. 
2. EuPC published results of its 2nd survey on the use of re cycled plastics materials,10 Jan 2019. From January till 
September 2018, EuPC conducted its 2nd European survey on the use of recycled plastics materials (rPM) in 
Europe’s plastics converting industry. 
3. On 3rd July 2018, the new Joint Paper on “A Governance Structure for an ambitious EU Industrial Strategy” was 
published. The joint position paper is co-signed by 122 member associations of the Industry4Europe coalition. 
4. On 23rd March 2018, the new Joint Paper on “Setting indicators for an ambitio us EU Industrial Strategy” was 
published. The joint position paper is co-signed by 111 Associations of the Industry4Europe coalition. 
5. On 24th April 2019, EuPC launched MORE platform (Monitoring Recyclates for Europe). MORE is the unified, 
digital platfo rm to monitor the use of recycled polymers in the European plastics converting industry. MORE is 
helping the plastics industry to become more circular by collecting the volume of recycled polymers that is used by 
plastics converting companies to create new products, and by stimulating a higher uptake of recycled polymers. 
Relevant previous projects or activities (up to five)  
Project 
ID 
Project Acronym 
& website 
Funded 
by Title Start – 
End date 
GA 
820665 
polynSPIRE 
(https://www.polyns
pire.eu) 
H2020 
Demonstration of innovative technologies towards a 
more efficient and sustainable plastic recycling 
 
2018-
2022 
GA 
768573 
DEMETO 
(www.demeto.eu) H2020 Modular, Scalable and High -Performance 
Depolymerization by Microwave Technology 
2017-
2021 
GA 
642231 New Innonet  The Near-zero European Waste Innovation Network 2015-
2017 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
43  
GA 
243409 PRIME FP - 7 
A Process to Engineer and Manufacture Medium to 
High Value 3D Products Using Mixed Polymer 
Recyclate 
2010-
2013 
Any significant infrastructure and/or any major items of technical equipment, relevant to the proposed 
work 
- 
 
 
EuPC 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks (please note that core tasks 
of the project should not be sub-contracted)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of its work is performed by linked third 
parties? 
YES 
EuPC foresees to support the work performed by a linked third party. In particular, the European  
Plastic Converters Association (EuPC) is functionally divided into two business units, which are  also 
different legal persons, to sustain the two types of activities that the association u sually performs 
for its members: market analysis and  dissemination/communication. This company, called Polymer 
Comply Europe (PCE), is a 100% owned subsidiary of EuPC and is a service  provider for the plastics 
industry specialized in EU legislation.  Polymer Comply Europe (PCE) will support European Plastic 
Converters Association (EuPC) in the market data analysis and the business plan for plastic waste in 
WP9 and also in concrete dissemination activities in WP10. 
 
WP5: PCE will capture the evolution of diff erent standards (e.g., regarding recycling, upcycling, 
circularity, recycled content, etc.), certification (e.g., sustainable sourcing for food contact 
materials) and labelling schemes  by conducting several surveys and interviews with the main 
stakeholders in the waste management and recycling sectors and relevant standardization bodies.  
 
WP7: PCE will participate in design the branding of the project (logo, brochures, leaflets, roll -up, 
banner, poster, etc.). Also, PCE will contribute to creating the project website and co-manage the 
social media (LinkedIn, Twitter, etc.). In all the workshops and events related to the project, PCE will 
contribute to the creation of promotional materials, invitation - registration process and post-event 
communication materials.  
The total budget allocated to these activities ascends to €50,000.  
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third 
parties (Articles 11 and 12 of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of the work is performed by International 
Partners (Article 14a of the General Model Grant Agreement)? 
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
44  
Section 5: Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
Regarding the ‘research with humans’ component , it is affirmed that activities under the MERLIN project 
(especially in relation with the CEIEC: Circular economy innovation exchange club ) do involve stakeholders 
(humans).  There will be special consideration and the uptake of all necessary standards for ensuring equity  and 
clarity in their recruitment, based on criteria that will be explicitly established and agreed upon by all involved  
partners in collaboration with and after consultation of the ir Research Ethics Departments. Priority will be given 
to asking and obtaining the participants’ signed forms of free, voluntary and informed consent and only in case 
where signing consent may put in danger their anonymity there will be an oral consent att entively asked for and 
taken from the participants. In addition to this, all ethical implications of the chosen methodology will be clearly 
specified and copies of authorization and ethics approvals will be provided in the institutions to perform research, 
such as the  Ethics committee of the coordinator, those of the other partners, or any relevant national boards in 
the partners’countries. 
No covert observations of the participants are  foreseen to take place and no vulnerable individuals or groups to 
be involved in the research activities.  Current available studies exploring the ethics of stakeholder engagement 
and citizen science , including issues such  as intellectual property and project design, will be taken into account 
during project execution. ITENE, with support of CSCP, will ensure that each member of the consortium pro -
actively discusses and considers all ethical aspects with respect to  the activities that will be carried out in the 
project, realization, evaluation and all of its public engagement strands. The ethical standards and guidelines of 
Horizon 2020 will be rigorously applied, regardless of the country in  which the research or engagement activity is 
carried out. 
Specifically, all activities developed and implemented within MERLIN will follow fundamental ethical principles 
including those reflected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union . Activities will also reflect 
and comply with individual institutions’ codes of conduct for research, stakeholder engagement ac tivities and 
guidelines. The MERLIN consortium further confirms that each partner will check with their national 
legislation/practice and their local ethics committee  that provides guidelines on data protection and privacy 
issues in terms of both data protection and Research procedures in relation to any of the proposed public 
engagement and potential volunteer research activities. Any  procedures for electronic data pro tection and 
privacy will conform to Directive (EU) 2016/680 and Regulation  (EU)2016/679 on the protection of personal 
data, and its enactments in the national legislations. 
Ethical approval for studies with volunteer participants (such as correlation of pu blic feedback) will be sought 
from ITENE in line with institutional procedures and the partners with extensive experience in stakeholder  
engagement (CSCP). There will be: 
● No collection of data on a citizen or any other stakeholder without permission; 
● Information will only be used for the purposes covered by agreement, and will not be retained except as 
required for these purposes; 
● Information will not be made public or provided to third parties without explicit permission; 
● Contractual and technical controls will be applied to prevent information becoming inadvertently available 
to third parties. Informed consent will be obtained from any volunteers, especially those participating in 
WP6-7 with the provision of online forms supported by the information necessary for the individual to make a 
voluntary informed decision about whether or not to participate in any of the evaluation feedback sessions. 
Any electronic information collected and mined will be anonymised to prevent the identification of individual 
subjects unless express permission is granted. 
With regards to dealing with issues of security of the personal data, it is anticipated that special care will be given 
first, to purposefully avoid any excessive or unnecessary collection of data from research and evaluation activities 
and second, to abstain from allowing any profiling or the tracking of any identifier in the personal data collected 
and processed. More particularly, all precautions and measures will be taken to minimize any possibility to 
connect any kind of information with a participant as a natural person, through procedures of anonymization/ 
pseudonymization. 
Moreover, all personal data collected will be fairly and lawfully processed and in a transparent way. As extra 
measures to demonstrate that MERLIN has full accountability of these issues and to avoid any risks to the rights 
and freedoms of the participants, (a) a Data Protection Officer (DPO) will be appointed by the coordinator and 
the contact details of the DPO will  be made available to all data subjects involved in the research and (b) an 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
45  
assessment of the envisaged processing operations will be carried out on the protection of the personal data 
(article 35.1 GDPR) and they will be retained for a specific period of time. 
Any research to be carried out at, or responsible to, ITENE or any other MERLIN partner and stakeholder will be 
undertaken within a structured framework. To ensure that we respect all ethical regulations both at EU and 
National level, we will constitute a Committee that will monitor and approve/reject the tests and researchers. 
Delegates from ITENE will coordinate this Committee which, when needed, will count with the support of experts 
in the different  fields from outside the consortium to ens ure neutrality. MERLIN will be managed in accordance 
with these procedures  and will comply with all data protection regulations, acts, directives, and opinions, along 
with institutional codes related to research ethics, both at a European and each partner’s national level.
5.2 Security 
 
Please indicate if your project will involve: 
• activities or results raising security issues: NO 
• 'EU-classified information' as background or results: NO 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
46  
ANNEX: LETTER OF SUPPORT TO MERLIN PROJECT  
• PlasticsEurope 
• Bergischer Abfallwirtschaftsverband (BAV) 
• Compta Emerging Business 
• Spanish Association for Standardization (UNE) 
• Chemical Recycling Europe 
• Cluster of Bioeconomy and Environment of Western Macedonia (CLuBE) 
• European Bioplastics (EUBP) 
• Fraunhofer UMSICHT 
• Spanish Technological Platform for Packaging (PACKNET) 
• Plastipolis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
47  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
48  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
49  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
50  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
51  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
52  
 
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
53  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
54  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
55  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
56  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
57  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
58  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
59  
 
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
60  
  
Jesús Pérez  
Cluster de Innovación Envase y Embalaje   
Jesus Perez <jesus.perez@clusterenvase.com>   
To: ITENE  
Albert Einstein, 1. 46980  
Paterna. Spain 
 
Re: Support letter for MERLIN Project. call: Horizon CE-SC5-24-2020  
 
 
The main objective of  Cluster de Innovación Envase y Embalaje  ( Packaging and 
Packaging Innovation Cluster) is to facilitate the generation of business among its 
associated companies through innovation, cooperation and internationalization, with the 
integration of the entire packaging and packaging value chain, where knowledge can be 
exchanged, efforts combined and R& D promoted in the packaging sector.  
 
Cluster de Innovación Envase y Embalaje  has been informed that ITENE is coordinating and 
will be submitting a proposal in response to the topic CE-SC5-24-2020  named MERLIN. 
MERLIN will improve the sorting and recycling process of the currently not valorized 
multilayer plastics from postconsumer and post -industrial sources and will offer innovative 
solutions for all the processes associated to the management and treatme nt of multi -layer 
packaging waste: i.e., monitoring, sorting, recovery and processability of materials.  
 
Cluster de Innovación Envase y Embalaje  will help maximising the impact of MERLIN, 
communicating the project results to a wider Community, informing o ur network about 
the project progress and outcomes.  
 
These are the reasons why we are willing to support this project. This commitment does not 
imply, in any case, either legal or financial endorsement. 
 
Yours Faithfully, 
 
Jesús Pérez 
Director of Cluster de Innovación Envase y Embalaje 
06/05/2020  
Signature:  
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
61  
 
 
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
62  
LETTER ADVISORY BOARD 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
63  
 
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
 
 
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË - Tel. +32 22991111 
 
 
  
 
This electronic receipt is a digitally signed version of the document submitted by your 
organisation. Both the content of the document and a set of metadata have been digitally 
sealed. 
This digital signature mechanism, using a public -private key pair mechanism, uniquely 
binds this eReceipt to the modules of the Funding & Tenders Portal of the European 
Commission, to the transaction for which it was generated and ensures its full integr ity. 
Therefore a complete digitally signed trail of the transaction is available both for your 
organisation and for the issuer of the eReceipt. 
Any attempt to modify the content will lead to a break of the integrity of the electronic 
signature, which can b e verified at any time by clicking on the eReceipt validation 
symbol. 
More info about eReceipts can be found in the FAQ page of the Funding & Tenders 
Portal.  
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/support/faq)