4. PERSONAL DATA  Page
Does your research involve personal data collection and/or processing?   Yes No 53 
 Does it involve the collection and/or processing of sensitive personal data 
 (e.g: health, sexual lifestyle, ethnicity, political opinion, religious or philosophical 
 conviction)?   
Yes No
  Does it involve processing of genetic information? Yes No
  Does it involve tracking or observation of participants? Yes No
Does your research involve further processing of previously collected personal data 
(secondary use)?
Yes No
5. ANIMALS Page
Does your research involve animals? Yes No
6. THIRD COUNTRIES Page
In case non-EU countries are involved, do the research related activities undertaken in 
these countries raise potential ethics issues? 
 
Yes No
Do you plan to use local resources (e.g. animal and/or human tissue samples, genetic 
material, live animals, human remains, materials of historical value, endangered fauna or 
flora samples, etc.)? 
Yes No
Do you plan to import any material - including personal data - from non-EU countries into 
the EU? Yes No
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 51 of 52
Proposal ID SEP-210687606 Acronym MERLIN
H2020-CP-STAGE2-RIA-CSA  ver 1.0 20180221 Last saved 03/09/2020 17:24
Do you plan to export any material - including personal data - from the EU to non-EU 
countries?  Yes No
In case your research involves low and/or lower middle income countries, are any 
benefits-sharing actions planned? 
Yes No
Could the situation in the country put the individuals taking part in the research at risk? Yes No
7. ENVIRONMENT & HEALTH and SAFETY Page
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to the 
environment, to animals or plants? Yes No
Does your research deal with endangered fauna and/or flora and/or protected areas? Yes No
Does your research involve the use of elements that may cause harm to humans, 
including  research staff? Yes No
8. DUAL USE   Page
Does your research involve dual-use items in the sense of Regulation 428/2009,  
or other items for which an authorisation is required?
Yes No
9. EXCLUSIVE FOCUS ON CIVIL APPLICATIONS Page
Could your research raise concerns regarding the exclusive focus on civil applications? Yes No
10. MISUSE Page
 Does your research have the potential for misuse of research results? Yes No
11. OTHER ETHICS ISSUES Page
Are there any other ethics issues that should be taken into consideration? Please specify Yes No
I confirm that I have taken into account all ethics issues described above and that, if any ethics issues 
apply, I will complete the ethics self-assessment and attach the required documents.
✖
How to Complete your Ethics Self-Assessment
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
Proposal Submission Forms
Page 52 of 52
Proposal ID SEP-210687606 Acronym MERLIN
H2020-CP-STAGE2-RIA-CSA  ver 1.0 20180221 Last saved 03/09/2020 17:24
5 - Call specific questions
Declarations on stage-2 changes
The full stage-2 proposal must be consistent with the short outline proposal submitted to the stage-1- in particular with respect 
to the proposal characteristics addressing the concepts of excellence and impact.
Are there substantial differences compared to the stage-1 proposal? Yes No
Extended Open Research Data Pilot in Horizon 2020
If selected, applicants will by default participate in the Pilot on Open Research Data in Horizon 2020
1
 , which aims to improve 
and maximise access to and re-use of research data generated by actions. 
  
However, participation in the Pilot is flexible in the sense that it does not mean that all research data needs to be open. After 
the action has started, participants will formulate a Data Management Plan (DMP), which should address the relevant aspects 
of making data FAIR – findable, accessible, interoperable and re-usable, including what data the project will generate, whether 
and how it will be made accessible for verification and re-use, and how it will be curated and preserved.  Through this DMP 
projects can define certain datasets to remain closed  according  to the principle "as open as possible, as closed as 
necessary". A Data Management Plan does not have to be submitted at the proposal stage.  
  
Furthermore, applicants also have the possibility to opt out of this Pilot completely at any stage (before or after the grant 
signature). In this case, applicants must indicate a reason for this choice (see options below). 
  
Please note that participation in this Pilot does not constitute part of the evaluation process. Proposals will not be penalised for 
opting out.
We wish to opt out of the Pilot on Open Research Data in Horizon 2020. Yes No
Further guidance on open access and research data management  is available on the participant portal: 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/docs/h2020-funding-guide/cross-cutting-issues/open-access-dissemination_en.htm  and in 
general annex L of the Work Programme.
1
According to article 43.2 of Regulation (EU) No 1290/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council, of 11 December 2013, laying down the rules for participation and 
dissemination in "Horizon 2020 - the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2014-2020)" and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1906/2006.
This proposal version was submitted by Carmen SÁNCHEZ REIG on 03/09/2020 15:45:10 Brussels Local Time. Issued by the Funding & Tenders Portal Submission System.
1 
 
Increasing the quality and rate of Multi-layer packaging recycLINg waste 
List of participants 
 Short name Participant organization name Role Country 
1 C ITENE Instituto tecnológico del embalaje, 
transporte y logística 
RTO - Recycling technologies SP 
2 IRIS IRIS technology solutions, sociedad 
limitada 
SME - Sorting and monitoring 
technology 
SP 
3 ROVIMATICA Rovimatica SL SME - Robotic solutions SP 
4 FERROVIAL Ferrovial Servicios SA LE - Waste treatment plant SP 
5 UNIBO Alma Mater Studiorum - Universita di 
Bologna 
HSE - Solvent-based delamination IT 
6 IONIQA Ioniqa Technologies BV LE - Depolymerization NL 
7 INDORAMA Indorama Ventures Europe BV LE - Repolymerization NL 
8 CEA  Commissariat à l’énergie atomique et aux 
énergies alternatives 
RTO - Additivation, purification, 
upcycling  
FR 
9 CSCP Collaborating Centre on Sustainable 
Consumption and production GGMBH 
SME - Stakeholder engagement, 
awareness, good practices.  
DE 
10 PARTICULA Particula Group SME - Environmental, cost, social 
analysis 
HR 
11 ITC ITC packaging, S.L.U LE - Rigid packaging manufacturer SP 
12 IM2 ICIMENDUE srl SME - Flexible packaging manufacturer IT 
13 ENCO ENCO SRL SME - Exploitation and dissemination IT 
14 EuPC European Plastics Converters Association - Policies, standardization BE 
List of contents 
1. EXCELLENCE ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2