2.3 Probe waveguide technology
WP3 Imaging MIR-ATR arthroscopy probe
3.1 Diamond ATR arthroscope probe
3.2 Diamond Atr probe surface modification
3.3 Arthorscopy probes towards imaging
WP4 Data analysis and software development
4.1 Pre-processing
4.2 Wavelength selection and multivariate discrimination
4.3 Model validation
4.4 Global Control System (GCS) and software development
4.5 Development of Decision Support concepts, tools and integration in the user interface 
WP5 Prototype development
5.1 MIR-ATR arthroscope probe optimization and manufacturing
5.2 MIR-ATR arthroscopy system: testing and fine tuning
5.3 MIR-ATR arthroscopy system: prototyping
WP6 Demonstration and validation in clinical settings
6.1 Pre-validation via in vitro studies
6.2 Clinical demonstration and validation I: ex vivo
6.3 Clinical demonstration and validation II:  ex-vivo
6.4 Clinical demonstration and validation III: in vivo 
WP7 Dissemination, Exploitation and Standardization
7.1 Project Visibility, Web, Social Media Presence and Communication Toolkit
7.2 Stakeholder Engagement, liaison with other EU funded projects
7.3 Intellectual Property management
7.4 Endorsement of Key deliverables, Exploitation and Sustainability
7.5 Standardization activities 
WP8 Coordination and Management
8.1 Administrative, Financial and Legal Management and Reporting to EC
8.2 Risk Management
8.3 Quality Management
8.4 Innovation Management
MS6
MS4MS3MS2MS1 MS5 MS7MS8
MS9 MS10
MS11
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 48 of 96
3.2 Management structure, milestones and procedures  
3.2.1 Organizational structure overview 
The MIRACLE project will be executed by a consortium of 14 partners from 6 different EU Member States combining 
partners with previous EU frameworks projects experience, as well as partners who are participating in EU projects for the 
first time. The MIRACLE consortium will use a simple but effective management structure ( Figure 22) with well-defined 
responsibilities ensuring smooth daily operation and maintaining the project progress. By choosing a simple structure, each 
partner has clear understanding of his duties and may focus on addressing the challenges, deliver results, and 
disseminate/exploit new knowledge according to schedule and proposal. In addition, An External Expert Advisory Board 
will be invited to follow up and provide feedback on the project progress. The detailed responsibilities and roles of the project 
bodies will be defined in the Consortium Agreement (CA) that will be based on the DESCA 2020 ver. 1.2 model and 
concluded prior the project start.  
 
Figure 22. MIRACLE project organizational structure 
3.2.3 Management bodies within the project 
Table 13. Project management bodies 
Level Management 
Body 
Composition Main Responsibilities 
WP WP Leader One person from 
partner leading the WP 
▪ Coordinate, plan and monitor the WP according to the overall 
work plan. 
▪ Support and cooperate with task leaders.  
▪ Report WP work progress to the Project Manager. 
▪ Ensure that deliverables and reports from correspondent WP 
follow the proposed schedule. 
▪ Organize online meetings within tasks leaders when necessary.  
Task Leader One person from 
partner leading the task 
▪ Follow up the work proposed on the task within other partners. 
▪ Coordinate the practical/technical work to be developed in the 
task. 
▪ Communicate with WP leader and provide the material for 
deliverables and reporting according project plan.  
Project 
as a 
whole 
General 
Assembly 
One representative 
from each partner, 
Chairman of the 
General Assembly: 
Adj. Prof. Gabriela 
Lorite (UOULU) 
▪ Main decision-making body of the project 
▪ Responsible for all legal issues arising during the project, 
including IPRs. 
▪ Make strategic decisions on major changes 
▪ Reviewing and approving project reports and milestones and 
monitoring over-all quality 
▪ Adopt any corrective measures wherever necessary as well as in 
any major conflict 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 49 of 96 
Executive 
board 
WP leaders and Project 
Manager 
▪ Operational project management 
▪ Monitor the satisfactory progress of the project in its technical 
and planning aspects. 
▪ Make strategic decision regarding project coordination, 
direction, overall management and planning. 
▪ Monitor the challenges achievements and manage the projec t 
risks. 
▪ Prepares general assembly meetings and proposes decisions 
Coordinator 
(UOULU) 
Project Manager and 
support team (see 3.2.4) 
▪ Act as administrative interface between European Commission 
and general assembly and/or executive board. 
▪ Implement decisions made by the executive board and/or 
general assembly.  
▪ Assist all other management bodies. 
▪ Ensure the communication in the consortium as well as project 
progress in its technical, financial and planning aspects. 
▪ Manage the overall day-to-day project coordination.  
3.2.4 Project Manager and the Support Team 
University of Oulu will have the role of Project Coordinator as well as the responsibility for the overall management of the 
project. The project manager of MIRACLE will be Dr. Gabriela Lorite who has been leading her own Academy of Finland 
post-doctoral p roject and participating in project management of previous EU Framework Programme (SusFoFlex, 
HIPPOCAMP). In addition, she has strong experience on multidisciplinary research due her background as physicist and 
previous work experience in the biomedical department with physicians. She will be assisted by Prof. Krisztian Kordas who 
has been participating and coordinating several national and international projects including previous EU Framework 
Programme (SANES, THEMA-CNT, SusFoFlex, NAPEP, INSTANT, HIPPOCAMP). Prof. Simo Saarakkala will support 
the team for medical issues. This will ensure a smooth management and an effective bridging the gap between different fields 
involved in this proposal. In addition, for financial and legal issues Dr. Lorite will be s upported by the Office for Research 
and Innovation Services of the University of Oulu.  
The main responsibilities of the support team are: 
▪ Implement and follow up the progress of the project cost as planned. 
▪ Adjust focus and coordination of technical work as the project evolves.  
▪ Support and advice project participants on any document (administrative or technical) requested by the Commission.  
▪ Follow up the project progress, report, results, deliverables according to schedule and plan. 
▪ Organize of general and regular meeting, review meetings and events. 
▪ Maintain ease of communication within the Consortium and facilitate the access to project documents.   
3.2.5 Ethics committee and External Expert Advisory Board  
The project will appoint a three-person External Expert Advisory Board (EEAB) consisting of medical device 
for orthopaedics, photonics and orthopaedic surgery experts not  directly involved in the project as partners’ 
representatives. The EEAB shall assist and facilitate the decisions made  by the GA. The Coordinator will ensure 
that a non-disclosure agreement is executed between all Parties and each EEAB member. The EEAB will convene 
once a year during the project in connection with the GA meetings for reviewing the project outcomes and pla ns 
for the next phases from a scientific perspective. The EEAB will report its findings and recommendations to the 
GA. The Coordinator shall write the minutes of the EEAB meetings and prepare the implementation of the 
EEAB's suggestions. The EEAB members shall be allowed to participate in GA meetings upon invitation but have 
not any voting rights. As EEAB representatives in the fields of medical devices, photonics and orthopaedic surgery 
the consortium has invited: Giles Melsom  (MBA, Co -Founder and Sharehol der of Fixus BV and COO of 
JointSphere Bv), Prof. Dr.  Gottfried Strasser (Director of the Center for Micro- and Nanostructures, Technical 
University in Austria) and Dr. Richard Glaab (Head of the Physician Sports Traumatology, Kantonsspital Aarau, 
Switzerland). The Letter of Support to the MIRACLE proposal can be found in Sec 4-5, Annex I (pages 38-40).  
To ensure that the all the project activities and deliverables comply with the et hical principles and guidelines of 
H2020 Programme  and relevant national, EU and international legislation, an Ethics Committee  will be 
established. The Committee that will advise the work of the Consortium will consist of external experts who will 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 50 of 96 
sign non-disclosure agreements. The Chair of the Ethics Committee will be an ex officio a member of the EEAB. 
The Committee will review the project work and deliverables annually. Committee’s work is included in the Task 1.1. 
3.2.6 Decision-making mechanisms 
Decisions will be handled in different levels according to the decision-impact in the project (Table 14). As general principle, 
MIRACLE will try to achieve the decisions using common sense and informal means. Formal procedures such as voting will 
be used only when essential. All decisions with major impact in the project progress will be documented via meeting minutes 
or other formal ways when necessary. Details regarding voting procedures are clearly defined in the Consortium Agreement.  
Table 14. Decision-making mechanism summary 
Decision-kind Level Decision Mechanism 
Minor impact (e.g. changes on the work plan 
to accomplish tasks goal, alternative 
approach to a technical issue)   
WP Verbal consensus  
Continuous communication via email and regular 
online meetings 
Medium to major impact (e.g. delivery date 
change, changes which will reflect in other 
WPs work plan) 
Executive Board Verbal consensus 
Vote (if necessary) by simple majority 
Communication whenever necessary 
Online Meetings every 3 month 
Major impact (e.g. partner leaving the 
Consortium, milestone changes) 
General Assembly  Voting mandatory by simple majority 
Face-to-face meetings every 6 months  
3.2.7 Conflict Management 
All project participants are responsible to identify any conflicts which may arise during the project. Detailed conflict resolution 
will be defined in the Consortium Agreement. The conflict resolution protocol will be established according to the follow 
guidelines:  
▪ Partners should notify any sign of disagreement to the WP leader or project manager (according to the case).  
▪ The manager (WP leader or coordinator) will mediate the conflict by separately contacting all parties to identify the 
viewpoints. It is  highly recommended to avoid email on this situation which often leads to rapid escalation of 
disagreements. Based on the clarifications, the manager need propose a solution.  
▪ If no agreement is achieved with the manager mediation, the Executive Board must  be called to discuss and vote the 
matter (at a special meeting if necessary).  
▪ If the Executive Board measure fails, the issue will be taken up to the GA at a special meeting where the partner 
representatives must vote on the matter.  
▪ Conflicts will be resolve within the framework of MIRACLE consortium and not be moved to legal and courts disputes.  
▪ Project manager must act according to the majority vote decision on the Executive Board and/or GA. 
▪ Conflict resolution measure must NOT contradict the project contract, Consortium agreement and/or any national and 
Commission regulations.  
▪ If the issue reaches the Executive Board or GA, all discussions and decisions must be documented.  
▪ It is expected that all partner participants use the good sense to avoid any conflicts.  
3.2.8 Innovation and risk management 
Innovation management 
The MIRACLE project offers opportunities for new innovations. Innovations are partly generated within the consortium as 
a joint effort and partly as individual partners’ in-house process. Innovation performance is one of the key indicators for the 
success of the project and requires an understanding of both market and technical problems, with a goal of successfu lly 
implementing appropriate creative ideas. Innovation management is in the proposed project understood as a continuously 
evolving activity, adjusted during the project implementation. The focus of innovation management in this project is to allow 
the consortium to respond to an external or internal opportunity, and use its creative efforts to introduce new ideas, services, 
processes or products.  
Innovation management is included in the project in the task 8.4 lead by UOulu. The key innovation management activities 
are monitoring of innovation actions, supporting partners in enhancing their innovation capacity and integration of new 
knowledge. However, important are also the project tasks related to exploitation and defining the exploitable results (task 
7.4), and ownership / IPR (task 7.3) that allow all partners to build their innovations in a manner that explicitly protect their 
IPR. For joint innovations, the boosting is done at several levels. Also, the measures for disseminating and communicating 
the project’s innovative elements to external groups are considered as a part of the innovation management. Innovation 
potential of MIRACLE is described under the section  1.5 of the proposal, and IPR management under section 2.2. The 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 51 of 96 
innovation process will be  regularly monitored through interim management reports, meetings and telcos, the EC’s 
innovation questionnaire, etc. 
Communications in the project 
The project participants will be encouraged to active telephone, video-conferencing and e-mail communication for ensuring 
effective knowledge transfer. The project’s different meetings will be important forums for communication and exchange of 
experiences. An electronic document repository and exchange to facilitate the sharing of written information is implemented. 
In addition, the project will set up a portal which will include the project web pages and an intranet part. It will be used for 
internal and external communications and distribution of different types of materials and include also a discussion forum for 
the use of consortium members. Further communication can be handled via variety of channels: e -mail (distribution lists) 
and teleconferencing, social media and other innovative means. Dissemination and communication Work Package (WP7) 
establishes the communication infrastructure. 
3.2.10 Risk Management 
As a cutting edge research, the project carries some potential risks, thus the success of this proposal relies on: (1) Outstanding 
skills and know-how from the consortium; (2) Consistence of proposed work packages and different approaches to be carried 
out; (3) Multidisciplinary team and expertise of the partners combined to achieve several objectives in their own field but 
committed to one main goal; (4) The ability of the Project Coordinator  and support team to manage EU projects and 
multidisciplinary research. The main risks were identified, the likelihood evaluated and mitigation measures proposed to avoid 
or overcome the risks (Table 18).
3.3 Consortium as a whole  
MIRACLE consortium has a good geographical, and also cultural coverage across the Europe from north to south and east 
to west. This naturally provides to the project an understanding on different business and healthcare cultures, while enables 
to access several stakeholders and e nd-users providing wide feedback and promoting the project. Table 15 summarize the 
partner profile and main role in the project; please refer to section 4 for individual partner profiles.  
Table 15. Consortium profile and main role in MIRACLE 
Organization 
Type 
Partner 
Short 
Name/ 
#No. 
Profile Main Role in MIRACLE 
Project 
Coordinator 
 
Higher 
Education 
UOULU 
#1 
Finnish Higher Education focusing 
on functionalization and surface 
modification (MIC) and spectroscopy 
techniques applied to osteoarticular 
disease diagnosis (MIPT) 
Leader of WP8, focusing on validation of 
the MIR-based diagnostic system to knee 
injury and  OA diagnosis and project 
management 
 
 
 
Higher 
Education 
UULM 
#2 
German Higher Education focusing 
on optical chemical sensor technology 
in the mid-infrared (MIR) spectral 
range. 
Major contributions in WP2 and WP3 
focusing on the development of an MIR 
arthroscopy probe for in depth joint tissue 
evaluation and OA diagnosis. Contributor 
to WP4, WP5, and WP6 focusing on the 
development of the MIR -ATR 
arthroscopy probe prototype , 
chemometric data analysis, and probe 
system testing/application. 
UEF 
#3 
Finnish Higher Education focusing 
on research related on musculoskeletal 
disease and diagnostic tools. 
Key role in WP6, focusing on ex -vivo 
validation of the MIR -based diagnostic 
system for arthroscopy. 
NMBU 
#4 
Norwegian Higher Education 
focusing on  
biophysics with a background in 
multivariate analysis, theoretical 
physics and experimental biophysics. 
Major contribution in WP4 providing data 
analysis where protocols for spectral pre -
processing will be obtained t ogether with 
optimal variable selection and models for 
discriminant analysis 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 52 of 96 
Hospital KUH 
#5 
Finnish university hospital with 
strong clinical and scientific focus in 
musculo-skeletal diseases. 
Key role in WP2, focusing on in vivo 
testing of the MIR-probe. Provider of the 
end-user (surgeon) input in designing of 
the probe. 
UU 
#6 
Dutch Veterinary University 
Hospital, one of the global leaders in 
equine orthopaedic research with a 
strong track record in translational 
regenerative medicine.  
Major contribution in WP6, first clinical in 
vivo use of the MIR -probe. Use of the 
probe for long -term monitoring of 
cartilage defect r epair, so showing both 
feasibility to do so and validating the probe 
for in vivo assessment of well -
characterized lesions. 
SME NP 
#7 
German SME, world leader position 
on laser sources for gas sensing 
applications, focusing on novel QCL-
based emitter for medical diagnostics 
Leader of WP2, focusing on the 
development of the mid -infrared laser 
sources for broad wavelength coverage 
and supports the implementation of the 
source in WP5. 
OP 
#8 
German SME focusing on optical 
sensing solutions for industrial and 
medical applications 
Leader of WP5 focusing on MIR -ATR 
arthroscopy probe system prototyping 
IRIS 
#9 
Spanish advanced engineering 
SME focusing on digitalisation and 
software development for process 
industry and medical applications 
Leader of WP4 developing the Global 
Control System Platform, enabling data 
management tools for acquiring data from 
the different case studies.  
AP 
#10 
German SME, world leader position 
on special optical fibers for MIR 
systems, focusing on fiber optics 
solutions for industrial and biomedical 
applications 
Leader of WP3 focusing on MIR -ATR 
arthroscopy probe prototyping 
Dissemination  
Manager 
 
 
INEB 
#11 
Portuguese private non-profit 
institute focusing on dissemination 
and communication 
WP7 will lead the communication, public 
information, contacting stakeholders and 
dissemination activities 
Standardization 
Body 
UNE 
#12 
Spanish standardization body 
participating in the development of 
national, European and international 
standards. 
UNE will advise, manage and develop all 
the activities related with standardization 
aimed at contributing to the exploitation of 
the project results.  
Cluster PF #13 Finnish photonics cluster with 
establish channels for dissemination  
PF will contribute in the dissemination of 
the novel photonics-based components. 
Exploitation 
manager  
UCP #14 Portuguese university focusing on 
knowledge transfer and exploitation 
activities  
Leader of WP7 focusing on  contacting 
stakeholders and exploitation activities. 
 
  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 53 of 96
3.4 Resources to be committed 
Table 20  summarizes the allocation of person -month (PM) effort by work packages and partners. The allocations were 
defined based on partners’ responsibilities and the resources estimated for achieving their assigned tasks. The overall effor t 
of the project is 718 person months over the 3.5 project years.  
 
As specified by H2020 application guidelines, applicants must only provide details on “other direct costs” when those exceed 
15% of the personnel costs for that participant. This information can be found in Table 16.  
Table 16. Other direct costs justification 
1. UOULU Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  63,500 UOULU MICROELECTRONICS (UOULU MIC): 16 trips @ 1,562.50  Euros (project 
meetings, conferences, technical meetings) =25,000€, Advisory board travel costs: 3 persons 
x 3 meetings x 1 ,500 € / meeting trip = 13 ,500€. TOTAL 3 8,500€  
UOULU Medical Imaging, Physics and Technologies (UOULU MIPT): 16 trips @ approx. 
1,562.50 Euros (project meetings, conferences, technical meetings). TOTAL 25,000€. 
Equipment  31,800 UOULU MIC: Laminar flow cabinet 6,000€, incubator 21,000€, autoclave 4,800€ - these 
values are based on depreciation time of 5 years. 
Other goods 
and services 
87,000 UOULU MIC: Consumables (35 ,000€/entire project) required for surface bio -
functionalization development and evaluation (for example: AFM probes, antibodies (it can 
costs 1,000 euros/microgram), silicon wafer /NCD film, diamond ATR probe); fees to access 
SEM, TEM, XPS, XRD ( 7,000€/entire project ); expenses related to project meet ings 
(10,000€/entire project), 1  financial audits (2,500€) TOTAL: 54 ,500€ 
UOULU MIPT: Consumables related to in vitro validation (enzymes, (immuno)histochemical 
stains, laboratory chemicals). TOTAL 32,500 € 
Total 182,300  
 
2. UULM Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  30,000 Collaborative research at partner laboratories; presentation of results at international 
scientific conferences and workshops, participation in project meetings (20 trips @ 1,500€). 
Equipment  90,000 IR spectrometer module (Bruker Alpha OEM or IRcube; approx. 20k); IR imaging camera 
for characterization of probe waveguides, iBEAM, and probe prototype (approx. 60k); IR 
detectors and detector arrays (approx. 10k). All purchased instruments will be 
modified/customized specifically for the needs in this project, and thus cannot be used or are 
available for any other purpose. Hence, full prices have to be budgeted on these items. 
Other goods 
and services 
122,000 iBEAM development (approx. 60k):  GaAs wafers coated with waveguiding layers for 
iBEAM basic waveguide structure optimization; various III-V wafers with waveguide coatings 
for alternative on -chip waveguide materials (e.g., MCT, etc.); on -chip microfabrication, 
microstructuring, and processing at cleanroom facility (incl. masks, photolithography, ICP, 
etc.); FIB prototyping of iBEAM d esigns; characterization of iBEAM materials and devices 
(e.g., FIB/SEM, imaging EDX, imaging EBSD, XPS, etc.); waveguide coating materials (e.g., 
DLC, SiN, etc.); etc.  Optical components (approx. 30k): focusing and coupling optics for 
AgX fibers, hollow w aveguides, and on -chip waveguide structures; optical positioners for 
alignment of prototypes and coupling of probe to FTIR; HWG waveguides; polarization 
rotators; MIR filters; etc.  Diamond probe (approx. 25k):  NCD chips for prototyping of 
diamond structures and coating strategies; customized probe tips made from diamond (e.g., 
conical, cylindrical, hemispherical) for point probe and imaging probe; special coupling 
interface structures an coatings; anti -reflectance coatings; microfabrication of specific 
coupling structures (i.e., with I/O waveguides and fiber bundle); etc. 
Financial audits (approx. 5k). Expenses to host one project meeting (2k). 
Total 242,000  
 
 
 
 
 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 54 of 96 
3. UEF Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  22,500 15 trips @1,500 Euros (project meetings, conferences, technical meetings) 
Equipment  --   ---------------- 
Other goods 
and services 40,000 
Consumables related to biomechanical, biochemical and histological testing of human 
connective tissue samples (38k). Expenses to host one project meeting (2k) 
Total 62,500  
 
5. KUH Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  15,000 Project meetings, technical meetings, conference (10 trips @ 1,500€) 
Equipment  ----   ------- 
Other goods 
and services 8,000 
Consumables related to surgeries. 
Total 23,000  
 
6. UU Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  15,250 Utrecht NL to UEF FI (Tissue biomechanical measurements), participation in 2 
conferences, two annual face-to-face project meetings during the project. (10 trips @1,525€) 
Equipment  -----   ------- 
Other goods 
and services 
16,441.63 Costs of purchase, preparation and facilities for ex vivo experiments (14441.63€). Expenses 
to host one project meeting (2000€). 
Total 31,691.63  
 
7. NP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  10,050 Travel costs for project progress meetings (10 trips at 650 €) and review meetings (2 attendees) 
(3 trips at 750 €), FLAIR and SPIE Photonics Europe (1 attendee) (2 trips at 650 €) 
Equipment  95,350 Depreciation for: 1. sputter coater (72,000 €), required for development of suitable passivation 
and coating layers; 2. mask aligner  (9,600 €) , needed for high quality multi -section QCL 
processing; 3. FTIR (13,750 €), required for multi-section QCL characterization 
Other goods 
and services 
95,037 Consumables for QCL development including e.g. InP wafers, process chemicals, gases and deposition 
materials for 40 process runs including test samples for process development; laser mounts and 
accessories for assembly (Total 92,537 €). Certificate on the financial statements (2,500 €) 
Total 200,437  
 
8. OP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  25,000 Face to face meetings and joint lab experiments (16 trips @1,562.50€) 
Equipment    
Other goods 
and services 
130,000 Customized mechanical parts and specially designed electronics  to build test set-ups and first 
demonstrators (Total 127,500 EUR). Financial audit (2,500 EUR) 
Total 155,000  
 
9. IRIS Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  18,000 6 Project Meetings (6k); 12 Technical Meeting (12k) 
Equipment  15,000 Software Licenses 
Other goods 
and services 
35,000 
Materials (sensors, optomechanics, casing, etc.)(3K);  IPR fees and patent costs (1K); audit 
certificate (3K); Certification services (5K); Communication materials- video, leaflets, 
banners, posters, brochures (1K);  Cloud hosting and server services (20k); Expenses to 
host one project meeting (2k). 
Total 68,000  
 
10. AP Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
15,000 
Participation in the conferences (Photonics West, Photonics Europe, etc.); Milestone 
meetings; research visits of consortium members. (10 trips @1,500€). 
Equipment  
50,000 
License for Ray tracing software 11,500 €; License for SOLIDWORKS Professional 2016 
7,500 €; Volumetric Dispenser 4,500 €; Laminar Flow Box 5,500 €; Clean room part costs 
21,000 € 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 55 of 96 
Other goods 
and services 55,000 
Polycrystalline crystals for fibers 1kg 5,000 €; Diamonds 20,000 €; Other materials for 
probes development 10,000 €; Probes medical certification 20,000 € 
Total 120,000  
 
11. INEB Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  18,000 Costs of travelling for project meetings and for meetings with stakeholders. (12 trips @ 1,500€) 
Equipment  1,500 Computer/informatics equipment for personnel working in the project 
Other goods 
and services 
48,500 Project website and dissemination materials, dissemination events and other dissemination 
costs, stakeholder meeting, organisation of project events. Services from Hospital de São 
João, Porto (Total 52000 €). One financial audit (2500 €) . Expenses to host one project 
meeting (2000€). 
Total 68,000  
 
12. UNE Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  12,000 Management and standardization travels (12 travels in total @1,000€) 
Equipment  ---   ---------- 
Other goods 
and services 1,000 
Provision of relevant standards to the consortium 
Total 13,000  
 
13. PF Cost (€) Justification 
Travel  
20,000 
Costs of travelling for conferences, workshops, project meetings and meetings with stakeholders. 
(13 trips @ 1,538.46€) 
Equipment  ---   ---------- 
Other goods 
and services 8,000 
Dissemination materials, participation in events, organization of project events.  
Total 28,000  
 
  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 56 of 96 
4. Consortium 
University of Oulu (UOulu)                            Partner #1 (Finland) 
 
The organization: 
The University of Oulu (UOulu) was founded in 1958 and is among the largest universities in Finland with 16 000 
students and 3500 staff members working in ten faculties. UOulu has high -quality research environments for 
international research groups. UOulu has been involved in the EU R&D Framework programs since FP4, and has 
participated in more than 250 projects and networks, of which over 20 have been coordinated by UOulu.  UOulu 
has a highly skilled and experienced support staff helping research groups and principal investigators to successfully 
carry out coordination projects. The faculties and the specialized research units of UOulu form a foundation for 
multi- and interdisciplinary research, innovation and training of experts for demanding professional tasks. Two 
Research Units are joining LIFE iPrO project: Microelectronics (MIC) Research Unit and Medical Imaging, Physics 
and Technologies (MIPT) Research Unit.  These research units will add different backgrounds to the project as 
described below.  
Microelectronics Research Unit (MIC) 
 
The organization: 
Microelectronics Research Unit is an internationally recognized, high excellence team with significant scientific 
impact in the fields of micro and nanosystem technologies. The education and research fields are materials, devices 
and their manufacturing te chnologies with special emphasis on electronics, photonics and telecommunication 
applications. Recent projects have also expanded the research to biotechnology and biomedical applications. The 
research is carried out in several multidisciplinary research g roups in close co-operation with top research groups 
in Europe, Asia and USA and global and domestic industrial partners. The work is being carried out in collaboration 
with other research groups within the University, national and international research o rganizations and industrial 
partners in the framework of European, Tekes and Academy of Finland projects.  
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
MIC focuses on applications that exploit the advantageous properties of nanostructured materials. The group 
gathers young scientists with background in physics, chemistry and electrical engineering to meet the prerequisite 
of interdisciplinary research. The main focus of the research is on the synthesis and application of functional 
nanomaterials, structures and  assemblies that are implemented in electrical, electrochemical, optical and sensing 
devices as well as in environmental control, biotechnology and biomedical applications.  
Role in the project: 
UOulu/MIC is the Project Coordinator and will lead WP7 Manage ment. UOulu/MIC will also contribute with 
some tasks in the following WPs: 
▪ WP1: Task 1.3 Specifications and requirements for MIR-ATR arthroscopy system and user interface  
▪ WP3: Task 2.2 Diamond ATR probe surface modification 
▪ WP5: Task 5.1 MIR-ATR arthroscopy system: testing and fine tuning    
▪ WP6: Task 6.1 Pre-validation via in vitro studies 
Key Personnel: 
Dr. Gabriela S. Lorite, Postdoctoral researcher, Academy of Finland fellow since 2015. She received her Ph.D. 
in Science (2011) and M.Sc. in Physics (2007) degrees at the Department of Applied Physics, State University of 
Campinas. After 2-years as postdoctoral researcher at Anatomy and Cell Biology Department, University of Oulu, 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 57 of 96 
she has joined to the Microelectronics Research Unit. She has been project manager of two FP7 projects: 
HIPPOCAMP (2013 – 2016) and SusFoFlex (2013- 2014). She has extensive experience in AFM including probe 
functionalization for bio-sensing. Her research so far focused on multidisciplinary field combining material science 
and bioscience as evidenced by 15 publications in scientific journals.  
Prof. Krisztian Kordas, M.Sc. Physics and Chemistry (1998, U niv. Szeged), Dr. Tech. Microelectronics, Docent 
of Nanotechnology, Professor (2002, 2005, 2012, Univ. Oulu). Prof. Kordas has supervised or participated in more 
than 20 national and international research projects, published 130+ papers in refereed scient ific journals and co-
authored 4 book chapters. Under his supervision, six doctoral students graduated. His research is focused on 
synthesis, structural and electrical characterization, and implementation of nanostructured materials for electronics, 
sensors and catalyst applications. 
Profile:  
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Bibikova, O; Popov, A; Bykov, A; Prilepskii, A; Kinnunen, M; Kordas, K; Bogatyrev, V; Khlebtsov, N; Vainio, S; Tuchin, V; 
Optical properties of plasmon-resonant bare and silica-coated nanostars used for cell imaging J. Biomed. Opt. 20 (2015) 076017.  
Lin, JF; Kukkola, J; Sipola, T; Raut, D; Samikannu, A; Mikkola, JP; Mohl, M; Toth, G; Su, WF; Laurila, T; Kordas, K; 
Trifluoroacetylazobenzene for optical and electrochemical detection of amines, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 3 (2015) 468 7-
4694. 
Sainio, S; Palomaki, T; Rhode, S; Kauppila, M; Pitkanen, O; Selkala, T; Toth, G; Moram, M; Kordas, K; Koskinen, J; Laurila, T; 
Carbon nanotube (CNT) forest grown on diamond-like carbon (DLC) thin films significantly improves electrochemical 
sensitivity and selectivity towards dopamine, Sensors and Actuators B 211 (2015) 177-186. 
K. Kordás, T. Mustonen, G. Tóth, J. Vähäkangas, A. Uusimäki, H. Jantunen, A. Gupta, K. V. Rao, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan, 
Magnetic-field induced efficient alignment of carbon nanotubes in aqueous solutions, Chemistry of Materials 19 (2007) 787. 
K. Kordás, T. Mustonen, G. Tóth, H. Jantunen, M. Lajunen, C. Soldano, R. Vajtai, P.M. Ajayan, Ink -jet printing of electrically 
conductive patterns of carbon nanotubes, Small 2 (2006) 1021. 
Relevant research projects 
HIPPOCAMP [FP7 EU, project coordinator]: High-power pulsed plasma process operations for the creation of advanced 
metallic parts 
SusFoFlex [FP7 EU, project coordinator]: Smart and sustainable food packaging utilizing flexible p rineted intelligence and 
materials technologies 
Thema-CNT [FP7 EU, project coordinator]: Thermal management with carbon nanotube architectures  
HyNa [Academy of Finland, 2014-2016]: Hybrid Nanocarbon Materials for Biosensors  
CNT4Tissue [Academy of Finland, 2015-2018]: 3D hierarchical scaffold based on bio-decorated carbon nanotubes for bone 
and cartilage tissue engineering 
Existing Infrastructure 
MIC has access to an extensive laboratory infrastructure of University of Oulu which can be relevant t o accomplish the involved 
tasks such as AFM, XRD, TEM, SEM, FIB, XPS, FTIR microscopy etc.   
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
Medical Imaging, Physics and Technologies Research Unit 
 
The organization: 
MIPT Research Unit is an internationally recognized team that works in the fields of biomedical imaging, physics 
and technology. The education and research fields of MIPT are medical physics, medical and biomedical imaging, 
biomechanics, medical technology and radiation protection. The research is carried out in collaboration with other 
research groups within the University of Oulu, University of Eastern Finland, and international research 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 58 of 96 
organizations in e.g. Sweden, USA and Canada. The external research funding comes mainly from the Academy of 
Finland, European Research Council and TEKES (national funding agency for technology and innovation). 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
MIPT Research Unit has extensive experience in world -class research related to diagnostics of musculoskeletal 
diseases, focusing especially on spectroscopy, ultrasound diagnostics, computed tomography, and histology. The 
group leader, Associate Professor S imo Saarakkala, Ph.D., is primarily focused on working within European 
Research Council (ERC) funded project that focuses on development a novel 3D histopathological evaluation of 
osteoarthritis based on contrast -enhanced micro -computed tomography. This ER C project relies heavily on 
spectroscopic characterization of osteochondral tissues as it provides invaluable reference information about the 
biochemical composition of the tissues.  
Role in the project: 
UOulu/MIPT will have a major contribution in WP6 by leading the Task 6.1 Pre-validation via in vitro studies and 
as well contribute for: 
▪ WP1: Task 1.1 Ethics, Task 1.2 Clinical protocol development  
▪ WP4: Task 4.1 Pre -processing, Task 4.2 Wavelength selection and multivariate discrimination, Task 4.3 
Model validation 
Key Personnel: 
Dr. Simo Saarakkala, Doctor of Philosophy, Associate Professor. He has over 15 years’ experience in medical 
physics and biomedical engineering with particular emphasis on osteoarthritis research. He has been a visiting 
scientist at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Hong Kong, China). He has authored over 85 scientific papers 
published in peer -reviewed international journals (+3 book chapters). Dr. Saarakkala has h -index of 28 and his 
publications have been cited over 2400 times (Google Scholar). He has given talks at several international research 
conferences, primarily in Orthopaedic Research Society ( www.ors.org). He has been supervisor of undergraduate 
and postgraduate student and responsible leader of national and European-level research projects. 
Dr. Lassi Rieppo , Doctor of Philosophy, Postdoctoral researcher. He received his Ph.D. in Applied Physics 
(2012) and M.Sc. in Medical Physics (2010) degrees at the Department of Applied P hysics, University of Eastern 
Finland. After one year as postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Applied Physics, University of Eastern 
Finland, and one year working in his own data analytics company, he started working as a post-doctoral researcher 
in Associate Professor Saarakkala’s research group. He has extensive experience in infrared spectroscopy and 
spectroscopic imaging, particularly in osteoarthritis research. He has published 16 publications in scientific journals 
and co-authored two book chapters. 
Ms. Tarja Huhta, Laboratory technician. A skilled professional, who has experience in different tasks in laboratory 
work, including histology. Histology is a key element also in this application, as many reference techniques, e.g. 
FTIR imaging, polarized light microscopy and histopathological grading of tissues, depend on skilful preparation 
and staining of the histological sections. 
 
 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
L Rieppo. S Saarakkala. JS Jurvelin. J Rieppo. Optimal variable selection for Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analysis of 
articular cartilage composition. J Biomed Opt 2014. 
L Rieppo. T Närhi. HJ Helminen. Jurvelin JS. S Saarakkala. Rieppo J. Infrared spectroscopic analysis of human and bovine 
articular cartilage proteoglycans using carbohydrate peak or its second derivative. J Biomed Opt 2013.  
L Rieppo. S Saarakkala. JS Jurvelin. J Rieppo. Prediction of compressive stiffness of articular cartilage using Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy. J Biomech. 2013. 
L Rieppo. S Saarakkala. T Närhi. HJ Helminen. JS Jurvelin, J Rieppo. Application of second derivative spectroscopy for increasing 
molecular specificity of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic imaging of articular cartilage.Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2012. 
S Saarakkala, P Julkunen, P Kiviranta, J Mäkitalo, JS Jurvelin, RK Korhonen. Depth-wise progression of osteoarthritis in human 
articular cartilage: investigation of composition, structure and biomechanics. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2010. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 59 of 96 
Relevant research projects 
European Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant project, 2014-2018: "Development of 3D Histopathological Grading of 
Osteoarthritis” 
Academy of Finland Research Fellow project, 2013-2018: "Establishment of 3D histopathological grading of osteoarthritis” 
Existing Infrastructure 
MIPT has access to an extensive laboratory infrastructure of University of Oulu which can be relevant to accomplish the invol ved 
tasks such as AFM, XRD, TEM, SEM, FIB, XPS, FTIR microscopy etc.   
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties N 
 
Ulm University (UUlm)                             Partner #2 (Germany) 
 
The organization: 
UULM is among the leading young universities (<50 years) ranked #1 in Germany, and #6 in the world (Times 
Higher Education ranking) educating 10,000+ students in (i) Natural Sciences, (ii) Mathematics & Economics, (iii) 
Engineering, Computer Science and Psychology, and (iv) Medicine. The Institute of Analytical and Bioanalytical 
Chemistry (IABC; uni-ulm.de/iabc) at UULM is chaired by Prof. B. Mizaikoff, and comprises 3 lead Professors 
next to 8 permanent technical and scientific staff members. Currently, 28 Ph.D. students and several Postdoctoral 
Fellows (incl. two Humboldt Fellows) are employed at IABC. IABC a lso operates the Elemental Analysis Center 
and the Focused Ion Beam Center UULM for Micro/Nano Fabrication/Characterization. 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
The current research activities at IABC include (i) miniaturized chem/bio/biomimetic sensor systems for molecule 
specific gas phase and liquid phase analysis using FT -IR spectroscopy and quantum cascade laser spectroscopy 
applied in environmental analysis, process monitoring, and biomedical diagnostics; (ii) development of advanced 
mid-infrared waveguide technology; (iii) functional materials and synthetic receptors for environmental/food/bio-
analysis based on molecularly templated polymers applied in sensing and separations; (iv) multifunctional 
(nano)analytical techniques for biomedical applications and systems biology; (v) deep sea IR spectroscopy for in -
situ determination of VOCs and gas hydrates; and (vi) focused ion beam based micro- and nanofabrication. Since 
1996, Mizaikoff has been a lead researcher in 5 EU -projects related to the develo pment of novel mid -infrared 
chem/bio sensing technologies (EWALD, SOFIE, IMSIS, MISPEC, MENDOS), and is currently involved in three 
EU-projects evolving various infrared sensing technologies (MYCOSPEC, SCHEMA, TROPSENSE). At Georgia 
Tech, he has been the l ead PI in projects funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the US Geological 
Survey (USGS), and the US Department of Energy (DOE) next to industrial sponsors (e.g., ExxonMobil) on the 
development of advanced mid -infrared sensor and waveguide tec hnologies for environmental monitoring, deep -
sea applications, and biomedical diagnostics. Since 2007 (first at Georgia Tech, now at UULM), he is continuously 
sponsored by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (Livermore, CA, USA) on the development of ne xt-
generation substrate-integrated hollow waveguides (iHWGs) enabling advanced IR sensors. 
Role in the project: 
UULM will be predominantly involved in WP2 and WP3, and will be responsible for the fundamental development, 
integration, optimization, and evolution of the QCL-based MIR-ATR catheter system with specific focus on (i) the 
on-chip beam combiner (iBEAM), and (ii) the imaging probe development (incl. I/O and imaging waveguides, and 
miniaturized diamond ATR) probe for in-situ and in-depth OA diagnosis. Furthermore, UULM will contribute to 
the following WPs: 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 60 of 96 
▪ WP4: contribution to wavelength selection, data pre -processing, and multivariate algorithm selection 
strategies tailored to MIR data (task: 4.1 and 4.2). 
▪ WP5: contribution to the laboratory and clinical prototype design, laboratory trials, and prototype 
development/manufacturing (task 5.1-5.3). 
▪ WP6: assistance during operation and validation of the MIR catheter probe in preclinical and clinical 
settings (task: 6.1-6.3). 
Key Personnel: 
Prof. Boris Mizaikoff,  Chaired Professor and Director IABC since 2007. He received his Ph.D. in Analytical 
Chemistry in 1996, his Habilitation in 2000 – both at the Vienna University of Technology (Austria) - and has then 
been a faculty member at the G eorgia Institute of Technology (Atlanta, USA) prior to joining UULM. He is 
author/co-author of 240+ peer-reviewed publications and 17 patents. Under his leadership, IABC has established 
an acknowledged track record of collaborations with small and large in dustrial partners including ExxonMobil, 
Agilent/Keysight, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bruker Optics, nanoplus, OptoPrecision, etc. He has been elected Fellow 
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for “building bridges with industry through 
academic research in sensors, and for facilitating technology transfer between academia and industry” in 2006. He 
is also Associate Editor Europe of Analyst (RSC), a premium peer-reviewed journal in the analytical sciences.  
PhD-student Andreas Wilk at IABC is currently working on mid -infrared waveguide -based approaches for 
advancing IR sensing platforms. He has developed innovative IR waveguide technologies (e.g., substrate-integrated 
hollow waveguides; iHWGs). He is also an expert in designing and modelling IR sensing systems (i.e., spectral ray 
tracing), as well as simulating the spectral response function of IR sensing systems. 
PhD-student Pei Wang at IABC is currently researching advanced IR sensing approaches for label-free cartilage 
and protein analysis. Her thesis research is focusing on advanced multivariate statistics for analysing complex IR 
tissue data, and on IR -ATR studies at cartilage, and specifically meniscus (sheep and human) for evaluating 
degradation stages. 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
L. Wang, J. Chapman, R. A. Palmer, T. Alter, B. Hooper, O. Van Ramm, B. Mizaikoff, Classification of Atherosclerotic Rabbit 
Aorta Samples with an Infrared Attenuated Total Reflection Catheter and Multivariate Data Analysis, Appl. Spectrosc. 60, 1121-
1126 (2006) 
L. Wang, J. Chapman, R. A. Palmer, O. Van Ramm, B. Mizaikoff, Classification of Atherosclerotic Rabbit Aorta Samples by 
Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy and Multivariate Data Analysis, J. Biomed. Opt. 12, 0240061-11 (2007) 
M. Sieger, F. Balluff, X. Wang, S.-S. Kim, L. Leidner, G. Gauglitz, B. Mizaikoff, On-Chip Integrated Mid-Infrared 
GaAs/AlGaAs Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, Analytical Chemistry 85, 3050-3052 (2013) 
X. Wang, M. Karlsson, M. Sieger, L. Oesterlund, F. Nikolajeff, B. Mizaikoff, Diamonds are a Spectroscopist’s Best Friend: Thi n-
Film Diamond Mid-Infrared Waveguides for Advanced Chem/Bio Sensors, Analytical Chemistry 86, 8136−8141 (2014) 
R. Lu, B. Mizaikoff, W.-W. Li, A. Katzir, Y. Raichlin, G.-P. Sheng, H.-Q. Yu, High Sensitivity IR-ATR Sensors for In-situ Multi-
component Detection of Volatile Organic Compounds, Nature Protocols 11, 377-386 (2016) 
Relevant research projects 
MENDOS [EU project #QLK4-CT-2002-02323]: Biomimetic Optical Sensors for Environmental Endocrine Disruptor 
Screening 
MYCOSPEC [EU project #314048]: Novel Infrared Spectroscopic Tools for Mycotoxin Determination in Foodstuffs for 
Increased Food Safety 
SCHEMA [EU project #614002]: Integrated In-Situ Chemical Mapping Probes 
TROPSENSE [EU project #645758]: Development of a Non-Invasive Breath Tests for Early Diagnosis of Tropical Diseases 
APOSEMA [BMBF project #13N13085]: Advanced Photonic Sensor Materials 
Existing Infrastructure 
IABC provides ample laboratory infrastructure (1,000+ m 2), and operates instrumentation including FTIR, QCL, AFM, SECM, 
HPLC, etc. IABC also operates the Elemental Analysis Center (ICP-OES, CHNS, etc.) and the UUlm Focused Ion Beam Center 
for micro/nano prototyping, fabrication, and characterization (2 dual beam FIB -SEM systems incl. cryo, EDX, EBSD). B. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 61 of 96 
Mizaikoff is member of the directorate at the UULM Cleanroom Facility with unrestricted access to microfabrication and 
lithography technologies for thin-film waveguide (e.g., iBEAM) development. 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties   N 
 
University of Eastern Finland                Partner #3 (Finland) 
 
The organization:  
The University of Eastern Finland (UEF) is one of the largest universities in Finland, and home to approximately 
15,000 students and 2,800 members of staff. We have extensive international relations and are involved in several 
international networks. Our teaching and research staff and students are active in participating in various mobility 
programmes. We have concluded bilateral agreements of cooperation with approximately 100 universities abroad. 
Furthermore, we are involved in several international networks and discipline-specific projects. Together with our 
networks, we support the well-being and positive development of eastern Finland. Our goal is to be ranked among 
the leading 200 research universities in the world and, in the strong research areas, a mong the world's leading 50 
research universities. In this project the Department of Applied Physics has a key role.  
The Department of Applied Physics employs 10 professors and some 70 researchers working in the research fields 
of Environmental Physics, Medical Physics and in Applied and Computational Physics. We publish more than 100 
peer-reviewed scientific articles in international journals annually. We consume over 4 million euros of research 
funding per year from the sources like Academy of Finland, EU Frame work programs, TEKES (national funding 
agency for technology and innovation), and several foundations. There are two Centers of Excellence in Research 
appointed by the Academy of Finland operating in our department and two European Research Council  (ERC) 
starting grants.  
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
The BBC group, led by Professor Juha Töyräs, is one of the global leaders in cartilage and bone biophysics. The 
group comprises of 30-35 researchers with various backgrounds. BBC group applies a wide range of experimental, 
theoretical, and clinical methods, including mechanical testing, ultrasound, optical coherence tomography, MRI, 
CT and infrared spectroscopy, for the development of novel diagnostics for degenerative articular cartilage and  
bone disorders. We publish approximately 35 scientific articles each year, many of them reaching highly ranked 
journals in the ﬁeld. Furthermore, during the last ﬁve years, the BBC group has produced >20 doctoral theses in 
the ﬁeld of musculoskeletal research. The BBC group is networked through various international programmes and 
it collaborates with about dozen other research groups. 
Role in the project: 
UEF has a major contribution in ex vivo testing of equine and human tissues along with the Ethics lea d of the 
project (WP 1: Task 1.1 & WP 6: Task 6.2). Furthermore, UEF works in close collaboration with Utrecht University 
(WP 6: Task 6.3) and Kuopio University Hospital (WP 6: Task 6.4) on the clinical assessment of the MIR probe in 
equine and human joints. 
Key Personnel: 
Professor Juha Töyräs , PhD (age 41), has 19 years of experience in biophysics related diagnostics of various 
musculoskeletal conditions. He has published >190 peer reviewed scientific papers (H -index=36, Scopus) and 
supervised 28 PhD-theses. Currently, he acts as Professor of Medical Physics and Engineering in the Department 
of Applied Physics, UEF. He also serves as Chief Physicist at the Diagnostic Imaging Center, Kuopio University 
Hospital. He runs the BBC research group (3 Professors, 1 Academy fellow, 8 post-docs and >20 PhD-students). 
The group has solid funding (e.g. ERC and Academy of Finland) and one of the major research topics is related to 
application of near infrared spectroscopy to arthroscopic diagnostics of cartilage degeneration and injuries. 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 62 of 96 
Post-Doctoral Fellow Isaac Afara, PhD (age 34 yrs), has expertise in optical and spectroscopic characterization 
of soft tissues, and is a leading researcher in NIR spectroscopic assessment of articular cartilage for diagnostics of 
various musculoskeletal conditions. He has published >32 high impact peer reviewed journal and conference 
papers. He has acquired the title of docent in biomedical spectroscopy and currently supervises several PhD -
students along with his own research interests in the BBC-group, UEF. His research interests centre around real -
time non-destructive evaluation of soft tissues (including articular cartilage) using fast optical techniques, and novel 
application of multivariate statistical and analytical methods for synthesis of information from optical data in order 
to improve decision-making during surgery. He has secured, or directly assisted in securing, grants of over a quarter 
of a million euros in the last 5 years, including funding for studies that involv e development and clinical trial of a 
novel near infrared arthroscopic probe for real -time diagnostics of articular cartilage, subchondral bone and 
meniscus injuries and degeneration. 
PhD-student Jaakko Sarin, MSc (Tech) (age 29) has strong optical background with years of experience in optical 
research (Applied Optics, Tampere University of Technology) and interest in medical imaging. Currently, he is 
working in the BBC research group in University of Eastern Finland. He is focused in research and writing 
publications for his thesis “Smart arthroscope with automated software for quantitative diagnostics of cartilage 
injuries and degeneration” which aims to improve the reliability of arthroscopic surgeries by implementing 
quantitative multimodal imaging. Jaakko has assured the funding for his thesis with the doctoral school position of 
University of Eastern Finland, with two grants from Kuopio University Hospital (VTR project 5041744) and one 
grant from Orion Research Foundation sr. 
PhD-student Mithilesh Prak ash, MSc (Tech) (age 29), Biomedical Engineering graduate from Tampere 
University of Technology, Finland. He has research work experience in Tampere University Hospital in CBCT 
domain, internship experience at Nokia TECH and has over 4 years of professiona l software development 
experience. Currently he works as a PhD student in BBC group at UEF. His research focuses on application of 
infrared spectroscopy for arthroscopic diagnostics of cartilage degeneration. Mithilesh has assured funding for his 
thesis from Instrumentarium Science Foundation. 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Ala-Myllymäki J, Honkanen JT, Töyräs J, Afara IO: Optical spectroscopic determination of human meniscus composition. J 
Orthop Res. 2016 Feb;34(2):270-8 
Afara IO, Hauta-Kasari M, Jurvelin JS, Oloyede A, Töyräs J: Optical absorption spectra of human articular cartilage correlate with 
biomechanical properties, histological score and biochemical composition. Physiol Meas. 2015 Sep;36(9):1913-28. 
Puhakka PH, Te Moller NC, Afara IO, Mäkelä JT, Tiitu V, Korhonen RK, Brommer H, Virén T, Jurvelin JS, Töyräs J: Estimation 
of articular cartilage properties using multivariate analysis of optical coherence tomography signal. Osteoarthritis Cartilag e. 2015 
Dec;23(12):2206-13. 
te Moller NC, Brommer H, Liukkonen J, Virén T, Timonen M, Puhakka PH, Jurvelin JS, van Weeren PR, Töyräs J: Arthroscopic 
optical coherence tomography provides detailed information on articular cartilage lesions in horses.  Vet J. 2013 Sep;197(3):589-95. 
Niemelä T, Virén T, Liukkonen J, Argüelles D, te Moller NC, Puhakka PH, Jurvelin JS, Tulamo RM, Töyräs J: Application of 
optical coherence tomography enhances reproducibility of arthroscopic evaluation of equine joints.  Acta Vet Scand. 2014 Jan 
10;56:3. 
Relevant research projects 
Academy of Finland (project 267551, Multimodal arthroscopic imaging of cartilage and meniscus injuries and degeneration)  
The Research Committee of the Kuopio University Hospital Catchment Area for the State Research F unding (Project 5041744: 
Smart Arthroscope with Automated Software for Quantitative Diagnostics of Cartilage Injuries and Degeneration).  
The Research Committee of the Kuopio University Hospital Catchment Area for the State Research Funding (Project 504175 0, 
Near Infrared Spectrocopy for Arthroscopic Diagnostics of Cartilage and Meniscus Degeneration).  
 
Existing Infrastructure 
At UEF we have state of the art laboratories and reference techniques for all planned preclinical and laboratory experiments. For 
example, we have biomechanical testing facilities from organ to nano-scale, full range of imaging modalities: µCT, dual-energy CT, 
CBCT and MRI (0.18T – 9.4T). Moreover, ultrasound microscopy, OCT and infrared spectroscopy facilities are a vailable. In 
addition we have a long tradition in collaboration with KUH in testing of novel techniques in arthroscopic environment.  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 63 of 96 
 
Norwegian University of Life Science (NMBU)                            Partner #4 (Norway) 
 
The organization: 
NMBU is Norway’s largest Life sciences university with 5200 students; 1700 employees; 800 scientific staff; 580 
PhD students; approx. 100 PhD degrees per year. NMBU’s main strategy is to help people all over the world to 
tackle big challenges regarding human health, environment and resources management. NMBU has been involved 
in the EU programs since FP3, and it currently participates in 20 projects financed under FP7 and Horizon 2020, 
of which three multi-partner projects are coordinated by NMBU. In addition, the university participates in projects 
within JPI, COST, INTERREG, ERA-net and other European research. The university has signed the “European 
Charter for Researchers” and the “Code of Conduct for the Recruitment of Researchers” (Charter and Code) and 
is a HRS4R Acknowledged Institution. NMBU has a highly skilled and experienced staff in biophysics and 
spectroscopy as well as mathematics and multivariate statistics to successfully ca rry out the project plan. NMBU 
has several spectroscopy labs as well as bioengineering facilities for multi - and interdisciplinary research thus 
enabling us to deliver all the necessary results in the project. The department of Mathematical Sciences and 
Technology (IMT) will be a partner in the project carrying out the task identified in the project description. 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
The department of Mathematical Sciences and Technology (IMT) is an engineering department with a strong focus 
on physics and mathematics. IMT has spectroscopy facilities and highly trained staff to operate them. The group 
at IMT involved in the project consists of chemists, physicists, biologists, bioengineers and mathematicians – a 
highly multidisciplinary team with a strong expertise in biospectroscopy and data analysis. 
Role in the project: NMBU will have major contribution in the WP4 Data analysis and software development as 
a leader of Tasks 4.1-4.3 providing data analysis including protocols for spectral pre-processing, variable selection, 
and the model for discriminant analysis. NMBU will further contribute to the development of the software 
prototype (Task 4.4). In addition, NMBU will participate in WPs 3, 5 and 6, regarding MIR -ATR arthroscopy 
probe’s development, optimization and validation. 
Key Personnel: 
Achim Kohler is a professor in physics at RealTek/NMBU. Prof. Kohler has a background in multivariate analysis 
and biophysics. He has more than 15 years’ experience in development of measurement technology within 
biospectroscopy, and multivariate data modelling. Prof. Kohler has more than 100 publications, several patents, 
successfully supervised 12 PhD students and is currently supervising 9 PhD students in the field of FTIR 
spectroscopy and multivariate analysis. He has extensive experience in the management of research projects related 
to biospectroscopy, energy physics and biorefinery. He has led several successful research projects developing 
spectroscopic techniques for industry and founded two companies in the field of biospectroscopy. 
Valeria Tafintseva is a postdoctoral researcher at NMBU. She received her M.Sc. in Mathematics (2008) degrees 
at the Department of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Tambov State University in Ru ssia and a Ph.D in 
Applied Mathematics and Data Analysis at RealTek/NMBU in 2013. Her research interests are focused on 
multivariate data analysis and data pre-processing. She has published 6 articles in scientific journals. She is actively 
participating in several national research projects as well as national and EU projects writing. 
Boris Zimmermann is a researcher at NMBU. He received both his M.Sc. in chemical engineering (2001) and 
Ph.D. in physical chemistry (2008) from the University of Zagreb. He h as been awarded with six research grants, 
including a Marie Skłodowska -Curie fellowship (FP7), and has been involved in ten projects, including four as a 
project leader. During the last decade, he has been working on spectroscopic characterisation and mult ivariate 
analysis of a variety of inorganic, organic and biological systems, resulting with 24 publications in scientific journals.  
 
 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 64 of 96 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Konevskikh T, Lukacs R, Blümel R, Ponossov A, Kohler A (2016) Mie scatter corrections in single cell infrared 
microspectroscopy, Faraday Discuss., 187, 235-257. 
Zimmermann B, Tafintseva V, Bağcıoğlu M, Høegh Berdahl M, Kohler A (2016) Analysis of Allergenic Pollen by FTIR 
Microspectroscopy. Analytical Chemistry, 88, 803-511.  
Konevskikh T, Ponossov A, Blumel R, Lukacs R, Kohler A (2015) Fringes in FTIR spectroscopy revisited: understanding and 
modelling fringes in infrared spectroscopy of thin films, Analyst, 140, 3969-3980. 
Karaman I, Nørskov NP, Yde CC, Skou Hedemann M, Bach Knudsen KE, Kohler A (2015) Sparse multi-block PLSR for 
biomarker discovery when integrating data from LC-MS and NMR metabolomics. Metabolomics 11, 367-379. 
Karaman I, Qannari M, Martens H, Skou Hedemann M, Bach Knudsen KE, Kohler A, (2013) Comparison of Sparse and Jack-
knife partial least squares regression methods for variable selection. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems. 122, 65-
77. 
Relevant research projects 
2012-2016: Project leader for the ISP-project ‘Hyperspectral imaging in biophysics and energy physics’ funded by the Norwegian 
Research Council at IMT/UMB, grant Nr. 216687) (Total grant: 4 400 000 NOK). 
2013-2015: Kohler was coordinator for the EU project (Marie Curie Actions— Intra-European Fellowships (IEF)) entitled 
‘Pollen— Plant Phenotyping by Vibrational Spectroscopy of Pollen’ European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7 -
PEOPLE-2012-IEF). European Commission, Research Executive Agency (FP7-PEOPLE-2012-IEF, project Nº. 328289). (EU 
funding:  291 840 Euros). 
2012-2014: Kohler was coordinator for the EU project (FP7-SME-2012 ‘Research for the Benefit of SMEs’) entitled ‘Source 
tracking and monitoring of mould contamination in food production’ with acronym ‘FUST’ in European Union’s Seventh 
Framework Programme managed by REA-Research Executive Agency (FP7-SME-2012-315271-FUST) Ranged as number 8 
among approx. 150 funded projects. (EU funding:  1 130 050 Euros). 
Existing Infrastructure 
Fully equipped spectroscopy lab with equipment for FTIR microspectroscopy and high -throughput measurement 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
Kuopio University Hospital (KUH)                          Partner #5 (Finland) 
 
The organization: 
Kuopio University Hospital (KUH) is one of the five university hospitals in Finland. It is publicly owned and 
financed by the municipalities of the North Savo Hospital District (Pohjois-Savon sairaanhoitopiirin kuntayhtymä). 
It is responsible for the speci al health care in Eastern Finland. KUH closely collaborates with the University of 
Eastern Finland in education, training and research. KUH has all medical specialities for which it acts as a teaching 
hospital. KUH is the largest trainer of medical doctors  in Finland with its 1000 doctor trainees and 1000 trainees 
for other specialities.  
KUH`s vigorous scientific research activity is respected nationally and internationally. KUH is an important 
provider of training for physicians and other health -care personnel. KUH`s strengths also include a skilled staff 
committed to the best possible patient care, and health-care technology that is undergoing constant development. 
KUH offers specialized medical care in all fields of medical specialization. In comparisons  performed by the 
National Institute for health and Welfare, KUH has repeatedly been found to be Finland`s most productive 
university hospital. 
In its research activity, KUH aims for results that will be respected internationally. For example, in gene ther apy 
for blood vessels and brain tumours, KUH has been a world pioneer. Furthermore, KUH has extensively 
contributed on the clinical research of the musculoskeletal disorders. Other strong research areas include chronic 
endemic diseases such as diabetes, musculoskeletal disorders, Alzheimer`s disease, and obesity.  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 65 of 96 
Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Kuopio University Hospital, is serving as a clinical center for the 
study. The study subjects with joint disorders will be operated (arthroscopy) on this center. 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
Department of orthopaedics and traumatology (KUH) and Kuopio Musculoskeletal Research Unit (KMRU) 
http://www2.uef.fi/en/crc/kmru) UEF, both headed by Prof. Heikki Kröger, form a multi -disciplinary research 
organization in Kuopio campus. The core of the KMRU is the globally recognized Kuopio OSTPRE Study. Several 
prospective randomized clinical trials and clinical follow -up studies are conduc ted in our unit and hospital 
departments. KMRU consists of a strong team of senior and junior researchers with a high level of expertise in 
their research field. Our research focuses on improving understanding of the pathophysiology of osteoporosis and 
osteoarthritis, recognizing risk factors for those diseases and developing imaging and modeling tools, thereby 
improving diagnostics and patient-specific prediction of the disease progression. Innovative methods enable new 
and cost-effective treatment paths in primary and special health care.      
Role in the project: 
Kuopio University Hospital (Dept. of Orthopaedics and Traumatology) is leading the WP1 related to clinical 
applicability. Major contribution is given in WP 6 in the task 6.3 and 6.4 related to demonstration in clinical setings.   
Key Personnel: 
Prof. Heikki Kröger  is the head of Kuopio Musculoskeletal research Unit (KUH). He has published over 330 
scientific papers in international peer review journals (H -index=58) and supervised 23 PhD theses in 
musculoskeletal research. He is the chief orthopaedic surgeon at the Dept Orthopaedics & Traumatology, KUH. 
Together with the orthopaedic surgeons Debuty Prof. Antti Joukainen and Assistant professor Joonas Sirola, 
he is responsible for the clinical part of this project.  
 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Mustonen AM, Nieminen P, Joukainen A, Jaroma A, Kääriäinen T, Kröger H, Lázaro -Ibáñez E, Siljander PR, Kärjä V, 
Härkönen K, Koistinen A, Rilla K. First in vivo detection and characterization of hyaluronan -coated extracellularvesicles in 
human synovial fluid. J Orthop Res. 2016 Feb 25. doi:10.1002/jor.23212. [Epub ahead of print] 
Karjalainen JP, Riekkinen O, Töyräs J, Jurvelin JS, Kröger H. New method for point -of-care osteoporosis screening and 
diagnostics. Osteoporos Int. 2015 Nov 10. [Epub ahead of print]. 
Tong X, Burton IS, Isaksson H, Jurvelin JS, Kröger H. Cortical bone histomorphometry in male femoral neck: the investigation 
of age-association and regional differences. Calcif Tissue Int. 2015 Apr;96(4):295-306 
Jakkula E, Melkoniemi M, Kiviranta I, Lohiniva J, Raina SS, Perala M, Warman ML, Ahonen K, Kroger H, Goring HH, Ala -
Kokko L. The role of sequence variations within the genes encoding collagen II, IX and XI in non -syndromic, early-onset 
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2005; 13(6):497-507. 
Laine CM, Joeng KS, Campeau PM, Kiviranta R, Tarkkonen K, Grover M, Lu JT, Pekkinen M, Wessman M, Heino TJ, 
Nieminen-Pihala V, Aronen M, Laine T, Kröger H, Cole WG, Lehesjoki AE, Nevarez L, Krakow D, Curry CJ, Cohn DH, Gibbs 
RA, Lee BH, Mäkitie O. WNT1 mutations in early-onset osteoporosis and osteogenesis imperfecta. N Engl J Med. 2013 May 
9;368(19):1809-16. 
Relevant research projects 
Smart Arthroscope with Automated Software for Quantitative Diagnostics of Cartilage Injuries and Degeneration). 
Prospective randomized study of knee osteotomy in patients with osteoarthrosis (OHTO -study) 
Novel clinical approaches in musculoskeletal imaging with a dedicated extremity cone -beam CT (cadaveric study) 
Existing Infrastructure 
At KUH we have state of the art research facilities and modern operating rooms for all planned clinical experiments. We have a 
long tradition and experience in testing novel arthroscopic techniques and instruments in collaboration with UEF physicists.  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
Utrecht University (UU)                         Partner #6 (The Netherlands) 
 
The organization: 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 66 of 96 
Utrecht University (UU) is an international university of the highest quality and the alma mater of many leading 
names, academics and scientists who have made an important contribution to the quality of society. The challenge 
to develop a sustainable society is one of the greatest facing Society in the 21st century. Utrecht University is 
committed to fulfilling its social responsibility in this area. Utrecht Univer sity is comprised of 7 faculties which 
collectively cover the full spectrum of research and education.  The Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of Utrecht 
University has a unique position in the Netherlands. Not only is this the only institution where veterinar ians are 
trained, researchers are also working together on innovative scientific research. In addition, the faculty provides 
specialist clinical care in the largest academic veterinary hospital in Europe. Thanks to this position, the Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine is a point of contact for all veterinary matters, both nationally and increasingly internationally. 
Role in the project: 
UU will be have major contribution in WP6 (tasks 6.2) regarding the in vivo testing in an equine model and proof 
of principle as monitoring device for cartilage repair. In addition, UU will contribute in the clinical protocols and 
device requirements in WP1.  
Key Personnel: 
Prof. P.R(ené) van Weeren DVM, PhD, Dipl. ECVS: After many years of clinical activities as first a large animal 
surgeon and later an exclusively equine surgeon, René van Weeren is now almost exclusively involved in research 
activities and the supervision of PhD students, apart from administrative duties such as being chair of the 
Department of Equine Sciences. Special areas of interest are the influences of exercise on the (development of) 
the musculoskeletal system, research on joint homeostasis and cartilage regeneration, tendon disorders and 
biomechanics. He enjoys working in these areas within a translationa l framework together with colleagues from 
human medicine and as part of large (international) collaborative networks. He is of the opinion that in these 
activities the coaching of young people and helping them to find develop themselves as critical, indepe ndent and 
truly academic researchers is the most rewarding aspect. He has authored or co-authored over 250 publications in 
peer-reviewed journals and more than 15 book chapters. He is an associate editor of Equine Veterinary Journal, 
which is the leading journal in the field. 
Associate Prof. H(arold) Brommer, DVM, PhD, Dipl. ECVS: Harold Brommer is working as an Equine 
Surgeon at the division of surgery and orthopaedics of the Department of Equine sciences. He is both diplomate 
of the Royal Netherlands Veterinary Association (Specialist KNMvD, Equine Surgery) and diplomate of the 
European College of Veterinary Surgeons (Dipl. ECVS). Besides clinical work, he is also involved in the education 
of students and in research. Harold Brommer is involved the research line 'Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cells' 
in which he focusses on equine joint disease and more specifically on aspects of early degenerative changes of 
articular cartilage. In this field he collaborates with the research group Biophysi cs of Bone and Cartilage of the 
University of Eastern Finland (UEF, head: prof. Toyras). 
 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services  
Sarin, J. K., Brommer, Harold, Argüelles, D., Puhakka, P. H., Inkinen, S. I., Afara, I. O., Saarakkala, S. & Töyräs, J. 
Multimodality scoring of chondral injuries in the equine fetlock joint ex vivo. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 2016  
Sarin, Jaakko K, Amissah, Michael, Brommer, Harold, Argüelles, David, Töyräs, Juha & Afara, Isaac O (2016). Near Infrared 
Spectroscopic Mapping of Functional Properties of Equine Articular Cartilage. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 44 (11), (pp.  
3335-45). 
Te Moller, N.C.R., Brommer, H., Liukkonene, J., Viren, T., Timonen, M., Puhakka, P., Jurvelin, J.S., van Weere n, P.R. & Toyras, 
J. (2013). Arthroscopic optical coherence tomography provides detailed information on cartilage lesions in horses. Veterinary 
Journal, 197, (pp. 589-595) (7 p.). 
Brommer, H., Laasanen, Mikko S., Brama, P.A.J., van Weeren, P.R., Helminen, H.J. & Jurvelin, J.S. (2006). In Situ and Ex Vivo 
Evaluation of an Arthroscopic Indentation Instrument to Estimate the Health Status of Articular Cartilage in the Equine 
Metacarpophalangeal Joint. Veterinary Surgery, 266, (pp. 259-266) (8 p.). 
Brommer, H., Laasanen, Mikko S., Brama, P.A.J., van Weeren, P.R., Helminen, H.J. & Jurvelin, J.S. (2005). Functional 
consequences of cartilage degeneration in the equine metacarpophalangeal joint: quantitative assessment of cartilage stiffnes s. 
Equine Veterinary Journal, 37 (5), (pp. 462-467) (6 p.). 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 67 of 96 
Relevant research projects 
Dutch Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) and Dutch Arthritis Foundation (2 themes) : Theme 1 is focusing on studies 
to explore the cellular basis of intrinsic cartilage repair and the role of biomechanics: This could be either stem cell populations 
residing in the joint but might also be chondrocyte subpopulations or alternative cell sources. Once identified we will aim a t two 
strategies that can exploit these cell populations: i) development of bioactive scaffolds that in a cell-free manner can induce 
regeneration of lost cartilage tissue by activating these resident stem or progenitor cell populations; ii) controlled releas e 
strategies that release bioactive components that activate the regenerative potential of these cells. Theme 2 is focusing on studies 
to explore the molecular basis of joint homeostasis by assessing the composition of synovial fluid in opposing conditions 
(catabolic versus anabolic conditions). This may lead to new diagnostics but also to new drugs / biologicals that can restore joint 
homeostasis. 
HydroZONES (the European Union Seventh Framework Programme) - Bioactivated hierarchical hydrogels as zonal implants 
for articular cartilage regeneration: HydroZONES represents an interdisciplinary consortium that adopts a strategy to regenerate 
articular cartilage based on biofunctional hydrogel-based implants that mimic the tissues zonal structure and function. Yet, 
despite intensive research, no clinical therapy is available that leads to healing of cartilage defects. Treatment to achieve hyaline 
cartilage regeneration and not only formation of fibrous repair tissue that only delays prosthesis remains a great challenge.  
Current cartilage implants cannot establish the hierarchical tissue organisation that appears critical for normal cartilage function. 
We hypothesise that a biomimetic zonal organisation of the implants themselves is critical to induce native tissue hierarchy and 
thus achieve regeneration of functional hyaline cartilage. Degradable and clinically used thermoplastic polymers will be applied 
for mechanical reinforcement of the hydrogels. HydroZONES will follow and compare cell -free and cell-loaded hydrogels, 
comparing chondrocytes and bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells for their efficacy. Three-dimensional printing 
techniques will be employed for the automated assembly of the implants to guarantee reproducibility. Scaffolds that pass our 
stringent and well-documented in vitro and in vivo screening will undergo long-term pre-clinical testing in minipigs and horses, 
which will set a new international standard for pre-clinical testing of cartilage implants. 
Existing Infrastructure 
A. Facilities surgical and orthopaedic department (new since 2007): 
 
a. Surgical theatres: 
• Surgical theatre 1 (OR1): + down flow facility (clean procedures) 
• Surgical theatre 2 (OR 2): clean contaminated, contaminated, infected procedures)  
• Surgical theatre 3 (OR 3): standing surgery room (laparoscopy, dental surgery)  
• All the facilities are equipped with high-tech recording and endoscopy systems, Telgte surgical tables, 3 scrub rooms, 1 
room for preoperative patient preparation and induction, hoist system 
 
b. Anaesthetic and critical care equipment: 
separate anaesthetic monitoring room, 2 round padded recovery rooms (with assisted recovery possibilities) 
Monitoring: 
• In surgical theatre and in a separate room 
• Monitoring in and outside recovery 
• anaesthetic machines for large horses and for smaller horses/foals (< 150 kg) + IPPV (intermittent Positive Pressure 
Ventilation) 
• medical gas, O2 and CO2 monitoring (Rapid Lab, Siemens) 
 
c. Surgical instruments 
• 4 castration kits, 6 laparotomy kits, 4 large and 6 small wound repair kits, 2 kits for hernia surgery, 2 kits vascular surge ry, 2 
ophthalmology kits 
• Endoscopy equipment: arthroscopy (2 kits) + tower (Arthrex, new 2015), laparoscopy (2 kits), upper respiratory tract 
surgery, reproductive tract surgery 
• Equipment for dental surgery 
• Laser surgery (diode laser) 
• AO/ASIF (osteosynthesis) equipment (Synthes) 
• Other equipment: Versajet, Ligasure, Electrosurgical equipment 
 
d. Sterilization: 
• Separate sterilization unit: contaminated/infected and clean area separated  
• Steam autoclave (1 large and 1 small), desinfection machine (Oxivario, Miele), washing machine 
• Pack preparation and storage room 
 
e. Other facilities: 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 68 of 96 
• Farriery: 2 certified farriers 
• Facilities for orthopaedic examinations: indoor hall with hard surface for walking and trotting horses on straight line and 
on a circle, indoor arena with soft (sand) surface,  force plate instrumentation and computed analysis of equine locomotion 
(QHorse, Qualysis), paddocks outdoor 
• Five waiting rooms for orthopaedic and soft tissue consults 
• Room for ophthalmologic examinations, examination room for endoscopy upper respiratory tract and laser surgery 
• 2 padded boxes for colic horses 
• One padded room with hoist for hospitalization of neurologic horses 
• Intensive care unit (6 boxes) 
• Box stables surgical and orthopaedic department (46 boxes) 
• Isolation unit (6 boxes) 
 
f. Staff division of Equine Surgery and orthopaedics: 
• 7 Diplomates ECVS 
• 1 resident ECVS 
• 5 interns (rotating between divisions of surgery and orthopaedics, internal medicine, anaesthesia and intensive care)  
• Assistant personnel: administration, sterilization unit, surgery unit, hospitalization and stable unit 
 
B. Diagnostic Imaging service 
a. Department of Diagnostic Imaging (small animals & equine) 
Personnel: 
• 6 Diplomates ECVDI 
• 2 residents ECVDI 
• Assistant personnel 
 
b. Facilities: 
• High-field 1.5 T MRI (new 2014) 
• 64 slice CT-scanner for standing horses (new 2015) 
• Digital radiography 
• Ultrasonograhpy / Doppler/UTC 
• Fluoroscopy 
• 2 separate viewing rooms at the Department of Diagnostic Imaging 
• Extra viewing room at the Department of Equine Sciences (Agfa Impax Client system) 
 
C. Emergency lab: 
a. haematology 
b. clinical chemistry 
c. cytology 
 
D. University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory (UVDL) 
a. haematology 
b. clinical chemistry 
c. cytology 
d. hormone and endocrinology analyses 
 
E. Pathology services: 
a. Veterinary Pathology Diagnostic Centre (VPDC) 
Facilities include necropsy rooms, tissue processing/histology laboratory, electron microscopy laboratory, immunostaining 
laboratory, microscopy facilities including a 5-headed microscope, digital gross and microscopic photography facilities, 
histomorphometry equipment. 
b. Veterinary Microbiological Diagnostic Centre (VMDC) 
 
F. Medical records 
a. Medical records are maintained by an automated veterinary medical programme, VETWARE, in which  it is possible to obtain 
all necessary information for each individual case. 
b. Supplementary recording of all incoming patients (personal patient data) 
 
G. Medical library 
a. Digital library (web access) of Utrecht university (http://www.uu.nl/en/university-library) 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 69 of 96 
b. Main library of Utrecht University (nearby faculty of veterinary medicine) 
c. Library at Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht university  
d. Library at the Department of Equine Sciences 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks No 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  No 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  No 
 
nanoplus (NP)                                           Partner #7 (Germany) 
 
 
The organization: 
NANOPLUS is an SME which was founded 1998 as spin off from Würzburg University. The company focuses 
on the development of customer specific optoelectronic devices for sensor applications. The company with 
currently 65 employees, has two clean room facilities with 250 m2 (Gerbrunn, Germany) and 650 m2 (Meiningen, 
Germany), respectively. A complete process line for semiconductor laser fabrication is available, comprising mask 
aligners for optical lithography as well as systems for electron beam lithography, different dry etch systems, sputter 
systems, evaporators, laser mounting facilities, etc. Key products of NANOPLUS are complex coupled distributed 
feedback (DFB) laser diodes. In these lasers complex coupling is obtained by combining a ridge waveguide with 
metal gratings on top of the waveguide layer on both sides of the laser ridge. DFB lasers realized by this technique 
in various material systems have a high single mode yield (>90%), high sidemode suppression ratio (>40dB) 
combined with low back reflection sensitivity and thresholds and efficiencies, which correspond to those of Fabry 
Perot lasers realized from the same layers.  
NANOPLUS manufactures and sells DFB and Fabry -Perot laser diodes in the wavelength range from 0.7 up to 
3.0 μm for sensing and spe ctroscopic applications. As base material for the lasers GaAlAs/InGaAs, InGaAsP, 
GaInAsN and GaInAsSb heterostructures are used. In addition, NANOPLUS offers interband cascade laser (ICL) 
DFBs from 3 -6 μm and quantum cascade laser (QCL) DFBs at certain wav elengths between 7 and 14 μm for 
specific applications. Previous work within national and international cooperations has allowed NANOPLUS to 
acquire significant experience in long wavelength device processing based on Quantum Cascade as well as 
Interband C ascade material. nanoplus has e.g. coordinated the European research projects SENSHY 
(www.senshy.eu) for the development of GaSb based devices in the 3.0 – 3.6 μm wavelength range for which the 
company was awarded the Prism Award for Green Photonics and Sustainable Energy in 2012. 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
nanoplus Nanosystems and Technologies GmbH, Germany is an ISO 9001:2008 and ISO 14001:2009 certified 
supplier of semiconductor devices and one of the leading manufacturers of lasers for gas  sensing applications. 
NANOPLUS is currently supplying mono mode DFB lasers in different types of packages at various wavelengths. 
Some typical DFB devices and their performance figures based on different material systems can be found at 
www.nanoplus.com. 
NANOPLUS has significant experience with DFB lasers in the GaAs and InP, but also the GaSb material system 
and associated challenges like water -free chip processing. Based on this material system, NANOPLUS has e.g. 
supplied long -wavelength DFB lasers for the NASA Mars Science Laboratory MSL mission (isotope ratio 
measurements on-board the Mars Rover Curiosity). The company holds the current long -wavelength record for 
mono mode type I GaSb -based laser diodes, as well a s the current long -wavelength record for mono mode 
Interband Cascade Lasers. MIR laser sources based on DFB and multi-section BSG ICL devices with performance 
defining the current state -of-the-art have been demonstrated. Researchers from NANOPLUS also made  various 
important contributions in the field of Quantum Cascade Laser device development.  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 70 of 96 
NANOPLUS will in particular contribute to the MIRACLE project by bringing in capabilities and related expertise 
in the field of QCL technology. 
Role in the project: 
NP main task is the developments of quantum cascade laser based MIR in WP2 Quantum cascade laser and 
iBEAM. NP will also support the WP5 Prototype development. NANOPLUS will in particular contribute to the 
Life iPrO project by bringing in capabilities and  related expertise in the field of QCL technology. nanoplus is a 
leading supplier of semiconductor laser sources for gas sensing applications and has already been able to provide 
a variety of innovations (as discussed above) into this field. Having a high interest to maintain a strategic position 
with respect to emerging technology and related market opportunities concerning infrared emitters in the medical 
field as for IR catheter probes in osteoarticular disease diagnosis, nanoplus is fully committed to t he project and 
the related investigations for future device applications in biophotonics. 
Key Personnel: 
Dr. Caroline Kistner (Principal Investigator, female) was born in Würzburg, Germany in 1981. She graduated 
in Physics from the University of Konstanz, Germany in 2007. In 2011 she received her PhD degree for her 
thesis on the spectroscopy of electronically contacted micro-cavities from the University of Würzburg. Following 
her studies Ms. Kistner joined the product development team of OSRAM Opto Semiconductors GmbH as 
Project Manager Engineering, where she led a variety of international product development projects concerning 
opto-electronical components. In 2016 Ms. Kistner joined the R&D division of nanoplus as development 
engineer where she is in charge of project management for novel laser sources and modules.  
Dr. Marc Fischer  (Co-Investigator, male) was born in Tettnang, Germany in 1972. He graduated in Physics 
from the State University of New York and Würzburg University in 1997 and 1999, respectively. During his 
PhD, he worked on the MBE growth of GaInNAs structures and developed EELs and VCSELs in this GaAs 
based material system for future telecom applications, realizing for example the first GaInNAs LD in the 1500nm 
wavelength range. In 2003, he received his PhD degree from Würzburg University. In 2002 he joined nanoplus 
Nanosystems and Technologies GmbH, where he is cu rrently leading the R&D division and is responsible for 
the development of novel devices and related process technology development. At NANOPLUS, he also 
contributed to various national and international research activities on novel laser sources and serve d e.g. as 
project manager for the EU project SensHy. He is author or co -author of around 150 publications concerning 
novel semiconductor material and devices. 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
L. Naehle, C. Zimmermann, S. Belahsene, M. Fischer, G. Boissier, P. Grech, G. Narcy, S. Lundqvist, Y. Rouillard, J. Koeth, M. 
Kamp and L. Worschech, “Monolithic tunable GaSb-based lasers at 3.3 μm“, Electronics Letters 47, 1092 (2011) 
M. v. Edlinger, J. Scheuermann, R. Weih, Ch. Zimmermann, L. Nähle, M. Fischer, J. Koeth, 
S. Höfling,and M. Kamp, "Monomode Interband Cascade Lasers at 5.2 μm for Nitric Oxide Sensing", Photonics Technology 
Letters, Volume 26 , Issue: 5 (2014) 
M. von Edlinger, J. Scheuermann, R. Weih, L. Naehle, M. Fischer, S. Höfling, J. Koeth, M. Kamp, Widely-tunable interband 
cascade lasers for the mid-infrared“, Photonics West 2015, February 7-12, 2015, San Francisco, USA 
J. Koeth, M. von Edlinger, J. Scheuermann, L. Nähle, L. Hildebrandt, M. Fischer, R. Weih, M. Kam p, „Distributed feedback 
interband cascade lasers for applications in research and industry“, Photonics West 2015, February 7 -12, 2015, San Francisco, USA 
P. Fuchs, J. Friedl, S. Höfling, J. Koeth, A.Forchel, L. Worschech, and M. Kamp, “Single mode quantu m cascade lasers with 
shallow-etched distributed Bragg reflector”, Optics Express, Vol. 20, Issue 4, pp. 3890-3897 (2012) 
Relevant research projects 
SENSHY [FP7 EU]: develop high quality ICL material for device processing and since then commercially exploit the project 
results ( only commercial manufacturer worldwide to offer ICL based DFB lasers).  
WIDELASE [FP7 EU]: special monolithic widely tunable ICL devices are currently investigated for the first time.  
QUIP [German Federal Ministry of Education and Research]: tunable QCL based devices around 14 µm.  
Existing Infrastructure 
For advanced device processing within Life iPro, state-of-the-art clean room facilities will be used at NANOPLUS with proven 
track records on the production of high performance and high reliability sensing lasers at various wavelengths. MBE growth 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 71 of 96 
equipment as well as a complete semiconductor process line is available (comprising systems for optical and ebeam lithography, as 
well as various dry etch systems, sputter systems, evaporators etc.) together with corresponding equipment for structural ana lysis 
(by electron microscopy SEM, profilometers etc.). In addition NANOPLUS possesses a fully integrated laser mounting and 
packaging line, including for example systems for die bonding, wire bonding, fibre coupling (incl. PM fiber packages) in 
combination with high-precision optical alignment systems. Besides the technical background in semiconductor device processing, 
NANOPLUS has extensive expertise in the mounting and integration of a variety of laser types and related components in many 
different laser packages. NANOPLUS will validate the performance of the newly developed laser sources and modules for sensing 
and has its own dedicated equipment and highly skilled personnel to ensure fast progress. Equipment for advanced laser 
characterization for sensing applications in the NIR and MIR includes specialized spectroscopic equipment. These characterization 
capacities are flanked by equipment for aging and reliability studies, which enable NANOPLUS to perform reliability tests and  to 
evaluate device lifetime. 
 
 
Some examples of processing equipment available at nanoplus:  
JEOL JBX 6300FS 100 kV ebeam lithography system (left) and Oxford Plasmalab 100  
RF Plasma etching system (right) 
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
OptoPrecision (OP)                                                     Partner #8 (Germany) 
 
The organization: 
The OptoPrecision GmbH is a small yet leading company in research, development, and production of high quality 
optical sensing devices. With 12 engineers and physicists providing many years of work experience in the fields of 
trace gas sensin g, laser driver electronics, and system design, they will contribute to the collaborative project in 
terms of developing electronics and software for the implementation of the novel sensing technologies proposed 
herein for the development of a dedicated analyzer, which will also be constructed and produced in house.Relevant 
skills/experience/technologies: 
With 12 engineers and physicists providing many years of work experience in the fields of trace gas sensing, laser 
driver electronics, and system design, we will contribute to the collaborative project in terms of developing 
electronics and software for the implementation of the novel sensing technologies proposed herein for the 
development of a dedicated analyzer, which will also be constructed and produced in house. 
Role in the project: 
OP will lead the WP5 Prototype development which main focus is the prototyping of the MIR -ATR catheter 
probe based system. Among the several tasks, the main objectives are:  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 72 of 96 
▪ Development of appropriate microcontroller -based electronics and software to drive the lasers, detect 
the measurement signals and to stabilize via control loops the whole system. 
▪ Mechanical construction of the analyser, manufacturing of first demonstrators. 
Key Personnel: 
Dr. Markus Nägele, Physicist, has 19 years of work experience in the field of laser-based trace gas sensing using 
mid-infrared lasers (e.g., CO 2 -lasers, quantum-cascade-lasers). 
Dr. Gerald Schubert, Electrical engineer, has 27 years of work of experience in the field high -speed electronics 
and ultra -sensitive detectors and amplifiers. He is also very experienced in the development of software for 
measurement and control loops. 
Michael Baumgarten, Mechanical engineer, has 9 years of work experience in the field mechanical system design 
(e.g., robust and reliable optical devices for weather forecast satellites). 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Product: GasMo: Gas Monitor to measure trace gases (in the ppbv range) in industrial applications  
Product: LiMo: Liquid monitor to measure traces of chemical impurities [in the ppmV range) in different liquid solvents  
Recent publication (submitted): iHWG-ICL: Methane Sensing with Substrate-Integrated Hollow Waveguides Directly Coupled 
to Interband Cascade Lasers, E. Tütüncü, M. Nägele, M. Fischer, B. Mizaikoff, ACS Sensors 2016  
Recent publication: Liquid analysis of traces of Isocyanat in Butyl acetate using a novel MIR laser photometer, M. Nägele, M. 
Theuer, S. Hennig, W. Kasten, tm –Technisches Messen 2016, DOI 10.1515/teme-2015-0103 
Publication: Quantum cascade laser spectroscopy for monitoring of ppb-concentration levels of phosgene, talk and poster at the 
EuroPACT2014 trade fare in Barcelona, 2014 
Relevant research projects 
APOSEMA[EU M-era.Net]: Advanced Photonic Sensor Materials – Development and test of first demonstrators:, Running 
since 2012 
OIFA [German Federal Ministry of Education and Research]: Optical inline fluid analysis, Development of gas and liquid 
sensors to measure traces of carbon monoxid and butylacetat, 2012-2015 
QUINGAP [German Federal Ministry of Education and Research]: Quantum-cascade laser systems for industrial gas sensing 
and process control, 2006- 2010 
Existing Infrastructure 
Ray-tracing software to simulate optical systems 
Several CAD workplaces to construct sophisticated new optical sensing solutions 
All hard- and software tools to develop, realized and test electronic circuits  
incl. electromagnetic compatibility and thermal characterization 
In-house machine shop to build all needed mechanical parts 
Different software languages/compiler to realize embedded software and human-machine interfaces for new self-made devices 
Workplaces to assemble and test new devices   
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third  parties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
Innovacio I Recerca Industrial I Sostenible SL (IRIS)                                              Partner #9 (IRIS)  
 
The organization:  
IRIS was established in Barcelona in 2007 as an advanced engineering and R&D company, specialising in the field 
of process engineering. IRIS has expertise in the following fields of engineering: Production Processes (with a 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 73 of 96 
strong specialisation in novel technologies); Smart Systems; and Optical Systems, combined with a knowledge and 
research capacity in food technology, materials science and environmental science. IRIS applies its knowledge and 
expertise to develop solutions for industry in the fields of a dvanced monitoring and control, surface activation, 
decontamination and biocompounds, as well as to provide contract research services to the food, agriculture, 
chemical and pharmaceutical industries, among others. The company has a policy of continuous in vestment for 
growth, and currently employs 48 staff based in two sites (Barcelona and Dublin) which are equipped with 
engineering workshops (3), food testing and wet chemistry laboratory, optics labs (2), and an 
electronics/telecommunications lab. IRIS is ISO 9001:2008 certified and also is certified under UNE -EN-ISO 
166002: Management Systems R&D&i. 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
In terms of programming and advanced ITs capabilities, IRIS has a specialized staff (software and 
telecommunication engineers with programming experience) that work on the basis of the Agile methodology and 
philosophy a (scrum and kanban) for developing complex applications that include hardware interfaces, SQL and 
No-SQL databases (MySQL, PostgresDB, Couchbase among others) and advanced and user-friendly graphic user 
interfaces not only for computers (using Windows Presentation Foundation) but also for smartphones (Android, 
iOS) or web-based access (HTML 5). Our software engineers are skilled in a wide variety of languages and operating 
systems as well as 
low-level programming (microcontrollers). 
 
Role in the project: 
IRIS will act as partner and they have extensive expertise at this level, and in particular in the context of industry -
driven FP7 and H2020 projects, and pri vate contacts with the industry. In addition, they will contribute WP4, 
whereby, they will be responsible for the development of the Global System Control, software and data 
management. IRIS will also have minor contribution in WP5 during prototype phase.  
 
Key Personnel: 
MSc. ALEJANDRO ROSALES (Male) has a M. Sc. in Physics from the Universidad de La Habana (1986). His 
background comprises theoretical and technical skills in several scientific and technological areas: optics, lasers, 
high vacuum, colorimet ry, UV -VIS-NIR-MIR spectroscopy, chemometrics and design of measurement 
instruments. He has extensive practical experience in programming, electronics and mechanical CAD design as 
well as R&D methodology and management. His career has included positions as researcher applications engineer, 
design engineer, business developer and R&D manager. In 2000s, he worked in the FTIR spectroscopy field applied 
to quality control in the agrofood (wine) industry, whereby he developed two new measurement instruments for 
wine analysis. His career as industrial physicist has been focused in applying his wide expertise to provide solutions 
for industrial problems. Since 2011, he has been the Technical Manager in IRIS, leading a staff of 20 engineers and 
researchers involved in R&D projects aimed at developing novel high -end solutions for industry. Currently, he is 
the Science & Technology Managerin IRIS. 
 
IVAN PAQUICO RODRIGUEZ. (Male) Telecommunications Degree in UPC (Barcelona) and a Joint Degree 
in Multimedia  Development in LUAS (Finland). His final thesis, 'Augmented Reality Chess and Application to 
Detect Chess Moves', implemented by using Computer Vision, Augmented Reality and Artificial Intelligence 
techniques, has won several awards, such as the best final thesis of t he UPC and the best final thesis of Spain 
(received from Vodafone Spain and Universia foundation). He is an official iOS and Android Developer since 
2010, creating a social network for iPhone called: 'BeThere' developed by iOS SDK from Apple and used 
Couchbase technology for the database. He also has experience in different programming languages such as C, 
C++, Objective C or Java, 8 bits embedded and real time systems. He has expertise in multimedia methodologies 
ranging from Virtual Reality programming techniques to 3D/2D modelling software such as OpenGL, Quest3D, 
Autodesk Maya, Autodesk 3DS Max or Adobe Photoshop. 
 
DAVID NETTLETON (Male). Data Mining Analyst. Has a Ph.D in Artificial Intelligence from the Universitat 
Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, M.Sc. In Computer Software and Systems Design from the University 
of Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K., and B.Sc. (Hons) Computer Science from the University of Wolverhampton, U.K. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 74 of 96 
Has over 20 years experience of applying data mining algorithms (including n eural networks, rule induction) and 
statistical techniques (including ANOVA, regression, principal components) in a diversity of data analysis and 
modeling projects, such as medical diagnosis/prognosis, fraud detection, customer loyalty and segmentation, online 
user web search behaviour and data privacy. As well as commercial projects, he has conducted research and lectured 
at two universities. He has published a diversity of articles in specialized data analysis journals/congresses and three 
books. He has participated in several competitive multi -partner research projects and has a European patent 
application for a graph matching algorithm. His IT Industrial experience includes project management, 
consultancy, programming and analysis, database development and business startups. He has developed software 
with a diversity of programming languages, (including Java, C++ and COBOL/CICS/DB2), database systems 
(such as Oracle, Ingres, MySQL) and data mining systems (IBM Intelligent Miner, Clementine, Weka). In IRIS he 
is currently involved in two major European projects (OpenMind and Sharebox), as a data mining specialist. The 
work in OpenMind involves modeling a complex industrial production process for producing high precision 
medical instruments. The work in Sha rebox involves building a symbiosis system for industrial collaborations 
between companies for the recycling of waste products using case based reasoning and agent modeling. 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
1. Development of a commercial system for real-time monitoring of moisture, CO2, temperature and filling level of grains in 
industrial silos. It comprises a network of multi-sensor probes and a data management subsystem. B2B project (private contract 
research). 
2. System for real-time on-line multipoint monitoring the olive oil extraction (centrifuge) in order to optimize the yield and 
reducing wastes. B2B project (private contract research). 
3. A platform for in-field multi-point monitoring of salinity in rice paddies in order to optimize the water consumption 
(AgriBox, in IRIS products line) 
4. A database-based system for decision support to ensure quality of ready-to-eat foods production (from FP7 project Startec: 
Decision Support Tools to ensure safe, tasty and nutritious Advanced Ready -To-Eat foods for healthy and vulnerable 
Consumers, Grant Agreement no: 289262. 
5. VIS and NIR-based on-line QC control in plastic injection process and DDS using chemometrics, as well as high temperature 
and pressure reflectrance and transmittance probes relevant to ProPAT (from FP7 OPTIJECT: A novel NIR -based instrument 
for in-line monitoring during injection moulding , GA nº 262623) 
Relevant research projects 
OptiNanoPro, Project full name: Processing and control of novel nanomaterials in packaging, automotive and solar panel 
processing lines, H2020- NMP-PILOTS Grant Agreement no: 686116, 2015-2018- 7M€, www.optinanopro.eu 
OpenMind, On-demand production of entirely customised minimally invasive medical devices, H2020- FoF Grant Agreement 
no: 680820, 2015-2018, 5M€, www.openmind.eu 
ProPAT, Robust and affordable process control technologies for improving standards and optimising industrial operations, 
Grant Agreement no: 637232, H2020- SPIRE, 2014-2018, 5M€, www.pro-pat.eu 
Existing Infrastructure 
  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks NO 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  NO 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  NO 
 
art photonics GmbH (AP)                                                                                   Partner #10 (German y) 
 
The organization:  
Art photonics (AP) is a privately owned SME founded by Dr Artyushenko in 1998 in Berlin to develop and 
produce specialty fiber products for very broad spectral range – from 200nm to 16µm, including 3 product lines 
now:  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 75 of 96 
FlexiRay® line consists of silica, chalcogenide IR -glass and unique Polycrystalline IR (PIR -) Silver Halide fibers 
and cables or bundles assembled from them. FlexiRay® Laser Cables can deliver laser power at any wavelength 
from UV up to 10,6µm and could combine power from many lasers by bundles of unique metal coated fibers. 
FlexiSpec® Fiber Optic Probes can eliminate sampling for lab spectrometers and enable real time remote process 
spectroscopy for reaction monitoring, industrial process control and medical diagnostics in clinics. 
Brand new FlexiSens® line premieres spectral fiber Moisture Sensor (MoiSens) – small LED-sensor to control 
moisture in media with fiber probes. FlexiSens® platform allows to control various components in customized 
application for low cost process-control in pharma, food, chemical and other industries with remote data analysis 
via specific IP-address of each sensor. Biomedical sensors are under constant development. 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
Art photonics is the world's leading manu facturer and supplier of InfraRed chalcogenide and polycrystalline 
specialty optical fibres, spectroscopy fibre probes & fibre bundles, high power fibre cables for industrial and 
medical applications. Art photonics GmbH is an ISO 9001:2008 certified suppli er of development and 
manufacturing of special optical fibers and various fiber systems. 
The Company's unique technology experience accumulated over 30 years allows to design, develop, and 
manufacture the highest quality, cost -effective optical fiber solutions of a broad spectral range (from 200nm to 
18µm) for industrial and OEM market. The flexible design of fiber probes enables multi -spectral analysis of any 
process by different spectroscopy methods over the broad range of spectra including middle IR  range. The 
possibility to design disposable or serializable probes allows to integrate probes in vivo in clinics. 
Role in the project: 
AP will be leading WP2 Imaging MIR-ATR arthroscopy probe and in cooperation with UUlm will be responsible 
for the fundamental design, development, optimization, and evolution of the diamond ATR arthroscopy probe, 
and imaging MIR-ATR arthroscopy catheter probe with specific focus on (i) polycrystalline fibers; (ii) monofiber 
probe; (iii) the catheter diamond ATR probe for in -situ and in -depth OA diagnosis. Furthermore, AP will have 
major contribution to the WP5 in prototype phase and minor contribution to WP2.   
Key Personnel: 
Dr Viacheslav Artyushenko PhD, President & CEO of ART PHOTONICS is a physicist. His PhD from 1981 
was focused on pioneering development of polycrystalline fibers for Mid IR-range: 3-18µm. Multiple publications/ 
patents were devoted to fiber optic technologies & applications in a broad spectral range from UV to Mid IR, 
including laser medicine, process-spectroscopy, optical sensing & diagnostic. In 1998 he founded art photonics in 
Berlin to spin -off his unique technology of polycrystalline fibres to industrial production and to develop and 
produce various fibre probes for process-spectroscopy. Dr. V. Artyushenko is a member of SPIE since 1985, OSA, 
SAS, EPIC, SPECTARIS, Optec-BB, Photonics-BB, GDCh-DECHEMA; CPACT & CLIRSPEC.  
Dr Tatiana Sakharova PhD , PhD in Technology, Since 1987 work in the area of infrared semiconducto r 
detectors, holds more than 20 papers and patents in semiconductor materials technology. Experience in crystal 
growth, semiconductor films technology, analytical methods and research, material science of infrared materials, 
electrical and optical test methods. Since 1998 works in fiber optics technology. Holds more than 10 papers in fiber 
optic technology and research. Experience in optical fiber production, manufacturing and testing of fiber optic 
cables and probes, fiber spectroscopy, technology development.  
Dr. Olga Bibikova  PhD, PhD in bio physiscs (Russia). PhD student of International PhD Programme in 
Molecular Medicine within Oulu (Finland) and Ulm (Germany). She is a specialist in fields in optical spectroscopy 
methods including FT -IR, NIR, fluorescence, Raman spectroscopy; cells and tissue culture methods; data and 
image processing; chemical synthesis of nanoparticles, optical coherency tomography; light, electron and confocal 
microscopy. Organizer and the first President of the SPIE Student Chapter of Oulu University  Author and co -
author of 11 publications in peer-reviewed and scientific journals and conference proceedings; 25 presentations at 
major international conferences and workshops (oral and poster) 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 76 of 96 
US Patent No. 7,956,317 Fibre Optic Probe 
US Patent No. 6,564,587 B2 Method of producing an optical fiber by gath-ering material from a molten bat 
US Patent Application No. 09/944,825 Optical fiber and method of pro-ducing 
European Patent Application EP 1184339 A3 Optische Faser und Herstellungsverfahren für eine optische Faser 
V. Artyushenko, F. Schulte, U. Zabarylo, H.-P. Berlien, I. Usenov, T. Saeb-Gilani, H. Eichler, L. Pieszczek, A. Bogomolov, H. 
Krause. O. Minet, “Spectral fiber sensors for cancer diagnostics in vitro, Proc. Of SPIE Vol. 9537, 2015;  
Relevant research projects 
Fiber Optic Molecular Sensor [FOMoS], European Regional Development Fund - ERDF 
Multimodal Spectroscopic Investigation for inline determination of cell viability [Multispec], Federal Ministry of Educati on and 
Resarch, Germany; Technologie centrum, Germany   
Miniaturized Mir Sensors for Biorefinery process [MEMS-BIOPRO], Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy; ZIM 
program for SMEs 
Existing Infrastructure 
ART PHOTONICS owns the needed research facilities, infrastructure and equipment to cover the project tasks, including 
spectrometric systems, biological samples, fibre probes.  
Equipment Manufacturer Type and details Comments  
FTIR spectrometer 
Matrix MF 
Bruker Optics Mid IR range 5000 -500cm-1, 
sensitive LN -cooled MCT 
detector,  
For fiber 
optics only 
FTIR spectrometer 
Nicolet 6700 
Thermo Scientific Mid IR range 5000 -500cm-1, 
room temperature DTGS 
detector and sensitive LN -cooled 
MCT detector 
Equipped 
with fiber 
optic coupler 
Raman spectrometer 
Ventana 
Ocean Optics 785nm laser For fiber 
optics only 
ATR fiber optic probes art photonics Different ATR crystals and fibers 
to cover mid IR range from 2 to 
17 microns 
 
Equipment and facilities for development and production of fiber optic spectroscopy probes of all 
types: transmission, reflection, diffuse reflection, ATR, Raman 
Dewar system for liquid nitrogen storage and sample containing. 
Freezer for biological 
samples 
Arctico    
 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
 
Instituto Nacional de Engenharia Biomedica (INEB)                                        Partner #11 Portugal  
 
The organization: 
INEB - Instituto Nacional de Engenharia Biomédica – INEB is a private non -profit association with the 
statute of public interest, founded in June 1989 by six institutions, including the University of Porto (UPorto).  
In 2008 INEB established the consortium i3S – Instituto the Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, together with the 
University of Porto, the Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology (IBMC) and the Institute of Molecular Pathology 
and Immunology of UPorto (IPATIMUP). In 2014, i3S was among t he 11 national institutions rated as 
“Exceptional” by the national Foundation for Science and Technology. 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 77 of 96 
The Mission of INEB is to generate knowledge, by promoting research, advanced training and technology transfer 
in biomedical engineering. INEB’s Visio n is to be an international reference in the application of integrated 
engineering solutions to improve human health. INEB is an internationally recognized interdisciplinary research 
institute, where integrative engineering solutions are applied to improve  human health, involving specialists in 
biomaterials, tissue regeneration, nanomedicine, bioimaging, medical signals, geoepidemiology, biology and 
medicine. Several clinicians, based at Porto’s largest hospital (Hospital de São João), have joined INEB in t he 
specialities of Orthopaedics (including surgeons), Obstetricians and Nephrologists, with the latter creating the 
Nephrology and Infectious Diseases Research Group  (NG), devoted to clinical and translational research in 
chronic kidney disease (CKD), with competencies in several additional pathologies.  
About 200 persons work at INEB (58 PhDs and 100 post -graduate students). INEB is a dynamic institute with a 
large majority of young researchers (79% of researchers with less than 40 years old), including cl inician and MDs 
doing their PhD theses at INEB.  
In the past 10 years INEB’s researchers have generated 12 patents, 40 prototypes, 6 commercial products and 3 
spin-offs and has licenced several technologies to global companies. In addition, in the last 5 y ears, INEB’s 
researchers have published more than 300 scientific publications in high impact peer reviewed journals. The 
excellence of research performed at INEB is regularly recognized through international and national prizes, 
including the George Winter Award and Jean Leray Award (from the European Society of Biomaterials) and the 
L'Oreal-UNESCO Award for Women in Science (three awardees).  
INEB is a member of the following European Networks: ETPN - European Technology Platform – 
Nanomedicine, the European Institute for Biomedical Imaging Research (EIBIR), is a member of the Portuguese 
Cluster for Health (Health Cluster Portugal), and has collaborations with almost 100 institutions worldwide. INEB 
integrates actively the European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing. INEB is qualified by the 
National Strategic Reference Framework to provide consultancy and services in research a nd technology 
development (RTD) to support innovative SMEs.  
INEB has participated and coordinated EC projects under FP4, FP5, FP6 and FP7 (as well as other European and 
international funding schemes), including FP7-NMP213904-Disk Regeneration and Marie Curie ITN-EID 317052 
IB2 – Industrial Biological Biomaterials project in partnership with Grifols, SA.  
Additional details at http://www.ineb.up.pt.  
Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S) 
The Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, i3S, headed by the University of Porto (UPorto), brings 
together four institutions and researchers from several schools of UPorto. i3S results from the long -term 
collaboration between INEB, IBMC (Instituto de Biologia Mol ecular e Celular), and IPATIMUP (Instituto de 
Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da UPorto) and several research groups from Faculdade de Medicina da UPorto 
(FMUP), encompassing joint projects, co -supervision of PhD students, sharing of large equipment and 
employment of research staff under coordinated policies. 
The research unit i3S (Ref UID/BIM/04293/2013) was evaluated in 2014 by an international panel, and was 
among the 11 national institutions rated as “Exceptional” by FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia).  
i3S focuses on 3 Integrative Programs: 
• Cancer; 
• Host Response and Interaction; 
• Neurobiology and Neurologic Disease. 
The trans-disciplinary character of i3S is achieved through these Integrative Research Programs and by promoting 
projects addressing questions that require participation of basic and applied sciences, such as: 
• The development of effective and reliable in vitro diagnostic tools (for early detection of gastric cancer and 
bacterial infection, combining molecular targets and nanotechnologies, with emphasis on in vivo bioimaging); 
• The development of carriers, scaffolds and cell isolation, and manipulation technologies for effective cell 
therapies and tissue engineering strategies in neurological diseases and trauma, pa rticularly for elderly and 
diabetic patients; 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 78 of 96 
• The development of fundamental research to solve basic biological questions will be a priority and it lays the 
groundwork for future advancements; it will also be a guiding principle in hiring new researchers. 
 
The i3S consortium is strategically located in a campus with a strong focus of Health, next to the largest hospital 
in the Region and the Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO) as well as the Faculty of Medicine (and other scientific 
institutions of the region, including INESC). Moreover, i3S has long and fruitful collaborations with local hospitals, 
as demonstrated by collaborative projects and the fact that several i3S members also work at CH São João, including 
some integrating this Program. Thus, i3S has a well-established environment and experience to foster transfer and 
translation of technologies from the bench to the bedside.  
i3S also has a Program for Scientific Culture, with the main objective of dissemination of scientific culture among 
students and the general public. 
Relevant skills/experience: 
 
 
INEB has considerable experience not only in the management and participation in European projects and 
networks, but also on the valorisation and exploitation of scientific results and competences in the life, materials 
and health sciences. INEB has a vast  experience in knowledge transfer and in the valorization of scientific 
knowledge and competences: in the past 10 years INEB’s researchers have generated 12 patents, 39 prototypes, 6 
commercial products and 3 spin-offs, and has licenced several technologies to global companies, including Baxter 
Healthcare and CAE Healthcare.  
INEB and i3S have launched the RESOLVE Programme (www -resolve-health.pt). RESOLVE is a health 
technology-based Program designed to provide support and management tools to early -stage projects and start-
ups in the health sector, focused on the transformation of innovative research into profitable ventures. The aim is 
to foster the transfer of knowledge, ultimately leading to licensing patents or launching start -ups by teams of 
researchers and entrepreneurs involved in this area. RESOLVE is hosted at i3S and is funded by 
NORTE2020/FEDER. The knowledge and channels accrued will be made available to the MIRACLE 
consortium.  
Role in the project: 
INEB will  be the WP7 Leader. As such, INEB will be responsible for overseeing all tasks related to the 
dissemination and exploitation of the project results, as well as to implement IP monitoring and management in 
MIRACLE and the implementation and continuous impro vement of the MIRACLE Business Plan, the 
Exploitation Plan and the Dissemination Plan. In addition, INEB will also lead the task 1.4 regarding the pathway 
for regulatory approvals.  
Key Personnel:  
The project will be mainly carried out within INEB’s Technology Transfer and International Projects Office, 
integrated in the Technology Transfer and Programmes Unit of i3S. The participants are actively engaged in the 
RESOLVE Programme, a project dedicated to technology transfer of Health-related technologies with TRL 3 and 
above.  
 
Sofia Esteves (female) has graduated in Biology at University of Porto (2007) following by a master in Molecular 
Genetics at University of Minho (2010). During this period, she also worked as a molecular geneticist in the Medical 
Genetic Center (CGM-INSA) and as a researcher at IPATIMUP. She recently obtained her PhD in Health Sciences 
at University of Minho (2016), Life and Health Science Research Institute (ICVS) focusing in t herapeutic 
approaches and pre -clinical trials for neurodegenerative disorders. She published 9 peer review scientific papers 
and submitted a patent. She joined INEB in 2016 and is currently working as a Project Manager of the RESOLVE 
Program at Technology Transfer and Programmes Unit at i3S. Her main interests are related with translational 
research and health science entrepreneurship projects and activities. 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 79 of 96 
Nuno Neves (male) graduated in Medicine in 1997 at the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Por to, and 
became a specialist in Orthopedics and Traumatology in 2006. He trained at the Hospitals Pitié -Salpétrière e 
Armand Trousseau, Paris, France (2004) and Rothman Institute, Jefferson University, Philadelphia, USA (2008). 
He is a PhD researcher at INEB and the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto. He practices at Hospital 
Cuf Porto, Porto, and Centro Hospitalar de S. João, Porto. He has published more than 40 scientific articles in 
national and international peer reviewed journals.   
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Vasconcelos DM, Cortez J, Lamghari M. 2016. Technical Standards and Legislation for Implants and Implantable Medical 
Devices. Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803581-
8.04059-5  
Cortez J, Vorobieva E, Gralheira D, (...), Gomes P, Franco R. Bionanoconjugates of tyrosinase and peptide-derivatised gold 
nanoparticles for biosensing of phenolic compounds. 2011. Journal of Nanoparticle Research. 13 (3), pp. 1101-1113. 
Lopes F, Esteves S, et al.. Identification of novel genetic causes of Rett syndrome-like phenotypes. 2016. Journal of Medical 
Genetics. 53 (3), pp. 190-199.  
Vasconcelos, D, Neves N et al. Fibrinogen scaffolds with immunomodulatory properties promote in vivo bone regeneration. 
Biomaterials, 2016. 111:163-178. DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.10.004 
Prothesis of the patella. Silva M, Rodrigues P, Antunes A, Monteiro E, Neves N, Oliveira P. Comparative study in knee 
arthroplasties. Rev. Port. Ortop. Traum. 2013(21):2  
Relevant research projects  
RESOLVE-Respostas Eficazes para Superar Obstáculos que Limitam a Valorização Eficaz; SIAC NORTE -01-0246-FEDER-
000018 (2016-2018) 
 
Existing Infrastructure 
INEB has access to advanced equipment for undertaking research in the fields of nanomedicine and biomaterials, and in 
particular the state-of-the-art facilities Centre in Bioimaging (www.bimage.ineb.up.pt), which include confocal Raman 
microscopy, atomic force microscopy, with the possibility of exploring the combination with inverted fluorescence microscopy,  
imaging cytometry, microultrasounds for in vivo, confocal microscopy, imaging ellipsometer and fluorescence microscopy with 
time-lapse. Others apparatus and facilities include: FTIR/RAMAN spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, XPS, QCM -D, 
surface energetics, electro kinetics, GPC/SEC, DMA, DSC, advanced light microscopy facilities, cell culture and animal 
(including P3) facilities, histology and electron microscopy services for advanced tissue analysis, advanced flow cytometry 
facilities, genotyping and metabolomics. 
These can be made accessible to the project partners if and as necessary.  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
Asociación Española de Normalización (UNE)                             Partner #12 (Spain) 
 
The organization: 
The Spanish Association for Standardization (UNE) is a non profit-making, private, independent and multisectoral 
organisation, recognised at National, European and International level. Through the development of technical 
standards helps improve the quality and competitiveness of companies, products and services. 
As standardization body, UNE is the national representative and member of the European (CEN/CENELEC), 
International (ISO/IEC) and Panamerican (COPANT) Standards Organizations, and member of the European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI). 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 80 of 96 
More than 30000 standards in catalogue, 200 national technical committees and 150 responsibilities (chairpersons, 
secretariats, convenors) in international standardization committees are a sample of the experience developed as 
national standards body during the last 30 years. 
Relevant skills/experience/technologies: 
UNE is the National Standardization Body of Spain, member of CEN, CENELEC, ISO, IEC and ETSI. 
UNE is participating in many Research and Innovation projects (Horizon 2020, FP7, Life+, CIP etc., see examples 
here) representing the European Standardization Organizations CEN and CENELEC to support and manage the 
integration of standardization activities in the projects, fostering the dissemination of their results to the relevant 
European stakeholders and facilitating their introduction into the market. It is also an active member of the CEN-
CENELEC Strategic Group ‘STAIR’ (STAndardization, Innovation and Research), which develops the guidelines 
for the practical integration of standardization and research. 
Role in the project: 
UNE will advise, manage and develop all the activities related with standardization in WP7. European 
Standardization Organizations, CEN and CENELEC do not participate directly in research and innovat ion 
projects, delegating this participation into their national members. 
Key Personnel: 
Fernando UTRILLA (Mr)  
Mechanical Engineer (University of Zaragoza). Master Degree on Innovation Management (UNE). 
Since 2012, Head of Research and Innovation Unit at the Standardization Department of UNE, coordinating the 
participation of UNE as National Standards Body in research projects and proposals, including Horizon 2020, 
FP7, Life+, CIP programmes. Spanish representative in CEN -CENELEC ‘STAIR’ (Standardization, Innovation 
and Research) Group. Secretary of CEN/TC 389 “Innovation Management”. Previously worked for 11 years as 
Standardization Programme Manager in UNE, giving support and carrying the Secretariat of several national and 
European Technical Committees in  the engineering and innovation sectors. Previous experience in metal 
transforming industry, as Production Manager. 
Cristina HERNÁN (Ms) 
Degree in Pharmacy (Complutense University of Madrid). Master degree in Pharmaceutical and 
Parapharmaceutical Industry (CESIF). 
Since 2006, Standardization Programme Manager on Health. Secretariat of the Committee AEN/CTN 179 
"Quality and safety in health care facilities", Giving support to several national standardization committees related 
to the health sector such as optical, dental, medical devices, information and communication technologies for the 
health, assistive products for persons with disability or implants for surgery. Previous experience in the medical 
device industry as Quality Manager and as a technical guarantor. 
José Antonio JIMÉNEZ (Mr) 
Electronic Engineer - Specialization in automation and electronics (University of Málaga) 
Currently Program Manager of Electronics and ICT at the Standardization Department of UNE (since 2007), 
giving support and carrying the Secretariat of several national Technical Committees mainly on the fields of Electric 
equipment and automatic systems for industry, Luminaries, lamps and related equipment, and Electronic 
equipment. 7 years of previous experi ence working as responsible for the maintenance of telecommunication 
network equipment and network management systems. 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
UNE has a specific national standardization technical body related with photonics, CTN 209/SC 76 "Laser and electro-optical 
equipments, installations and systems". More than 50 published standards are directly related with these committee, covering 
terminology, test methods, determination of key parameters, etc. Additionally, UNE has national standardization committees 
related with medical and electromedical devices such as CTN 209/SC 62 "Electromedical equipment"and CTN 111 "Surgical 
and medical devices".  More than 250 published standards are directly related with these commi ttee 
The total number of standardization committees in UNE is over 200, involving more than 10000 experts and having published 
more than 30000 standards. 
Relevant research projects 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 81 of 96 
BRIDGIT- Bridging the gap between research and standardization – FPA – 2013-2014 – 1.640.000€ – 
http://www.cencenelec.eu/research/BRIDGIT/Pages/default.aspx 
PHOCNOSIS- Advanced nanophotonic point-of-care analysis device for fast and early diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases– 
H2020 PHC 10 – 4.146.000 €–https://phocnosis.eu/–(Subcontractor) 
ELASTISLET - Tailored Elastin-like Recombinamers as Advanced Systems for Cell Therapies in Diabetes Mellitus: a Synthetic 
Biology Approach towards a Bioeffective and Immunoisolated Biosimilar Islet/Cell Niche – H2020 NMP-10-2014 - 2015- 2019 
– 6.718.000€–http://www.elastislet.eu/en/–(Subcontractor) 
SCAFFOLD - Innovative strategies, methods and tools for occupational risk management of manufactured nanomaterials 
(MNM) in the construction industry – FP7 NMP – 2012-2015 - 3.763.000€ - http://scaffold.eu-vri.eu/ 
REEMAIN - Integration of Renewable Energy Sources at Factory Environment – FP7 FoF - 2013-2017 – 12.200.000€ - 
http://www.reemain.eu/ 
Existing Infrastructure 
UNE, as member of the European/International standardization system, has full access to its entire internal information 
infrastructure which will be required to fulfil the relevant tasks in the project. 
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks No 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties  No 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties No 
 
Photonics Finland                                                  Partner #13 (Finland) 
 
The organization:  
Photonics Finland is a technology oriented association that drives the photonics industry in Finland. It connects 
photonics companies, research centres and public authorities. Photonics Finland is a national photonics platform 
and cluster.  
Relevant skills/experience/technologies:  
Photonics Finland was founded in June 2014. Photonics Finland develops new business and research opportunities 
and helps realise the full potential of the photonics industry in sectors like health care, energy efficiency, safety,  
manufacturing and sustainability. Photonics Finland team has experience in communication and marketing in the 
field of photonics and new technologies.  
Role in the project: 
Photonics Finland will contribute in WP7 in the dissemination of the novel photoni cs components developed in 
MIRACLE, including to establish communication channels, organize events and participate in relevant events in 
the field.  
 
Key Personnel: 
Juha Purmonen (male) is executive director of the Photonics Finland association. He is an executive director at 
Photonics Finland. With both scientific and business background, Juha has over 10 years’ experience in a variety 
of projects, e.g. development and sales experience from the wide global business sectors. Juha started his carrier as 
software engineer focused on cryptography solutions. Later on, he concentrated spectral color research and was 
spectral color researcher at University of Eastern Finland. Juha is a c o-founder of SoftColor Ltd that won the 
president of Finland granted INNOFINLAND prize in 2005. He is responsible for the development of photonics 
and nanotechnology business activities. He is one of the co -founders of Photonics Finland Cluster. Juha has 
participated in several European projects and has a lot of experience in national development projects. 
Tuukka Pakarinen (male) is a communication manager of Photonics Finland association. He is also a project 
coordinator at Joensuu Science Park in Finland.  His main responsibilities are to produce and develop 
communication and marketing communication in the fields of photonics and new technologies as well as events. 
With his background, Bachelor of Media specialised in Producing and Video and a Philosophy Ma ster degree 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 82 of 96 
specialised in Media and Communication, Tuukka has been an entrepreneur doing photography and video 
productions with many companies and has experience in communication development cases and in producing a 
variety of projects. 
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Photonics Finland supports the development of the photonics field from basic research through to the employment and 
market launch of products.  
Existing Infrastructure 
Photonics Finland has over 80 member organisations that operate together in seven multidisciplinary work groups. It has 
established channels to disseminate the project results in the field of photonics.  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks No 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third parties No 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  No 
 
Universidade Católica Portuguesa (UCP)                                                                                        Partner #14 Portugal 
 
The organization:  
Universidade Católica Portuguesa (UCP) is a research university committed to contribute to knowledge and to the 
well-being of society. It is a national university with 4 regional campi (Lisbon, Porto, Braga ,Viseu) with strong 
inter-sectoral ties. The University is recognized for the social impact of its research agenda and for its contribution 
to the formulation of policy. 
UCP is privately funded and recognized by the Portuguese State as an autonomous university institution of public 
utility. In line with the University’s Research Strategy UCP2020, UCP aims to foster interdisciplinary and 
transversal research and potential candidates will preferentially work across disciplines to address complex social 
challenges. UCP is committed to foster a supportive and productive research environment anchored in diversity 
and equality, offering ample opportunities that involve a ll scholars regardless of their nationality, ethnicity, class, 
or gender. UCP is committed to disseminating its research outcomes both nationally and internationally. As such, 
in line with UCP’s open access policy, the University encourages all researchers  to deposit their dissertations and 
accepted manuscripts in its open access repository Veritati (http://repositorio.ucp.pt/), which is part of the 
national scientific repository in open access RCAAP.  
The Faculty of Biotechnology of the Universidade Católica Portuguesa (ESB-UCP) has a respected and recognized 
position in higher education on biotechnology, with particular emphasis on the agro-food and environmental areas 
and their interfaces with health and well -being. Its research centre, the Centre for Bio technology and Fine 
Chemistry – CBQF, holds disciplinary competencies essentially based on biosciences, bioengineering, biomaterials 
from biological origin, nutrition and analytical chemistry, applied to thematic challenges focused on the Health and 
Well-being of the Citizen and the Competitiveness of the Agricultural and Food Systems. Fundamental and applied 
research are developed in close partnership with Portuguese and international R&D partners and companies. 
CBQF as a Research Centre was evaluated by an international jury as Excellent (highest rank), following the 2018 
evaluation implemented by the Portuguese Science Foundation (FCT). More than 120 researchers, 66 holding a 
PhD degree, 50 PhD students and several research fellows, currently work at CBQF -UCP. CBQF is strongly 
involved in national and international R&D+I and educational projects developed in partnership with R&D 
Centres, Universities and Companies (more than 100 in the past five 5 years where 50% were in collaboration with 
industry). In th e last 5 years, CBQF has published more than 550 peer reviewed papers, submitted 22 patents, 
collaborated with 130 HE institutions and research centres from approximately 50 countries, and is active in 35 
international education and research networks (e.g. , ISEKI_Food, EULAFF, SPESS, Erasmus +, REAL, 
INOVAR).  

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 83 of 96 
Relevant skills/experience: 
CBQF-UCP is equipped with different thematic advanced platforms serving the research activities and extension 
services: Bioactives Characterization, Molecular Biology and Cell Culture, Analytical Chemistry, with the capability 
of designing and using prototypes and pilot scale equipment in the food, environmental and health R&D+I 
activities. The scientific and technological developments have promoted more competi tive companies and 
contributed to the internationalization of solutions and companies. The CBQF connection to key stakeholders is 
achieved by transfer of knowledge and technology with the direct application of results, services or project 
implementation, with the exploitation of the acquired patents and by promoting qualified entrepreneurship. 
CBQF’s track record includes ca. 35 business projects in the area of biotechnology (startups), developed in the 
framework of pre -incubation and incubation activities.  CBQF has an office for Research and Funding Advice, 
headed by João Cortez, a Knowledge Transfer and Partnerships Platform and will have the support of the Business 
School of UCP, based at the same Campus in Porto. 
Role in the project: 
Responsible for the Exploitation Tasks in MIRACLE (Task 7.4) and WP7 Leader.  UCP will assist the industrial 
partners in supporting the partners in innovation activities and activities to ensure the exploitation of key 
exploitable results in MIRACLE. 
Key Personnel:  
Dr. João Marques Cortez (male) graduated in Chemistry at the University of Coimbra and obtained his PhD in 
Textile Chemistry in 1999 at De Montfort University, UK. His post -doc work was carried out at the Nottingham 
Trent University, where he became Senior Research Fellow in 2006. In 2008 he started a Ciência 2007 position at 
the Faculty of Science and Technology of Universidade Nova de Lisboa (PT), in nanotechnology applications in 
biosensors and in textiles. Since graduation, his research involved collaborations wi th industry, and the 
development of products and processes, resulting in 3 patents. He was Head of the International Projects and 
Business Development Office at INEB for 7 years and Head of the i3S Research Funding Office for 3 years, with 
responsibilities as coordinator of the tech transfer project RESOLVE. He has considerable experience both as 
researcher and in the management of European projects. He managed the FP7 Marie Curie ITN-EID project IB2 
coordinated by INEB, was the PI of H2020 ICT -30: 780598 p roject MIRACLE at INEB/i3S (Exploitation 
Manager), and was participant of the H2020 RESTORE project (814558), as Exploitation Manager. He is now 
Research and Innovation Advisor at CBQF and the Porto Campus of UCP. ORCID: 0000-0002-8227-0754  
Profile: 
Relevant publications/patents/products/services 
Vasconcelos DM, Cortez J, Lamghari M. 2016. Technical Standards and Legislation for Implants and Implantable Medical 
Devices. Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803581-
8.04059-5 
Cortez J, Vorobieva E, Gralheira D, (...), Gomes P, Franco R. Bionanoconjugates of tyrosinase and peptide derivatised gold 
nanoparticles for biosensing of phenolic compounds. 2011. Journal of Nanopartic le Research. 13 (3), pp. 1101-1113. 
Relevant research projects  
Participation in NMBP-22-2018 project RESTORE: 814558; (User-centred smart nanobiomaterial-based 3D matrices for 
chondral repair). João Cortez worked as Exploitation Manager.  
RESOLVE: Respostas Específicas para Superar Obstáculos que Limitam a Valorização Eficaz. Project NORTE -01-0246-
FEDER-000018. This was an ignition program to promote seed projects and start-ups in the health sector, boosting the 
translation of innovative ideas into business ventures and value creation. João Cortez was Head of the team of 5 people 
implementing the project at i3S (www.resolve-health.pt). 
Organiser of WARP: the first conference for accelerator programmes dedicated to the health sector.  
Founder of the i3S-Hovione Capital Innovation Prize, an international award aimed at distinguishing innovative ideas in the 
health sector. This 35k€ prize brings together an innovation institute and a health solutions dedicated investor.  
HIRF Innovation Fellowship (UK, £27,000), to bring to market an enzyme-based solution for textiles, in partnership with Marks 
& Spencers (UK) and Ajinomoto (JP). 
 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 84 of 96 
Existing Infrastructure 
 UCP has extensive experience in collaborating with the industry in developing market-led R&D&I. CBQF’s portfolio includes 
30 active patents, several licensing agreements undergoing and has been involved in the co -development of products currently in 
the market. The Team’s direct access to the expertise in the UCP Business School, in the same Campus, will also ensure the 
correct and timely delivery of the tasks assigned.  
CBQF-UCP has dedicated laboratory equipment and supporting facilities for research unde rtaken within areas such as 
microbiology, molecular biology, cell culture, fine chemistry and biochemistry, food technology and packaging. CBQF is 
equipped with the most advanced scientific resources in the areas of chemistry, biology, molecular biology, p hysical and sensory 
analysis, dedicated to basic science, food and environmental technology and human nutrition  
Does the participant plan to subcontract certain tasks N 
Does the participant envisage that part of this work is performed by linked third par ties N 
Does the participant envisage the use of contributions in kind provided by third parties  N 
 
5. Ethics and Security
5.1 Ethics 
The MIRACLE consortium ethics self-assessment recognizes the ethical issues regarding to three particular points: 
(i) Humans and (ii) and Human cells/tissues and (iii) Equines. The follow sub -sections presents the ethics self -
assessment realized during proposal phase.   
5.1.1 Ethical self-assessment for humans  
5.1.1.1 General aspects 
It is stated in Declaration of Helsinki - Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects general 
principles ‘The primary purpose of medical research involving human subjects  is to understand the causes, 
development and effects of diseases and improve preventive, diagnostic and therapeutic interventions (methods, 
procedures and treatments)’. Accordingly, MIRACLE’s purpose of involving human subjects is to validate 
the novel diagnostic method in order to improve joint tissue evaluation promo ting better tools for 
therapeutic decision making.  
  
The validation in the clinical setting in MIRACLE will be carrie d out in accordance with the following main 
principles: 
Common principles: 
▪ The subjects will not be exposed to any extra danger or complications. 
▪ The arthroscopic techniques to be used in the study are comparable with routine clinical arthroscopic 
techniques.   
▪ The study will be submitted to the appropriate Ethics Committee once the project is granted and before 
the Grant Agreement conclusion.  
Humans: 
▪ The rights, safety and wellbeing of clinical investigation subjects will be protected consistent with the 
ethical principles laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki. 
▪ All regulations and measures of confidentiality and data security will be strictly enforced according to 
the University guidelines, national legislation and in accordance with Declaration of Helsinki. 
▪ All study subjects must provide a written informed consent. In MIRACLE, no children or other vulnerable 
subjects will be recruited. 
▪ The validation in the clinical setting will be performed by highly qualified orthopaedic surgeons.  
 
 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 85 of 96 
5.1.1.2 EU Directives and International Organization for Standardization (ISO) for Human subjects 
EU Directives 2001/20/EC  and 2005/28/EC state the laws, principles and regulations regarding to the 
implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use. 
Although these documents emphasis are related to ‘investigation in human subjects intended to discover or verify 
the clinical, pharmacological and/or other pharmacodynamics effects’, general good clinical practices will be 
adopted during MIRACLE validation in clinical settings as follow: 
▪ Ensure protection of human rights and the dignity of the human being during the clinical trials. 
▪ Follow the proper legal instruments to obtain the human subject legal consent to the clinical investigation. 
Persons who are incapable of giving legal consent to clinical trials should be given special protection. 
▪ Ensure that the person information is treated as strictly confidential and is not made publicly available. 
▪ Follow all ethical and scientific quality requirements which must be observed for designing, conducting, 
recording and reporting clinical trials that involve the participation of human subjects. 
▪ Provide assurance that the rights, safety and well -being of trial subjects are protected, and that the results of 
the clinical trials are credible. 
 
Important to emphasize that although these directives are regarding clinical trials, MIRACLE will NOT carry out 
clinical trials (which are extensive clinical validation on humans) but ONLY perform system prototype testing and 
validation in conditions of cl inical environment, on real samples/subjects and involving highly competent users 
i.e. orthopaedic surgeons. The aim of the ‘validation in clinical settings’ is to establish that the developed diagnostic 
system in MIRACLE accomplish its full functionality in real medical use i.e. arthroscopy procedure. In this sense, 
the EU Directive 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC (as amended by  2007/47/EC) regarding medical devices 
defines additional regulations to MIRACLE validation in clinical settings which we can highlight t he follow 
practices: 
▪ Assess the safety and clinical performance of the device in question and evaluate whether the device is suitable 
for the purpose(s) and the population(s) for which it is intended. 
▪ Clinical investigation should be carried out in an adequate human clinical environment. 
▪ Clinical investigation should be carried out by qualified medical practitioner or authorized person with 
accepted equivalent qualification. 
▪ Prototype design and manufacture should ensure system quality, safety and clear ins tructions regarding the 
device. 
▪ Follow a proper risk management procedure to avoid undue risks. 
▪ Be compliant to all relevant legal and regulatory requirements. 
▪ Follow appropriate ethical principles.  
In addition, it is a good practice to follow international standardization on clinical investigations of medical devices 
as for example: 
▪ Clinical Investigation of Medical Devices for Human Subjects – General requirements (EN ISO 14155-1:2009) 
▪ Clinical investigation of Medical Devices for Human Subjects – Clinical Investigation Plan (EN ISO 14155 -
2:2009) 
▪ Application of risk management to medical devices (EN ISO 14971:2009) 
The Council Directive above does not apply to human tissue collection. For this case, EU Directive 2004/23/EC 
governs the handling of tissues and specific rules must be followed which we can highlight the follow aspects: 
▪ Ensure donor protection and confidentially. 
▪ Obtain free and fully legal consent from the donor. 
▪ Handle the tissue collection by highly competent medical practitioner. 
▪ Ensure quality management of tissue by well establish protocols for preparation, processing, labelling, 
packaging and storage. 
▪ Keep track of the origin of the tissues that are collected and obtain the necessary authorisation for using 
properly the generated results. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 86 of 96 
5.1.1.3 Humans subjects 
MIRACLE will address the validation in clinical settings of the novel diagnostic system via clinical environment 
testing on human cadaver knees (task 6.2) and in vivo human patients (task 6.4). Table 17 provides the relevant 
information on human subject clinical validation in the context of MIRACLE project.  
Table 17: Relevant information on ethics self-assessment regarding human 
Human cadaver 
Nature of disease/condition/disability Not applicable to human cadaver.  
Details on recruitment, inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, informed of consent 
procedures 
Recruitment and inclusion/exclusion criteria will be define when preparing the 
documents regarding ethics approval for this specific project. The documents will be 
prepared based on previous project.  
All study subjects provide a written informed consent.  
Details of consent procedure will be defined during ethics approval request phase. 
The consent form will be prepared based on previous project. 
Details on your policy for incidental 
findings 
Not applicable to human cadaver.  
Methodology to be used during research Simulation of in vivo arthroscopy on human cadaver knee in order to evaluate joint 
tissues (articular cartilage, meniscus and ligaments).  
After the measurements, cadaver knee joints will be opened and tissue samples will 
be detached from the measurement locations for reference measurements via 
conventional methods. 
Impact of the research Provide feedback information from the end user (i.e. orthopaedic surgeons) 
regarding the design and technical features of the developed diagnostic system durin g 
arthroscopic conditions before actual in vivo application.   
Evaluate the functionality and capabilities of the system for further technological 
development.   
Responsible to conduct the research The partners in charge of clinical investigation will be Kuopio University Hospital 
(KUH) and University of Eastern Finland (UEF).  
The researchers in charge will be Prof. Heikki Kröger (chief orthopaedic surgeon at 
the Dept Orthopaedics & Traumatology, KUH) and Professor Juha Töyräs (chief 
Physicist at the Diagnostic Imaging Center, KUH and Professor of Medical Physics 
and Engineering, UEF).  
They are both highly qualified to perform the clinical investigations due their 
previous experience in clinical settings and trials.  
Ethics Approval All regulations and measures of confidentiality and data security will be strictly 
enforced according to the University guidelines, national legislation and in 
accordance with Declaration of Helsinki. 
MIRACLE clinical seetings will be submitted to the Ethics Committee of the 
Hospital District of North Savo for Ethics Approval for this particular project.  
The ethics approval will be request specifically for MIRACLE clinical settings once 
the project is granted and before the Grant Agreement conclusion.  
Similar clinical investigation has been conducted by this team in previous projects 
evidencing the awareness regarding the ethics assessment as well as the submission 
of ethics approval to the competent national authorities. 
Human patients 
Nature of disease/condition/disability Patients undergoing total knee replacement surgery and patients undergoing routine 
arthroscopy due to ligament or meniscal injury. 
The subjects will not be exposed to any extra danger or complications. 
Details on recruitment, inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, informed of consent 
procedures 
Recruitment and inclusion/exclusion criteria will be define when preparing the 
documents regarding ethics approval for this specific project. . The documents will 
be prepared based on previous project.  
No children or other vulnerable subjects will be recruited. 
All study subjects provide a written informed consent.  
Details of consent procedure will be defined during ethics approval request phase. 
The consent form will be prepared based on previous project. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 87 of 96 
Details on your policy for incidental 
findings 
Not applicable to this study. This project focuses on the applicability of the 
technology for in-depth diagnosis. Therefore, no conclusions can be made about the 
health of an individual patient during the measurements. Clinical trials will be 
necessary in further steps. In addition, since the studied patients are either already 
going to total knee replacement surgery or are being arthroscopically investigated due 
to a known existing injury, it is unlikely that our study reveals any additional 
incidental findings.  
Methodology to be used during research The arthroscopic techniques used in the study are comparable with routine clinical 
arthroscopic techniques.  
For patients undergoing to total knee replacement surgery, after the total knee 
replacement, cartilage tissue and meniscus will be harvested from the removed bone 
ends of the knee joint. Tissue samples will be detached for reference measurements. 
After thorough biomechanical testing histological stainings for collagen and 
proteoglycans will be used for evaluation of the tissue integrity and histopathological 
grading of osteoarthritis in the tissue. 
For patients undergoing routine arthroscopy due to ligament or meniscal injury, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will be performed before arthroscopy. MRI 
serves as a reference for MIR probe measurements, and results from multivariate 
models will be compared with MRI-based grading of tissue degeneration. 
Impact of the research Provide feedback information from the end user (i.e. orthopaedic surgeons) 
regarding the design and technical features of the developed diagnostic system during 
real medical use. 
Evaluate the functionality and capabilities of the system for further technological 
development.   
Responsible to conduct the research The partners in charge of clinical investigation will be Kuopio University Hospital 
(KUH) and University of Eastern Finland (UEF).  
The researchers in charge will be Prof. Heikki Kröger (chief orthopaedic surgeon at 
the Dept Orthopaedics & Traumatology, KUH) and Professor Juha Töyräs (chief 
Physicist at the Diagnostic Imaging Center, KUH and Professor of Medical Physics 
and Engineering, UEF).  
They are both highly qualified to perform the clinical investigations due their 
previous experience in clinical settings and trials.  
Ethics Approval All regulations and measures of confidentiality and data security will be strictly 
enforced according to the University guidelines, national legislation and in 
accordance with Declaration of Helsinki. 
MIRACLE clinical seetings will be submitted to the Ethics Committee of the 
Hospital District of North Savo for Ethics Approval for this particular project.  
The ethics approval will be request specifically for MIRACLE clinical settings once 
the project is granted and before the Grant Agreement conclusion.  
Similar clinical investigation has been conducted by this team in previous projects 
evidencing the awareness regarding the ethics assessment as well as the submission 
of ethics approval to the competent national authorities. 
 
5.1.1.4 Human cells/tissues 
MIRACLE will also address the validation in clinical settings of the novel diagnostic system via human tissue in 
vitro testing (task 6.1).  TT provides the relevant information on human tissue collection in the context of 
MIRACLE project.  
 
Human tissues  
Details on tissue types Knee joint tissues (articular cartilage, meniscus and ligaments) 
Details the source of materials, 
the amount to be collected, the 
procedure of collection 
Both healthy and intact samples from cadavers as well as naturally diseased samples from 
patients undergoing total knee replacement surgery will be investigated (see 1.1 for human 
cadavers and human patient ethics self-assessment). 
The subjects will not be exposed to any extra danger or complications. 
No children or other vulnerable subjects will be recruited. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 88 of 96 
Details on the duration of 
storage and what you will do 
with the material after the 
research ends 
Until the end of the project, formalin fixed human tissue samples will be stored in 70% 
ethyl alcohol, and samples not fixed will be immersed in phosphate-buffered saline and 
stored in a deep freezer at -70°C. According to Finnish law, the biologic samples will have 
to be destroyed when the respective research project has ended without a justification. 
Therefore, the biologic samples collected during this project will be cremated within 1 year 
of completion of the project. 
Informed consent forms All study subjects provide a written informed consent.  
Details of consent procedure will be defined during ethics approval request phase. 
Impact of the research Human tissues will provide information about the sensitivity of the developed MIR-based 
diagnostic system for in-depth tissue-level changes during different phases of osteoarthritis. 
The results will be compared with traditional methods (e.g. histological stainings, FTIRI, 
PLM and biochemistry) in order to fully evaluate the spatial composition and structure of 
the tissue samples. 
Responsible to conduct the 
research 
Human tissue collection will be collected by KUH and UEF (Prof. Heikki Kröger, chief 
orthopaedic surgeon at the Dept Orthopaedics & Traumatology, and Professor Juha 
Töyräs, chief Physicist at the Diagnostic Imaging Center) according to the human cadaver 
and human patients ethics described in 1.1).   
The tissue evaluation will be conducted by Dr. Simo Saarakkala, (Associate Professor at 
Medical Imaging, Physics and technology, UOulu). He has over 15 years’ experience in 
medical physics and biomedical engineering with particular emphasis on osteoarthrit is 
research.  
Ethics Approval 
 
Accreditation/designation/ 
authorisation/ licensing for 
using processing or collecting 
the human tissues 
All regulations and measures of confidentiality and data security will be strictly enforced 
according to the University guidelines, national legislation and in accordance with 
Declaration of Helsinki. 
MIRACLE human tissue evaluation will be submitted to the Ethics Committee of the 
Northern Ostrobothnia Hospital District for Ethics Approval for this particular pro ject.  
The ethics approval will be request specifically for MIRACLE clinical settings once the 
project is granted and before the Grant Agreement conclusion.  
Similar clinical investigation has been conducted by this team in previous projects 
evidencing the awareness regarding the ethics assessment as well as the submission of 
ethics approval to the competent national authorities. 
 
5.1.2 Ethics self-assessment: Equines 
5.1.2.1 General aspects 
The animal experiments will be reviewed and authorised by the local animal experimentation committee. All 
experiments will be performed by authorised and specifically educated personnel only and will respect rules of 
ethical and medico-ethical committees of the given country. During local approvals professional statisticians will 
be consulted to determine minimum animal numbers, sufficient for statistically significant results, to validate the 
experiments. The animals will be housed in specialised facilitie s that conform to the local animal research 
regulations. Only authorised and qualified personnel will attend animals and health parameters will be monitored 
regularly.  
5.1.2.1  Relevant national and EU regulations relating to the use of animals 
National Regulations (and local regulations) for ANIMAL STUDIES 
Netherlands • National Guidelines for Animal Experimentation (Experiments on Animals, 
act amended 2003) 
Relevant EU legislation and directives 
• Directive 2003/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 July 2003 amending Council 
Directive 86/609/EEC on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the 
Member States regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 89 of 96 
National Regulations (and local regulations) for ANIMAL STUDIES 
• Directive 86/609/EEC of 24 November 1986 on the protection of Animals used for Experimental and 
other Scientific purposes 
 
5.1.2.2 Measures to minimise pain, distress and other suffering  
An Ethical Advisor will monitor all animal experiments regularly. All invasive procedures (e.g. surgery and in vivo 
imaging) will be performed under general anaesthesia. These and other procedures will be carried out to minimise 
pain and distress. Partners will work in accordance with the European Union Council’s directive 86/609/EEC), as 
well as NIH guidelines on animal care and experimentation. Partners will adhere to the Society of Neuroscience’s 
Policies on the Use of Animals and Humans in Neuroscience Research 
(http://www.sfn.org/index.aspx?pagename=guidelinesPolicies_Use Of AnimalsandHumans).  
The Consortium carefully considered the possibility of restricting studies to humans or cellular models. Equine 
studies were deemed necessary, however. First, because the horse is a target animal in itself with great and unmet 
clinical need for earlier and better diagnosis of joint disorders. This means that the species itself can benefit from 
the outcome of the project and that in terms of valorisation the equine  sector can be a commercially attractive 
second market for the device. Second, because the species offers a unique opportunity for the clinical validation of 
the MIR-probe as a tool to monitor healing of standardized lesions, which cannot be done in human subjects. This 
is important to evaluate the potential of the device for future clinical application. 
At the end of the in vivo experiments, animals will be euthanized by procedures that are considered acceptable 
(Appendix A of the European Convention for t he Protection of Vertebrate Animals used for Experimental and 
other Scientific Purposes, ETS No. 123), by overdose of barbiturates after sedation and proper induction for 
anaesthesia. 
5.1.2.3 Measures to minimise the number of animals used in experiments (reduce)  
The pilot studies with horses (estimated number needed for these: 3 horses), as described in WP6 will be performed 
on animals that will be sacrificed for educational purposes anyhow. For this reason, no additional animals are 
necessary for these pilot experiments.  
The total number of horses to be used by UU for the clinical trial is 8. This will allow for testing a state-of-the-art 
regenerative therapy for cartilage defect repair against micro-fracture as the current clinical standard of care (using 
both femoropatellar joints with the animal as its own control). If invasive procedures are to be performed and 
general anaesthesia is necessary (e.g. in case of arthroscopy) this will be combined with other interventions (such 
as arthrocentesis) to reduce as much as possible any negative effect on animal welfare.  
 
Non-invasive procedures that do not require any form of analgesia or additional medication include radiography 
and kinetic and kinematic analyses (the animals will be accustomed to the treadmi ll before the start of the 
experiment). The repeated arthrocentesis is minimally invasive and may require sedation, depending on the 
character of the horse, but will not require anaesthesia or other forms of analgesia. Only for the arthroscopic 
interventions at 2 and 4 months general anaesthesia will be necessary.  
For the in vivo animal experiments, selection of the number of animals to be used in the trials is based on statistical 
calculations. The number of animals needed with 95% reliability (p<0.05), a power of 0.90 and an expected effect 
of 20% is 7. Eight is convenient as it accounts for inadvertent loss of animals that may occur during a long -term 
experiment.  
To prevent redundancy in experimental work, all scientific data will be available online to all Consortium partners 
(non-restricted) via the HydroZONES’s dedicated website (intranet). Results will be published with as little delay 
as possible in peer-reviewed journals. 
5.1.2.4 Identification of ethical committees and regulatory organisations involved in the animal experiments  
▪ Instituut voor Dierwelzijn (IVD, Institute for Animal Welfare), Utrecht, 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 90 of 96 
▪ Dierexperimentencommissie (DEC, Comittee for Animal Experimentation), Utrecht  
▪ Centrale Commissie Dierexperimenten (CCD; Central Committee on Animal Experimentation), national.  
The UU research group possesses a licence, granted by the CCD after prior approval by the DEC and IvD, to 
perform the type of experiments as envisaged in WP6. For the specific experiment only a work protocol will have 
to be approved by the local Instituut voor Dierwelzijn (IVD, Institute for Animal Welfare).   
5.1.3 Ethical Advisors 
MIRACLE will nominate two Ethical Advisors (Kuopio, Utrecht) to evaluate the ethical performance during the 
project. The nominated advisors may be employees of a MIRACLE partner but may not be directly involved with 
the work performed within the project or  paid by the project. The mandatory actions required include the 
submission of ethical evaluation statement for the 1) mid -term review and 2) the final review of the project. The 
ethics advisors will be invited to select project management committee meetin gs to follow the progress related to 
the validation in clinical settings.  
5.1.4 Validation in clinical settings overview plan 
MIRACLE validation in clinical settings will take in consideration the scientific principles underlying the collection 
of clinical data along with accepted ethical standards surrounding the use of equine and human subjects. Objectives, 
methods, risk assessment, data evaluation and device performance produced during validation in clinical settings 
will be documented and reported in t he correspondent deliverables and reports (WP1 related). Details on the 
patient nature of disease/condition, recruitment and inclusion/ exclusion criteria will be establish during applying 
for Ethics Approvals. The number of test cases will be limited ONLY  to what is needed for validating of the 
functionality of developed diagnostic system and demonstrated its capabilities to fulfil the application objectives.  
5.1.5 Ethics Approval  
The ethics approval will be request specifically for MIRACLE clinical sett ings once the project is granted and 
before the Grant Agreement conclusion. Task 1.1 will focus on the ethics approval documents. 
5.1.6 Ethics self-assessment: other issues 
MIRACLE will also address the validation in clinical settings of the novel diagnost ic system via equine tissue in 
vitro testing (task 6.1). In this case, knee joint tissues (articular cartilage, meniscus and ligaments) will be collected 
and measured with the developed MIR-based diagnostic system in vitro. Healthy, intact tissue samples will be used 
as controls to represent normal joint tissues. The equine tissues are obtained from a local slaughterhouse from 
animals that are slaughtered for the meat production. The slaughters are routinely carried out in the slaughterhouse 
in accordance w ith the national legislation. The tissue samples that are used in the study would otherwise go to 
waste.
5.2 Security: N/A 
  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 91 of 96 
Annex I External Expert Advisory Board – Letter of  Support 
 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 92 of 96 
 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 93 of 96 
 
 

780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 94 of 96 
Annex II Response to the Ethical Summary Report 
Ethics Opinion 
Current status:      Ethics assessment recommended 
 
The main issues are: 
 
1) Some inconsistencies with regard to the clinical studies undermining the credibility of the proposed studies. For 
example: 
a. S1, page 16: The final clinical validation will be performed during arthroscopy surgery in real patient (two 
patients). 
b. S3, page 54: groups of patients undergoing routine arthroscopy due to ligament or meniscal injury (B) will be 
investigated. 
 
[Response] We apologize for this inconsistency, and have revised the Final Application by readjusting the total number 
of patients to twenty, therefore ensuring the precision and reliability of the multivariate model. Ten patients undergoing 
a total or unicompartmen tal knee arthroplasty (with unicompartmental osteoarthritis) will be measured to enable 
prevalidation and optimization of the multivariate model built based on cadaveric data (arthroscopic MIR -ATR & 
reference measurements). Furthermore, the final validation of the optimized multivariate model will be performed in ten 
patients undergoing an ACL reconstruction. Please find below corrections, and alterations on the Application. 
[S1, Page 8] Demonstrated for ex vivo (cadavers) and in vivo (patients) 
[S1, Page 1 0] Since large clinical trials are not included, the MIRACLE consortium agreed that 8 equine cases and 
twenty (10 + 10) human patient cases should be enough for validation the functionality of the system and for showing 
its capabilities to fulfil the application objectives. 
[S3, Page 45] To validate the multivariate model built based on cadaver measurements, human patients undergoing a 
total knee replacement surgery (A, n=10) and an ACL reconstruction (B, n=10) will be investigated. In group A, joints 
of patients with unicompartmental osteoarthritis will be arthroscopically measured with the MIR-ATR probe prior to the 
knee replacement surgery, followed by osteochondral and menisci sample harvesting. Arthroscopic assessment of the 
joint is routinely assessed prior to a knee replacement surgery. The measurement locations are tracked throughout the 
experiment to ensure accurate location matching for the reference measurements (biomechanics, microscopy and 
biochemistry). The objective of this task is to prevalidate and optimize the multivariate model built based on the cadaver 
measurements. In the group B, pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will be performed prior to arthroscopic 
MIR-ATR measurements and repair surgery. MRI is utilized as reference met hod for MIR-ATR probe measurements, 
and results from multivariate models will be compared with MRI-based grading of tissue degeneration. 
[S3, page 54]  The human tissue samples will be subjected to similar reference measurements as the equine samples 
described in Task 6.1, including biomechanical testing and histological staining for collagen and proteoglycans. 
[S3, page 53]  
iii) Clarify and provide technical feedback to WP3 related to use of the MIR-ATR probe during arthroscopic conditions 
(task: 6.2, 6.3). 
iv) Apply the MIR-ATR probe during arthroscopy in vivo (task: 6.4). 
[S3, page 54]  In this task, the MIR -ATR probe will be tested clinically during in vivo arthroscopy. To validate the 
multivariate model built based on cadaver measurements, human pati ents undergoing a total knee replacement surgery 
(A, n=10) and an ACL reconstruction (B, n=10) will be investigated. In group A, joints of patients with unicompartmental 
osteoarthritis will be arthroscopically measured with the MIR-ATR probe prior to the knee replacement surgery, followed 
by osteochondral and menisci sample harvesting. Arthroscopic assessment of the joint is routinely assessed prior to a  
knee replacement surgery. The measurement locations are tracked throughout the experiment to ensure accurate location 
matching for the reference measurements. The reference measurements will include biomechanical testing, histological 
staining for collagen and proteoglycans, FTIRI, PLM and biochemistry. These reference measurements will enable the 
evaluation of tissue integrity, the biomechanical competence and spatial composition and structure of the tissue samples. 
Furthermore, the histological staining will be used for the histopathological grading of OA. This will enable the 
prevalidation and optimization of the multivariate model built based on the cadaveric data.  
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 95 of 96 
Final multivariate models will be validated in this task to obtain information about the disease status of various joint 
tissues during in vivo arthroscopy. In the group B, pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will be performed 
prior to arthroscopic surgery. MRI is utilized as reference method for MIR-ATR probe measurements, and results from 
multivariate models will be compared with MRI-based grading of tissue degeneration. 
[S5, Page 32] MIRACLE will address the validation in clinical settings of the novel diagnostic system via clinical 
environment testing on human cadaver knees (task 6.3) and in vivo human patients (task 6.4). 
[S5, Page 35] All study patients provide a written informed consent prior to the surgery.  
 
2) The studies in horses and ponies raise serious ethical concern, especially as these animals are described as "teaching 
material" undergoing several invasive procedures after which they are euthanized as no longer necessary. 
The applicants write that the number of animals needed in the trials is based on statistical calculations, which however 
is far from clear (sample size calculation on what outcome?). 
The applicants quote directive 86/609/EEC "on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions of 
the Member States regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes" and 
directive 2003/65/EC amending the former, but do not seem to be aware that directive 86/609/EEC was repealed and 
replaced by directive 2010/63/EU "on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes" in 2010. 
 
[Response] First we apologize for not having cited the most recent EU directive on the use of animals for scientific 
procedures. However, the proposed procedures are in line with directive 2010/63/EU, as they comply with current 
guidelines in the Netherlands. 
 
Recommendations (preliminary) 
1. Detailed study protocols should be provided with clear inclusion and exclusion criteria. 
2. Detailed information must be provided on the informed consent procedures that will be implemented. 
 
[Response to Recommendations 1 & 2] 
Human tissues 
Adult cadaveric donors of various ages will be recruited for Task 6.3. Donors with non -diagnosed and advanced joint 
conditions will be selected to ensure comprehensive sampling for the multivariate model building. The arthroscopies will 
be performed by experienced orthopaedic surgeons along routine practice. Briefly, an access point will be created on the 
medial and lateral side of both knees to enable the simultaneous use of the MIR-ATR probe and the arthroscopic camera. 
The mapping system demonstrated by Brittberg et al. (2003, “Evaluation of cartilage injuries and repair”, Fig. 7) will be 
utilized in the cartilage measurements. Additionally, menisci and ligaments will be mapped during the arthroscopy. The 
measured sample locations are extracted after the arthroscopy and subjected to extensive reference measurements, such 
as biomechanics, microscopy and biochemical analysis.  
All the investigators working with cadaveric tissue will take appropriate personal protection measures (vaccinations, 
gloves, gowns, etc.).  
Human patients 
The human patients required for Task 6.4 will be volunteers who do not belong in any of the following groups: disabled, 
underaged, pregnant, nursing women or prisoners. Additionally, patients with debatable voluntarily (military serv ice, 
people involved in the research and medical students) will be excluded. An orthopaedic surgeon will select suitable 
patients from people undergoing a knee replacement (with unicompartmental osteoarthritis) or an ACL reconstruction.  
The surgeon provid es the suitable patients with a research handout and a consent form, and explains the study in a 
separate appointment prior to arthroscopy day. In the day of the arthroscopy, the patients are requested to shortly explain 
study procedure and its consequence s (increase of operation time ~10 minutes, no clinical benefits at this stage). 
Additionally, patients are encouraged to ask questions involving study and ensured to know that they are free to drop out 
of the study without explanations. 
Legislation of Finland demands patients to have indemnity insurance or other insurance to cover costs of any accidents. 
The recruited patients belong under the patient indemnity insurance of Kuopio University Hospital. 
780598  MIRACLE   Part B Page 96 of 96 
3. Details about data protection procedures that will be implemented in the project. 
 
[Response to recommendation #3] The data concerning human patients will be first stored to password protected hard-
drives. Along ethical guidelines of the Kuopio University Hospital, the data collected on humans will be stored without 
information enabling donor identification. The identifier information will only be stored at the safe of Kuopio University 
Hospital with the senior physician Heikki Kröger as the records keeper. The anonymized raw data and daily modification 
during data processing will be backed up daily to network drivers provided by Department of Applied Physics of Eastern 
Finland. 
 
4. More information is needed on ethical issues with regard to the experiments in horses and ponies. 
[Response to recommendation #4] 
It should be clear that the horses (or ponies) that will be used for the project consist of two groups of animals.  
The first group concerns 2 to 3 animals for pilot studies in which the practical clinical applicability for standard 
arthroscopic intervention in the horse of the MIR-ATR probe that has been developed within the MIRACLE consortium 
will be tested. Depending on the outcome, it may be necessary to make modifications, which will be done in WP5 
(prototype development). For these pilot studies that do not need standardization or a statistically sufficient number of 
animals, use can be made of horses that are listed for surgical training of students. This surgical training is a regular part 
of the curriculum of students doing the master equine veterinary science at Utrecht University. For this training animals 
are used that have been donated by their owners for this purpose or that are destined for slaughter anyhow. They are 
anaesthetised, undergo various surgical procedures by the students and are at the end of the training euthanized without 
waking up first. They are therefore not euthanized “as no longer necessary”, but to avoid unnecessary suffering. As said, 
this is a standard procedure within the Utrecht curriculum for which of course ethical permission exists and has to do 
with clinical training and nothing with MIRACLE or any other research project. These same animals are, however, 
sometimes used in the weeks before the practical training as pilot animals for various types of r esearch. In those cases 
they undergo the procedure and will wake up after anaesthesia and are just treated as patients would be. Additional ethical 
permission is needed for such use and will also be sought in the case of MIRACLE. Normally, this permission is easily 
granted, as such use reduces the total number of experimental animals that is used. This procedure complies with point 
(25) in the preamble of EU directive 2010/63/EU and what is stated in Article 16 of this directive on the reuse of animals. 
The second group of animals concerns 8 adult Shetland ponies. This study focuses at evaluating the performance of the 
newly developed MIR -ATR probe for the assessment of osteochondral defects and the longitudinal (over time) 
monitoring of repair of these. This can best be done in a study in which standardized artificial osteochondral defects are 
made, treated in two different ways, followed over time with the probe (i.e. through relook arthroscopy) with the outcome 
at the end compared to the gold standard, whi ch is histology. The situation is different than with the pilot studies here, 
as we need a homogeneous group of animals, standardized lesions and a well-described and strict protocol of monitoring 
of these lesions (and of the final processing of the sample s). These animals are euthanized too, which is necessary if 
histology and other techniques (such as micro-CT, biochemical and biomechanical assessment) are to be performed, thus 
again not because of “being no longer necessary”. Also other monitoring techni ques such as kinetic and kinematic gait 
analysis will be performed during the course of the experiment (see also original proposal). In this case statistics do play 
a role. Group sizes are forcibly limited in large animal studies. For this reason this type of study is almost invariably set 
up in a way that animals are their own control, in this case by using both stifle (knee) joints. This is done to reduce the 
effect of inter -individual variation which is more important in large animal experiments that mak e use of outbred 
populations than when using specific strains of often strongly inbred laboratory species; the advantage of the procedure 
is that this situation is much more representative of  the human clinical situation. In large animal experiments a gro up 
size of 8 is often used (which is based on an estimated variation coefficient of 10% and a relative effect size of 20%, 
leading to n=7 with a safety margin of 1 animal). Partner UU has ample experience with this type of study and has 
published various papers on the osteochondral defect model in the equine stifle.74 
 
74 Benders, K.E.M et al.. (2013) Extracellular matrix scaffolds for cartilage and bone regeneration. Trends in Biotechnology 31, 169-176.; Vindas 
Bolaños, et al.(2017) The use of a cartilage decellularized matrix scaffold for the repair of osteochondral defects: the importance of long-term 
studies in a large animal model. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, 25, 413-420.; Mancini, I.A.D et al. Fixation of hydrogel constructs for cartilage 
repair in the equine model: a challenging issue. Tiss. Eng. Part C., accepted for publication.